d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report Number: 72899-AL

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

FOR

ALBANIA

FOR THE PERIOD FY11-FY14

April 18, 2013

South East Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective November 1, 2012) 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31

Currency Unit = Albanian Lek (LEK) 
US$1 = LEK 12 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
APL 
Adaptable Program Loan
BoA 
Bank of Albania
CAD 
Current Account Deficit
CEDB 
Council of Europe Development Bank
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy
CPS PR Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
DeMPA Debt Management Performance Assessment
DHS 
Demographic and Health Survey
DP 
Democratic Party
DPL 
Development Policy Loan
EBRD 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EC 
European Commission
ECA 
Europe and Central Asia Region
ECSEE 
Energy Community of South East Europe
EIB 
European Investment Bank
EITI 
Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative
EU 
European Union
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment
FY 
Fiscal Year
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product
GPF 
Governance Partnership Facility
HIV 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
IPS 
KfW 

International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Integrated Planning System
German Reconstruction Credit Institute

ii

IFI 
IMF 
IPA 
JSDF 
LAMP 
LFS 
LITS 
NPL 
OECD 
PEFA 
PER 
PHC 
PPP 
REPARIS 
ROSC 
SEE 
SECO 
SIDA 
SLRP 
SPIL 
TA 
TF 

International Financial Institutions
International Monetary Fund
Instrument for Pre-Accession
Japan Social Development Fund
Land Administration and Management Project
Labor Force Survey
Life in Transition Surveys
Non-Performing Loans
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Public Expenditure Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public Health Center
Public Private Partnership
Road to Europe Program for Accounting Reform and
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
South East Europe
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
Swedish International Development Corporation Agency
Secondary and Local Roads Project
Social Protection Investment Loan
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
UN 
United Nations
UNDP 
United Nation Development Program
UN MDGs United Nations Millennium Development Goals
VAT 
Value Added Tax
WBG 
World Bank Group
WBI 
World Bank Institute

Vice President 
Country Director 
Country Manager 
Task Team Leader 

IBRD 
Philippe H. Le Houerou 
Ellen Goldstein 
Kseniya Lvovsky 
Kseniya Lvovsky 

IFC
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Tomasz Telma
Per Kjellerhaug
Gjergj Konda/Elira

Sakiqi

111

Table of Contents

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

Introduction 

t...................... 

Country Context........................................................ 

1

1

Key Development Challenges for the Remainder of the CPS Period ........... 

......... 5

Progress towards achieving CPS objectives and outcomes 

.................. 

Modifications to the CPS and the way forward 

............................ 

Risks................................................................ 

.........

...... 

7

10

14

Tables:

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators, 2005-2015 
..............................................
2
Table 2: Lending, FYI 1-14 (in US$ million) 
.......................................... 
12
Table 3: Actual and Planned Country Specific AAA, FYI 1-14 
........................ 
..... 13
Table 4: Actual and Planned Regional AAA, FYI 1-14. 
...................................
14

Boxes:

Box 1: Governance and Public Sector Management...................................... 

10

Annexes:

Annex 1: Results Matrix for the Country Partnership Strategy 
........................ 
..... 16
Annex 2: Gender Issues in Albania........................................... 
...... 23
Annex 3: The World Bank Group and Other External Donors..............................27
Annex 4: List of Active and Planned Trust Funds in Albania 
........................
Annex 5: Standard CPS Annexes........................................... 
.......

29
31

iv

I. 

Introduction

1. 
This Progress Report assesses the implementation of the FY11-FY14 joint Bank-IFC
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Albania and sets out planned activities for FY13 and
14. The CPS identifies three strategic objectives for World Bank Group (WBG) support: (i)
supporting a recovery 
in economic growth by 
improving competitiveness 
through fiscal
consolidation, better public sector management, an improved business climate, deeper access to
credit and reduction of infrastructure bottlenecks; (ii) sustaining and broadening social gains
through enhanced social protection and more effective social services; and (iii) reducing
vulnerability to climate change through improved water resource and disaster management.

2. 
The objectives and pillars of the CPS remain unchanged since its preparation in FY11,
but the prolonged volatility in Eurozone economies since 2008 points to the need for increased
emphasis on reducing economic vulnerabilities and supporting economic growth. 
In this
context, the Bank allocated an additional US$275 million to help Albania respond to the
Eurozone crisis through increased support for the financial sector, structural reforms and social
protection - allowing for a total program under this CPS of up to US$575 million. To date, the
Government has made progress towards realizing CPS milestones and outcomes in a number of
areas, although fiscal consolidation has remained an elusive goal. High levels of public debt and
a sensitive dialogue on fiscal consolidation have thus far limited the absorption of CPS financing
through development policy operations. Going forward, the dialogue will continue toward a
satisfactory fiscal framework, and the Bank will diversify planned lending instruments to better
support growth and reduce economic vulnerability. Most investment projects have met or are
meeting their development objectives. Challenges have remained, however, 
in supporting
improved financial performance and reliable supply in the energy sector. A strong knowledge
program supported by IBRD and IFC has been an important part of the partnership strategy, in
addressing the economic crisis as well as supporting sector level reform programs. IFC's
program complemented IBRD's efforts in private sector development. During FYI 1-13 (as of
March 25), IFC significantly increased its program in the country, investing in six projects
totaling about US$125 million. Details of progress to date and updated performance indicators
are reflected in the Results Matrix (see Annex 1).

II. 

Country Context

3. 
Relations between Albania's two main political parties remain tense, but there has
been cooperation on the EU accession reform agenda leading to an EC recommendation that
the country be granted EU candidate status if progress continues. Following the close elections
of 2009, the ruling Democratic Party (DP) formed what has proven to be a relatively stable
governing coalition with a smaller party, the Socialist Movement for Integration. The coalition
has been able to move forward with its agenda in most cases. However, legislation requiring a
three-fifths majority has been more difficult to pass by the DP and its main opposition, the
Socialist Party (SP). Since November 2011, the two parties have come together to deliver on
substantial reforms identified by the EC in its 2010 Opinion as pre-requisites for EU candidate
status. Most recently, the parties came together to pass laws on electoral reform, administrative
courts and elimination of the exemption from prosecution for high officials. In light of these
developments, the October 2012 EC Progress Report has recommended that Albania be granted
candidate status by the EU Council subject to completion of key measures in the areas of judicial
and public administration reform and revision of the parliamentary rules of procedure.
1

4. 
With a large majority of the population supporting EU membership, EU accession
remains a key driver of reform in public policy. In this regard, particular focus will be placed
on: conducting elections in line with European and international standards; strengthening the
independence and accountability of judicial institutions; combating corruption and organized
crime; reinforcing protection of human rights and antidiscrimination; and implementation of
property rights. The successful conduct of Parliamentary elections in 2013 will be a crucial test
of commitment to the new electoral reform and is a pre-condition for opening EU membership
negotiations.

5. 
Since the 2008-09 globalfinancial crisis, growth has remained subdued. After the pre-
crisis decade of a 6 percent average growth rate, growth fell to 3.3 percent in 2009. The crisis led
to lower remittances and exports, which in turn contributed to lower growth and fiscal revenues.
GDP grew by 3.5 percent in 2010 and 3 percent in 2011, supported mainly by services and
industry.

6. 
Albania's growth outlook has weakened substantially due mainly to the continued
deterioration of the external environment. Like all countries in Southeast Europe, Albania has
been hit hard by the prolonged crisis in the eurozone. Given its close links to the Greek and
Italian economies via exports and through remittance and financial flows, the sovereign debt
crisis affecting these key economic partners has dampened the growth outlook for Albania.
Growth in 2012 has been estimated at 0.8 percent. With the Eurozone crisis lingering, growth in
Albania is projected to remain modest averaging just 2 percent between 2012 and 2015 (Table
1).

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators, 2005-2015

Actual 

Est. Proj. Proj Proj. Proj

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Real GDP growth (%) 

5.5 

5.0 

6.0 

7.7 

3.3 

3.5 

3.0 

0.8 

1.6 

2.0 

3.0

Retail prices (end-period, %) 

2.0 

2.5 

3.5 

2.7 

2.7 

2.9 

1.7 

3.0 

3.0 

3.0 

3.0

(in percent of GDP unless otherwise noted)

Fiscal sector

Revenues and grants 

24.5 25.3 25.5 26.7 26.0 26.5 25.3 25.0 25.2 25.3 25.3

Tax revenue 

22.0 23.0 23.4 24.3 23.6 23.5 23.2 23.1 23.3 23.4 23.4

Expenditures 

28.1 28.6 29.2 32.3 33.1 29.7 28.7 28.5 28.6 28.4 28.4

Overall balance (including grants) 

-3.6 

-3.2 

-3.7 

-5.5 

-7.0 

-3.1 

-3.4 

-3.5 

-3.4 

-3.1 

-3.1

Primary balance (including grants) 

-0.5 

-0.4 

-1.1 

-2.7 

-3.9 

0.3 

-0.3 

-0.5 

0.4 

0.8 

0.7

Public Debt 

56.9 55.9 53.7 55.5 59.4 58.5 59.4 60.8 61.7 61.9 61.4

External sector

Current account balance (incl. official transf.) 

-6.7 

-7.3 

-11.2 

-14.9 -15.4 

-11.8 -12.3 -10.5 

-9.7 

-7.9 

-6.0

Trade balance (goods and services) 

-24.0 

-24.3 -27.2 

-26.7 -25.0 -21.3 -22.6 -18.5 

-19.1 

-17.6 

-16.0

International Reserves (in months of imports) 

4.0 

4.7 

4.3 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0

Remittances 

12.6 13.2 

12.5 10.2 10.4 

9.8 

9.3 

8.7 

8.9 

9.1 

9.3

FDI 
3.3 
Source: World Bank staff, IMF and authorities' estimates

3.6 

6.0 

7.0 

7.8 

9.3 

7.6 

7.4 

6.2 

6.3 

6.3

2

7. 
While an expansionary fiscal policy helped mitigate the negative effects of the global
crisis in 2009, fiscal space is now exhausted and public debt is projected to exceed 60 percent
of GDP in 2012 and 2013. The fiscal stimulus, which started in 2008, consisted of elevated
public investments (mainly on roads) and increases in public salaries and pensions. The resultant
rise in fiscal deficits, combined with a 10 percent depreciation of the Lek, brought public debt
levels close to 60 percent of GDP, the legal limit set in 2008. In 2010, with fiscal space tight and
revenue growth slowing, the Government cut expenditures by 9.5 percent at mid-year, reducing
the fiscal deficit to 3.1 percent of GDP (from 7 percent in 2009). Another mid-term fiscal
adjustment (1.4 percent of GDP) was made in 2011 to keep public debt within 60 percent. For
2012, though revenues were again lower than projected, the Government did not make a mid-
year fiscal adjustment in anticipation of receipt of privatization revenues. However, a looming
energy shortage (see para. 19) and delays with completing privatization transactions made an
increase in the fiscal deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2012 unavoidable, pushing the debt level to
60.8 percent. In addition, there are sizable outstanding bills and accumulated arrears for public
works and full VAT reimbursements (approx. E200m per IMF estimates). In December 2012, the
parliament approved the removal of the 60 percent ceiling from the organic budget law, without
proposing any other limit or goal. Albania's 2013 budget targets a general government fiscal
deficit of 3.4 percent and foresees a further increase in public debt.

8. 
Clearing arrears to private companies, 
together with establishing an effective
mechanism for commitment control, is a key priority. The ambitious agenda of public
investments put forward in 2007 was based on anticipation of much higher fiscal revenues than
actually happened after the global financial crisis in 2008. Many public works continued at the
same pace as initially planned despite considerable cuts in the annual budget funding for these
works because of growing fiscal constraints. These works were often carried out through
commercial bank lending. While the unpaid claims could not be identified in the treasury due to
the lack of a multiannual commitment system, the delays in arrears clearance showed up in the
increasing level of Non-performing Loans (NPLs, see para. 11). Swift clearance of arrears is
important for the credibility of public finances, as well as for supporting the private sector at a
difficult time, reducing pressures on the commercial banks, and improving the quality of bank
lending. Recently, government has accelerated the work on setting up the mechanisms that
would prevent recurrence of arrears in the future and publicly committed to clearing existing
arrears in the first half of 2013. Fulfilling this commitment will be a good step forward.

9. 
Lowering public debt over the medium-term remains critical to macroeconomic
stability and growth. Albania's public debt is among the highest in Eastern Europe. A high and
growing public debt means increased rollover risks and elevated interest costs. Interest
expenditures are much higher than in other SEE countries, crowding out more productive
spending and representing a major source of vulnerability for the budget. While the deficit has
been mainly used for the development of infrastructure, which has historically suffered from the
lack of investment, financing the deficit is becoming unsustainable. Increased public borrowing
would also damage growth prospects by crowding out the private sector. Additional fiscal
consolidation measures embedded in structural reforms are needed to send a credible signal to
the markets. Priority actions being discussed with the Bank include: (i) strengthening tax
administration and exploring new revenue sources; (ii) reforming power sector rules and tariffs
to make the sector more self-sustaining; and (iii) reforming the pension scheme to stem the
pension fiscal deficit. The use of future privatization revenues, to complete clearance of arrears

3

and reduce debt will be of paramount importance. Albania would also benefit from entering into
a new program with the IMF, after the precautionary program was terminated in 2009.

10. 
External imbalances improved in 2012, but remain high. After reaching 15 percent of
GDP in 2009, the Current Account Deficit (CAD) dropped to below 12 percent of GDP in 2010,
owing to an increase in exports, particularly of minerals and electricity. The resumption of large
public investments 
in 2011 resulted in a spike in imports of machinery and equipment,
contributing to a small deterioration in the trade deficit which was fully financed through foreign
loans. In 2012 CAD dropped to 10.5% of GDP as a result of narrowing trade deficit. The trade
deficit is expected to decline further in the medium-term (to 8 percent by 2014) due to the
moderation of large public investments, which should result in lower imports. The CAD will be
financed by foreign direct investment (banking sector inflows).

11. 
The financial sector has remained largely stable vis-d-vis the on-going Eurozone crisis
but faces escalating risks derived from the prolonged unfavorable external environment and
the continued deterioration of banks' loan quality. Albania's banking sector, with assets
equaling about 85 percent of GDP (2011), comprises 16 banks. Five banks collectively hold
about three-quarters of total banking system assets. Four of these banks are Austrian, Greek or
Italian owned. As of September 2012, the overall banking sector capitalization was 15.9 percent
and deposits exceeded pre-crisis levels (having recovered steadily from a sharp drop in 2008).
The banking system is relatively well-provisioned, as the ratio of provisions to total loans has
increased four-fold since 2007. However, this increase in provisions has impacted banks'
financial performance, which is evidenced by declining returns. Furthermore, there has been a
sharp rise in non-performing loans (NPLs), from 6.7 percent in 2008 to 22.7 percent at end-
September 2012, by now the highest level in the region. This reflects both the general economic
slowdown and the difficulties faced by banks in the execution of their collateral. These
weaknesses are exacerbated by the obstacles some bank borrowers are facing in obtaining VAT
reimbursements and/or payments for goods and services provided to the Government. The tide of
rising NPLs has undermined banks' earnings, capitalization and their ability to extend new loans.

12. 
The Bank of Albania (BoA) has been proactive in adopting prudential measures to
safeguard financial stability but continued efforts are needed. Important steps already taken
include requiring banks to seek additional capital, putting in place higher liquidity ratios,
stepping up financial sector monitoring, and finalizing the transformation of bank branches into
subsidiaries. The banking sector has increased its capitalization by over US$200 million in the
last two years. A November 2011 amendment to the Law on Banks strengthened the BoA's
capacity to deal with distressed banks by providing it with the power to establish a bridge bank.
The Ministry of Finance, Financial Supervisory Authority and BoA also established 
the
Financial Sector Action Group in early 2012 to strengthen macro-prudential supervision across
the financial sector, to enable quick action in the event of a threat to financial stability. While
these actions have helped 
to maintain financial stability, ongoing Eurozone uncertainty
necessitate continued vigilance and further actions 
to reduce remaining financial sector
vulnerabilities, stem the tide of increasing NPLs, and encourage banks to resume lending once
private sector demand re-emerges.

13. 
The recent sluggish economic performance has likely been insufficient to reduce
poverty. Although Albania experienced rapid poverty reduction up to 2008, the effects of slower
growth appear to be placing a large part of the population under increasing strain. While there
4

has been no official household survey to measure poverty since 2008, available sources such as
the Life in Transition Surveys (LITSs) conducted in 2006 and 2010 indicate that poverty has
stagnated or possibly worsened. This is also supported by Labor Force Survey data on
employment, which shows that 27 percent of Albanian households have at least one member
who had lost a job versus an ECA average of 18 percent. Furthermore, available data on
unemployment indicate a slight increase from 12.5 percent in 2008 to 13.3 percent in 2011.
While the situation of Albanian women has improved over the past decade (particularly with
regard to social services access), gender gaps are pronounced in terms of economic opportunity.
The share of women entering the labor force has increased gradually since the transition but a
large gap in labor force participation is still apparent - with a 56 percent activity rate for women
compared to 77 percent for men. Albania also has a comparatively large wage gap, with women
earning only around 65 percent of men's earnings. See Annex 2 for further information on
gender.

14. 
Overall, Albania still faces a number of challenges with respect to the availability and
accuracy of statistics in terms of both macroeconomic monitoring and social welfare
measurement. Annual national accounts data (on expenditure basis) have not been published
since 2007, while quarterly GDP statistics are available only with significant lags. The
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is providing TA to develop capacity to complete national
account statistics. As noted above, a comprehensive household survey dataset has not been
published since 2008, complicating the measurement of trends in poverty and household welfare.
The Life in Transition Survey (LITS) program, supported by the Bank, should help to partially
address this gap, but more efforts will be needed - including further analysis of available data to
understand the impact of the slowdown on the most vulnerable groups (e.g., Roma, children and
the elderly). The Bank is increasingly coordinating its assistance in this area with EU-funded
support to raise Albania's capacity to undertake censuses, data processing and analysis, and
dissemination.

III. Key Development Challenges for the Remainder of the CPS Period

15. 
In broad terms, the main challenges facing Albania remain unchanged since the CPS
was prepared but there are some shifts in specific priorities given external and internal
developments. These shifts in priorities are described below to provide context for the changes in
the CPS program described in Sections IV and V below.

Improving Competitiveness

16. 
While Albania has made notable achievements 
in 
some areas affecting
competitiveness, recent external developments and/or policy 
inaction have complicated
progress in others. One area in which concrete progress is observable concerns the legal and
regulatory framework for business, which has been substantially overhauled and modernized.
Since 2011, the Government has also stepped up efforts to strengthen property rights, though
deficiencies persist in some key related areas such as construction licensing.

17. 
Albania continues its efforts to obtain EU candidate status. In particular, recent
positive steps in terms of governance include the passage of key legislation linked to the EU
accession agenda and the recommendation of EU candidate status, subject to clear conditions.
The past two years also saw some important results with regard to public sector management,
5

including more transparent public procurement and improvements in tax administration. Going
forward, efforts to strengthen public administration, public financial management and the rule of
law must continue. Priority should also be given to the ongoing efforts to fully implement new
financial management and procurement procedures within 
the central government and
municipalities. Finally, efforts to introduce EU and international accounting standards for the
private sector will also need to be strengthened.

18. 
Albania's competitiveness is adversely affected by the fiscal and financial sector issues
discussed in the preceding section. As mentioned in para 9, the high government demand for
credit (to roll-over the large public debt) tends to crowd out the private sector and keep interest
rates at levels above those seen elsewhere in SEE. In turn, weaknesses in fiscal and public
financial management - particularly the non-payment of government contractors and timely
VAT reimbursements - have exacerbated both the rise of NPLs and private sector hardship
during the economic slowdown.

19. 
Overcoming infrastructure bottlenecks remains critical to Albania's competitiveness.
The WBG in 2008 supported Albania in a major reform of its power sector. Key elements of this
reform included unbundling of generation, transmission and distribution, and privatization of the
distribution arm (76 percent of shares) to a strategic investor. After initial improvements to the
distribution network, the situation in the sector deteriorated in 2012, leading to the removal by
the regulator of the operating license for the private distributor in early 2013 and appointment of
an interim administrator. Furthermore, Albania and Southeast Europe more broadly suffered a
severe drought through most of 2011-12. This, combined with the dispute with the distribution
company, brought the sector to the verge of crisis, threatening social welfare and economic
growth, undermining investment, and adding pressure on public finances. While favorable
hydrology since December 2012 has helped avert the worst-case scenario for power supply, all
main power sector entities remain exposed to severe financial stress, weather volatility and
uncontrolled energy losses, and the country still faces a constant risk of imminent power
shedding and potential outages. Regarding the dispute between the Government and the majority
shareholder of the distribution company, the two sides are heading towards arbitration, but are
also beginning to engage in informal mediation towards an amicable solution. The World Bank
Group has a long-term commitment to develop Albania's power sector as a key to unlocking
growth.

20. 
Addressing this situation in a permanent way will involve, inter-alia: (i) rapid reduction
of power losses, which have increased since 2008; (ii) investments in the grid and in generation
to increase reliability and diversify; (iii) mobilization of funds to inject liquidity and restore
creditworthiness of the public generation company; (iv) restoration, and enforcement, of
commercial contractual practices in the power market and with suppliers; and (v) consistent
Government commitment to implementation of market rules to encourage investment. Another
priority with regard to infrastructure is to strengthen the maintenance, quality and safety of the
road network through institutional reforms to strengthen the nascent roads authority and develop
sustainable road management and financing systems.

Sustaining Social Gains

21. 
In light of the potential impact of the economic slowdown on poor households, it is
imperative to ensure that social services and the social protection system alleviate declines in

6

welfare. Despite comparable expenditure patterns, Albania's health and education outcomes
continue to lag behind EU 10 country averages. The key challenge is to improve the efficiency
and quality of services, while continuing to close remaining coverage gaps in rural locations and
for ethnic minorities, such as the Roma. In health, it is critical to strengthen the management of
health care institutions and payments systems to improve the quality and efficiency as well as to
address regional imbalances in the access and quality of service provision. Such efforts need to
be complemented by investments in water and sanitation and waste management to improve not
only population health but also the business environment. 
In education, it is important to
strengthen school accountability and incentives, reform curricula and improve teacher training.
To foster growth, it is also critical to invest in higher education and skills. Finally, it is of utmost
importance to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of Albania's social safety net to avoid the
impoverishing effects of the economic slowdown, including improving the targeting, benefit
design and coherence of the various programs.

Strensthenins Water Resource Management and Adapting to Climate Chanse

22. 
Albania's high dependence on its water resources, particularly for hydropower and
irrigation, and the increased incidence of both floods and droughts due to climate change
make it imperative to address water management in a comprehensive and integrated way.
Albania is among the countries in Europe that are most exposed to climate change -- particularly
with respect to damage due to floods and overall water resource management. Climate
variability has magnified serious weaknesses in the management of Albania's water resources,
which 
is characterized by 
fragmentation and duplication and 
inadequate 
stakeholder
involvement. High priority needs to be accorded to addressing these weaknesses inter alia
through strengthening river basin authorities, developing realistic river basin management plans,
rehabilitating dams and ensuring dam safety while at the same time modernizing irrigation
systems in collaboration with local governments. These efforts should be complemented by
improving watershed and forest management at community level.

IV. 

Progress towards achieving CPS objectives and outcomes

23. 

The Bank program is delivering important development results in many areas although
efforts to achieve fiscal consolidation and reduce public debt have encountered difficulties in
the face of political pressures and the prolonged Eurozone crisis. While many activities are
still underway, some important results have been achieved to date across all three CPS pillars.

* 
In Pillar I - Competitiveness: With regard to the business climate, key achievements
include establishment of an EU-compliant National Metrology Laboratory, adoption of an EU-
compliant regulatory framework for inspections, and associated training of 175 government
officials. The inspection legislation has seen major changes with the aim of making the
inspection regime more transparent, efficient and corruption-free. A new central inspectorate was
established and the number of inspectorates has been reduced from 36 to less than 15. The
number of days needed to register a business has been further reduced from 5 to 4 days. Support
to land administration and management, including computerization and capacity building of
major property registration offices, has helped reduce the time to register a property transaction
(now being undertaken within 10 days in Tirana) and improve the quality of services, according
to customer surveys. In public sector management, key outcomes included implementation of an
automated treasury system, tax e-filing, and e-procurement, supported by the Integrated Planning

7

System (IPS) and the Governance Partnership Facility (GPF) multi-donor trust funds. The IPS
project has been instrumental 
to improve analytical capacities for running effectively the
medium-term expenditure framework, and strengthening planning and budgeting processes (see
Box 1). Debt management processes have seen major improvements. Of more than 50 countries
assessed by the World Bank under the Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA)
program so far, Albania stands out as one of the few which has sound debt management practices
in the largest number of areas as defined by the DeMPA methodology. Albania jointed the
Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI), produced two assessment reports and has
asked the International EITI Secretariat to conclude the evaluation exercise, which could result in
Albania being declared EITI compliant during the Global EITI Conference in May 2013.
Following Bank's recommendation to link education with labor market needs, progress has been
made on the adoption of the Bologna process for modular education that is compatible across
Europe, the expansion of the numbers of students in higher education, and the introduction of
short-cycle, sub-degree programs in regional universities. In addition to curriculum reforms,
there has been progress on setting up an accreditation system for universities, and university
ranking procedures. The regional REPARIS program promoted the introduction of EU
requirements and standards in corporate sector accounting, helping over 170 local companies.
IFC's engagement helped to improve corporate governance, and environmental and social
standards at the firm level. Through introduction and implementation of international standards,
IFC helped to increase their sales and exports. Further, an IFC alternative dispute resolution
program contributed to resolving commercial disputes, avoiding lengthy and expensive court
cases and releasing funds for investments. IFC also invested US$6.7 million additional equity in
a state-of-art cement production facility, which, in total, increased local availability of cement at
more competitive prices and provided 400 new jobs. Another area in which outcomes have
largely been met concerns transport bottlenecks. As planned, 110 km of secondary and local road
networks were rehabilitated or constructed, 81 communities are now connected by road to
services and markets, and an asset management system for secondary and local roads is in place.
In Pillar II -- Broadening and sustaining Albania's social gains -- some key
achievements 
include universal retraining of primary health care providers, unification of
primary and secondary health care purchasing, and adoption of performance based contracts in
the funding of public hospitals, as well as adoption of the legislation on mandatory health
insurance. With respect to education, secondary school curricula have been fully revised and
enrollment has risen to over 75 percent (versus a target of 70 percent), triple shifting of
classrooms has been eliminated and double shifting reduced from 36 percent to 16 percent in
basic education and 6 percent in secondary education. Independent assessment of student
achievement is another important innovation. In social protection, significant legal reforms were
implemented to improve targeting of the main programs.
In Pillar III -- Improving water, environment and climate risk management -- one
notable result has been improved management of forest, pasture and water resources in about
250 communes, as evidenced by a 28 percent increase in income generated by forest and
agricultural lands, and a significant reduction of soil erosion. Albania also became one of the
first countries to sequester carbon on eroded lands, realizing an emissions reduction payment of
nearly US$200,000 (with an additional payment being processed, following confirmation of
verification of 178,600 tons of Emission Reductions undertaken in September 2012), mainly for
the local communities. Further results have been achieved with respect to remediation of one of
the most contaminated coastal sites in Albania at Porto Romano. In addition, disaster risk

* 

* 

8

management has been strengthened through equipping first responders and piloting a regional
affordable catastrophe risk insurance program. 
IFC helped foster the private sector role in
renewable energy through supporting a new Renewable Energy Law. Also, IFC financed
US$11.8 million credit line to support a local bank in Albania. The proceeds from the loan will
be utilized to finance energy efficiency and renewable energy projects through eligible sub-loans
to Albanian companies.

24. 
The World Bank supported portfolio currently consists of nine operations totaling
US$243.5 million of which 31.2 percent has been disbursed. Eleven operations closed during
FYs10-12, all but one of which were rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory with respect to
achievement of their development objectives. The outcome of one project, the Power Sector
Generation project, was rated moderately unsatisfactory in the ICR due to problems with the
cooling system at the Vlore Power Plant which appeared after project closure. The Bank has
helped to assess the causes of this late-breaking problem, and plans to include support for
upgrading the cooling system within the program going forward (see para. 29). In line with the
operational objective defined in the CPS, closure of these operations led to a significant
consolidation of the portfolio from 18 projects at the end of FY09 to 9 projects by end FY12.

25. 
Of the eight projects in the current portfolio, four projects -
the Education Excellence
and Equity project, 
the Land Administration and Management project (LAMP), the Integrated
Coastal Zone Management and Clean-Up project, and Dam Safety Project - are rated moderately
unsatisfactory for implementation progress. For the LAMP, development objective was also
rated moderately unsatisfactory because implementation delays have put at risk the completion
of some key activities. The Government and the Bank have jointly worked on addressing the
implementation issues, and these projects have recently shown improved progress and are
expected to be upgraded in the next months. . During FYsI 1-12, the disbursement ratios (22 and
24 percent respectively) were in line with ECA averages). As of March 2013, IFC's investment
portfolio consists of nine projects totaling US$159 million, of which US$135.6 million is
outstanding.

26. 
Trust Funds managed or implemented by the WBG total US$19.1 million and are fully
aligned with Bank activities in support of the CPS pillars (Annex 4). Half of the TF portfolio -
about US$9.2 million -
is in support of Pillar 3 of the CPS, focusing on water and natural
resources management. Nine grants totaling about US$8.7 million are in support of Pillar 1
activities, largely covering the financial sector, infrastructure and land administration. The
governance agenda in particular received substantial support during the CPS period through: (i) a
GPF grant for US$1.5 million aimed at strengthening governance, accountability and public
sector management in a number of areas; and (ii) a US$6 million multi-donor trust fund for an
IPS operation. Both trust funds closed at the end of FY12. A follow up IPS-2 operation has been
prepared, also financed by a multi-donor trust fund, for an initial amount of about US$4 million
dollars, with a further contribution expected in FY14 (Box 1). Additionally, it is expected that
Albania will receive a grant from the new Russia-financed ECA Capacity Development Trust
Fund to prepare a Roads Safety and Maintenance project for delivery at the beginning of the new
CPS period, most likely in July 2014. Finally, for Pillar 2, the CPS program includes US$1.2
million for a community-based youth program financed by a grant from the Japan Social
Development Fund, and the EU is considering support to the work on strengthening social
assistance through IPA13.

9

27. 

The Bank Group is using its analytical expertise to engage with the Government, the
private sector and other partners through both formal reports and just-in-time assistance. The
FY11 Country Economic Memorandum focused on priorities for returning to higher economic
growth rates and helped inform the ongoing national debate on the economy. The Bank also
provided analytic and advisory support on debt management (through DeMPA) and carried out
an assessment of Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) at the request of the
Ministry of Finance. A major AAA on strengthening governance and anti-corruption efforts was
influential in shaping both Government programs and Bank projects. In addition, the Bank
partnered with UNDP to undertake a joint project on Economic Governance, Regulatory Reform
and Pro-Poor Development. The Bank also provided Aarhus Convention Compliance TA to
improve access to information, public consultations and justice with respect to the environment.
A country specific FY12-14 Corporate Financial Reporting Reform TA project builds on past
REPARIS regional efforts to strengthen corporate sector accounting and financial management
practices in line with EU requirements. In parallel, IFC has been helping to develop a better
corporate governance culture through work with the key regulatory and market institutions and
establishing the Corporate Governance Institute of Albania. IFC's sub-national program helped
assess implementation of streamlining procedures at sub-national level.

Box 1: Governance and Public Sector Management
Governance and public sector management remain important challenges as Albania strives for rapid and
broad-based socio-economic development and convergence with the EU. Given the centrality of
improved governance to Albania's progress towards EU accession, the EC through its annual Progress
Report and accompanying technical and financial assistance has been taking the lead on a wide range of
political and governance criteria. Albania has made notable progress in several priority areas including
electoral reform, anti-corruption actions (such as lifting immunity for high officials, see para 3), judicial
reforms, and strengthening public sector management in areas such as donor coordination, adoption of a
single treasury account and on-going improvements in personnel administration. With the EC in the lead
on governance activities, the WBG and other external partners are playing supportive roles in areas of
their respective expertise. Specifically, the Bank, with EU and bilateral donor financing, has been
involved in strengthening the policy planning and budgeting framework to ensure that core policy and
financial processes function in an integrated manner. Inter alia, the Integrated Planning Systems (IPS) 1
project, which closed in 2012, helped develop an orderly process for budget preparation, development of
a results-based monitoring system, implementation of an automated single treasury system and capacity
development in central and line ministries. An IPS 2 project, also funded by donors, is currently being
prepared to ensure full implementation of reforms introduced under IPS 1. The project will also
strengthen: 
input cost analysis in public budgets; the quality of M&E in line ministries; capacity for
decentralized management in conformity with EU practices; and, more dynamic macro-fiscal forecasting,
including promoting transparency and improved outreach to all stakeholders. .

V. 

Modifications to the CPS and the way forward

28. 
The CPS program has been adjusted in some important respects to better help Albania
to manage the risks arising from economic vulnerabilities. As originally designed, the CPS
envisaged total IBRD commitments of US$275 million for FYI 1-14, which was increased to
US$300 million at the end of FY11 to help with catastrophic flooding and safety of major dams.
It retained some flexibility with respect to the pipeline of operations (especially for FY13 andl4)
in view of ongoing Eurozone volatility and the need to calibrate new lending to the pace of
consolidation of the existing portfolio. 
In light of the continued deterioration in the external
10

environment, growing fiscal constraints, and power sector problems, the Government and Bank
recently agreed to increase the CPS' emphasis on reducing economic, financial sector and energy
sector vulnerabilities. In FY12, the Bank allocated an additional US$275 million to help Albania
respond to the Eurozone crisis, for a total CPS envelope of US$575 million. 
Incomplete fiscal
consolidation has slowed the pace for absorbing the CPS financing envelope, and efforts in the
second half of the CPS period will focus on structural reforms to create the fiscal space needed
for growth-enhancing investments and targeted support for the economically vulnerable.

29. 
The CPS program for FY13 and 14 will include projects under all three Pillars as
described in the following paragraphs (Table 2):

* 
Pillar 1 - Competitiveness: To reverse the deteriorating situation in the energy sector
(para. 19), the Government has requested technical and financial support for: i) undertaking, on a
priority basis, a study for optimizing the use of hydro reservoirs along the Drin river cascade and
advising on the tendering process for cooling pipe upgrading works at the Vlore TPP; and ii) to
restoring financial viability and service provision in the sector over the medium-term. While the
first part of the request is being addressed by the on-going program of TA and implementation
support , a new Energy Sector Reform and Recovery Project (US$150 million) will be delivered
in FY14 to help restore financial viability of the sector through: (a) financial restructuring of the
key public energy companies; (b) enforcing application of commercial practices among energy
utilities and consumers, including payment discipline, and (c) targeted investments to increase
efficiency in the power utilities. The Bank and IFC will provide coordinated technical assistance
and advice. Building on its FYI 1-12 investments in re-development of an onshore oilfield in
southern Albania, IFC will continue to be involved in infrastructure through three projects: (i) a
first PPP transaction for the operation and maintenance of the main highway connecting
Albania's coast with Kosovo; (ii) privatization of a series of hydropower plants; and (iii) a PPP
transaction for integrated solid waste management in the Municipality of Tirana. Support to
public sector management and governance will continue through a multi-donor funded IPS2
project, which has been developed in place of the IBRD financed operation proposed under the
original CPS. Given heightened external and internal risks to the financial sector, a new DPL to
strengthen financial sector resilience (US$150m) would be considered for delivery, as soon as
the government demonstrates a clear commitment to a credible program for sustainably tackling
fiscal issues, tentatively in FY14. Provided such commitment, a new series of budget support
operations (US$50-75m per loan) focused on fiscal consolidation and competiveness would
follow the financial sector DPL. Preparation of the roads project, which was planned in the
original CPS program, will begin in FY13, but, provided that all the above operations
materialize, the project will be delivered early under the next CPS to make room under this CPS
for the energy and DPL operations. Should the DPL operations be further postponed, the road
project will be brought forward for FY14 delivery.

* 
Pillar 2 - Social Sector: The bulk of IBRD lending under this CPS during FYs 11 and
12 has focused on Pillar 2. The Social Sector Reform DPL (US$25m) was approved in FY11 and
was followed by a results-based investment project for Social Assistance Modernization
(US$50m). The latter project was doubled in size to help Albania address increased household
vulnerability associated with the economic slowdown. A follow-on project is planned in health
for FY14 (US$42m). If both financial and fiscal DPLs go forward in FY14, the health project

11

will be postponed for the next CPS period. An education project will be prepared for the next
CPS, following completion of the ongoing Education Excellence and Equity project.

* 
Pillar 3 - Water and Climate Change: The Water Resources and Irrigation Project,
originally planned for FY12, was approved in the second quarter of FY13, and the Water Sector
Investment Project will be delivered later in FY13. Processing of these projects was delayed due
to the challenges in preparing projects involving central and local governments as well as
community organizations. To support the use of clean energy, IFC invested US$8.6 million
equity in a holding company in Albania, which in turn will invest in small hydro projects during
FYs 13-14.

Table 2: Lending, FY11-14 (in US$ million)

FY11
Social Sector Reform DPL (US$25m) 
Total FY11(Actual) 

FY12
Additional Financing for APL5 Dam Safety 
Social Assistance Modernization Project 
Total FY12(Actual) 

FY13
Water Resources and Irrigation (Actual) 
Water Sector Investment Sector 
Total FY13 

FY14
Energy Sector Reform and Recovery Project 
Financial Sector DPL* 
Health Project 
Environment Services 
Total FY14 

25
25

21.6
50
71.6

40
86
126

150
150
42
10
352

Total FY11-14 

574.6

*The DPL will go forward if the macro outlook improves. In this case, the fiscal DPL, planned for

FY15, may also be delivered in FY14.

30. 
The Bank Group's knowledge work will continue to play a prominent role in support to
Albania. The Bank's AAA program will continue to be demand driven, providing economic and
social analyses, as well as best practice examples and experience from other countries to aid the
authorities in developing policy choices for future reforms. At the request of the Ministry of
Finance, the main support the main focus on AAA in this period will be on supporting fiscal and
financial management. FY13 TA to help the government update its Public Finance management
(PFM) Strategy (FY13) and a FY14 formal report on Public Expenditure and Finance Review

12

will help define means of consolidating and increasing efficiency of spending. In addition, TA
activities for pension reform (FY14) and the energy sector (FY13-14) will focus on increasing
performance and financial sustainability. NPL TA (FY13-14), undertaken with the Bank of
Albania, aims to help reverse an increasing trend in NPLs. In the environment sector, the Bank
will undertake an innovative research activity to value specific environmental services and
develop strategies for payment to communities for the services. Findings will feed directly into
design of the proposed Environmental Services Project (FY14). IFC will continue to use its
advisory services to support Albania to further improve the investment climate in line with the
country's overall EU accession aspirations.

Table 3: Actual and Planned Country Specific AAA, FY11-14

Supporting the recovery in Albania's 
economic growth/competitiveness 

Country Economic Memorandum 
Better Governance Policy Notes 
Debt Management Assessment 
Public Economic and Financial 

FY11 
FY11 
FY12
FY13

Accountability

PFM Strategy TA 
Extractive Industry Transparency 
Initiative 
NPL TA 
Public Finance Review 
Energy Sector TA 
Policy Notes on key reforms 

IPS2 

FY13 
FY14 

FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14

FY15

Broadening and sustaining Albania's 
social gains 
Actual (FY11-12)
Economic Governance, 
Regulatory Reform

FY12

Water resource management and
adapting to climate change

Planned (FY13-14)
Youth Empowerment (JSDF) 
Pro-Poor Development 
Pension Reform TA 

FY14 Comprehensive flood 
FY14 management (GFDRR)
FY14 Aarhus Convention Compliance FY13

FY13

31. 
Albania will also benefit from regional AAA work on Regular Economic Reports,
Jobs, Safety Nets, Health Financing, Capacity Building for Monitoring and Evaluation, and
the Regional Energy and Climate Change Strategies, as well as the multi-year efforts on Poverty
Analysis and Gender Monitoring. 
IFC will also make use of regional programs to support
Albania. The ongoing Balkans Renewable Energy Program will support private sector efforts to
develop and operate feasible energy plants. It will continue to emphasize streamlining of
regulations at the sub-national level and support investment generation and policy advocacy
capability at the national level investment generation and policy advocacy capability at the
national level.

32. 
The Bank will work closely with the EU as well as other donors in the delivery of both
lending and AAA activities building on the successful collaboration over the past two years.
Going forward, the Bank will partner closely with the EU, particularly in the social assistance
and public sector management areas. In both these areas, the EU expects to provide IPAl3
financing which will expand and complement ongoing Bank-supported programs. The Bank and
EU also expect to work closely in the areas of property rights and environment in the coming
years. Monthly joint operational meetings have been introduced 
in order to ensure adequate
coordination. Cooperation will also continue with other multi-lateral partners especially EBRD,
EIB and the UN system. The Bank program also benefits from strong collaboration with a

13

number of bilateral partners including Austria, Japan, Germany (KfW), Sweden and Switzerland.
See Annex 3 for additional information on donor and IFI activities. IFC's extensive advisory
service programs are supported primarily by EU, Austria and Switzerland.

Table 4: Actual and Planned Regional AAA, FY11-14

Broadening and sustaining 
Water resource management and
Albania's social gains 
adapting to climate change
Program. Gender 
FY12-15 Adaptation to Climate 
FY11
Monitoring 
Change in Agriculture
FY12-14 
Programmatic Poverty 
PROFOR Innovative 
FY12-15 Monitoring 
Financing for Sustainable
FY12-15 
Smart Safety Nets 
Forest Management in
Health Finance 
Southwest Balkans
Employment and Jobs 
Climate Change 
Strengthening

FY13 
FY14 
FY14 

FY12-15 

FY12-15 

Supporting the recovery in Albania's economic 
growth/competitiveness 
Regular Economic Reports 
TA Science Research and Development 
and Innovation (EC TF) 
Monitoring & Evaluation (EC TF) 
Programmatic Financial Sector 
Development 
Gas Ring Study (WBIF) 
Transport Study (WBIF) 
Public Financial Management (EC TF) 
Energy Strategy 
Trade Logistics IFC 
Renewable Energy Advisory IFC 
Corporate Governance IFC 
Investment Climate IFC 

FY12-15 
FY12-15 
FY13
FY14
FY14
FY12-15
FY12-15
FY12-15

FY14

FY14

33. 
The adjustments to the CPS program under this Progress Report are reflected in the
revised results matrix attached as Annex 1. Most of the indicators have remained unchanged
because they derive from the ongoing portfolio which has been implementing satisfactorily
during this CPS period. However, some modifications have been introduced to reflect: (i)
introduction of the new financial sector operation and related technical assistance: (ii) the delay
in moving forward with the original DPL program; (iii) delays in processing of the Water
Resources and Irrigation Project and the Water Sector Investment Project; and (iv) the
postponement of the roads project to the next CPS.

VI. 

Risks

34. 
The CPS faces three main risks: (i) fiscal management and high debt levels; (ii) energy
sector issues; and, (iii) political polarization.

* Fiscal management and high debt levels: The main risk for the CPS objectives and
program is fiscal management and associated mounting pressures on the public finances. The
problems Government is experiencing in effecting fiscal adjustments have already increased
the debt level beyond the 60 percent benchmark. In addition, there remain sizeable arrears
with respect to VAT reimbursements and payments to contractors for services provided to
the state. A prolongation of the Eurozone crisis would further depress growth prospects in the
medium term, making it difficult for the country to maintain macroeconomic stability,
banking sector resilience and growth without swiftly initiating structural reforms. Lack of
fiscal consolidation and exhausted fiscal space has also delayed the implementation of the
existing portfolio and the planned CPS program. The Bank would support a reform strategy
through continued policy dialogue, a AAA program, and DPL operations.

14

* Energy sector: The situation in the energy sector, which has dramatically deteriorated over
the past year, presents a major fiscal, financial and supply security risk. The WBG is helping
to mitigate the sector's fragility and vulnerability through: (i) encouraging the government to
find an amicable solution to the dispute with the majority shareholder of the distribution
company through negotiations; (ii) FY13-14 TA to assist with hydropower management and
preparing a long-term sector recovery plan; (iii) a subsequent Energy Reform and Recovery
Project in FY14 to strengthen performance and viability of sector participants in the medium-
term; (iv) a power sector reform pillar in the fiscal DPL series, which are expected to start in
FY14 or early FY15; and (v) Bank's technical assistance coordinated with IFC support to
bring in competitive private sector.

* Political context: Although the ruling party and the opposition have recently increased
cooperation (para 3) there is a risk that the extreme polarization of 2009-2011 could
reemerge in the run up to and after the June 2013 general elections. This risk is partially
mitigated by the common objective of both parties to achieve EU accession and the position
of the EU that successful conduct of the elections will be key to opening membership
negotiations.

15

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 
EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

Annex 1: Results Matrix for the Country Partnership Strategy

Strategic Objective 1: Accelerating the recovery in Albania's economic growth through improved competitiveness

ISSUES AND OBSTACLES and COUNTRY DEVT GOALS

(i) Sound macroeconomic management and improved public expenditure management

Albania needs to strengthen the credibility and contestability of fiscal policy and the budget process, including by introducing more ex post monitoring and analysis of expenditures and
development outcomes, and improving the quality of national statistics. Meanwhile continued progress on fiduciary reforms is essential to improve the governance of public expenditures.
lImproved credibility and 
Automated treasury system fully implemented across and 
By 2011 the milestones were fully achieved. 
Completed: Integrated Planning
contestability of fiscal policy, 
used by all central government ministries and agencies for 
System (IPS) MDTF
strengthened financial stability, 
payments, receipts, commitments and asset management.* 
Planned: IPS2 MDTF FY13
national economic statistics, 
Detailed and consolidated government in-year budget 
reporting on development outcomes 
execution reports published monthly on-line by 2012. 
and governance of public spending 
All Bank-finance projects budgeted fully in the MTBP, 
using Treasury System for financial management, and 
reported on in government financial reports.* 

Achieved. However reporting needs improvement in
order to be timely and more user-fr7iendly. 

Planned: Fiscal DPL FY14
Quarterly Econ Reviews

Fully functional EU-compliant procurement complaints 
review mechanism in place. 

e-procurement system certified for use by some donor- 
financed projects, including World Bank.* 

A back-stop facility with the MoF for the Deposit Insurance 
Authority established. 

Foreign bank branches, which retains capital in country, are 
converted into subsidiaries.

for Goveyance Filter v2.0

16

In progress. The automated Treasury System has
SEE biannual regional reports
been enhanced and is expected to be decentralized. 
The Bank is using the system in a number of projects. 
Completed: Governance
The Bank financed projects are partially considered in Partnership Facilityprogram -
the.MTBP and Annual Budget preparation and 
Fiduciary Review
revision process.
In progress. Procurement complaints revieweCommneted:
mechanism is in place but not yet fully compliant with Completed: ROSC on Fiscal
EU. A new institution (PPC) is responsible for the 
Transparency (FY12)
complaints review mechanism, instead of Public 
Onog:RSonDtQuly
Procurement Agency (PPA). Both agencies are not 
Ongoismn: ramCok Daa(uiY
decentralized and report to the Prime Minister.AsemntFawok(Y3
Ongoing: PFUStrategy (FY13)

Achieved. E-procurement was used in the Local and
Secondary Roads project. 

Completed: MoU between MoF, DIA and BOA 
signed. 

Completed. 
B 
emiyestones 
Completed: The Financial Stability Action Group
(FSAG) was established to regularly monitor and
identif threats to financial stability. The FSAG is led

by the Minister of Finance, and issues a press release

Planned: Public Finance and
Expenditure Review (FY14)
Planned: Financial Sector DPL
FY14

Ongoing: NPL TA (FY1 4)

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 

EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

with each of its meetings.

Completed: The remaining foreign-owned bank
branches were converted to wholly-owned
subsidiaries, ensuring domestic capital is available if
called upon at times of need.
(ii) Improving business regulations and reducing compliance costs for the private sector
The cost of doing business in Albania remains high in part due to administrative corruption and a high "time tax", Albania's investment climate is undermined by inadequate property administration
and weaknesses in urban land administration.

Albania is slowly introducing EU and international standards for the private sector, but there is a need to reinforce the implementation and strengthen private sectors ability to comply with these
requirements.

Increased satisfaction with quality of Regulatory framework for business inspections revised and 
regulations (base: 3.3 in 2005; target: 
adopted. 
2.5 in 2012; 1=very satisfied; 6=very 
dissatisfied). 

Increase in government officials trained in techniques for 
regulatory review (status: 3 in 2008; target: 175 in 2011). 

Achieved in 2012. 

Achieved. 175 government officials were trained in 
regulatory review techniques by 2012. 

Reduction in time for registering 
immovable property transactions. 
(status: 30 days in 2009, target: 10 
days in 2012). 

Development of land and property rights regime. 

Achieved. Average time to register property in 2012 
was 9.8 days. 

Complete computerization of Tirana Immovable Property 
Registration Office. 

Achieved. The IT system is operational in Tirana and
is being rolled out to municipal offices. 

Improving private sector compliance 
with selected EU and international 
requirements particularly with 
respect to: (i) accounting and 
auditing standards; (ii) compliance 
with EU standards for exports; and 
(iii) issuance of environmental 
permits. 

By-laws and regulations developed for an audit oversight 
system in line with EU directives. 

In progress. To be completed by end 2013. 

National Accounting Council regularly publishes updated 
International Financial Reporting Standards, 

In progress. The NAC has taken leadership in
strengthening its capacity. Results will be visible in 
early 2013. 

EU-compliant National Metrology Laboratory fully 
operational. 

Achieved. An EU-compliant National Metrology
Laboratory is staffed with equipment to be fully 
operational fCom January 2013. 

17

Completed: Business Environment
Reform and Inst Strengthening
Project
Ongoing: FYO7Land
Administration and Management

Project

Completed: Governance
Partnership Facility program -
Property rights and Expropriations
Assessments

IFC Trade Logistics Program
IFC Tax Simplification Project

IFC Sub-national Competitiveness
Program

Completed: Business Environment
Reform & Inst Strengthening
Project

Completed: Aarhus Convention
Compliance TA (IDF)
Ongoing: REPARIS Corporate
Finance Reporting Enhancement

Extractive Industry Transparency
Initiative TA (MTDF)

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 
EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

Public, on-line database on environmental permit 
applications in place by Dec 2012.

Achieved. 

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

IFC International Standards
& Technical Regulations Program

Increase in number of individuals and organizations trained 

Achieved. At least 250 individuals/organizations were

in AaC principles (status: 0 in 2010; target: 250 in 2012) 

trained in AaC principles by 2012.

(iii) Improved and more financially sustainable, infrastructure services in roads, energy, and irrigation

Albania's energy sector continues to face technical and financial challenges, in part owing to an unfinished reform agenda. Recent reforms including unbundling of the system, privatization of the
retail supply and investments in strengthening generation and transmission capacities need to be brought to fruition before the impacts can be felt.

Albania's competitiveness is impaired by inadequate road infrastructure. Over 75% of the local network is in poor condition. There has been a significant increase in road investments requiring
commensurate increases in provisions and the efficiency of road maintenance. Efforts to improve road management institutions are underway and need to be consolidate.

Increased agricultural productivity by improving irrigation system.

Albania has high potential for agriculture, but faces significant rainfall variability, and irrigation and water management practices are fragmented and inefficient.

Improved domestic energy supply 
(800 gigawatt of additional power 
supply per year), transmissions 
system operation, safety and 
operational efficiency of hydropower Rehabilitation of three substations completed. 
dams. 

Complete construction and initiate commercial operations of 
Vlore Thermal Power Plant. 

Complete restructuring of Transmission System Operator 
and business plan including new tariffs approved. 

Remedial measures of high and medium priority targeting 
spillways and other dam infrastructure completed. 

In progress. Construction of Vlora Thermal Power 
Plant completed, but the plant is still not operational 
due to a failure of the cooling system. 

Achieved.

In progress. Result are expected to be visible and 
measured in 2014

Completed: Power Sector Gen &
Restructuring Project
Planned: AF for Dam Safety
FY13

Completed: ECSEE Energy APL2
Transmission Project

In progress. Spillway rehabilitation and 
electromechanical rehabilitation of Koman 
hydropower plant is underway 

Dam Safety Project
Completed: FY10 Partial Risk
Guarantee for Privatization of

Improved cost recovery within the 
electricity distribution system. 

Timely tariff adjustments approved for Distribution System 
Operator and Retail Public Supplier in conformity with the 
agreed Regulatory Statement. Financial Recovery program 
in the Sector, to allow KESH to clear its arrears to suppliers 

In progress. The tariffs were adjusted three times
during the 2010-2012 regulatory period, tariff levels 
will have to be adjusted in January, 2014. 

Promote energy efficiency and use 
of cleaner energy (progress will be 
measured by the number of projects 
signed: base: 0 in 2010; target: 
i 

Cooperation Agreements signed with five banks to 
implement the Residential Energy Efficiency program. 

Revised step-in rights law encourages banks to finance 
Small Hydro Power Plants (SHPPs). 

Achieved. Cooperation agreements were signed and 
implementation of the program is underway. 

In progress. Draft Laws and related bylaws have 
been prepared and are awaiting parliamentary 
approval.

IFC Renewable Energy Program
for Small Hydro Power Plants
IFC Residential Energy Efficiency

Micro Loans
lFC direct investments &
specialized financial products in
clean and renewable energy
lFC credit line to finance energy

D 

a 

ey

18

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 

EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

2013). 

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

projects

Completed: Economic Governance
of Utilities - UNDP Fee-based
service

Completed: Transport Project

Improved road conditions and 
sustainability of road investments. 

108 km in local and secondary roads 
reconstructed/rehabilitated (by Bank project). 

Achieved. 110 km in local and secondary roads have 
been reconstructed / rehabilitated to date.

Improved road access to services and markets (status: 0 in 
2010; target: 26 communities in 2012). 
Increase in share of regional and local roads in better 
conditions (status: 0 km in 2009; target: 108 in 2012). 

Achieved. 81 communities with improved road access Ongoing: FY08 Secondary &
to services and markets. 
Local Roads Project
Achieved. 108 km of regional and local roads
rehabilitated. 

Oraio 
d M 
n
Operation and Maintenance

Creation of an asset management systems for secondary 
local roads and Albania National Road Authority. 

Percentage of the national road network covered by
performance based maintenance contract (status 0 in 2009; 
target 10% in 2014). 

Achieved. The Asset Management Database and
Systems have been established, the former under the
Bank-funded SLRP, and the latter by EU.

Achieved. 10% of Albania National Roads Network
was under performance based maintenance contract
by 2012.

Strategic Objective 2: Broadening and sustaining Albania's social gains

(i) Broader access to education, particularly secondary and higher education, and improved quality at levels
Albania needs to broaden its sources of productivity and employment growth through more effective investment s in human capital - secondary enrollment is low in part due to poor quality and
learning outcomes , and tertiary education needs to be more market-responsive.

Improved access to and quality of 
secondary education. 

Complete reform of curricula for all three grades of 
secondary school. 

Achieved. Revised curricula used in all three grades 
of secondary school. 

Ongoing: FY06 Education,
Excellence, and Equity Project

Increase in secondary enrollment (status: 60% in 2009; 
target: 100% at end-2014). 

In progress. In 2011, secondary enrolment was at
76,1%.

Increase in teachers participating in continuous professional 
development (status: 25% in 2009; target: 70% at end- 
2010).

Triple shifts eliminated; double shifts reduced from 36% in 
basic and secondary schools. 

In progress. To date about 45% of teachers have
participated in professional development activities.

Achieved. Triple shifting has been fully eliminated,
while double shifting has reduced from 36% overall
tol6% in basic schools and only 6% in secondary
schools.

19

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 
EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

Higher education institutions 
reformed to strengthen financing and 
overall quality through establishment
of a comprehensive assurance
system. 

Construction of 12 new schools; extension of 8 existing 
schools; and rehabilitation of 10 schools completed by end- 
2013. 

In progress. 4 new schools have been built, 6 schools
have been rehabilitated, and 3 schools have been
extended, resulting in 112 new classrooms and 20 new
science laboratories.

Performance based financing in place for all (11) public 
universities by 2014. 

In progress. Financing reform framework is drafted
and is under consultation with relevant stakeholders.

100 university labs provided with modem didactic 
equipment. 

Achieved. More than 100 labs have been provided
with modern didactic equipment.

A quality assurance system has been established for higher 
education institutions. 

Achieved. A quality assurance system for higher
education institutions has been fully set up and
institutional accreditation is underway.

(ii) Improved access to quality primary health care and more efficient ofpublic spending on health care
Access to quality primary health care services is inadequate in Albania, particularly among the poor.

Health care financing and governance is fragmented, and an inefficient distribution of facilities impairs effective delivery of care.

Improved access to quality primary 
health care. 

Universal re-training of PHC providers completed. 

Basic Benefits Package for PHC established and 
implemented. 

Achieved. Nearly all PHC provider have received re- 
training. 

Completed: Health System
Modernization Project
Completed: FYI 
In progress. Legal framework is in place and bylaws CPL
are under preparation. Law will require provision of
the basic benefits package to 100% Ndihme 

.Social Services

Ongoing: FY12 Social Assistance

Unification of primary and secondary health care purchasing Economike recipients. 
under the Health Insurance Institute. 
Achieved.

Modernization Project

Improve the efficiency of public 
spending on health care, as 
evidenced by: Decrease in the share 
of public sector spending on hospital 
care.

Increase in the population enrolled in health insurance 
(status: <10% in 2009; target: 70% in 2014) 

Achieved. Almost 90% of population was enrolled in
health insurance by October 2012.

All public hospitals financed under performance-based
contracts to achieve efficiency in spending and reduce share Achieved. Spending on hospital care amounted to
of hospital spending in total health spending. (status: 58%; 
US$130m for 2012, amounting to 44.8% of the total
target: 48%). 
public sector health spending in 2012.

(iii) Improved targeting and effectiveness of Albania's social protection systems
Poverty impact of Ndihma Ekonomike is low, in part due to the need for better targeting. Meanwhile, the administration of social benefits is inefficient, and spending on non-contributory disability

20

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 

EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

program is disproportionate. Pension system has significant long term fiscal deficits and low coverage.

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

Improved efficiency of social 
assistance expenditure and benefit 
administration to increase the 
percentage of the poor receiving 
means-based social assistance and to 
improve the equity and effectiveness 
of the Ndi(ma Ekonomike program. 

Assessment procedures and eligibility criteria revised for 
disability benefits (including disability pensions). 

Electronic central registry of beneficiaries introduced and
fully operational. 

In progress. The Gov. is working on strengthening 
the eligibility criteria and processes for the disability 
assistance program to ensure that the disability 
benefits reach the disabled. 

Ongoing: FY01 Social Service
Delivery Project
Completed: FY11 Social Services
DPL

In progress. The DPL supported the legislation to 
initiate the process to create a unified registry of 

Ongoing: FY12 Social Assistance
Modernization Project

The coverage of the poor by the Ndihma Ekonomike 
program is estimated to increase (status: 22% in 2008; target 
40%in2014). 

beneficiaries of social assistance programs.

In progress. 

Improved financial management systems and fraud and 
error controls for NE fully operational. 

In progress. 

Parametric reform of the pension system, to improve
participation and the long term fiscal deficit, under 
implementation Pension reform strategy adopted.

In progress.

Programmatic Poverty Analysis
Economic Governance of Utilities -
UNDP Fee-based service

Ongoing: Pension Reform TA
(FYj3)

Improving the solvency of the 
pension system (measured by 
gradual decline of 1% per year in 
dependency rate - total number of
beneficiaries divided by total
number of contributors; base line in
2013 is 83%) and improve
participation (base line (2010): 30%
of the working age population (ages
15-64); target: 1-2% increase in the

CPS period)

Strategic Objective 3: Reducing Albania's vulnerabilities to climate change

(i) Improved the conversation, management and efficient use of Albania's water resources
Forests and water catchments in mountainous regions face increasing pressures from erosion, illegal logging, and development, but local capacity to manage resources is limited.
Improved coastal infrastructure and services to conserve tourism potential and ensure development in a sustainable manner Lack of critical environmental infrastructure and services in the Southern
Coast risk damaging coastal resources and jeopardizing tourism development.
Improved water resource management toward more efficient and sustainable use of Albania's water resources.
Albania will likely face significant impacts from climate change on the availability and pattern of its water resources which it needs for energy, municipal water and irrigation, meanwhile water
resources management practices are fragmented and inefficient.
Albania is well endowed with water resources but faces serious shortfalls of supply in critical economic areas.
Reduce upstream risks of erosion by 
Continued implementation of community-based micro- 
In 251 communes the following has been achieved: 
improving management of Albania's 
catchment management plans in 30 communes and 
(a) 8 % increase in income earned from forest 
wetlands, forest and pasture 
community-based forest and pastures management plans in 
activities in communal forest and pasture lands 

Completed: Natural Resources
Development Program Project -
IDA + GEF

21

OUTCOMES THE WBG PROGRAM IS 
MILESTONES
EXPETEDTO IFLUNCEPROGRESS 
EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE

resources and water catchments to: 
(i) increase in income earned from 
forest activities in communal forest 
and pasture lands; (ii) to reduce 
erosion. 

239 communes. 

400,000 tons of erosion reduced 2014.

Restructured forestry extension services.

Increased carbon sequestration from sustainable forestry
activities (status: est 45,000 tons C02 sequestered in 2009; 
target: 18(1,000 tons in 2014). 

Completed remediation of one of the most contaminated 
coastal sites at Porto Romano. 

Improved critical public 
environmental infroastructure and 
municipal services as evidenced by:
(i) tons of household waste safely 
disposed in accordance with EU 
standards in South Coast (status: 0 
tons, target: at least 5000 tons of 
Completed extensions to the sewage network and
household waste); (ii) tons of treated wastewater outlet in Saranda. 
sewage in coastal cities (status : 0 in
2010; target: 48,000 in 2012).

Operational landfill near Saranda and transfer center in 
Himara. 

TO DATE 

WBG INSTRUMENT

(baseline in 2005 was 0%); (b) 28 %increase in
income earned from forest and agriculture activities in Ongoing: Natural Regeneration
30 micro-catchments(baseline in 2005 was 0%);; 
Bio Carbon project (H)

In progress. Approximately a 220,000 ton reduction 
inrerosion

Ongoing:s IMprovee 

t Natralec

Achieved. Forestry extension service established. And
training provided to 20 key extension staff.

In progress. As of January 20012 an estimated
amount of C02 sequestered was 143,000 tons. The
first installment of emission reduction payments of
US$200,000 for project beneficiaries has been
transferred by BioCarbon Fund.
Achieved. The remediation of the contaminated site 
of Porto Romano was completed in May 30, 2011. 

In progress. The construction of the regional landfill 
was postponed because of late community acceptance 
and is expected to be completed in early 2014.

In progress. Expected to be completed in early 2014.

Completed: Butrinti conservation
project (medium-size GEF grant)

Ongoing: FY05 Integrated Coastal
Zone Mngt & Clean-Up Project

Adoption of new management plan for Butrint National 
Park and wetlands in line with Ramsar Convention. 

Achieved. The management plan for Butrinti National
Park was approved by the Ministerial Decree in
September 2011.

Improvements in the fr7amework for 
management of water resources. 

Capacity building programs provided to the National Water 
Council, water user associations, and drainage boards. 

Joint Albania! Montenegro Lake Shkodra management cross 
border institution fully operational. 

In progress. A Position Paper on Integrated Water 
Resource management (IWR) 
and a functional 
analysis of the water sector were prepared and 
endorsed by the MEFWA. 
Achieved. Albania and Montenegro have committed
that they will bear the costs of operation of the Joint 
Secretary and Lake Commission after project closure
by end 2012. 

Completed: FY08 Lake Shkodra
Integrated Ecosystem Mgmt GEF
Ongoing: Water Resources and
Irrigation project FY1 3

Ongs, target: atn a 

t

Completed: GFDRR Flood
Management Studyfor Drin- Buna
basin

22

Dia2nostic

Annex 2: Gender Issues in Albania

The situation of women in Albania has been improving overall during the past decade. In addition, the
country has made notable progress in raising awareness around the core principles of non-discrimination
and reforming the legal framework to reflect this priority. Nonetheless, evidence from a recently
completed Gender Profile shows that gender concerns persist in several areas, particularly in: (i)
education, particularly access for some population groups; (ii) access to economic opportunities with, for
example, evidence of a gender gap in labor force participation and wages; and (iii) agency, including
issues of domestic violence and women's representation in high level positions and politics. Across all
areas, efforts need to be made for more timely collection and dissemination of data to allow for better
monitoring of gender-related outcomes.

Gender gaps in literacy and education are, on average, low; however, disparities appear for some
population groups and for higher education. Literacy is very high across all parts of the Albanian
population, and universal among young people for both genders. Poor rural girls are less likely to be
enrolled in primary school than any other group, though their enrollment rate is still over 83 percent.
However, both boys and girls, non-poor and poor, see a dramatic drop in enrollment after primary school.
Less than a third of poor Albanian girls are enrolled in secondary school, and even fewer in rural areas.
Poor boys, however, fare even worse: 23 percent of poor boys are enrolled in secondary school (17
percent in rural areas). In the general population, the female secondary school enrollment rate outstrips
the male rate by more than four percentage points. For all groups-poor and non-poor, male and female-
secondary school enrollment is higher in urban areas, though still just above half of the population. The
group with the highest enrollment rate is non-poor urban girls, at 65.7 percent. Girls appear to be at a
learning advantage over boys. The latest PISA findings show that girls outperform boys not only in
reading, but also in math and science, which are often seen as more "male" subjects.

University education has expanded dramatically in recent years, especially among females. Urban
women have the largest absolute gains while rural women have made tremendous relative gains.
Focusing on the urban population between 20-24 years, there is a 20 percentage point gender gap in
higher education attainment in favor of girls. In this time, the share of urban women who have completed
college has doubled to more than half of their population. The share of rural women has gone up by a
factor of ten, though overall their tertiary completion rates remain far behind their urban sisters. Men's
university education has also increased tremendously. Despite the government's push to make university
education available to all Albanians who want it, there are concerns that quality is not keeping pace with
the rapid expansion.

Gender inequalities in health are not particularly pronounced. Nearly all Albanian women receive pre-
natal care and deliver their babies in a professional health facility, though Albania still has the highest
maternal mortality rate in the Western Balkans countries at 31 per 100,000 births (ECA average is at 34).
Adolescent fertility rates are lower than the regional ECA and OECD averages, at 17 births per 1,000. In
addition, the male mortality rate is significantly lower than its neighboring countries and the ECA and
OECD averages. This is reflected in one of the highest male life expectancies in the region (74 years),
significantly higher than the regional average of 66 years. Life expectancy for women is also high at 80
years (75 for ECA). New health challenges are however emerging for Albania, with the adult population
facing a "double burden" of developing and developed world diseases (e.g., infectious diseases such as
HIV, as well as problems of obesity and diabetes).

Maternal mortality stands out as a big outlier in Albania (21 per 100,000 live births) as opposed to other
countries in the region. The share of births attended by health personnel and antenatal care are at the
23

ECA average, according to DHS still there are differences especially in rural and remote areas where
antenatal care starts later and it is not as frequent as needed, and there is inadequate emergency response
and rapid referral.

Another dimension in which Albania appears to stand out against the rest of the region is fertility.
Adolescent fertility rates (14.25) are lower than ECA and the rest of the Western Balkans. But while
education levels are rising among young women, the adolescent fertility rate is also slowly rising, with
one quarter of a percentage point higher than in 2002.

Some of the main gender inequalities in Albania are in labor markets. Even though a greater share of
women entered the labor force since transition, there is still a large gender gap in labor force participation,
with a 56 percent activity rate for women, compared to 77 for men (2009). Among women of working age
who are inactive, more than one in three report that this is due to domestic work. The share of inactive
women who are housewives has decreased since 2005 while the share of women students has increased.
For unemployment, the overall gender disparity is small. Albania has a large wage gap (raw) compared to
other countries in the region, with women earning around $0.65 for every $1 men earn. Although women
work slightly fewer hours per week than men, many also continue to bear the full burden of household
duties.

While the female share in the total labor force is comparable to the regional one,with the female
participation rate at about 56 percent. Women constitute 43 percent of the economical active population.
Female employment is more concentrated in agriculture than in other countries perhaps due to the
importance of this sector in the economy. The limited coverage of preschool services (only 40 percent of
children attend kindergarten) and of other gender friendly services to explain the low levels of labor
market participation.

Women not only are less likely to be engaged in market activities, they also are less likely to be in the
sectors which before the crisis experienced vigorous employment growth, such as construction. Data
show that during the decade to 2006 female trend stagnated, while male employment increased. Firm
level surveys confirm this picture, with only 37 percent of women as full time workers, and with only 9
percent of full time non-production workers being women. While this is in line with the regional
performance, only 11 percent of firms in 2007 had women participating in their ownership, against an
ECA average more than 3 times as high.

Registration of immovable property in Albania is done by the male spouse, or head of household in the
case of the farming family, who register the property in their own name. Also, the registration for
legalization of illegal/informal constructions of matrimonial homes is done at the name of the household.
These practices can lead to discrimination against women in access to these properties. For example, there
have been problems in the area of applications for credits and alienation of property, when these are done
by one of the spouses in both spouses' names, but without even letting the other spouse know or seeking
their consent.

Important gender gaps remain in agency and domestic violence continues to be a serious issue. Women's
roles in public life remain circumscribed by traditional gender norms which limit their decision-making
power in local and national politics, though important breakthroughs at the national level took place
recently. The share of women parliamentarians and ministers, however, remains relatively low (16 and 7
percent respectively). Women's representation in high positions in firms is also low; only 11 percent of
firms have females in their ownership structures and 20 percent of firms have females in top management
positions. At the household, evidence suggests that most women have some voice within their household
on how their own earnings are spent. On the other hand, violence against women continues to be a serious

24

issue. One out of every three women has been physically abused and 13 percent are survivors of sexual
abuse. 51 percent and 39 percent of women have suffered emotional and psychological abuse,
respectively. In addition, there are still challenges to overcome in women's property rights, where there
are still issues in land titling that put women at a disadvantage.

Albania's Family Code generally provides a favorable level of protection to Albanian women. However,
challenges remain especially in the private sphere for women to have a productive life. According to a
survey run by the Statistical Office (UNICEF-INSTAT 2009) 31 percent of women experienced physical
violence, and 13 percent sexual violence in their marriage or relationship, with psychological and
emotional abuse even more widespread. In the period 2003-2009 tangible improvements have occurred in
the Albanian legislation and the measures taken concerning the prevention and reduction of domestic
violence. Among the most important measures were the Law "On Measures against Violence in Family
Relations" and the accompanying measures for its implementation and, the adoption of two new laws,
"On Gender Equality in Society" and "On Protection from Discrimination". However, indication are that
enforcement of the law remains weak.

Important measures have been taken to facilitate the reporting of violence and to create new specialized
structures for the protection of women from domestic violence such at the Police Directorate in the
Ministry of the Interior, and the Ministry of Labor. In the courts there are judges who specialize in family
law and the examination of petitions for protection orders. However, Ministry of Justice must ensure
offering of free legal assistance for the victims as provided by the law. Further training and monitoring of
the activity of bailiff s offices with regard to the enforcement of protection orders is needed.

Women's roles in public life remain circumscribed by traditional gender norms which limit their decision-
making power in local and national politics, though important changes took place in 2009. In the run-up
to the 2009 parliamentary elections, Albania adopted a quota calling for 30 percent of all candidates on
party lists to be women. While the target for representation in political positions has not been reached, the
legislation nevertheless had an impressive impact, helping to sweep 23 women into the 140-MP
Parliament, bringing the share of seats held by women to nearly 16 percent, up from 7 MPs in the
previous election cycle. Also, more women voted in the last elections and participated in electoral
commissions than in previous years (UN MDGs report). At the local level, women's representation has
been very low. Less than three percent of those nominated for mayor in 2007 were women. Of the 33
women nominated, only nine won. At the national level, there is currently only one woman in the
Cabinet of Ministers, though women now make up 22 percent of the deputy ministers. In the lower-level
governmental jobs, women are much better represented, making up almost 57 percent specialists in the
public administration of line ministries, and 32 percent of directors (UN MDGs report).

Gender in the Bank Pro2ram

The Albania portfolio includes examples of successful gender mainstreaming in several operations, but
continued efforts to strengthen the inclusion of gender considerations in both ongoing and new projects
are needed. During FYs 13 -14, the "Gender in the Western Balkans" AAA initiative will support gender
mainstreaming into the Albania portfolio with a specific focus on increasing monitoring and evaluation of
gender-aware interventions. Some examples of gender mainstreaming are:
* The Land Administration and Management Project (LAMP), which addresses gender-biases in land
ownership - from legal frameworks to registration practices. Specific project actions to reduce gender
inequalities in land rights include: (a) public awareness/information campaigns; (b) gender-sensitivity
training of central and municipal office workers; and (c) encouragement of joint titling during
registration.
* The Secondary and Local Roads project created spaces for women's participation at the community
level. Women are represented in communal authorities and have been part of project consultations such as

25

safety improvements, and design improvements -- translating into better physical access to health,
education and administrative centers for rural women.
* The Health System Modernization project supported maternal health by increasing access to antenatal
services and setting quantitative targets to measure progress. It improved early detection of breast cancer
through introducing screening at the primary care level and provision of mammography equipment at four
hospitals.
* The Social Assistance Modernization Project, which focuses on improving the targeting and
efficiency of Albania's main social assistance programs, should also contribute to narrowing gender gaps
in living standards given that women are slightly overrepresented among the poor.
* 
In some cases, gender-informed work is taking place outside the lending portfolio. A particularly
noteworthy example is the JSDF grant for Youth Empowerment which is enhancing young people's
access to opportunities in education and employment, with a major focus on young women. Lessons from
this type of intervention can inform future programs and lending operations.

Four investment projects included in the FY13-14 program are expected to focus on gender. Preparation
of the two water projects (WRIP and WSIP) 
is already well advanced and both included early
consultations with gender specialists to ensure sensitivity to gender concerns. For example, the WRIP will
pay special attention to the needs of the over 5,00 women farmers living in the project area through
targeted social mobilization activities. All relevant indicators will be disaggregated by gender with special
attention paid to participation of women in public consultation processes and in water user organizations.
The two FY14 investment projects (environment services and health services respectively) are still at a
very early stage of development but will involve careful attention to gender concerns in the projects'
design and ensure that women participate in, and benefit fully, from the projects' components.

26

Annex 3: The World Bank Group and Other External Donors

The WBG continues to be among the biggest donors in Albania with an average of US$36 million per
year in terms of disbursements. Moreover the Bank Group has continued to play the role of a catalyst in
helping the Government coordinate donor assistance and mobilize financing for key sector programs, with
considerable success. The current portfolio of 8 projects totals US$218.5 million in IDA credits and
IBRD loans and is co-financed with other partners for an the amount of US$112.1 million - implying a
ratio of US$0.5 in co-financing for each dollar of Bank financing.

Notably, in the transport sector, the Secondary and Local Roads Project (IDA US$20m) has benefitted
from the partnership of several international and European financing institutions, mobilizing parallel
financing of around US$430 million. The Education Excellence and Equity project, designed as a sector-
wide operation, is supporting a broad based sectoral reform with parallel financing from EIB and CEDB.
The regional Energy Community of South East Europe project and the Dam Safety project are co-
financed by SECO, EBRD and KfW. In public sector management, the Bank successfully managed a First
Multi-Donor Trust Fund of US$6 million which included financial contributions from seven donors. IFC
has also been successful in mobilizing support from a wide range of development partners for its advisory
services and technical assistance. With Government's support in promoting donor coordination, the
World Bank program in Albania is enhanced by several co-financing trust funds - both stand alone grants
and grants linked directly to projects. Some examples include, the second multi-donor TF for the
Integrated Planning System (IPS-2), currently planned to be financed by multiple donors at a level of
about US$4 million; a Multi-Donor Trust Fund of US$ 1.8 million under the REPARIS program to
improve financial reporting; the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) grant of US$1.1 million for
youth empowerment; an IDF grant of US$370,000 to implement the Aarhus Convention agreements; a
grant of US$ 1.1 million from the GFDRR for flood risk mitigation; a Swedish TF for Improved Natural
Resource Management of about US$ 2.8 million, and a US$ 740,000 fee-based-service from UNDP on
public utility governance in water and electricity.

In line with the objectives set forth at the beginning of the CPS, the Bank and IFC have intensified the
dialogue and collaboration with the EU in support of Albania's European integration process and in
mobilizing co-financing for the forthcoming operations. As a result, EU is committed to co-finance the
TA component under the Social Assistance Modernization Project at the amount of Euro 1,5 million. The
Bank and EC also expect to work closely in the areas of property rights and environment in the coming
years. Cooperation will also continue with other multi-lateral partners especially EBRD, EIB and the UN
system. Joint operational meetings on monthly basis have already been initiated. The Bank program also
benefits from substantial support from a number of other bilateral partners including Austria, Japan,
Germany (KfW), Sweden and Switzerland. Close cooperation with these partners will continue through
Government-led platforms as well as on a bilateral basis.

27

Sector/Thematic Areas

>~ 

n

0~0

E 

e 

C

w, 

F; 

02:- 

f 

D

m 

CD 

-u

CEB. 

15 

5 

6. 

2

Germany 

r 

61

0. 

-2. 

u~ 

-v 

o m

EBR 

32 

6.3 

26C

SpainZx

ty 23 

2 

0o -oc2
12 

0 
CD 

5. 

23 

9

O .f3 

CD

VI 

0> 

r 

-> 

~ 

n 

'

0. 

0 

0 

0n

0 

0CD

European Commission 
World Bank 
United 
States 

1.5
42 

3.5 

8.3 

8 

3.7 

7.9 2.7 

2.1 

5.9

1.4

CEB 

15 
61l 

5 

6.8 2.4 

i____

Germany 
EBRD 

l

32 

6.3 

26

EIB 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x

Spain 
United Nations 
taly 
OFID 
Sweden 
Switzerland 

x

5.9 
56 
4.3
6.5 
9.5 

3.6 
0.8 

0.5 

0.8

2.3 

20 

12 

5.4 2.8 2.3 

9

1.6 
1.1 

1.3 

1.4
0.3 

1.1 

1.5 

2.6 

0.3 

0.3 

1.4

DB 

x 

x 

x 

x

Netherlands 
Norway 
Greece 
Austria 

0.4 
5
4
3

0.1 

0.3

Japan 

0.6 __ __ __ 

__ 

__ 

__0.6____

Fra nce 

i

OSCE 

0 

x_ 

l_ _ _ _ x x lx

28

Annex 4: List of Active and Planned Trust Funds in Albania

Net 

Grant

Grant 

Funds 

Grant Sign

PILLARS 

Trust Fund Name 

Amount 
(in 

Disb. to 
Date 

Date 

Closing 

Donor Name 

Exec. By

Date

US$000) 

Date

Albania # 10051 Liberalizing
MTPL Insurance Market 
Albania #10177 Strengthening

327.70 

187.32 

6/29/2011 

4/30/2013 MULTIPLE DONORS 

Bank

Deposit Insurance and Resolution

Framework 

119.03 

80.42 

1/30/2012 

4/30/2013 MULTIPLE DONORS 

Bank

Co-financing for Land
Administration and Management

Pillar 1: 
Accelerating the 

Project 

269.56 

195.84 

5/31/2007 

6/30/2013 SIDA 

Bank

Co-financing for Land

recovery in 
Albania's 
economic growth

Administration and Management 

2,503.40 

2,012.64 

7/17/2007 

6/30/2013 SIDA 

Recipient

Co-financing Land Administration

Management Project 

2,882.16 

0.0 

12/18/2012 

6/13/2013 SIDA 

Recipient

through improved 
competitiveness 

LAMP phase II contribution 
Residential Energy Efficiency
Project - Albania 
Albania: Residential Energy 

320.24 

187.58 

12/01/2009 

6/30/2013 SIDA 

Bank

350.00 

104.00 

10/26/2009 

2/28/2014 MULTIPLE DONORS 
Austria - Federal Ministry of

Bank

Efficiency Project 

300.00 

134.56 

11/11/2009 

6/30/2013 Finance 

Bank

REPARIS - ALBANIA - Corporate
Financial Reporting Enhancement 
Project (CFREP)

1,669.06 

490.56 

3/28/2011 

10/30/2013 MULTIPLE DONORS 

Recipient

Pillar 2: 
Broadening and 

Youth Empowerment through

Community Development in
Albania 

1,155.70 

561.52 

11/6/2009 

11/6/2013 

Japan - Ministry of Finance 

Recipient

Youth Empowerment through
Community Development in
Albania (Bank-executed) 

Albania's social 

gains 

20.00 

13.74 

11/6/2009 

11/6/2013 

Japan - Ministry of Finance 
Swedish International

Bank

Pillar 3: Improved Albania Improved Natural 
Resources Management Project 

Development Cooperation Agency
(SIDA) 

the conversation, 

2,716.03 

200. 

5/31/2012 

12/31/2013 

Recipient

management and 

Co-financing Integrated Coastal

Zone Management and Clean-up 
Project 

Austria - Federal Ministry of
10/31/2014 Finance 

efficient use of 

2,617.09 

6.02 

5/17/2006 

Recipient

Albania's water 

Albania Improved Natural

resources 

Resources Management Project

supervision 

200 

65.40 

12/19/2011 

12/31/2013 SIDA 

Bank

29

Co-financing Integrated Coastal
Zone Management and Clean-up

project 
Albania Assisted Natural
Regeneration Project 
Albania: (BETF) Strengthening of
Flood Risk Management (GFDRR:
Track II TA Core) 

TOTAL : 

IPS2 

Water Resource and Irrigation 

Social Assistance 

Environment Services 

2,230.0 

1,298.25 

8/6/2005 

6/30/2014 

Japan Ministry of Finance 

Recipient

1,013.58 

203.64 

6/29/2007 

12/31/2018 MULTIPLE DONORS 

Recipient

109.40 

2/16/2011 

12/31/2013 MULTIPLE DONORS 

Bank

Planned Trust Funds (in US$000)

400.00 

19,093

5,200

5,000

4,000

10,000

30

Annex 5: Standard CPS Annexes

ANNEX 5.1: ALBANIA AT-A-GLANCE

Europe & 
Central 
Asia 

Upper
middle
income 

Key Development Indicators 

Albania 

Age distribution, 2010

(2010) 

Male 

Female

Population, mid-year (millions) 
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
Urban population (% of total population) 

3.2 
29 
04 
48 

405 
23,614 
04 
64 

2,452 
59,328 
0.7
57 

75-79
60_64
45-49

30-34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI per capita (PPP, international $) 

12.7 
3,960 
8,520 

2,947 
7,272 
13,396 

14,429 
5,884
9,970 

15-19

0-4

10 

5 

O 

10

GDP growth (%) 

3.5 

5.7 

7.8 

percent of total population

GDP per capita growth (%) 

3.1 

5.3 

7.1

(most recent estimate, 2004-2010)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %) 
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

<2 
4 
77 
16 
6 

0 
2 
71 
19 
2 

.

nder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

-

73
17
3 

50

40 

"

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older) 
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group) 
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group) 

97 
95 
87 
87 

99 
97 
99 
98 

96
91
111 
111 

2

20

Access to an improved water source (% of population) 

95 

96 

93 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2010

Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 

94 

84 

73

GAlbania 

0Europe & Central Asia

Net Aid Flows 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid 
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
European Union Institutions 
Italy 
Greece 

.. 

11 

318 

338 

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

.. 

0 
5 

87 
18 
12 

75 
55 
52 

20
10

-. 

-. 

-

0

Aid (% of GNI) 
Aid per capita (US$) 

.. 
.. 

0.5 
3 

8.4 
103 

2.9 
105 

10

-20
-30

Long-Term Economic Trends 

-401

95 

05

Consumer prices (annual % change) 

.. 
-0.5 

4.2 

3.4

GDP implicit deflator (annual % change) 

-2.2 

4.3 

3.5 

GDP 

-

GDP pr capita

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$) 
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100) 

.. 

8.0 

144.0 
100 

103.9
143

.. 

1980-90 1990-2000 
2000-10
(average annual growth %)
2.1 
-0.7 
0.4
1.5 
3.8 
5.4

Population, mid-year (millions) 
GDP (US$ millions) 

2.7 

3.3 
2,102 
(% of GDP)
35.9 
48.2 

3.1 
3,687 

3.2 
11,786 

.. 

Agriculture 
Industry 

33.6 
45.0 

29.1 
19.0 

20.2 
19.3 

1.9 
2.1 

4.3 
-0.5 

1.4
4.7

Manufacturing 

.. 

.. 

11.4 

19.3 

.

Services 

21.4 

15.9 

51.9 

60.5 

-0.4 

6.9 

8.1

Household final consumption expenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capital formation 

56.1 
9.0 
34.5 

60.5 
18.5 
29.3 

84.8 
8.9 
24.7 

88.0 
8.1 
25.9 

.. 
.. 

1.2 
14.5 
25.8 

9.1
6.3
5.1

-0.3 

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

23.1 
22.7 

14.9 
23.2 

19.1 
37.5 

29.8 
51.8 

.. 
.. 

18.9 
15.7 

9.2
11.8

Gross savings 

-

21.1 

14.9

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

31

Balance of Payments and Trade 

2000 

2010

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob) 
Total merchandise imports (cif) 
Net trade in goods and services 

255 
1,076 
-816 

1,301
3,909 
-2,587 

Voice and accountablity
Political stability and

absence of violence

Current account balance 
asa%ofGDP 

-274 
-7.4 

-1,451
-12.3

Workers' remittances and 

Role of law

compensation of employees (receipts) 

598 

1,156 

Control of corruption

Reserves, including gold 

608 

1,420 

0 

25 

50 

75 

100

Central Government Finance 

02010 

Country's percentile renk (0-100)

02000 

higher val-w imply biter ratings

(% of GDP)

Current revenue (including grants) 
Tax revenue 
Current expenditure 

23.8 

26.1

19.6 
25.3 

23.5
24.0

Technology and Infrastructure 

2000 

2010

Overall surplus/deficit 

-8.2 

-3.0

Paved roads (% of total) 

39.0

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
Individual 

Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people) 

6 

152

Corporate 

.

0 

High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports) 

0.7 

0.9

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI) 

1,070 
26 

4,736 
464 

Agricultural land (% of land area) 
Forest area (% of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area) 

42 
28.1 
7.1 

44
28.3
9.8

.- 

-

Total debt (% of GGP) 

29.0 

40.2 

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters) 

6,706 

,425

Total debt service (% of exports) 

2.2 

8.2 

Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources) 

6.8 

4.4

Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 

143 

1,110 

C02 emissions per capita (mt) 

0.99 

1.3

Portfolio equity (net inflows) 

0 

8

GaP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

8.3 

13.8

Composition of5total external debt, 2010

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

575 

538

I19.6,22.

Slht-term, 5736 

I 

850
2A, 

World Bank Group portfolo 

2000 

2010

11MF, 58

Fixed line 
(US$ millions)

lateral, 646

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 

0 
0 

26
3

Privte, 1,91 

Principal repayments 
Interest payments 

0 
0 

0
0

lateral, 637 

US$ millions 

IDA

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

346 

850

Disbursements 
Total debt service 

64 
2 

26
17

Private Sector Development 

2000 

2011 

Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to starts business (% of GNI per capita) 

-
-

5 
29.0 

TFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 

10 

78

Time required to register property (days) 

.- 

33 

of which IFC own account 
Disbursements for IFC own account 

10 
3 

78
16

Ranked assa maGor constraint to business 
(% of managers surveyed who agreed) 
Anticompetitive or informal practices 

2000 

2010 

Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account 

0 

4

46.8

Tax rates 

h 

m 

B40.9 

MIA

Gross exposure 

2 

27

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP) 

lNew 

guarantees 

2 

25

Bank capital to asset ratio 

o(%) 

a 

s8.5

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 

4/2/12

indicates data are not available. -

indicates observation is not applicable.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

32

Millennium Development Goals 

Albania

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years) 

Albania

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population) 
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population) 

1990 

1995 
<2 

2000 
<2 
25.4 

2010
<2
12.4

.. 

.. 

.. 

Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%) 

.. 

8.7 

9.1 

8.1

Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

.. 

.. 

17.0 

6.3

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling

Primary school enrollment (net, %) 
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group) 

.. 

.. 

99 
102 

80
86

.. 

93 

Secondary school enrollment (gross, %) 

89 

71 

72 

89

Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24) 

.. 

.. 

99 

99

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%) 

95 

97 

97 

98

Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment) 
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 

29.
5 

29 

12 

16

Goal 4: 
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 

41 
36 

35 
31 

29 
25 

18
16

Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %) 

88 

91 

95 

99

Goal 5: 
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) 

48 

44 

41 

31

Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) 
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49) 

93 

89 

99 
58 

99
69

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 

24 

24 

23 

14

Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms) 

81 

84 

87 

97

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 

97 

98 

98 

95

Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 
Forest area (% of total land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area) 

76 
28.8 
3.4 

78 

84 
28.1 
7.1 

94
28.3
9.8

.. 

3.5 

C02 emissions (metric tons per capita) 

2.3 

0.7 

1.0 

1.3

GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

4.8 

8.5 

8.3 

13.8

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people) 
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people) 

1.2 
0.0 

1.3 
0.0 

5.0 
1.0 

10.4
141.9

Internet users (per 100 people) 
Computer users (per 100 people)

0.0 

0.0 

0.1 

45.0

Education indicators (%) 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125 

100 

200

1 

75 

150

50 

50 

100

25 2 

25 

50 

00 

0j. 

. .21
.

. .2O5. .

1990 

1995 

2000 

2010 

2000 

2005 

2010

-- 4-- Primary net enrollment ralo

--- 

Ratio ofgiristo boysin primary& senecdary 
education

GAlbania 

GEurope & Centrl Asia 

=Fixed + Mobile subsnbersilntemet user

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. 

4/2/12

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

33

ANNEX B2: IBRD/IDA PROGRAM SUMMARY

(as of March 31, 2013)

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal 
year 

2013 

Proj ID 

Water Resources and Irrigation 
Water Sector Investment Project 

2014 

Health Project 
Environmental Services 

Financial Sector DPL* 
Energy Sector Reform and Recovery Project 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards 
b (HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

40.0
86.0 

42.0 
10.0 

150 
150

H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 

L
L

L
L
H
H

*the DPL will go forward only if the macro outlook improves

34

ANNEX 5.3: IFC INVESTMENT OPERATIONS PROGRAM

(as of March 31, 2013)

Original Commitment Activity - IFC 

Original Commitment Activity - partners 

Original Commitment Activity - IFC (by sector)
Oil, Gas and Mining 

Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing 

Finance & Insurance 

Electric Power/Energy Efficiency 

Total 
Original Commitment Activity - IFC (by product)

Guarantee 
Loan-LN 
Straight Equity (incl. Fund) 

Total 

FY10 
2.3 

-

-

-

2.3 

-

2.3 

2.3 
-
-

2.3 

FY11 
0.4 

13 

-

-
0.4 
-
0.4 

0.4 

-
-
0.4 

FY12 
112.7 

-

25.0 

6.7 

-

81.0 

112.7 

-

97.4 
15.4 

112.7 

$million
FY13
11.8

-

-

-

5.9

5.9

11.8

-
11.8
-

11.8

35

ANNEX 5.4: SUMMARY OF NON LENDING SERVICES
(as of March 31, 2013)
Completion FY 

Audience' 

Objective b

Product 

G, B, PD, D 
G, B, PD, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

G, B, D 

KG, PS

G, B, PD, D 

KG, PD, PS

G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 

G, B, D 
G, B, D 

G, B, D 

G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 

G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

Recent completions

Country Economic Memorandum 
GAC Governance Policy Notes (4) 
Debt Management Assessment 
Public Economic and Financial 
Accountability

Underway

Extractive Industry Transparency 
Initiative
Public Expenditure and Finance 
Review
PFM Strategy 
Energy Sector TA 
Economic Governance, 
Regulatory Reform and Pro-
Poor Development
Pension Reform TA 
Aarhus Convetion Compliance 
PROFOR lnnovative Financing for
Sustainable Forest Management in 
Southwest Balkans
Monit. & Evaluation (EC TF)* 
TA Scienc., R&D/Innov. (EC TF)* 
Program. Financial Sector Dev* 
Programmatic Gender Monit.* 
Programmatic Poverty Monit.* 
Smart Safety Nets* 
Gas Ring Study (WBIF)* 
Transport Study (WBIF)* 
Public Fin Mgt/PEFA (EC TF)* 
Trade Logistics IFC* 
Renewable Energy Advisory IFC* 
Corporate Governance IFC* 
Investment Climate IFC* 

Planned

Health Finance* 
Employment and Jobs* 
Energy Strategy* 
Climate Change* 

FY11 
FY11 
FY12 
FY12 

FY13 

FY13 

FY13-14 
FY13-14 
FY12 

FY13 
FY13 

FY13 

FY12-13 
FY12-14 
FY12-15 
FY12-15 
FY12-15 
FY13 
FY13-14 
FY13-14 
FY13-15 
FY12-15 
FY12-15 
FY12-17 
FY13-15 

FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
* Regional Western Balkans Non-Lending (AAA)

36

ANNEX 5.5: ALBANIA SOCIAL INDICATORS

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per w oman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2005=100) 
INCOM E/CONSUM PTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2004-10 

3.0 
2.0 
35.1 
3.8 

3.1 
-0.9 
38.9 
2.6 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

4.9 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

96 
96 

.. 

71 
69 
74 

41 
48 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

670 
47 

.. 

.. 
.. 

1.6 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

98 
100 
96 

91 
97 

.. 

72 
69 
75 

31 
35 

.. 
.. 

44 
89 

3.2 
0.4 
48.0 
1.5 

12.4
10.1
14.6

3,960 
115 

34.5
8.1
43.0

2.8 

.. 

80 
80 
80 

95 
96 
94 

99 
99 

6 

77 
74 
80 

16 
18 

95 
46 
31 
99 

Europe & 
Central 
Asia 

405.2 
0.3 
64.1 
1.8 

Upper-
middle-
income

2,452.1
0.7
57.4
1.8

7,272 
143 

5,886
127

3.9 
4.4 

92 
92 
91 

96 
99 
91 

96 
95 

2 

71 
66 
75 

19 
23 

273 
116 
34 
98 

3.2
4.8

94
93
95

93
98
86

96
96

3

73
71
75

17
20

161
100
60
98

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2012.

37

ANNEX 5.6: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Actual 
2007 

Estlimate 
2009 

Projected
02 
21 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 

'2008 

' 00 

0 1 

04 

21

100 
21 
19 
60 

100 
20 
19 
61 

100 
19 
18 
63 

100 
19 
16 
65 

100 
18 
16 
66 

100 
18 
16 
66 

100 
18 
16 
66 

100 
18 
16 
67 

100
17
15
67

Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

96 
30 
6 
24 

94 
32 
9 
24 

96 
29 
8 
21 

96 
26 
6 
20 

97 
25 
5 
21 

95 
25 
5 
20 

97 
20 
5 
16 

95 
21 
4 
16 

91
24
4
20

Exports (GNFS)b 

29 
55 

30 
56 

28 
54 

32 
54 

34 
56 

34 
54 

35 

35 

36

Imports (GNFS) 

52 

51 

51

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

4 
20 

6 
18 

4 
13 

4 
13 

3 
12 

5 
12 

3 
11 

5 
14 

9
18

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

10703 

12985 

12129 

11842 

12946 

13415 

14163 

14736 

15710

3320 

3820 

3960 

3990 

3970 

4040 

4290 

4430 

4650

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 96 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
5.9 
Gross Domestic Income 
14.7 

7.7 
13.8 

3.3 
-4.3 

3.5 
5.7 

3.0 
5.9 

1.6 
0.6 

2.5 
2.5 

3.0 
2.6 

3.5
3.8

rReal annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 96 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
4.7 
7.1 
Total consumption 
14.3 
11.3 
Private consumption 
14.8 
10.6 

2.7 
-3.0 
-2.3 

2.9 
2.8 
3.7 

2.4 
6.4 
6.4 

1.0 
-1.2 
-1.2 

1.9 
3.3 
4.0 

2.4 
-0.3 
-0.6 

2.9
0.1
-0.7

rBalance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 

3080 
1407 
5883 
3859 
-2803 
1463 
-1039 

3832 
1973 
7287 
4803 
-3455 
1393 
-1895 

3446 
1445 

3840 
1637 
6380 
4180 
-2540 
1172 
-1467 

4376 
1878 
7250 
4829 
-2874 
1208 
-1732 

4572 
1739 
7269 
4750 
-2697 
1108 
-1656 

4890 
1677 
7340 
4660 
-2450 
1200 
-1279 

5215 
1572 
7496 
4683 
-2281 
1297 
-1001 

5664
1533
8070
5040
-2406
1401
-977

Merchandise FOB 

Imports (GNFS)b 

6490 
4224 
-3044 
1266 
-1887 

Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, inel. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

653 
-78 
115 
-193 
121 

866 
311 
225 
85 
399 
320 

940 
492 
198 
293 
741 
-285 

1086 
-15 
67 
-82 
430 
-35 

750 
467 
52 
415 
222 
293 

800 
336 
53 
283 
491 
29 

850 
97 
-32 
128 
303 
29 

900 
-21 
-78 
57 
70 
52 

950
-45
-95
50
-117
188

342 

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% ofGDP) 
rReal annual growth rates ( YR96 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary

-26.2 

-26.6 

-25.1 

-21.4 

-22.2 

-20.1 

-17.3 

-15.5 

-15.3

8.0 

5.3 

1.5 

4.9 

3.9 

2.4 

2.6 

2.6 

2.7

Manufactures 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

34.1 

22.7 

-12.9 

-1.4 

14.8 

-2.4 

-1.9 

-0.4 

6.0

38

ANNEX 5.6: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS (continued)

Inidicator 

2007 

2008 

Es tinite 
2009 

'2O00 

2011 

Projected
'2013 

~2012 

p2014 

"2015

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth/ 
total credit growth (%)

'Price indices( YR96 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms oftrade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

25.5 
23.6 
1.9 
5.9 
1.1 

78.3 
13.7 
82.9 

26.4 
23.7 
2.7 
8.6 
3.5 

75.0 
7.7 
90.5 

26.0 
25.0 
0.9 
8.4 
3.8 

75.7 
6.8 
93.9 

26.0 
23.9 
2.1 
5.5 
2.8 

79.5 
12.5 
95.9 

24.7 
24.0 
0.7 
4.6 
2.3 

81.5 
8.8 
100.6 

24.5 
24.2 
0.3 
4.6 
3.5 

82.6 
6.1 
86.7 

24.8 
23.8 
1.1 
4.5 
2.5 

83.3 
6.5 
87.7 

24.8 
23.8 
1.0 
4.4 
2.1 

84.0 
7.0 
88.1 

24.8
24.0
0.9
4.3
1.8

84.7
7.5
87.1

205.4 
110.2 
186.3 
92.3 

273.4 
111.8 
244.6 
82.7 

197.3 
112.9 
174.8 
92.2 

213.0 
113.3 
188.0 
98.6 

235.1 
114.0 
206.3 
93.7 

212.7 
114.9 
185.1 
92.6 

199.9 
115.0 
173.9 
167.3 

182.7 
116.0 
157.6 
308.0 

173.4
117.7
147.3
556.2

-4.4 
2.0 

-1.6 
4.4 

10.4 
2.4 

3.0 
3.5 

0.4 
3.0 

3.8 
3.0 

3.2 
3.0 

3.4 
3.0 

2.4
3.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

39

ANNEX 5.7: KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS

Estimated 
2009 

Projected
2013 

Indicator 

2007 

2008 

2010 

2011 

2012 

'~2014 

2015

Total debt outstanding and 

2343 

2495 

2788 

2840 

3122 

3126 

3094 

3094 

3195

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

10 

159 

296 

52 

283 

3 

-35 

0 

101

Total debt service (TDS) 

128 

123 

128 

157 

162 

186 

189 

191 

201

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 

48.0 

46.0 

60.2 

57.4 

56.1 

54.6 
23.3 
3.2 
59.1 

50.0 
21.8 
3.0 
58.5 

46.7 

44.3
20.3
2.8
52.7

TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

21.9 
2.6 
61.8 

19.2 
2.3 
64.6 

23.0 
2.8 
61.5 

24.0 
3.2 
62.7 

24.1 
2.9 
58.4 

21.0 
2.9 
56.7 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 

0.2 
58.9 

0.8 
66.2 

3.6 
75.1 

4.9 

5.9 
74.7 

8.3 

11.6 

13.9 

14.5

Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)c

74.3 

66.0 

69.8 

70.1 

65.1

IBRD DS/XGS 
1BRD TDO (US$m)d 

0.0 

0.0 

0.1 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.3 

0.4 

0.4

6 

17 

88 

94 

126 

191 

233 

249 

258

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

ShareofIBRDportfolio(%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

0 
750 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

809 

833 

848 

856 

855 

843 

821 

793

IFC (US$m)

Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity /c 

38.8 
8.2 

42.7 
7.7 

65.7 
17.7 

78.2 
29.7 

95.6 
29.7 

144.5 
35.2 

197.4
35.2

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.

e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

40

ANNEX 5.8 (IFC): COMMITED AND DISBURSED OUTSTANDING INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO

(As of January 1, 2013)

(In USD Millions)

Commitment 
Fiscal Year 

2012 
2009/ 2012 
2008 

2013 

Institution 
Short Name 

Antea Cement 
Bankers 
Best Constr. 

Credins Bank 

Fushe Kruie 
Konstruksione 
enso Albania 

2005 
2007 
2012/2013 
Total Portfolio 
* Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types

Loan 

Equity 

Committed 
Quasi Equity* 

Total 

Part 

Loan 

Equity 

Outstanding
Quasi Equity* 

Total 

Part

-
55.0 
6.4 

11.8 

16.0 
2.6 
-
91.5 

24.4 
12.1 

-

-

-
-
7.7 
44.2 

21.9 
-
-

-

-
-
-
21.9 

46.4 
67.1 
6.4 

11.8 

16.0 
2.6 
7.7 
158.0 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-
53.0 
3.8 

-

16.0 
2.6 
-
75.4 

23.2 
12.1 

-

-
-
3.0 
38.3 

21.9 
-
-

-

-
-
-

45.1 
65.1 
3.8 

0 

16.0 
2.6 
3.0 

21.9 

135.6 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

41

ANNEX 5.8 (IBRD/IDA): COMMITED AND DISBURSED OUTSTANDING INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO

CASAnnexBB1- Albania

Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)

As Of Date 41120t3

Closed Projects 

63

IBRDfiDA*

Total Disbursed (Actve) 
of which has been repad 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repad 
Total Disbursed (Acte+ Clsed) 
of which has been repad 

Total Undisbursed (Actme) 
Total Undisbursed (Ckmsed) 
Total Undisbursed (Actme+Clsed) 

73.93
1.82
453.03
79.18
526.96
81.0f

167.53
1.78
169.31

Active Proiects

Project ID 

P086807 
P110845 
P110481 
P078933 
P096263 
P107833 
P122233 
P121186 
Overall Result 

Last PSR
Supervision Rating 

Project Name 

COASTAL ZONE MGMT (A 
DISASTER RISK MITIGAT1 
ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFE 
EDUC EXCEL & EQUITY 
LAND ADMIN & MGMT PR 
SECONDARY AND LOCAL 
Social Assistance Moderni. 
WATER RESOURCES AN 

Develoment 
Obiectives 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MU 
S 
MS 
# 

iuplementation 
Proc ls
MU 
MS 
MS 
MU 
MU 
S 
MS 
# 

* 

Fiscal Year 

2005 
2008 
2008 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2012 
2013 

GRANT

Original Amount in US$ Mions

IBRD 

3 
21.6 

1996 

50
40
134.56 

IDA 

17.5
6.16
35.3
15
15
20

108.96

42

IBRD 33359RI

ULY 2009

