d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 76349 SB

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

FOR

SOLOMON ISLANDS

FOR THE PERIOD FY2013 - 2017

May 15, 2013

Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Islands Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Last Country Interim Strategy Note: March 12, 2010 (Report No. 53496-SB)

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT (as of April 29, 2013)
Currency Unit: Solomon Islands Dollars (SBD)
US$ 1.00 = SBD 7.22

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

DHS 
DPO 
DV 
EDF 
EITI 
EU 
FAO 

AAA 
Analytic and Advisory Activities 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
AusAID Australian Agency for International Development 
CDD 
Community Driven Development 
CO 
Community Officer 
CEWG Core Economic Working Group 
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy 
CRISP 
Increasing Resilience to Climate Change 
and Natural Hazards Project 
Demographic and Health Survey 
Development Policy Operation 
Domestic Violence 
European Development Fund 
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 
European Union 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations 
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GFDRR Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery 
GFPR Global Food Crisis Response Program 
GNI 
Gross National Income 
HIES 
Household Income and Expenditure Survey 
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Information and Communications Technology 
International Development Association 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
International Monetary Fund 
Interim Strategy Note 
Justice Delivered Locally 

ICT 
IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
IFAD 
IMF 
ISN 
JDL 

NGO 
NPS 
PAPRI 

J4P 
Justice for the Poor
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
NDS 
National Development Strategy for Solomon
Islands 2011 - 2020
Non-Governmental Organizations
National Payment Systems
Pacific Payment, Remittances and Securities
Settlement Initiative
PCRAFI Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
Financing Initiative
RDP 
Rural Development Program
REP 
Rapid Employment Project
PFM 
Public Financial Management
PFTAC 
IMF Pacific Technical Assistance Facility
PIAC 
Pacific Infrastructure Advisory Center
PIFS 
Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
PPCR 
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
PRIF 
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility
PROP 
Pacific Regional Oceanscape Program
RAMSI Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands
RSE 
New Zealand Recognised Seasonal Employment
Scheme
RSIPF Royal Solomon Islands Police Force
SIEA 
Solomon Islands Electricity Authority
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises
SOE 
State Owned Enterprise
SPC 
Secretariat to the Pacific Community
SPF 
State and Peace Building Trust Fund
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
VDS 
Vessel Day Scheme
WBG World Bank Group
WHO World Health Organization
WIM Women In Mining

Vice President: 

Country Director: 

Country Representative/TTL: 

Co-Task Team Leader: 

IDA/IBRD 

Axel van Trotsenburg 

Franz Drees-Gross 

Anne Tully 

Robert Jauncey

IFC

Karin Finkelston

Sergio Pimenta

Gavin Murray

FY2013 - 2017 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
SOLOMON ISLANDS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR SOLOMON ISLANDS ...... 

........... 1

COUNTRY CONTEXT: UNIQUE CHALLENGES 
...............
A Transition from Stabilization to Stability................1.......................
Economic Development and Outlook 
............................ 
..... 
......... 7
Government Development Strategy............... 
.................... 
......... 11
Donor Engagement 
...................................................... 
12

1................

WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT 
.................................... 
13
World Bank Group Engagement in Solomon Islands 
........................ 
13
Outcomes and Lessons from the 2010 Solomon Islands Interim Strategy Note...... 
......... 13

THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 
Building on Gains for a Stable Solomon Islands ................. 
Strengthening Economic Resilience ........................ 
Underpinning Improvements in Public Service Provision.............. 
Addressing Gender Across the WBG's Program.................. 
Partnerships, Flexibility and Selectivity ........................................
Financing Envelope and Program........................................... 

.. 
............. 16
................. 16
.................. 18
............. 22
............... 25
27
28

V. 

RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES..................................... 

30

Annexes:
Annex 1: Solomon Islands Results Matrix 
........................................... 
33
Annex 2: Outcomes and Lessons Learned from the 2010 Solomon Islands ISN ....... 
...................
39
Annex 3: Standard CAS Annexes 
.......................................... 
....... 46
Annex 4: Donor Coordination .................................................... 
55
Map of Solomon Islands IBRD 33482R 
................................................
58

Boxes:
Box 1: Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) .......................... 
3
Box 2: Justice at the Local Level 
..................................................
4
Box 3: Key Results from the 2010 ISN 
.............................................
15
Box 4: Joint WBG Program on Women's Empowerment in the Pacific.............................. 
17
Box 5: Job Growth in Pacific Island Countries. 
.............................. 
.......... 19
Box 6: Pacific Payment, Remittances and Securities Settlement Initiative (PAPRI) ...... 
.........
22
Box 7: Improving Data Analysis 
....................................... 
..........
23
Box 8: The Women in Mining Initiative in PNG................... 
................... 26
Box 9: IDA and IFC Collaboration....................................... 
...........
28

Figures:
Figure 1: Solomon Islands: GDP Growth and GNI per Capita: 1997 - 2012 (est.) ....... 
............. 8
Figure 2: World Bank Group IDA, Trust Fund and IFC Commitments to the Pacific Islands by IDA
Replenishment........................................................ 

13

Tables:
Table 1: World Bank Group Portfolio in Solomon Islands, March 2013 
Table 2: Tentative World Bank Group Pipeline in Solomon Islands, March 2013 ....... 
Table 3: Proposed World Bank Analytical and Advisory Services 
......... 

..................
14
..........
29
................. 30

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) is the first full country strategy prepared for Solomon
Islands, following an Interim Strategy Note (ISN) in 2010. The World Bank Group has been scaling
up its assistance in the Pacific and is moving to individual country strategies, to better acknowledge
country-specific challenges and priorities, while also ensuring that individual strategies are placed
within a coherent broader framework for engagement with the Pacific islands given common challenges
as well as differences.

This CPS is being presented within a more stable political, security and economic context than that
which accompanied the ISN. Solomon Islands has made significant progress in restoring stability
following conflict, known locally as the "tension", from 1998 to 2003. Macroeconomic and fiscal
stability has been restored since a fiscal crisis in 2009 precipitated by the global economic slowdown,
development gains have been achieved 
in many areas, key government functions have been
reestablished, and Solomon Islanders are increasingly taking leadership of government programs.
During the last year, Solomon Islands effectively managed a range of high profile events, including the
Festival of Pacific Arts, demonstrating an important level of cohesion and capability. Reflecting a
confidence in the overall security environment, the Regional Assistance Mission for Solomon Islands
(RAMSI), with the agreement of Solomon Islands Government, is about to undertake a transition,
reducing its military presence, retaining a police advisory team and transitioning civilian assistance to
regular bilateral and multilateral development programs.

At the same time, Solomon Islands remains a fragile country; deep development challenges persist
and some of the stresses that contributed to the tension a decade ago could potentially resurface
without sustained effort to address them by the government and its partners. Youth unemployment,
thin capacity, enclave developments, perceived spatial inequalities, a fluid political environment, and
rapid social change all present challenges to the resilience of Solomon Islands' young governance
institutions. In addition, Solomon Islands - as with many of the small and remote Pacific island
countries - presents significant challenges of diversity, geographic dispersion with a largely rural
population, and vulnerability 
to natural hazards. Delivering the services necessary to meet the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in such a situation is both challenging and costly. The sources
of revenue to help address these challenges have typically been dependent upon the exploitation of a
limited range of natural resources and small holder agriculture; the returns to which are vulnerable to
ongoing resource availability, volatility in global prices and external and internal shocks. Sustained
external financing over the long term is likely to remain important in order to address vulnerabilities and
provide the additional impetus necessary to overcome major constraints.

Building on the relative stability of the recent years and embedding gains achieved to date, will be key
to creating the economic incentives, social cohesion and improved state-society relationships that are
essential to avoiding future conflicts and reducing fragility and poverty. These objectives are fully
consistent with the World Bank Group's emphasis to eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and promote
shared prosperity. The government's own strategy focuses on building a vibrant and united Solomon
Islands with better livelihoods for all. Pursuing sustainable and inclusive growth, increasing social and
economic opportunities and maintaining peace and stability are key elements of this strategy. This CPS
is intended to support Solomon Islands in this process. In particular, the World Bank Group will support
Solomon Islands in: (i) strengthening economic resiliency through programs that maximize sustainable
growth and returns in agriculture, mining and fisheries while addressing key constraints to inclusive
growth, particularly in the provision of power; and (ii) supporting improvements in the equitable and
accountable delivery of basic services across the country. In each of these areas the Bank Group will be
guided by two cross cutting principles: (i) supporting government and its partners to embed the

I

institutional gains achieved to date - particularly those that promote inclusion and cohesion - into the
overall development effort; and (ii) ensuring that gender is mainstreamed through the portfolio with a
view to one hundred percent gender informed operations. Efforts will be made to strengthen economic
opportunities for women, while reducing negative impacts and harm for women in Solomon Islands.
This is part of a wider WBG effort across the Pacific to enhance women's economic empowerment,
reduce gender based violence and build a stronger voice for women in business.

The World Bank Group's value added in Solomon Islands comes primarily from the expertise and
experience of working in other fragile and capacity-constrained environments and the ability to
leverage the engagement of other public and private resources and expertise. In this context, the Bank
Group will work to underpin the larger investments of government and its partners in key service
delivery sectors to explore, pilot and monitor efforts to improve the sustainable and accountable delivery
of key public services and livelihoods across the country. The Bank Group will also draw together its
global knowledge and capacity 
to manage the technical, social, environmental and commercial
requirements - through both IDA and IFC engagements - of some key high risk-high return programs
where alternative expertise is limited and where the returns may be transformational for the country and
for local communities involved, particularly in the mining and energy sectors. We will also continue to
monitor Solomon Islands as a fragile and conflict affected situation (FCS) to ensure relevant Bank
flexibilities for FCS are applied and to mobilize additional implementation support as needed.

Given the relative stability of recent years and the expertise and experience the World Bank Group
has gained in Solomon Islands over the last three years, moving from an ISN to a CPS is appropriate.
In that context, this CPS will: (i) provide an update on the country context and its implications for the
Bank Group's operations; and (ii) reconfirm and deepen the Bank Group's strategy in the context of a
more stable but continuing high-risk operating environment.

ii

I. RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR SOLOMON ISLANDS

1. 
This is the first full individual Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) prepared for Solomon
Islands, following the preparation of an Interim Strategy Note (ISN) in 2010. Since preparing the
ISN, 
the World Bank Group (WBG) has amassed a considerable body of analytical work,
institutional knowledge, and in-country experience. Additionally, the Bank Group has established
clear areas of expertise and traction upon which it can build. At the same time, Solomon Islands has
demonstrated increasing resilience in several key areas, following the conflict from 1998-2003
including: recovering from the fiscal and economic crisis of 2009; addressing key structural problems
especially in major utilities; demonstrating a commitment to improved transparency in the extractive
sectors; and managing political transitions without recourse to significant violence. Solomon Islands
is moving into its second decade since the end of conflict in 2003 in a much more stable and robust
condition, although it remains vulnerable to setbacks that could undermine objectives of stability and
poverty reduction. In this context, a CPS is the appropriate strategy instrument going forward,
reflecting both the Bank's enhanced understanding of, and engagement in, Solomon Islands and the
country's greater confidence in leading its own development agenda. This CPS for Solomon Islands
builds upon the engagement and experiences of the prior ISN. It has been prepared in coordination
with the Government of Solomon Islands and key development partners to reflect the specific
challenges - especially related to geographical constraints, sustainable growth and state building -
that the country is attempting to address.

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT: UNIQUE CHALLENGES

A Transition from Stabilization to Stability

2. 
As a relatively young, remote, widely dispersed, and linguistically disparate country,
Solomon Islands faces considerable development and state building challenges. An archipelago of
997 islands, Solomon Islands has a total land area of 29,900 km 2 spread over 1.34 million km 2 Of
ocean (an area larger than France, Germany and Poland combined). The population of 550,000 is
dispersed across 90 inhabited 
islands and has among 
the lowest population densities (18
persons/kM2) and urbanization rates (17 percent) in the world. Distances between islands are
significant: the north western Choiseul group is approximately 1,500 kilometers from the south-
eastern Santa Cruz Islands - a distance equivalent to that between London and Rome. Distances to
major export markets are even greater - with the capital Honiara over 2,000 kilometers from urban
centers in Australia.

3. 

The island geography presents formidable and in some cases immutable challenges to
service delivery, infrastructure, and economic integration. There are only 5 kilometers of roads per
square kilometer, the lowest ratio in the Pacific, and travel in many areas is only by motorboat. Land
and food security, combined with kinship obligations, provide an essential social safety net. Small
and widely dispersed populations have given rise to significant cultural diversity, with about 70
distinct languages and numerous local dialects. The costs of governing and extending services across
such a vast space are high. Poor development choices that are seen as widening gaps between and
across provinces and islands potentially undermine broader state building efforts.

4. 
Like other countries in the region Solomon Islands has undergone enormous social and
economic change over the past 50 years. This includes the introduction of the cash economy in what
was previously a largely subsistence system. Social transactions and relationships were previously
based on systems of exchanges and reciprocal obligation, largely rooted in kinship or other local
affiliations. Monetization has qualitatively changed these relationships. These dynamics create strain

1

in general at the local level, but particularly affect intergenerational relationships. The traditional
hierarchies, based generally around age and status, have been stressed in many instances.

5. 
Solomon Islands has made significant progress in restoring stability following conflict
from 1998 to 2003. The conflict, known locally as the "tension", emerged as a result of grievances
between the local Guadalcanal landowners and migrants, predominantly from the most populous
island of Malaita, drawn by economic opportunities. Violent clashes involving rival militant groups
led to deaths, displacement, and the widespread destruction of property'. While often characterized
as an ethnic conflict, the tension had multiple political and economic causes, including the
disproportionate concentration of economic development in and around Honiara compared to the rest
of the country. Rapid social change associated with increasing urbanization also contributed to
stresses, including the erosion of customary authority, disenchantment among young people, and a
loss of social cohesion. In the decade since the tension, however, elections have been successfully
held in 2006 and 2010, and the country has been largely peaceful, except for one bout of unrest when
parts of Honiara's Chinatown were destroyed following the 2006 elections.

6. 
Engaging at the request of Solomon Islands' Prime Minister, the Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) played a critical role in restoring security and core state
functions (Box 1). The RAMSI intervention occurred at a time when the integrity of formal state
structures in Solomon Islands had been severely compromised and many technical functions had
largely collapsed. By 2003, the state was virtually bankrupt, most large scale commercial enterprises
had closed, government services were severely affected and public funds rapidly depleted as a result
of the manipulation of the compensation process, the corrupt use of ex militants' demobilization and
rehabilitation funds, and the direct theft and extortion of government finances. Fear and intimidation
paralyzed the courts, prisons were emptied and the police force effectively collapsed. RAMSI
moved with impressive speed to restore security and basic state functions, particularly law and order
and fiscal stability. RAMSI's presence is widely seen within Solomon Islands as the guarantor of
stability, and a 2011 survey found that approximately 86 percent of Solomon Islanders continued to
support the mission.

7. 
Since the tension, the country has made a relatively successful recovery and the
government continues to make progress in key areas of reform. The economy has grown relatively
strongly since the end of the tension, based predominantly on commodities such as logging and
mining. 
Institutional functionality has been restored in many areas and social indicators are
improving. Several major investments have come on line or expanded, notably the Gold Ridge mine
which began production after ten years of closure, and in 2011, the government successfully raised
the determined price of logs to reflect international prices, a reform that had previously proved
politically intractable. Financial management and budgetary processes have been much enhanced
following a significant fiscal and balance of payments crisis in 2009 and improved tax collection and
compliance have generated strong increases in revenues. After the challenges of the tension era,
media and civil society are playing a much more robust role in public debate. Nevertheless, and as is
the case with many countries, there is a need to continue building institutional capability to manage

While estimates of deaths and casualties vary, it is estimated that between 100 and 200 people were killed as a
direct result of fighting between late 1998 and late 2000. Around 35,000 people were displaced from their usual
places of residence during this period. The Townsville Peace Agreement of October 2000 effectively ended

organized military style fighting around Honiara. It is estimated that a further 50 people were killed between late

2000 and the deployment of RAMSI in July 2003. Fighting on the Weather Coast of Guadalcanal during this

period saw the displacement of a further 1500 to 3000 people. (Allen, M. 2007, Greed and Grievance in the
Conflict in Solomon Islands, 1998-2003, PhD thesis, The Australian National University)

2

the inevitable stresses and challenges that emerge in the transition from fragility and conflict to
resilience and stability.

Box 1: Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI)

RAMSI is a partnership between Solomon Islands and fifteen contributing countries from the Pacific region, led by
Australia. RAMSI arrived in Solomon Islands in July 2003 at the request of the Solomon Islands Government and
with the unanimous endorsement of Solomon Islands Parliament, and the countries of the Pacific Islands Forum.
With a mission to help restore stability, RAMSI supported efforts to improve justice and security; more effective
governance; stronger economic growth; and improved service delivery. RAMSI's capacity building strategy has
moved through three phases over the last ten years: the first stabilization phase from 2003-04 focused on restoring
law and order and stabilizing government finances. RAMSI technical advisers assumed line functions as a gap-
filling measure. The second phase, throughout 2004-09, emphasized the consolidation of the rule of law, the
beginning of public sector reform and measures to improve the economy as well as institution building. The third
phase from 2009 to date has emphasized capacity development with a reduction in the number of advisers, and the
transition of Solomon Island counterparts to in-line positions. Reflecting these changes, RAMSI has moved from an
initial presence of 330 police officers supported by a contingent of 1800 military personnel and a significant number
of in-line civilian positions, to a much smaller police presence of 146, a military presence of 160 with approximately
70 civilian advisers. Given recent stability and following Cabinet endorsement, RAMSI is again in transition. Its
police component will remain until 2017. From 1 July 2013, its military component will withdraw and remaining
development activities will transfer to the bilateral aid programs of Australia and New Zealand and multilateral

programs of the World Bank, the ADB and the EU.

8. 
The political environment in Solomon Islands remains fluid. The electoral system
introduced at independence in 1978 is based upon a Westminster Parliamentary system. The
National Parliament consists of 50 Members of Parliament (MPs) elected from single-member
constituencies. A first past the post system in a country of very small constituencies (between 2,000
and approximately 20,000 in size) and great ethno-linguistic diversity means narrow margins of
victory, contest, and that elected members do not necessarily represent an aggregate of public
interests in their home areas. Lack of established political parties has led to regular floor crossings,
votes of no confidence and uncertainty. Only one government and Prime Minister has ever served a
full term. And since independence, only two women have served in the National Parliament. The
impacts of high levels of political uncertainty on the reform context and on the implementation of
development programs are substantial as a result.

9. 
Access to the legal system is extremely difficult for many Solomon Islanders. Over the
period of the tension, Solomon Islands' state justice system was barely functioning. The Royal
Solomon Islands Police Force, the most visible organ of state power, was severely undermined by the
partisan role played by elements of the force during the conflict. Following the RAMSI intervention
in July 2003, external support to the state justice system and the Royal Solomon Islands Police Force
increased to unprecedented levels. While RAMSI assistance has been critical to reviving security and
justice agencies that had largely disintegrated during the conflict, the scale and form of assistance
involved has raised questions about long-term sustainability. RAMSI is acutely aware of these issues
with the focus now shifting from post-conflict stabilization to a longer-term development approach.
State security and justice service delivery to the rural populace remains a challenge, with the vast
majority of the population simply unable to access effective state, non-state or hybrid justice
mechanisms (Box 2). At the same time, respect for the judiciary overall remains high.

3

Box 2: Justice at the Local Level

The World Bank's recent study on Justice Delivered Locally (JDL) identified four broad areas of disputation in the
sites studied: (i) social order problems arising principally from substance abuse; (ii) domestic violence (DV) and
family disputes; (iii) land/natural resource related grievances; and (iv) those arising from the management of
development projects at the community level. Neither state, non-state, nor hybrid justice systems has been able to
address these issues effectively and legitimately. Police and courts have a limited reach outside provincial centers,
while lower local courts rarely sit due to a variety of structural problems and resourcing constraints. While citizens
often prefer to use non-state systems to settle disputes, these mechanisms are under immense stress due to larger
processes of change, as well as newer types of stresses due in part to the involvement of local leaders in logging or
other poorly managed development schemes.

10. 
There have been real improvements 
in development outcomes 
in Solomon Islands,
particularly during the past decade; yet partly because of the tension, progress toward most MDGs
remains off track 2, and has been more limited than in some neighboring countries. The paucity of
data however, may well hide more recent improvements in some areas, particularly child mortality
and maternal health.

Poverty remains a concern (showing mixed progress in MDG reporting), although there are
indications of improvements in recent years. Poverty in the Solomon Islands context does
not generally mean hunger or destitution, but rather households facing increasing hardship
i.e. some may struggle to meet daily/weekly living expenses, particularly those that require
cash payments. There are also households that experience difficulties in accessing basic
social services and employment opportunities. Solomon Islands' GNI per capita has
increased from about US$800 in 2003 at the end of the tension to slightly over US$1,100 3 in
2012, but has yet to recover to the level of US$1,450 reached in the late 1990s. UNDP,
drawing on survey data from FY06, estimated that approximately 22.7 percent of people in
Solomon Islands suffered basic needs poverty4 while food poverty was 10.65 percent.
Solomon Islands, like several other Pacific Island countries, has not been part of the surveys
conducted by the International Comparison Project (which computes Purchasing Power
Parities) until the most recent round (ICP 2011) for which results are not yet available. Initial
calculations suggest that, a $1.25 poverty line (averaged over the country) will result in a
poverty head count ratio lower than the one obtained from the national food poverty line. The
profile of poverty differs by geography. Per-urban households around the capital of Honiara
suffer from disproportionate levels of poverty, with almost one in three people unable to
afford a basic minimum standard of living. In contrast, 19 percent of people in rural areas are
poor. Analysis of provincial data, suggested that provinces with the highest proportion of
poor households were either those which are most remote or are the most densely populated.
A new household survey to update poverty measures is being conducted and a much stronger
baseline on poverty dynamics is expected to be available by early 2014. In parallel, other
indicators suggest broad improvements in living conditions, with commensurate reductions in
poverty, since 2006. Non-extractive real production (one-quarter of which is non-logging
agriculture) is expected to have grown by 17 percent between 2006 and 2013 after accounting
for population growth, and urban living costs grew less rapidly than in the early 2000s.
Service delivery and outcomes have generally improved, as discussed below. In addition, the

2 2012 Pacific Regional MDG Tracking Report. Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, October 2012
Atlas method, constant US dollars.
4 Final report on the Estimation of Basic Needs Poverty Lines, and the Incidence and Characteristics of Poverty in
Solomon Islands, Solomon Islands National Statistics Office and UNDP Pacific Centre Suva, Fiji, July 2008.

4

Rural Development Program, operating since 2009, has provided 300,000 beneficiaries
across all the rural wards (apart from Renbel) with improved access to water supply, health
posts, education, and energy services while, its extension services have helped as many as
120,000 people across 80 percent of Solomon Islands' rural wards directly benefit from
improved agricultural productivity. These factors are expected to have improved livelihoods
and human development outcomes.

* Education has seen recent progress, although Solomon Islands is likely to fall slightly short
of the MDG target of achieving universal primary education by 2015. Net primary enrolment
rates have increased significantly over the past decade - from about 75 percent to 90 percent
- although this follows limited growth in the early 1990s and a decline during the tension.
Each year Solomon Islands allocates between 20 and 25 percent of the government budget to
education, higher than most other countries at comparable income levels. Despite strong
recent gains in access to primary education, the quality of learning outcomes remains of
concern, with only about 30 percent of students completing primary school being
functionally literate5 .
Secondary education enrollments have increased from about 20
percent during the midst of the tensions to over 40 percent. Still secondary education remains
out of reach for many, with children in poor households half as likely to have received
secondary schooling as the rest of the population. A large proportion of the government's
investment in enhancing skills benefits a small number of tertiary students, with little support
for those Solomon Islanders who need to gain or regain basic literacy, numeracy and
livelihoods skills to increase their employability and productivity both at home and abroad6.

* Health outcomes have improved significantly, as a result of free healthcare and relatively
strong service provision, but Solomon Islands, like many other developing countries, will not
meet ambitious MDG targets. In the two decades since the early 1990s, the proportion of
children dying before their fifth birthday has almost halved, from 42 to 22 per 1,000 births -
a figure below the average for all lower middle income countries - although this will fall
short of MDG targets to reduce child mortality by two thirds. Similarly, maternal mortality
has fallen from 150 per 100,000 live births in 1990 to about 90 in 2010, but still remains
higher than most other Pacific island countries. Malnutrition rates have also fallen. Life
expectancy has increased from 58 in the early 1990s to 68 years; as with other Pacific Island
countries, however, a rapid increase in non-communicable diseases such as diabetes and
cardiovascular disease could erode these gains over the next decade unless urgent attention is
given to early prevention and treatment options. Outreach efforts have especially helped to
reduce the incidence of malaria, although as the cause of 10 percent of all under 5 deaths, the
disease still remains a bigger health care risk in Solomon Islands than any country outside of
Africa. Despite overall gains, there are some concerns that recent spending decisions will
increasingly focus service delivery on higher level health care facilities in Honiara rather than
primary health care in rural areas.

* Gender inequality remains a serious issue. Gains have been made in educational access, with
about 95 girls now attending primary school for every 100 boys - but this drops away to
about 80 girls for every 100 boys at the secondary level. Despite some modest improvement
in maternal mortality, women's access to family planning services and the capacity to choose

s Asia Pacific Bureau of Adult Education. Educational Experience Survey; Education, language and Literacy
Experience in Solomon Islands. October 2007.
6 Skills for Solomon Islanders, Opening New Opportunities, World Bank, October 2012

5

the timing and number of children they would like is limited. This is reflected in the high
fertility rate (4.2) and relatively low contraceptive prevalence (35 percent). This has an
impact on the work, study and other life choices women can realistically make. While women
have historically played important roles within the family and community and in dispute
resolution during the tension, participation in formal institutions and employment is low. An
estimated 54.3 percent of women over 15 are 'economically active,' but are concentrated in
informal businesses, such as selling cooked food, handicrafts, or running micro-businesses,
such as kiosks. Only 38 percent of public service positions are occupied by women, of which
only 12 percent are senior positions. Women play a significant role in agriculture, but have
less access than men to formal agricultural extension services. Gender based violence is
endemic, with the most authoritative survey suggesting that almost two thirds of women had
suffered some form of violence 7 . Formal services to support women in such situations are
limited and often difficult to access.

* Access to basic services is very low, although this varies by location. Nationally, less than 20
percent of the population has access to electricity. However, in Honiara, this figure is over 63
percent. In many of the outer islands, less than 5 percent have access to electricity. Similarly,
national figures show that only 9 percent of the population (with almost 40 percent in
Honiara) has access to modern cooking fuels, with extremely low numbers in rural areas.
Access to improved water sources is unequally distributed throughout the country, with over
78 percent of Honiara households having access to water piped either into the home or the
neighborhood, compared to 33 percent nationally. Approximately 62 percent of Honiara
households have access to flush toilets, compared to 15 percent nationally.

11. 
Limited employment opportunities in urban areas and a sizable youth bulge present a
persistent risk. Only about 50,000 people out of a working population of over 250,000 are employed
in the formal economy, with the bulk of the remaining population engaged in subsistence agriculture
with periodic cash incomes. Rapid population growth - 2.3 percent per year' - with 44 percent of the
population below 15 years of age has outstripped job creation in the formal economy. An estimated
7,500 young people enter the workforce each year, but only one among every six school leavers will
find paid employment. Unlike a number of other countries in the Pacific region, Solomon Islands has
very low rates of migration to regional job centers. Many young people make their way into the
urban and per-urban areas particularly around Honiara, which have been growing at an average rate
of 4.7 percent per year for the last ten years. The Bank's Justice Delivered Locally (JDL) study
documents the strain placed on many communities by these dynamics. In many areas, the research
found that alcohol and drug production, consumption and anti-social behavior among youth was seen
as among the biggest "justice" problems facing communities - but one which neither the customary
nor formal systems were able to effectively address. Youth dynamics are a challenge for many
developing countries but are rendered more acute in Solomon Islands due to its small size,
remoteness, and lack of opportunity.

12. 
Government capacity is improving and attention has turned to enhancing performance
within parts of the civil service. Performance contracts have been put in place at the Permanent
Secretary level and the Public Service Commission is beginning a review of remuneration levels
across the public service given the decline in real public sector wages over the past decade. A

7 Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC). Solomon Islands Family Health and Safety Study, A Study on

Violence Against Women and Children. 2009

World Development Indicators, 2009

6

particular challenge will be to strengthen institutions which, despite some notable exceptions such as
the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, had virtually collapsed during the tension, following an
incremental process of degradation during much of the post-independence period. State structures
and functions remain poorly defined and understood, and were previously seen as incapable of
stemming the conflict that befell Solomon Islands during the tension. The results of capacity building
efforts under a decade of RAMSI support, with an early focus on capacity substitution, remain
unclear. In key central agencies, capacity among civil servants, though growing, remains thin and
centered upon donor-supported high performing units. Service delivery through government systems
has been improving, although institutional arrangements to support local level delivery remain weak.

13. 
Further improvements in service delivery across a widely dispersed population will be
critical to build confidence in the legitimacy of state institutions. Building on the relative stability
of recent years, improved local level service delivery will be vital to build social cohesion and
address underlying grievances which are a result of enclave economic activity, spatial inequalities
brought about by longstanding patterns of uneven development, rapid social change, and perceptions
of patronage in public spending. Partly in response to challenges to service delivery that a difficult
geography presents, and the frustrations arising from the slow pace at which government capacity is
increasing, the government has taken a high risk approach to basic service delivery at local levels.
Constituency Development Funds provided to each national Member of Parliament to encourage
local level investments were increased significantly in 2012, and a new Constituency Development
Fund Act, passed by Parliament in 2013, institutionalized constituency development offices as
parallel local development structures to provincial government. While potentially helping to ensure
services 
in rural areas, these funds are often disbursed narrowly, opaquely, and with limited
oversight.

Economic Development and Outlook

14. 
Solomon Islands' economy has grown relatively strongly since the end of the tension, but
population growth means average per capita incomes have only now recovered to the levels of the
mid 1990s. After a steep contraction in economic output of 24 percent during the tensions, overall
economic growth has rebounded (Figure 1). In 2010 and 2011, a surge in logging, the restart of gold
mining operations, support from development partners, improved external conditions, and gains in
macroeconomic management lifted growth rates. Foreign exchange reserves and government cash
reserves were rebuilt, and retail price increases moderated. These conditions contrast sharply with
conditions in 2009, when Solomon Islands was hit hard (more so than other Pacific island countries)
by the global economic crisis, with output contracting sharply, the government running short of cash
to meet recurrent obligations, and foreign exchange reserves being depleted. Still, even with the
recovery in the Solomon Islands economy in the post-tension period, incomes have barely kept pace
with population growth. The latter averages almost 2.3 percent a year, according to the 2009 census,
meaning that by the end of 2012 per capita incomes were only slightly higher than their pre-tension
level.

7

Figure 1: Solomon Islands: GDP Growth and GDP per Capita: 1997 - 2012 (est.)

15% 

10% 

5% 

0% 

-5% 

-10% 

-15% 

GDP per capita 

(RHS) 

Real GDP
growth (LHS)

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011e2012e

Constant
2012 US$

1,500

1,200

900

600

300

0

15. 
Gains in macroeconomic conditions slowed in 2012, as logging and mining activity
stabilized and agricultural production declined in response to weaker prices. Stronger government
spending provided some offset. GDP growth slowed in 2012 to around 4.5 percent, following
growth near 10.5 percent in 2011. The slowdown in aggregate growth was due to flat or lower
production across a range of major commodities, especially agricultural exports. Agricultural
commodities such as copra, cocoa and palm oil are important sources of cash income to smallholder
farmers in rural areas. Volatility in commodity prices at the global level can therefore have an
important impact on farmers. Other key drivers of economic growth and government revenue
stabilized in 2012. Mining, which contributed as much as 2 percentage points to 2012 growth, is
now likely to have stabilized. Log production was affected by rains early in the year and prices
weakened slightly with slower construction activity in the main Asian markets. Nevertheless,
reported log exports of 1.9 million m 3 in 2011 and 2 million m 3 in 2012 were at record highs. With a
total value of about US$190 million in 2011, logging made up almost 20 percent of GDP and 30
percent of all exports by value. Fisheries make an important contribution to the economy, with
exports, primarily of tuna, amounting to about US$20 million, or about 5 percent of GDP. With the
softening in external conditions, the number and scale of applications for foreign direct investment
retreated in 2012 from recent record highs. Domestic demand remained robust through 2012. A
notable boost to private consumption and government spending came from the Festival of Pacific
Arts, which was held around Honiara in July, while implementation of donor-funded projects also
added to domestic demand. This demand appears to have translated into more job opportunities, with
the Central Bank's preferred employment indicator rising by 9 percent over 2012 (to over 46,000

people).

16. 
Recent macro-economic management has been essentially sound, following a severe fiscal
crisis in 2008/09. The macroeconomic framework implemented by the authorities has been adequate
to provide an acceptable level of price stability, maintain internal and external balances, reduce the
stock of debt, and build reserves to cushion shocks. This broad framework is expected to be
maintained in the coming years. An IMF review of the current Standby Credit Facility undertaken in
December 2012 concluded that the Solomon Islands Government was making good progress against
the program's structural benchmarks, albeit with some delays. The government has had significant
fiscal surpluses (6 percent of GDP in 2010, 9 percent in 2011), due largely to improved revenue

8

collection, the commodities boom and to restrained growth in realized spending. The fiscal situation
deteriorated somewhat in 2012 with increased spending and lower revenue growth leading to the
overall surplus falling to 4 percent of GDP. This was due in part to one-off spending related to the
Festival of Pacific Arts, as well as a significant increase in spending through constituency funds
(from 2 percent to 4 percent of GDP). The 2013 budget anticipates a surplus of 0.8 percent of GDP,
and balanced budgets are projected through 2015. Non-food and fuel inflation has been moderate.
International reserves have been rebuilt to US$460 million (8 months of exports). The net present
value of external debt fell to 13 percent of GDP in 2012.

17. 
In the medium-term, higher agricultural productivity, greater opportunities in urban areas,
and improved public service delivery are likely to be the key sources of improvements in living
standards and shared prosperity. The factors driving strong aggregate growth in economic activity
over 2010 and 2011 appear to have abated, and growth is likely to return to a medium-term trend
approaching 4 percent per year in the non-extractive economy. Mining and logging are expected to
subtract slightly from aggregate growth, as the rate of logging is expected to decline slowly through
this decade while Gold Ridge production remains near 2012 levels, which are around one fifth below
expectations at the time the mine was re-opened. Agricultural production is expected to contribute to
growth as various cash crop sectors revive, extension services improve, and improved intermediation
by trading companies facilitates farmers' access to markets. Gradually expanding access to regional
labor markets for Solomon Islanders combined with various low-cost innovations in financial
services is likely to complement improved agricultural productivity to support rural incomes. In
urban areas, less expensive and more reliable public utilities, and stronger human capital through
investments in education and health are likely to support urban business. 
In addition to overall
growth, these drivers are likely to support improved living standards for the bottom 40 percent of the
population.

18. 
Solomon Islands' medium term outlook is subject to considerable risks inherent in a small,
isolated and geographically dispersed economy. External developments provide the main source of
macroeconomic risk. The Solomon Islands are particularly susceptible to natural disasters, which can
disrupt fragile transport and production infrastructure and place additional demands on public
finances to support recovery. Risk modeling under the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
Financing Initiative (PCRAFI), supported by Japan, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC),
and the World Bank, suggests that disasters are on average likely to cost the country 3 percent of
GDP per year. 
In addition, the 'economic geography' of Solomon Islands puts communities
significantly at risk to climate change. Sea level rise, soil and fresh water lens salination, increased
flooding and coastal erosion are already being experienced, with some communities experiencing
food shortages as crops previously grown to sustain them are no longer viable. Declines in global
commodity prices also have a dampening influence on real activity, and slow the development of
participation in the market economy. A deeper or more protracted global slowdown than currently
anticipated, or sustained declines in gold and other commodity prices, could adversely affect exports,
growth, incomes and reserves. Similarly, fuel price shocks have a significant impact upon Solomon
Islands given the heavy dependence upon fossil fuels for electricity generation and for the transport
of people and goods across a widely dispersed archipelago. The transition from the RAMSI program
to more traditional bilateral support is expected to have limited overall impact on domestic demand,
although it does present some downside risks. Conversely, there are also notable positive risks,
especially from 2015, with significant investments proposed in nickel mining pending clarity on the
mining tax and land access regimes, while various proposals for new fish canning operations are also
under development.

9

19. 
Government debt has continued to decline over the last few years, and the country's risk
rating improved to 'yellow light' status from 'red light' status under the Honiara Club Agreement
(HCA) in 2012. This allowed the HCA to be revised, and Cabinet endorsed a debt management
strategy (DMS) in May 2012. Under the DMS, the government sets a yearly borrowing limit as part
of the annual budget, based on a debt sustainability assessment. The debt limit covers external
borrowing by the government and all forms of SOE borrowing and guarantees (both domestic and
external). The government entered its first loan under the revised HCA late in 2012, with the ADB
financing a submarine fiber optic cable. The November 2012 joint IMF-World Bank debt
sustainability analysis (DSA) concluded that Solomon Islands remained at a moderate risk of debt
distress. Containing the risk of debt distress will require continued efforts to maintain fiscal buffers,
and strengthening the budgetary process to improve fiscal discipline and the quality of spending.

20. 
The government continues to make progress on structural reforms 
to encourage
investment. Perhaps 
the most noticeable 
reforms have been 
the 
liberalization of 
the
telecommunications market, with the introduction of competition resulting in significant reductions
in prices, and the number of people with mobile phones increasing from about 50,000 in 2008 to over
300,000 in 2012. Over the past few years, reforms have significantly improved the overall
environment for Doing Business. In 2010, the government made it easier for firms to get credit,
including the establishment of a unified credit registry, expanding the range of assets able to be used
as collateral, and allowing out-of-court enforcement of creditors' rights. During 2011, Solomon
Islands was one of the leading reformers globally, strengthening protection for investors and
streamlining insolvency. The implementation of the 2009 Companies Act and the establishment in
2011 of an online company registry has also reduced the time required to register a company from
over 50 days in 2009 to 9 days. Despite these gains, there is limited dialogue between the local
private sector and the government on key constraints to broader economic development.

21. 
Administration of urban and peri-urban land constrains growth, fuels communal tensions,
keeps standards of living low, inhibits growth of the middle class, and costs government revenue,
which could otherwise support service provision. Less than 15 percent of land in Solomon Islands is
registered and therefore within the formal land tenure system. The other 85 percent remains under
customary tenure systems which vary from place 
to place. The registered land is the most
commercially valuable and strategically 
located. It 
is technically owned by the government,
administered by the Office of Land Commissioner and the Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Survey,
and leased to individuals or commercial entities under fixed or perpetual term estates. Lack of a
modern cadaster, under-valuation, negligence in collections of rents and taxes, and corruption in land
titling and assignments constrain both the supply of land and the revenue collected by government.
This has fueled a cycle of inflated land prices, lack of housing for Honiara's increasing population,
and deteriorating infrastructure. These factors in turn constrain incomes, and place families and
communities under stress.

22. 
Infrastructure bottlenecks present a major obstacle for further economic development,
contributing to a very high-cost operational environment Electricity costs in Solomon Islands are
amongst the highest in the world with current average rates at US$0.82/kWh, compared to the US
average of US$0.12/kWh. According to an enterprise survey conducted by the Solomon Islands
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2011), a majority of respondents identified rising utility costs
as one of the major constraints limiting further investment. Of a total estimated road network of
1,694km, only 126 km are sealed and primarily on Guadalcanal and Malaita. Only two international
ports serve the country (Honiara and Noro), with Honiara port traffic growing five percent per annum

10

and struggling to cope with the existing throughput of vessels and cargo. Its capacity is expected to
be reached within the next 5-10 years.

Government Development Strategy

23. 

The government's National Development Strategy (NDS) 2011-2020 sets out a vision of a
united and vibrant Solomon Islands with an overarching theme of building better lives for all
Solomon Islanders. The NDS sets out three broad goals:

* 

Increasing social and economic opportunities -
through efforts to alleviate poverty;
providing targeted programs to assist the vulnerable; and encouraging equitable distribution
of public resources and economic benefits across the country, including the proposed
development of outer island growth centers.
* Securing sustainable growth - by facilitating private sector development; diversifying the
economy, including new mining sector investments to replace the traditional reliance on
logging for export revenue; and improving management of environmental issues and climate
change adaptation.
* Maintaining stability and peace - including a focus on ensuring security, law and order; and
securing international partnerships.

24. 
Alleviating poverty and improving the lives of Solomon Islanders in a peaceful and stable
society is the first objective of the NDS. In this context, the NDS focuses primarily upon addressing
income poverty, through efforts to increase employment and income earning opportunities in urban
and rural areas. Facilitating infrastructure development for improved service delivery in rural areas,
and ensuring effective partnerships between investors and resource owners to ensure fair benefits
accrue to each, are important features of the government's poverty reduction strategy in rural areas.
With regard to addressing extreme poverty and hunger (MDG 1), the government plans to focus upon
strengthening the subsistence sector to better achieve food security, reduce hunger and facilitate
marketing of surpluses from subsistence as well as income generation from smallholder production.

25. 
Solomon Islands has successfully 
formulated several gender policies, although
implementation remains a work in progress. National and political awareness of the importance of
gender equality is increasing and gender disaggregated data collection is improving. Efforts to
mainstream gender across the government's policies and activities including in health, education and
agriculture, are beginning, and efforts to increase women's political leadership are underway. Recent
performance contracts 
for Permanent Secretaries 
include 
requirements 
to oversee gender
mainstreaming within their ministries. Domestic violence (DV) is now more openly discussed and
the government is increasingly aligned with partners in efforts to improve services for victims of
domestic violence and to understand how to work with men and women to prevent violence.

26. 
A key theme running through the NDS is the emphasis placed on improving the quality of
public sector governance. The strategy highlights the importance of increasing the efficiency,
effectiveness, and accountability of public service delivery, with a particular focus on policing,
health, education, and infrastructure. Accountability institutions, including the Auditor General's
office, will be strengthened to ensure compliance with laws and regulations, and public tendering and
procurement procedures modernized. Following the release of the NDS, the government is now
preparing a series of sectoral and provincial strategies, which are intended to set out prioritized,
costed activities linked to a monitoring and evaluation framework.

11

27. 

Solomon Islands is a participant in the International Dialogue on State Building and
Peace Building and a member of the g7+ group of countries9 . Although not formally a pilot country
under the g7+ "New Deal for Fragile States", Solomon Islands has prepared a Country Reportlo that
details some of the challenges that have faced state building and peace building efforts and is actively
engaged in the various discussions including state and peace building indicators. The Government
has expressed interest in pursuing national level implementation of g7+ initiatives.

Donor Engagement

28. 

Per capita aid flows to Solomon Islands are among the highest for any country in the
world. Solomon Islands receives approximately US$300 million in official development assistance
annually. This is equivalent to almost US$550 per capita, or approximately one third of annual GDP.

29. 
Australia is by far the largest donor to Solomon Islands, and anticipates providing about
US$230 million in FY13. Of this, slightly over US$100 million funds the Australian Federal Police
contribution as part of RAMSI. Other main partners include Japan, New Zealand, Taiwan China, the
Asian Development Bank, the IMF, the EU, and the United Nations system. In addition, church and
community groups play a significant role in delivering services, as across most of the Pacific islands,
particularly in the provision of primary education. Donor programs are summarized in Annex 4.

30. 
Aid coordination is improving, particularly through regular policy discussions between the
government and partners through the Core Economic Working Group (CEWG). The CEWG was
launched in 2009 to ensure coordinated, government-led, policy dialogue to underpin flexible budget
support, and to assist Solomon Islands to respond to the global economic crisis. This has been an
effective coordination mechanism, and now includes the major development partners who are
providing budget support. Both sector based and general budget support have been increasing in
Solomon Islands (from 7 percent of recurrent budget in 2009 to 13 percent in 2012) although
significant non-appropriated development expenditures remain (equivalent to approximately one
quarter of the total consolidated budget). Australian and New Zealand led sector dialogue in health
and education has been important, given external financing makes up a very significant portion of
total spending in these sectors. Australian support to the recurrent budget for Ministry of Health and
Medical Services was budgeted at 37 percent for 2012 (actuals were lower at around 33 percent) and
is anticipated to increase to over half the recurrent budget in 2013. In education, New Zealand and
Australian budget support provided about 12 percent of total recurrent expenditures in 2012 (lower
than the 20 percent budgeted) with a little over 20 percent budgeted for 2013. The Ministry of
Development Planning and Aid Coordination is attempting to improve aid coordination through
efforts to incorporate the non-appropriated budget as part of the integral budget process through the
introduction of medium term forecasting of the development budget. This will require all line
ministries to produce a pipeline for both government-funded and donor funded projects as part of the
2013 budget process. A Donor Coordination Group also facilitates regular information exchanges
among a broader group of partners. Nevertheless, aid coordination and management places
considerable strain on government with over 100 separate donor financed programs spread across 26

9 The g7+ is a group of 18 fragile and conflict affected countries from across Africa, Asia and the Pacific. The

group has championed the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States as establishing new principles for

development architecture and calls for new ways of working that better respond to the needs and challenges faced

by fragile countries.

10 Peacebuilding and Statebuilding in Solomon Islands: Country Report for International Dialogue on Peacebuilding

and Statebuilding, Dili, Timore-Leste, 9-10 April, 2010, Prepared by the Ministry of National Unity, Reconciliation

and Peace

12

government agencies, and a limited amount of bilateral assistance directed through government
budget processes.

III. WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT

World Bank Group Engagement in Solomon Islands

31. 
The World Bank Group is continuing to scale up its engagement with the Pacific Island
member countriesn, including Solomon Islands, as part of a renewed longer-term commitment.
World Bank IDA and trust fund commitments to the Pacific, of almost US$300 million since the
beginning of the IDA15 period in FY10, have been more than IDA resources in all prior years, and
are expected to increase by a further US$100 million by the end of IDA16 (Figure 2). Similarly, IFC
investments of over US$90 million in the same period have been more than in prior history.

Figure 2: World Bank Group IDA, Trust Fund and IFC Commitments to the Pacific Islands by
IDA Replenishment

350

300

250

200 

50

100 

-.

m Solomon Islands

IFC
$ Other Pacific Islands

IDA-12 

IDA-13 

IDA-14 

IDA-15 

IDA-16 (proj)

Outcomes and Lessons from the 2010 Solomon Islands Interim Strategy Note

32. 
The World Bank Group has significantly scaled up its engagement during the ISN period.
While IDA commitments to Solomon Islands have grown moderately, this has been leveraged by
Trust Fund resources sign ficantly larger than IDA commitments. The ISN highlighted three areas
of strategic engagement for the World Bank Group:

(i) 

(ii) 

Addressing barriers to growth;

Enhancing the benefits of global and regional integration; and

(iii) 

Supporting improved public administration and management.

Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, the Kingdom
of Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

13

33. 
World Bank Group engagement in Solomon Islands has been highly selective, combining
the strategic use of relatively modest IDA resources with trust funds and with IFC investments also
encouraging responsible growth. As set out in Table 1 below, the current portfolio includes
activities with a total of approximately US$20 million in IDA commitments, mobilizing almost
US$36 million in trust fund resources which have been fully integrated into all aspects of strategy,
planning, portfolio management, and results measurement. 
In 2010, IFC also made its first direct
investment in Solomon Islands, a US$35 million loan to support the re-opening of the Gold Ridge
mine, which was subsequently repaid in 2012.

Table 1: World Bank Group Portfolio in Solomon Islands as of March 2013

Activity 

Approved Prior to ISN

Rural Development Program (RDP) 

Health Sector Support1 2  

Sustainable Energy 

Approved Durin2 ISN Period

Tina River Hydropower TA 
Mining Sector TA 
Rapid Employment Project 
Telecoms and ICT Development 

RDP Additional Financing 

Development Policy Operation 
Increasing Resilience to Climate Change and
Natural Hazards Project (CRISP) 

Total 

IFC Investments 

Gold Ridge Mining Ltd 1 5  

Year 

FY08 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY10 

IDA 

($m) 

3.2 

1.5

4.0

3.2 
3.3 

3.0 

2.0

20.2 

IFC

35.0

TF Source

Australia

Australia (PRIF) 13
SPF 1 4
Australia, SPF
Australia (PRIF)

IFAD, GFRP

Japan (PHRD)

TF 

($m)

5.9 

3.5 
0.8 
3.8 
4.2 

14.6 

2.7 

35.5

34. 
The growing program has been supported by a strengthened in-country presence. In 2008,
the World Bank Group opened a joint office with the ADB in Honiara, which has allowed a robust
engagement with government, development partners, and civil society. 
IFC has also hired a
dedicated IFC Resident Representative, to be based in Honiara, and additional staff to support a
growing business pipeline and portfolio including engagement in the fisheries, mining and economic
infrastructure sectors.

35. 

A strategically focused program and analytical work have enabled the Bank Group to play
an instrumental convening and coordinating role. While the Bank Group financing is modest
compared to the significant amounts Solomon Islands receives from other donors, the Bank is valued
by client, partners, and civil society for its convening power, technical expertise, and high quality
analysis. The most prominent example of this role is the CEWG. The group is widely viewed as

12 Project closed December 2011.

13 Australian trust fund financing provided through the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF).
14 State and Peace Building Fund.
is Repaid 2012.

14

having transformed 
the relationship between donors and government, providing a forum for
substantive policy dialogue, deepening 
the reform agenda, and 
improving overall donor
collaboration. The associated reform program has been central to the turnaround in Solomon Islands'
macro-economic and fiscal situation since 2009.

36. 
The World Bank Group's financing and analytical engagement over the ISN period made
a real contribution to the gains that Solomon Islands has achieved over the past few years. Given
the delicate post-conflict environment, the World Bank's engagement was designed to generate direct
benefits to poor rural and urban communities through the Rural Development Program (RDP) and
the Rapid Employment Project (REP). This was balanced with more technically challenging
investments that encouraged broader policy reform (such as the introduction of competition in
telecommunications, improving the functioning of the electricity utility, encouraging adherence to
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) principles, and public financial management
reform to improve the quality of government expenditures). Key outcomes are set out in Box 3
below, with further details on outcomes against ISN indicators and lessons in Annex 2. Among the
key lessons from the ISN that will be built upon in the CPS are: the need to play to our areas of
strength; engage where an 
in-country presence 
is able 
to provide hands-on and constant
implementation support; and, ensure project/program design addresses the long term nature of thin
capacity in Solomon Islands.

Addressing barriers to growth

Box 3: Key Results from the 2010 ISN

* 

* 

Investment climate reforms in Solomon Islands, supported by IFC technical assistance and ADB's Private
Sector Development Initiative, have improved the enabling environment for private sector development with
Doing Business 2012 listing Solomon Islands as one of the leading reformers globally. Solomon Islands has
improved access to credit through the establishment of a unified credit agency, expanding the range of assets
able to be used as collateral, and allowing out of court enforcement of contracts. Similarly, the time required to
register a company has fallen from 50 days in 2009 to 9 days.
IFC's US$35 million investment in Gold Ridge Mining Ltd. supported the reopening of this mine, directly
creating 600 jobs, and playing a role in the increase in mineral exports from 0.5 percent of GDP in 2009 to
almost 14 percent of GDP in 2012.
* Technical Assistance from the World Bank assisted the government to become an EITI candidate country in
2012.
* The number of female owned businesses has increased from about 130 to over 180 between 2012 and 2013.
* The Solomon Islands Electricity Authority has significantly improved the quality of services, and moved from a
SBD 70 million loss in 2010 to a SBD 53 million profit in 2012.

Enhancing the benefits ofglobal and regional integration

* The number of mobile phone subscribers increased from 50,000 in 2008 to over 300,000 in 2012 (55 percent of
the population) due to the introduction of competition in the telecoms market, supported by the World Bank.

Supporting improved public administration and management

* The REP has provided 324,000 person days of work for the urban unemployed. Women make up 57 percent of
the beneficiaries, and youth 51 percent.
* The RDP has supported over 200 community infrastructure projects in rural areas, including classrooms, health
clinics, and water supply systems, reaching over 300,000 people, more than half the entire country.
* Health sector expenditure on primary health services and provincial health programs almost doubled - from an

estimated base of 17% in 2008 to 29% in 2011.

15

IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Building on Gains for a Stable Solomon Islands

37. 
Since the end of the tension in 2003, Solomon Islands has made important development
gains, and progress in developing key institutions for political and economic governance,
provision of citizen security and service delivery. Resilience has been built in several key areas, most
notably fiscal and economic management. The country came successfully through several political
transitions and the media and civil society are playing a more robust role. However, as the violence
that arose following the elections in 2006 demonstrated and consistent with other post conflict and
fragile countries, Solomon Islands remains vulnerable to setbacks that could potentially undermine
these important gains, which of themselves have been substantively supported by considerable
injections of international assistance. Some of these may be sustainably addressed through policy
efforts, such as urban development, while others are rooted in the immutable challenges of size and
distance, and can only be effectively managed.

38. 
Enhancing shared prosperity in fragile and conflict affected states requires institutions
that support both inclusion and cohesion. Building these institutional capabilities inevitably takes
time. A key lesson of the 2011 World Development Report on Conflict Security and Development is
that countries face multiple transitions on the pathway out of fragility or conflict. Pathways are often
non-linear, with initial solutions often begetting new challenges. Successfully navigating these
transitions distinguishes those that become more resilient from those that fail. As Solomon Islands
enters its second decade after the tension, building on the relative stability of recent years while
embedding and building upon gains achieved to date will be key to creating the economic incentives,
social cohesion and improved state-society relationships that are essential to avoiding future conflicts
and reducing poverty.

39. 
Solomon Islands'focus on social cohesion and improved livelihoods for all is well aligned
with the World Bank Group's dual emphasis on eliminating extreme poverty by 2030 and
encouraging shared prosperity, especially for the bottom 40 percent of the population. Pursuing
the goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Solomon Islands -
in line with the
Government's own objectives - will mean: ensuring that new opportunities for growth generate jobs
and benefits that are equitable and inclusive of all segments of society, and particularly the poor;
ensuring development expenditures and essential services reach a wide section of the population,
with a focus upon the poor; and, addressing particular groups that are vulnerable to falling into
poverty and potentially exacerbating tensions, including the youth in urban areas and those in rural
areas far from markets. Underpinning this is the need to build a stronger analytical and evidence
base of poverty within Solomon Islands so as to best target resources to addressing particular needs.
Two inter related areas are key in this regard and mirror the government's own areas of priority: (i)
on economic foundations, by managing a transition from an economy and public finances heavily
dependent upon a limited range of depleting or non-renewable resources and a high level of aid to
one that can facilitate enhanced livelihoods and jobs for a growing population and; (ii) in service
provision, by improving access and transitioning from a focus on central agency functionality to
delivery modalities that demonstrate quality, equitable and accountable provision.

40. 
The Bank Group's value-added in the Solomon Islands comes not from the financial
resources it brings to the table, but primarily from the expertise and experience of working in
other fragile and capacity-constrained environments and the ability to leverage the engagement of
other public and private resources and expertise. The WBG strategy for the coming period will focus
on a consolidation and deepening of the gains made so far, helping translate them into improved

16

economic and social well-being for a wider group of Solomon Islanders, and assisting the country in
managing the challenges inherent in size, geography and thin capacity. The overall partnership
strategy is focused around two broad themes:

(i) Strengthening economic resiliency. As the scope for growth in the forestry sector declines, the
country needs to maximize the return from other sources, to provide revenues for public services
and development, and opportunities for its increasing population. These new economic activities
need to be fostered in a way that provides local communities with a stake in natural resource
development so as not to exacerbate tensions and conflicts over the medium term. The World
Bank Group will focus on programs that support job creation, including through agriculture,
fisheries and the private sectorl6. At the same time, the Bank will support the government in
building institutional capacity for inclusive growth, particularly in the natural resource sectors by:
helping the government to adequately shape and manage the regulatory environment; develop
innovative approaches to land management and benefit sharing; ensure effective management of
critical supporting utilities and 
infrastructure; use environmental and social safeguards
effectively; and engage and support the private sector.

(ii) Improved service provision. Solomon Islands faces a range of challenges in delivering effective
local governance and services to its widely dispersed population. The reach of formal state
institutions remains limited. Provincial governments have few resources and less capacity - and
are dwarfed by constituency funds. For most people, schools, police and health posts, of mixed
quality, are the only tangible evidence of the state. Within Solomon Islands, an enduring driver of
conflict is a sense of inequity between different provinces, central government and different
interest groups. This suggests that a focus on institutions, systems and programs that can support
the equitable delivery of basic services across the country is necessary. In this context, the Bank
will work to underpin the larger investments of government and its partners in key service
delivery sectors (both public and private) to improve efficiency, equity and quality of expenditure,
and explore, pilot and monitor efforts to improve the sustainable and accountable delivery of key
public services and livelihoods across the country. 
In particular, the Rural Development
Program and the closely aligned Rural Community Infrastructure and Service Delivery activity
focus on enhancing the delivery of basic services in rural areas.

Box 4: Joint WBG Program on Women's Empowerment in the Pacific

A joint WBG Program on gender empowerment in the Pacific includes parallel and joint World Bank and IFC

activities to help improve equality for women in the Pacific. The program is looking to:

* Promote women's migration to formal sector employment;
* 
Improve women's access to public services and financial services;
* Enhance women's security and safety, in private and public spaces; and
* 
Increase the number of women in positions of leadership in business and society.

For Solomon Islands this will ensure a joint focus upon generating opportunities and minimizing harm from core
sectors of growth in fisheries and mining and increasing women's voice, representation and benefits in mining. 
It
will also support efforts to address safety and security issues around major employment areas, such as fish
processing, as well as increasing employment opportunities.

16 This work will build upon earlier analysis undertaken by the World Bank: Solomon Islands Growth Prospects,
Constraints and Policy Options, October 2010.

17

41. 
Bank engagement across these themes will be underpinned by two cross cutting policy
areas - embedding institutional resilience and addressing gender inequalities. The WBG will
support government and its partners to embed the institutional gains achieved to date into the overall
development effort. The WBG will also ensure that gender is mainstreamed through the portfolio
with a view to one hundred percent gender informed operations. Efforts will be undertaken to
strengthen economic opportunities for women, while reducing negative impacts and harm for women
in Solomon Islands. This is part of a wider WBG effort across the Pacific to enhance women's
economic empowerment, reduce gender based violence and build a stronger voice for women in
business (Box 4).
42. 
In preparing this strategy, the World Bank Group engaged with a range of stakeholders
through formal and informal consultations over the past year. Discussions with private sector,
civil society, government representatives, and development partners, offered views on priority areas
of World Bank Group engagement, including:

* The merits of Bank Group support for encouraging a growth strategy that supplements the
logging and mining sectors and supports private sector development;

* The importance of rationalizing urban land management so as to avoid potential conflicts and
support development and service delivery improvements;
* Encouragement that benefits from Bank Group engagement should extend beyond the main
island of Guadalcanal;
* The value of the Bank Group's convening power and policy dialogue capacity across a range
of areas, particularly in supporting the CEWG collaboration and the government's efforts to
improve the quality of spending;
* The need to consolidate gains from current areas of engagement, and further strengthen the
impact of continuing programs, including with the private sector;

* The relevance of the Bank Group's engagement improving the performance of key economic
infrastructure, including telecommunications and electricity.

Strengthening Economic Resilience

43. 
Solomon Islands must find new areas of economic activity to support its growing
population and to underpin poverty reduction. Current annual population growth of approximately
2.3 percent per year, with non-extractive GDP growth rates of around 3.5 to 4 percent, would mean
only gradual 
improvements 
in average per capita 
incomes, continuing high 
rates 
of
underemployment, and limited scope to reduce poverty and inequities. 
The Bank Group's
engagement will support the government to maintain macroeconomic stability, strengthen the
enabling environment for inclusive growth, and address key constraints. In particular, Bank Group
engagement will support opportunities for new economic activity in mining, fisheries and agriculture,
while 
enhancing 
the 
efficiency 
of 
supporting 
infrastructure 
including 
energy 
and
telecommunications, and managing the impacts of natural disasters. 
Job creation is particularly
challenging in Pacific Island Countries (Box 5) and requires innovative solutions. The Bank Group
will promote a broader dialogue within 
the region on the likely challenges and potential
opportunities. IFC will also target investments that have scope to generate significant economic
opportunities and leverage IFC's experience and relationships with the private sector elsewhere in the
Pacific and particularly, PNG.

18

Box 5: Job Growth in Pacific Island Countries

Creating more and better jobs is a priority for small Pacific Island Countries given slow economic growth, rapid
population growth and accelerating urbanization. A clear message from the 2013 World Development Report on
Jobs and the IFC 2013 Jobs Study is that policy makers interested in development outcomes should be concerned
about the number and types of jobs available in any economy, and that the Private Sector is the key to job

creation. This focus upon jobs reinforces the 2011 World Development Report on Conflict, Security and

Development as an important precursor to reducing fragility and the likelihood of a return to conflict. Work within
the Pacific region points to a number of priority issues for policy makers in regard to job growth:

* The need for realistic expectations regarding the trajectory of job creating economic growth;

* The need for improved international labor mobility through erosion of regulatory barriers and investment in
transferable human capital;

* Making the most of urbanization through investment in connective infrastructure, urban services and
agricultural productivity;

* Ensuring that public spending - including development assistance delivers good jobs and efficient services;
and,

* Generating sustainable jobs from natural resource industries and linkage opportunities with local businesses.

Across the CPS period, the World Bank Group will explore these and other options with Solomon Islands and its
partners to maximize job opportunities for its growing labor force.

44. 
Outcome 1: Strengthened public expenditure and fiscal management. Maintaining
macroeconomic and fiscal stability is critical to economic resilience. Progress has been made and
core capacity built in key areas including budget, debt management, domestic revenue collection and
financial management with the support of RAMSI advisers. The Bank Group will support the
government in embedding macro-economic resilience through: (i) regular economic monitoring and
analysis; (ii) ongoing participation in the policy dialogue around the CEWG, (iii) a continuing
Development Policy Operation (DPO) series; and, (iv) building fiscal resilience to natural disasters
into overall budgetary planning. The CEWG provides a means for coordinating budget support
across donors. This engagement will be supported by a DPO1 7 designed to support the government's
efforts to improve the quality of public financial management; strengthen financial management of
key State Owned Enterprises; and generate transparency around extractive revenue. Through the
PCRAFI, and potential follow on regional initiatives, support is available to the government to
improve fiscal and budgetary procedures for disaster management. As government's familiarity with
the DPO instrument grows, and as the CEWG moves into a new phase of policy dialogue, a future
DPO series may expand beyond the current Public Financial Management (PFM) focus to other
areas of high priority to the government.

45. 
Outcome 2: Enhanced regulatory framework, public sector capacity and community
benefits in the mining sector. The mining sector is likely to play a key role in the future of the
Solomon Islands economy and is expected to replace forestry as the main source of export earnings
in the years to come. Regional and international experience has demonstrated the risks associated
with large scale mining developments, including for women and the environment. Local economic
benefits may be limited unless Solomon Islands is able to effectively enforce tax and benefit sharing
regimes. The government has undertaken several initiatives to pave the way for the reform of the

17 The DPO scheduled for FY14 will be the second of a two operation series begun in FY13.
19

mining sector, including being accepted as a candidate country under the EITI. The government has
requested support from the WBG for a package of reforms, including: (i) updating the mineral
development policy; (ii) overhauling the legal and regulatory framework (new mining law and
regulations); (iii) establishing the Mineral Development Authority; (iv) institutional capacity building
for policy and sector management; and (v) a community development framework to address
landowner issues, women in mining, and regularization of artisanal mining. IFC will continue to
engage in the mining sector, drawing on expertise in community development around mining areas,
particularly women in mining, as part of IFC's global financial sector leadership on environmental
and social standards.

46. 
Outcome 3: Increased local economic benefits from the fishing industry by increased on-
shore production capacity. There is scope for greater returns from the fisheries sector, an important
source of livelihoods, revenue, biodiversity and sustenance for the people of Solomon Islands. The
Western and Central Pacific tuna fishery is the source of approximately 60 percent of the total global
tuna catch. Sustaining and increasing public revenues from tuna harvests while maintaining a
business environment that supports a regionally and globally competitive tuna processing industry is
a high priority. 
In addition, development of local capacity to manage coastal fisheries for food
security and to increase household income levels in rural communities is a focus of attention. IFC is
proposing a strategic investment in the Solomon Islands sole tuna loining and canning processor,
SolTuna Ltd, based in Noro, Western Province. SolTuna is the largest employer in Noro with
approximately 1,500 workers and provides jobs and training to a mostly rural area, including a high
proportion of women (62 percent of the labor force). IFC's investment is expected to contribute to
the improved management of the Pacific tuna fishery through better compliance with regional tuna
management measures and adoption of IFC's Environmental & Social Performance Standards. IFC
will support Solomon Islands to improve capacity and processes for investment analysis and
approvals of new onshore tuna processing facilities. To complement 
the proposed SolTuna
investment, IDA will provide support to Solomon Islands (along with other Pacific Island Countries)
to gain a better return from fisheries and in the sustainable management of the region's oceanic
fisheries, coastal fisheries and the critical habitats that support them. Support will be provided
through the Pacific Regional Oceanscape Program (PROP) in coordination with other partners in the
sector, to strengthen and extend a recently introduced Pacific Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) - a tradable
rights based quota system intended to regulate total fishing efforts and improve returns for island
countries. Analytical work to support the effective engagement of women in the fisheries sector,
including female employees at the SolTuna operation, will be supported and may well be a model
that can be implemented regionally.

47. 
Outcome 4: Increased productivity 
in key cash crops (cocoa and coconut) while
maintaining food security. As the most important, and often sole, source of income for the rural
population, the agriculture sector offers opportunities for improvements in incomes to be more
inclusive. Tree crops (oil palm, coconut and cocoa) are the dominant source of agricultural income,
with an estimated 60 percent of rural households growing coconuts and 40 percent growing cocoa.
Export earnings from these crops have also grown significantly over the past five years, with cocoa
in particular seeing a four-fold increase in export value. This trend of growth remains vulnerable to
declines in global prices, however, as evidenced by a significant drop in both cocoa and copra
production in 2012. Food security and nutrition remain a concern, particularly for isolated island
communities, and those vulnerable to extreme weather events. Through the RDP, the World Bank
Group has helped to revitalize the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock from its debilitated state
after the tension, including developing a wide-reaching program of extension services active in most
wards of the country. Building upon the current RDP, a second phase project will be developed with

20

a focus on productivity and income improvements in selected crops, as well as strengthening food
security in vulnerable areas. IFC will engage the private sector in partnerships around specific crops,
particularly in the major export crops of cocoa and coconut (copra and coconut oil). IFC will
leverage its global experience working with agribusiness companies in these particular commodity
groups and will evaluate opportunities to leverage innovation in other markets to the needs of the
commodity value chain in Solomon Islands.

48. 
Outcome 5: Lower cost and more reliable electricity from cleaner energy sources. A
reliable and affordable power supply is necessary to support growth, improve living standards and
reduce vulnerability to external shocks. Electricity consumption in Solomon Islands is lower than in
any other Pacific Island Country and more expensive than regional comparators and many small
island states. Virtually all grid electricity is generated with diesel fuel. Businesses outside the capital
are generally forced to rely upon costly generators using imported diesel. Technical assistance and
advisory services will be provided to the Solomon Islands Electricity Authority (SIEA) to continue
improving performance. There 
is scope to expand this assistance to SIEA to incorporate grid
extensions in and around SIEA's existing service areas, incorporate bulk metering on SIEA's
network to assist in reducing electrical losses, and to provide support for power system planning,
performance monitoring and investment project management capacity, including the ability to
negotiate a power purchase agreement with the developers of the proposed Tina River Hydro project
on Guadalcanal, the country's first hydro-power scheme. Complementing this, support will be
provided to the design and engagement of a private sector investor to build and operate Tina River,
with the potential to significantly reduce the price of electricity, and replace a large share of Solomon
Islands' diesel fuel imports. These engagements will draw together the Bank Group's best knowledge
and capacity to manage technical, social, environmental, and commercial requirements - through
both IDA and IFC - for these important investments.

49. 
Outcome 6: Improved access to Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
services and efficient ICT policy framework. Deregulation in the telecommunications sector has
allowed for a rapid expansion of coverage and a dramatic drop in prices1 8 . The market is growing
and diversifying, although access to the internet remains low. The main constraints to further
subscriber growth, particularly for broadband Internet, include the high-cost of international
bandwidth and of end-user devices, making the total cost of ownership expensive. The WBG will
build upon the early engagements in the sector, through support for the broadband enabling
environment and e-Government applications that support use of ICT for development purposes.

50. 
Outcome 7: Strengthened business climate. In spite of recent progress improving the
business enabling environment, significant challenges remain. Improvements in the Doing Business
indicators have been largely concentrated around a decrease in company registration times and
improved creditor rights and access to credit, with other indicators showing limited progress. There
is a need to improve public-private dialogue to raise awareness and understanding of issues that limit
the ability of the private sector to increase investments in their existing or new businesses. IFC is
well positioned to help reconstitute the previous Public-Private Dialogue platform, building on the
successful models in Timor-Leste and Papua New Guinea. Across the Pacific, the WBG will
continue to engage with financial authorities in both sending and receiving countries, as well as

18 The cost of a one minute local mobile call has fallen from US$1.20 in 2009 to between US$0.13 and US$0.27 per
minute in 2012.

21

commercial financial institutions, to encourage further reductions in the costs of sending remittances
to Pacific islands and the use of innovative new financial products such as mobile money, which
build on the rapid expansion of mobile phone access throughout the region (Box 6).

Box 6: Pacific Payment, Remittances and Securities Settlement Initiative (PAPRI)

In 2010 the WB and the IFC began a collaborative effort to assist with reforms to the National Payments System
(NPS) in Fiji, PNG, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu. The objective of the PAPRI is to identify
strategies to improve the safety, efficiency and integrity of the individual NPSs. The project also seeks to promote
policies and actions for the harmonization of payment systems throughout the region and in line with international
standards and best practices.

Since the launch of the PAPRI, the WB and IFC have undertaken assessments of the NPS in Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu and have started to work with countries to implement the reforms identified. Currently
the major ongoing TA efforts under the PAPRI umbrella are focused on supporting Central Banks in the region in
drafting the National Payment System Acts and the relevant regulation. In FY14 the TA will be expanded to include
a study to launch the adoption of modern payment systems infrastructure in Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and
Vanuatu.

PAPRI, combined with associated TA to improve transparency of remittance costs in the Pacific (with information
now available at www.sendmoneypacific.com) has helped to reduce the average cost of sending remittances to the
Pacific islands from Australia and New Zealand by a third. Given the rapid increase in mobile phone use in the
Pacific, PAPRI will help to provide a foundation for innovative new financial transaction methods, including the use
of mobile money. In addition to PAPRI, IFC is supporting development of a new credit bureau in Solomon Islands
as part of a Pacific regional project and is engaged with two financial institutions who are interested in expanding
their mobile banking platforms to the Solomon Islands.

51. 
Outcome 8: Greater resilience of rural communities to climate change, natural hazards
and catastrophic disasters. Solomon Islands' macroeconomic and growth outlook remains highly
vulnerable to extreme climate and natural hazard shocks. The economic impacts of disasters in
Solomon Islands are high while climate change represents a huge potential challenge to multiple
sectors, including: health, the economy, food security, water resources, agriculture, fisheries, security
and land use. The government has developed a National Disaster Risk Management Plan and a
National Climate Change Policy to guide its efforts. Both policies reference the importance of gender
in managing risk. The Bank has supported the development of a 'Gender and Protection 
in

Emergencies' training and Solomon Islands was one of the five Pacific countries to join the PCRAFI
pilot project, funded by the Japanese Government. The Japanese financed Increasing Resilience to
Climate Change and Natural Hazards Project and the Increasing Resilience to Climate Change and

Natural Hazards Project (CRISP) will support more resilient development in the context of climate

and hazard risks, 
through support 
to policy implementation, 
institutional capacity building,
emergency communication and data management systems, and community driven investments to

build climate and disaster resilience. Initiatives are also underway to identify tools and methods for

engaging Pacific Island women in community-based resilience building.

Underpinning Improvements in Public Service Provision

52. 

Improving access to services across the country is important for alleviating complex and
periodically tense relations between the center and provinces. Solomon Islands faces multifaceted
constraints to service delivery including: weak institutional capacity inside formal structures; a

concentration of limited capacity in well financed parts of central ministries; varied, uneven and
competing capacities and modalities across provinces and local levels; and high costs associated with
challenging geography.

22

53. 

The Bank will work to underpin the larger investments of government and its partners
across 
the service delivery sectors so as to understand service delivery constraints and failures,
explore, pilot and monitor efforts to improve the sustainable, accountable and more equitable
delivery of key public services and livelihoods across the country. Where opportunities arise, the
Bank will build upon and expand existing platforms and programs, and in particular the RDP and the
REP (both of which constitute more than half of the Bank's current portfolio) to extend the reach
and impact of various activities, e.g. using the RDP platform to engage in climate change or early
childhood activities at the community level or the REP platform to scale up skills training
opportunities for the youth.

54. 
Outcome 9. Improved policy and budgetary processes to support poverty reduction and
service delivery. Compared with many lower-middle income countries, Solomon Islands has
reasonable health and education outcomes. Nevertheless, with an increasing population and modest
economic growth, fiscal space will remain limited for expanding key service delivery and poverty
reduction efforts over the coming years. Enhancing the efficiency, equity and quality of expenditures
to achieve better services and system performance will therefore be essential. At the policy level, the
Bank and partners will widen the economic dialogue with government from a focus upon short term
stabilization and PFM infrastructure issues to one addressing improved service delivery outcomes.
This will be supported by: (i) strengthening the capacity of selected ministries and the central finance
agencies to analyze spending patterns relative to budget allocations and government priorities; (ii)
implementation support to the household income and expenditure survey (HIES) and technical
assistance on poverty measurement and analysis to better inform planning and policy (Box 7); (iii)
support to the Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) to improve public expenditure
management and essential service delivery over the next 3 years, and (iv) possible programmatic
analytical work in the education sector to cover a range of areas designed to improve quality and
targeting of expenditures including in the tertiary and vocational education areas. As government
engages with RAMSI and donors over the transition of civilian capacity to bilateral programs, there
is scope to explore key elements of civil service performance. This may be through the review of
formal and informal incentives and alleviating bottlenecks in key service delivery areas.

Box 7: Improving Data Analysis

Data analysis in Solomon Islands, as in many Pacific Island countries, is challenging given limited capacity within
national statistics offices (NSOs) and the cost of surveying across vast geographical distances. The SPC has been
leading support to national statistics offices, including with preparation of HIES, while the IMF supported Pacific
Financial Technical Assistance Facility has supported balance of payments and national accounts data analysis. The
Bank is supporting both of these initiatives across the region with quality control and technical advice. In Solomon
Islands the Bank will specifically support the government with the analysis and application of data arising from the
HIES.

UN agencies and SPC are supporting the government in various other survey efforts, including WHO engagement
with the MHMS on the Health Information System and the SPC with NSO on the Demographic and Health Survey
(DHS). The last DHS was undertaken in 2007/8 and the next one will be in 2014. As with most population based
surveys, conducting a quality DHS is a substantial and costly piece of work; for this reason they are generally
conducted every 5-10 years. For the HIES, WHO with others are supporting MHMS to streamline data collection on
health information and to report on this in a more timely way (quarterly) 
to inform implementation and
management. The Bank will complement this by supporting MHMS (including at provincial level) to improve their
financial reporting (at least on a quarterly basis) to again inform ongoing activity implementation and broader
management of resources (e.g. seeing where there are underspends and overspends and helping to address this where
needed).

23

55. 

Outcome 10: Capacity for collective action and increased access to services for rural
communities. Over the past five years, increased investments in rural development have flowed
through 
three main channels: provincial governments, 
the community 
level, and especially
constituency accounts (managed by Members of Parliament). While there are various linkages across
these channels of funding, greater efforts are needed to enhance their efficiency and effectiveness as a
whole and ensure they are driven by community needs and held appropriately accountable. Through
analytical work and its support for the RDP, the Bank will contribute to the strengthening of rural
service delivery and local governance systems in Solomon Islands. As one of the Bank's first major
projects following the "tension", RDP's highly participatory design was 
intended to increase
community capacity to take collective action. As recognized by the Peace-building and State-building
Indicators, building trust and social cohesion within communities diminishes the risk of inter-group
conflict.19 In the planned second phase of RDP, the Bank will apply lessons learned and the results of
a planned impact evaluation to improve upon the community-driven development (CDD) design
rolled-out under 
the first phase. In addition 
to continued financing from Australia and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), government budget allocations, which
started in 2013, are expected to continue and will help ensure the sustainability of such CDD
mechanisms following the end of RDP II. Analytical work will respond to the evolving landscape of
rural/local development 
financing, 
including drawing on global 
lessons about Constituency
Development Funds to guide reforms in this area, as well as potential changes in center-periphery
governance arrangements.

56. 

Outcome 11: Increased access to skills and employment opportunities for the urban
population. Government concerns about youth unemployment led to the development of a jobs
program targeting the urban poor as a response to both unemployment and poverty. The REP
provides vulnerable communities, particularly youth (who were key actors in the previous violence)
and women (who were negatively impacted), basic employment skills and work to improve their
employment prospects and cash incomes. Building on this foundation, the Bank will support the
government in exploring options for a social protection policy. This will include a continuation and
expansion of the workfare program supported under the REP. The REP will expand its focus on basic
skills for the urban poor through non-formal training and on-the-job training opportunities linked to
basic infrastructure needs in urban communities, and the creation of livelihood opportunities. Bank
engagement will build upon earlier work in addressing the skills mismatch between employer
demand and households and supporting the transition from school to employment opportunities at
home and potentially abroad. Complementing this support, the Bank will explore opportunities
through analytical work, policy dialogue and partnerships with others such as UNHABITAT 
to
engage with stakeholders on options to address the poor management of urban land which has fueled
a cycle of inflated land prices, lack of housing for Honiara's increasing population, deteriorating
infrastructure and lost revenue for government.

57. 

Outcome 12: Government support for establishment of functioning local justice
mechanisms. The World Bank through its Justice for the Poor Program (J4P), and with the support
of the RAMSI Law and Justice Program has been involved in the Justice Delivered Locally (JDL)
initiative of the Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs. This work has been critical to building an
understanding of justice issues and state-citizen interaction at local levels. While carrying out further

19 Peace-building and State-building Indicators - Progress, Interim List and Next Steps, Document 3 - For

Discussion, report produced from the "Third International Dialogue Global Meeting, "The New Deal: Achieving
Better results and Shaping the Global Agenda, 19 April 2013, Washington, DC.

24

analytical work (including a possible focus on justice issues pertinent to the per-urban areas of
Honiara), the Bank will support government in undertaking a pilot project supporting local level
functionaries called "community officers". This responds to the demand for a state presence in
community governance and service delivery at the village level, in particular for the quasi policing
and enforcement function played by such officers. The project builds on the recommendations
contained in both an evaluation of a previous pilot of Community Officers (CO), carried out under
the previous ISN and the broader empirical work undertaken of local justice and community
governance. The small-grant, recipient-executed operation will be implemented by the Ministry of
Provincial Government and Institutional Strengthening.

58. 

Outcome 13: Enhanced access to services for survivors of Gender Based Violence (GB V).
Both GBV and DV have widespread negative implications for a country's economic and social
development, as affecting the health, well-being, social engagement and labor integration of women
and the health, nutrition, well-being and education of their children, and that of future generations.
There is a strong commitment in Solomon Islands to improve gender equality and eradicate gender
based violence. In 2007, the government created the Ministry for Women, Youth, Children and
Family Affairs (MWYCFA) to elevate gender issues in the country. Although small and new,
MWYCFA has embarked on an ambitious policy agenda to empower women through the Gender
Equality and Women's Development Policy and a national sub-policy to eliminate violence against
women. The World Bank will support MWYCFA to undertake a diagnostic study on capacity
constraints in institutions and services to protect and support women who are vulnerable or victims of
GBV or DV. This will be followed-up by at least one sub-project to strengthen core capacity by
frontline responders, in particular focused on developing a standardized provision of services;
strengthening co-ordination and referral services and training responders in responding sensitively
and in a timely fashion to the needs to victims.

Addressing Gender Across the WBG's Program

59. 

Ensuring that the WBG delivers improved outcomes for both men and women is a priority
of this CPS. In this context, the CPS will focus upon several key areas: (i) demonstrating concrete
additional impact in our portfolio including strengthening extension services to women in rural areas
and involving women in community decision making on major developments; (ii) ensuring that the
Bank's support for enhanced service delivery identifies, provides for and monitors the access of such
services to men, women and children and institutionalizes these practices as much as possible into
government, private industry and community practices; and, (iii) identifying and delivering selective
'niche' interventions 
that address significant problems such as the challenge of gender-based
violence. A Gender Profile has been prepared as part of preparation of this CPS and as a contributor
to completion of a Country Gender Action Plan.

60. 
The WBG program to date has included a strong focus on gender. Key social service
delivery programs, such as the REP, have specifically targeted opportunities for women and girls,
who make up 57 percent of all beneficiaries. Similarly, IFC, through the gender and investment
climate reform assessment, has worked closely with the Solomon Islands' Women in Business
Association to improve the number of female owned businesses from 130 to over 180 in the last year
alone. 
In partnership with AusAID, IFC is supporting the establishment of a Pacific Business
Coalition for Women which will include Solomon Islands. This Coalition, is first to be developed in
PNG and then expanded to other countries as the private sector interest and demand grows. It will
focus on promoting women as employees particularly in management and leadership roles, as well as
women as customers and suppliers of goods and services. 
It will also play an important advocacy

25

role within the community by leading and demonstrating the economic benefits of increased gender
equity in business.

61. 
Looking forward, the WBG will focus on improving women's economic empowerment.
Building on the experience from RDP and the government's own Women in Agriculture program,
opportunities to expand extension and other services to women will be explored to enable women to
improve productivity and expand engagement in small holder cropping as feasible. In the mining,
fisheries and energy sectors, the WBG will build on the approach used in other parts of the Pacific
(Box 8), particularly the experience from the PNG Women in Mining initiative to increase women's
voice and benefits from these developments and minimize harm for women and children in the
process. IFC will work with IDA to support the engagement of women in the fisheries sector, and
will pilot the use of the ILO's Better Work Program to identify interventions to address potential
social issues that might arise in relation to a concentrated female work force at SolTuna. In the
service delivery area, the Bank will use sex-disaggregated data to monitor and promote participation
and to identify and respond to constraints for greater access. For example, the CO pilot project,
currently under design, will include gender specific M&E and activities to capture information
around women's utilization of services and women's experiences more broadly with government
service delivery at the local-level. The RDP and REP will continue to ensure women as well as men
engage in the planning and implementation of activities including relevant training. In response to
the limited range of services available to victims of gender based or domestic violence, the Bank is
supporting the government through an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant in identifying
gaps in service provision and piloting new delivery approaches.

Box 8: The Women in Mining Initiative in PNG

The PNG Women in Mining (WIM) initiative was developed based on evidence that women do not get a fair

share of mining benefits, because they have no voice and little capacity. The initiative sought to address both the
lack of voice and capacity challenges faced by women by offering women from mining areas a safe space to
discuss issues and a platform for dialogue with the other relevant stakeholders - including government and

private industry. This process has empowered women to have a stronger voice and ensured more equitable
participation in benefit sharing arrangements, as well as enhancing the role of women in planning decision-
making processes. The WIM Initiative helped to

a) build the self-esteem and confidence of local women by allowing them to design and participate in training
programs to increase their skills, contributing to the creation of several women micro-businesses in food
processing and sewing uniforms to sell to companies. Training programs, although targeting women, were
also open to men, which helped to strengthen the role of women as partners to their male counterparts;

b) 

c) 

establish and strengthen linkages among women in the community and within women's associations, to
recognize their legitimacy in shaping resource allocation and development decisions locally;

increase the effectiveness and equity of community development in mining, providing a model for corporate
social investment activities and helping to mitigate negative effects of the industries on women; and,

d) highlight nationally how activities within a particular sector (extractives) can have an impact on women's
social and economic empowerment, and raised the profile of gender issues in the national development
dialogue.

The WIM Initiative was extended to women in the petroleum areas, showing a potential for replication in other
natural resources sectors where women are the major beneficiaries and can play a significant role.

26

Partnerships, Flexibility and Selectivity

62. 

The WBG is committed to working very closely with partners in Solomon Islands. This
reflects the priority Pacific Island leaders placed on the 2009 Cairns compact to make better use of all
resources available for development. Flexible bilateral support for the WBG's operations in
Solomon Islands, and elsewhere, has been instrumental in allowing the scale up that has occurred. A
partnership approach has been critical to supporting the government through the CEWG and close
collaboration has enabled results to be achieved in areas such as health sector policy and education.
The WBG is working very closely with the UN system in aligning support to rural communities
through 
the RDP and 
the UN supported Provincial Government Strengthening Program.
Collaborative efforts across the WBG under the prior ISN engagement have demonstrated the added
impact of a selective program of engagement that builds upon the respective strengths of both IDA
and IFC. This collaboration will continue across the CPS period (Box 9).

63. 
The proposed WBG program for the CPS period is focused and selective; it builds on success
in areas of previous engagement and is limited to where the Bank has a distinct comparative
advantage. There are no proposed investment operations in areas with significant other donor financing,
(e.g. education, health, transport, water and sanitation, forestry, public administration), although the
government and development partners have requested the Bank to provide targeted analytical work in
areas such as health that brings in the Bank's access to global knowledge and experience in order to
complement donor and government programs, with a particular focus on improving the management of
public resources for improved service delivery. Reflecting good progress with much of the current
program, the CPS will build upon current activities through additional financing and "repeater" operations
that expand current operations. IDA investments will continue to focus on areas where the Bank has deep
operational and analytical experience (e.g. community driven development, and performance of utilities),
and where it can leverage donor financing and/or IFC investments (e.g. urban employment and fisheries).

64. 
The WBG's engagement will need to remain flexible given the generally fluid political
environment and some uncertainty about the longer term donor landscape. In the context of its
Debt Management Strategy, the government is discussing with IDA how to make use of IDA credits
in addition to IDA grants. The Bank program will consequently need to remain flexible, and to
explore co financing options in many areas. More broadly, in a highly fluid environment, WBG's
engagement will need to be sufficiently flexible to accommodate internal and external changes
affecting Solomon Islands and its development needs.

27

Box 9. IDA and IFC Collaboration

Mining: IFC investment in the Gold Ridge Mine in 2010 enabled it to reopen after 10 years of inactivity following
the tension. IFC also supported capacity building to Gold Ridge Mining Limited with regard to payments to
communities, environmental and social issues, and management and establishment of a Chamber of Mines for
Solomon Islands. 
IFC engagement was reinforced by Bank support under a mining sector technical assistance,
financed by the State and Peace Building Fund, to strengthen the mining regulatory environment. Additional
complementary support has been provided to support Solomon Islands EITI candidacy application to improve
overall transparency in the sector.

Energy: Early IFC engagement supported preparation of the international tender process and investor identification
for the proposed Tina River Hydro scheme. This has been complemented by IDA support to strengthening the
capacity and financial viability of the Solomon Islands Electricity Authority and for the preparation of feasibility
studies, environmental and social assessments and community benefit sharing regimes for the proposed development
of the Hydro project. The WBG is also engaged with a number of other parties who are undertaking feasibility
studies for additional and alternative renewable energy developments in the country.

Fisheries: IFC's proposed investment in fisheries (SolTuna) processing will be supported by a complementary IDA
investment in the regulatory environment and associated offshore and coastal fisheries management under the
Pacific Regional Oceanscape Program (PROP). Through IFC's engagement with the previous investors in SolTuna,
the WBG was able to provide advice to the SolTtuna Board, and share knowledge on how to encourage and
structure foreign investment in the sector.

65. 

The WBG will aim to streamline implementation modalities, which can be burdensome for
small countries with thin capacity. Moving as much as possible towards a programmatic approach,
exploring options for consolidation of implementation capacity, and the scope for using and
strengthening government systems over time will be important. The East Asia and Pacific Region of
the Bank has recently introduced "A New Way of Working in the Pacific" to respond to the demands
of clients and partners for a more flexible and tailored approach to fiduciary management. The
objectives are to make procurement and financial management for Bank financed projects more
efficient and less costly and to build sustainable capacity in implementing agencies. To complement
this, the Pacific department is exploring options to assign more implementation support staff to cover
critical portfolios in the region.

Financing Envelope and Program

66. 
The CPS integrates IDA financing, donor trust funds and co-financing, and IFC
investments (Table 2). Financing will be deployed in a flexible and selective manner to address the
country's needs and maximize development impact. The CPS period spans two IDA replenishment

periods (IDA16 covering FY12-14, and IDA17, covering FY15-17). The indicative IDA16 allocation

is SDR13.5 million for three years, and the CPS assumes a similar allocation for IDA17 2 0 . In
addition, there is scope for Solomon Islands to access additional resources from the IDA regional
program to finance eligible regional investments with cross country spillovers such as the Pacific
Regional Oceanscape Program (PROP), and potentially programs in maritime safety, aviation or

20 The estimate of the IDA envelope is based on available resource from the IDA16 replenishment, and it is updated
annually and may vary depending on: (i) total IDA resources available and the IDA 17 allocation framework; (ii)
the country's performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA assistance
(grants/credits); (iv) the performance, other allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA
borrowers; and (v) the number of IDA-eligible countries.

28

disaster resiliency following up on the PCRAFI pilot. The latest debt sustainability analysis in 2012
indicates that Solomon Islands has a moderate risk of debt distress. This has enabled Solomon
Islands to move from being eligible for IDA grants only to a mixture of grants and credits with the
current IDA allocation being approximately 45 percent grant and 55 percent credit 21 . The Bank will
work with the authorities to fully explore the flexibility in IDA financing, including using the
Immediate Response Mechanism 
that allows the inclusion of emergency related contingent
components in selected investment operations, to support rapid response in eligible crisis and
emergency situations when needed. Furthermore, in case of severe economic shocks and natural
disasters, Solomon Islands could potentially access the IDA Crisis Response Window. 2 2 Finally,
other financing sources, including trust funds, partnerships with other donors and the private sector,
or government inputs are highly anticipated across the portfolio and will be firmed up during project
preparation throughout the CPS period.

Table 2: Tentative World Bank Group Pipeline in Solomon Islands, March 201323

Activity 
Proposed Additional Financin1
Rural Development Program (RDP) 
Rapid Employment Program (REP) 

Increasing Resilience to Climate Change 
and Natural Hazards Project (CRISP)
Sustainable Energy 
Pipeline
Development Policy Operation 
Community Officers (CO) 
Mining Sector Support Phase 11 
Pacific Regional Oceanscape Program 
(PROP)
Rural Development Program il 
Telecoms and ICT Development 
Tina Hydro Partial Risk Guarantee 
Rapid Employment Project 11 
Sustainable Energy 11 

Total 

IFC Investments 

SolTuna 

Year 

IDA ($m) 

TF ($m) 

TF Source

Australia, SIG
Australia

GEF/GFDRR

Australia, GEF

AusAID

FY14 
FY14 

FY14 

FY14 

FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY15 

FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY16 
FY16 

FY13 

3.5 

2.0

4.0
1.0

4.0
3.0
4.0
3.0
2.0

26.5 

IFC
10.0

5.0 
1.5 

8.4 

1.9 

1.0 

17.8

67. 
IFC is expanding its areas of work in the Solomon Islands. Building on IFC's lessons
learned over the last five years in the Pacific region (specifically in PNG and Timor-Leste), IFC is
scaling up its presence and activities in Solomon Islands to explore opportunities beyond fisheries,

21 IDA's terms of assistance (grant or credit) is based on a recipient country's debt sustainability position, and these
terms are updated annually based on the latest Debt Sustainability Analysis. Currently, IDA credits have a zero
interest rate, a 10 year grace period, and a 40 year maturity.

22 For details of the eligibility criteria, see Annex 3 of IDA (2011) "Additions to IDA Resources: Sixteenth
Replenishment," available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/IDA/Resources/IDA16_Report-English-Final.pdf.

23 Potential activities, particularly in outer CPS years are tentative and subject to change. Activities in the IDA 17
period will be further defined in the CPS progress report in the latter part of FY15.
29

including in the agribusiness commodity value chains (e.g. cocoa and possibly palm oil). IFC will
closely follow the developments in the mining sector (e.g. Sumitomo nickel project), as well as the
major infrastructure investments, such as the Tina River Hydro project. The IFC value proposition is
greatly enhanced by the Bank Group leverage and there are opportunities to enhance this further
across potential growth opportunities in Solomon Islands. In addition, analytical work and technical
assistance will improve transparency and public sector capacity in the investment approvals process,
along with expanded access to finance through better financial infrastructure (credit bureaus and
payment systems) and a strong focus on local SME development (mobile banking and local supply
chains). IFC will also engage existing private sector partners and relationships in other countries
across the Pacific to identify their business interests and risk appetite for entering the market or
expanding into new markets in Solomon Islands.

68. 
A selective but strategic program of analytical work and dialogue is proposed in sectors
where the WBG has global expertise. Given both the staffing constraints and the approach of the
CPS, it is essential that analytic support be prioritized in those sectors where the demand from
government is clear, and where significant existing or new investments, financed by IDA or others,
potentially exist. An indicative analytical and advisory program is set out in Table 3 below. Over the
course of the CPS, the Bank will increasingly move to programmatic analytical pieces, providing just
in time policy notes and technical guidance in key thematic areas.

Table 3: Proposed World Bank Analytical and Advisory Services

Economic Resilience 

Service Delivery 

Economic Dialogue and Core Economic Working Group 
Agriculture commodity scoping and options 
EITI Implementation technical assistance 
Tina Hydro Benefit Sharing 
Women in Mining and Fishing TA 
Urban Land Governance TA 
Justice Delivered Locally Report and Policy Note 
Rural Community Infrastructure and Service Delivery Report and TA 
Solomon Islands Line Ministry Expenditure Analysis 
Health Facility Costing Study 
Health Sector PFM TA 
Portfolio Gender Review 
Social protection options 

Household Income and Expenditure Analysis and poverty mapping 

Ongoing
FY14
FY14-15
FY14
FY14-15
FY14-15
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14-15
FY15
FY15

FY14-15

V. RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES

69. 
Risks to the effective implementation of a growing World Bank portfolio and deepened
policy dialogue in the Solomon Islands are significant, and will be addressed in the CPS
systematically. Risks entail both country risks - including the possibility of a resurgence in unrest,
political volatility and the combination of thin capacity and vulnerability to external macro-economic
uncertainty or disasters - as well as implementation risks, especially for those activities that involve
sensitive reforms and complex social and economic issues.

70. 
Risks of a resurgence in unrest have declined over the past few years, but remain present.
The transition of RAMSI reflects a broader judgment by key partners that risks of instability have
fallen, although a continuing RAMSI police presence will remain. Risks to security are posed by

30

continuing inter-island migration, the breakdown of social systems, and significant numbers of
unemployed and under-educated youth in urban areas. Poor service delivery particularly in rural
areas, demographic changes, and perceptions about benefit sharing from resources potentially
heighten these risks. The WBG will work carefully with government and partners to mitigate risks.
Additional financing proposed for the RDP and REP investments are intended to address underlying
inequalities. Similarly, the J4P program is principally aimed at better understanding these risks, and
providing guidance for how grievances might be addressed. The Bank will engage as requested in
areas that contribute to this risk, including in the area of urban land governance and gender. In the
event that these risks re-emerge, the program is likely to have to be re-balanced to further strengthen
the focus on directly improving livelihoods.

71. 
The fluid political situation in Solomon Islands means that there are risks to reform
progress during the course of the CPS period. The CPS period will cover at least one election in
Solomon Islands, and experience suggests that governments can often change between elections.
Risks associated with political volatility are likely to especially impact on sensitive reforms
underpinned by budget support, as well as socially and environmentally complex operations such as
the proposed Tina River Hydro scheme. 
In the event that policy performance mean reform
objectives are unlikely to be met, the WBG would potentially step back from budget support
modalities or complex and sensitive investments - potentially with some reduction in the resources
the Bank could make available for Solomon Islands - and rebalance engagement to core service
delivery investments.

72. 

Political economy risks are compounded by thin capacity. Capacity constraints can impact
on performance, even when there is strong political will for reform. Although the current portfolio is
performing reasonably well, achieving outcomes from Bank investments in Solomon Islands has
historically been challenging. Capacity constraints will be mitigated by efforts to carefully calibrate
engagement according to existing capacity and, the provision of extensive capacity building as part
of investments, and strong portfolio oversight. Nevertheless, continued engagement by the Bank and
partners over the past several years on the overall reform dialogue, as well as in energy sector reform,
does provide a firm basis for making a considered judgment in the CPS to pursue a limited set of
such "high risk - high reward" activities in areas where there has been good experience to date.

73. 
Implementation risks will be managed at both the program design level and through
focused activity design and enhanced implementation support. Thin capacity and broader
uncertainty means implementation risks in Solomon Islands remain high. The current program is
generally performing well, with 3 out of 4 investments rated satisfactory. Portfolio performance
since re-engagement in the mid-2000s has similarly been reasonable, in part due to the stronger on
the ground presence from a country office, with IEG confirming the single project exit in the past
five years as satisfactory. Nevertheless, portfolio performance during the 1980s and 1990s highlights
risks, with over half of all exits in this period rated U by IEG (as outlined in Annex B2). As noted
above, these risks will be mitigated at the program design level by a focus on continuing engagement
in areas in which the WBG has a strong track record, with a limited number of carefully selected
"high risk-high reward" areas. At the activity level, investments will be designed with a tight focus,
avoiding complex designs and "Christmas trees". 
Implementation support will also be further
enhanced. The WBG already has a significant on the ground presence in Honiara, which has
expanded considerably since 2009, and this will allow strengthened day to day engagement on
implementation issues. A willingness to restructure activities if needed will also allow flexibility.
Intensive supervision and training to meet Bank fiduciary and procurement standards will also be
undertaken, alongside broader policy engagement through the DPO series to improve public financial
management and Solomon Islands' procurement system.

31

74. 
Macroeconomic volatility and risks of exogenous shocks are inherent in a small, fragile,
isolated, geographically dispersed, and largely subsistence economy. In recent years, the Pacific
Islands have been subject to a range of exogenous shocks, being especially hard hit by fuel price
spikes, as well as weather and seismic events. Risks of shocks to macroeconomic stability are
mitigated by evidence of government commitment and action in building up external and internal
buffers as part of the dialogue with the IMF, the World Bank and the multi donor budget support
group over the last three years. During the CPS period, the Bank will continue to monitor the impact
of global economic developments. Over the past few years, the Bank has been able to move quickly
in collaboration with partners to provide assistance to support governments with strong policy
settings faced with macro-economic volatility. Similarly, across the Pacific, the Bank has worked
with the IMF to closely monitor debt sustainability in the event of shocks, and calibrate terms if
required and justified. While catastrophic damage from cyclones has been more limited than in most
other Pacific Island countries (since the destruction wrought by Tropical Cyclone Namu in 1986,
which killed over 100 people) regular cyclones and flooding undermine development gains,
particularly at the household level where they repeatedly affect the most vulnerable groups - the
poor, the elderly, people living with disabilities, female headed households, and those without land
entitlements. Increased support, as part of the CPS, for climate change adaptation and disaster risk
reduction in Solomon Islands, as well as the introduction in 2013 of a pilot catastrophic risk
insurance scheme for five Pacific island member countries, including Solomon Islands, will help to
mitigate, although not remove, these risks.

32

Annex 1: Solomon Islands Results Matrix

(G) = Gender-disaggregated data

National Development Strategy Objectives

NDS 1: To alleviate poverty and provide greater benefits and opportunities to improve the lives of Solomon Islanders in a Peaceful and Stable Society
NDS 2: To provide support to the vulnerable
NDS 3: To ensure that all Solomon Islanders have access to quality health care and to combat malaria, HIV, non-communicable and other diseases
NDS 4: To ensure that all Solomon Islanders have access to quality education and for the country to adequately and sustainably meet its manpower needs
NDS 5: To increase the rate of economic growth and equitably distribute the benefits of employment and higher incomes across all the provinces and people of
Solomon Islands
NDS 6: To build and upgrade physical infrastructure and utilities to ensure that all Solomon Islanders have access to essential services and to markets
NDS 7: To effectively manage and protect the environment and eco systems and protect Solomon Islanders from natural disasters
NDS 8: To improve governance and order at national, provincial and community levels and strengthen links between them.

Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
Expected (FY13 - FY17) 

Milestones 

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Strategic Area 1: Strengthening Economic Resilience

Macro-fiscal stability and 
quality of spending 

(NDS 5, NDS 8) 

Economic Diversification 
for job growth 

(NDS 5) 

Weak macro-economic 
management and pro 
cyclical spending has 
contributed to fiscal gap 
and deteriorating balance 
of payments. 
* Poor link between 
appropriation/allocation 
and outputs 

Outcome 1: Strengthened 
public expenditure and fiscal 
management as indicated by: 
The number of ministries 
that do not deviate by 
more than 10% from 
original allocations 
approved by Parliament. 
(Baseline is 9 target is 
14). 

* Over dependence upon 
limited non-renewable 
resources; 
Poor returns to govt and 
weak community 
engagement in natural 

* 

Outcome 2: Enhanced 
regulatory framework, public 
sector capacity and 
community benefits in the 
mining sector 
EITI certification achieved 

33

CEWG sustains Govt- 
donor dialogue on
economic and PFM 
reforms linked to budget 
support. 
Line ministry 
expenditure analysis 
completed for at least 2
additional ministries 
(from 2 current) 

0 First EITI report 
produced by May 
2014 
Establishment and 
initial staffing of a 
Mining 
Development

Operations: DPO (P126740)

AAA: CEWG dialogue,
economic monitoring, Line
Ministry Expenditure
Analysis, Health Sector
Support Program TA

Donor Partners: IMF,
AusAID, New Zealand, EU

Operations.
IFC investment in SolTuna
Pacific Regional Oceanscape
Program (PROP) (FY14) new
Mining TA second phase
(FY14)

Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
Expected (FY13 - FY17) 

Milestones 

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

* 

resource developments;. 
Semi-subsistence 
agriculture provides the 
food and income basis for 
most of the population. 

(baseline is candidate 
status, target is 
certification) 
* Updated mineral dev., law 
and regulations in place 
(baseline - outdated law, 
title management, fiscal 
regime and landowner 
engagement mechanisms) 

Authority 
Regulations that 
require Community 
Development 
Agreements with
indigenous 
landowner 

AAA: IFC Public-Private
Dialogue, Women in fisheries
and Mining,
Agriculture sector scoping

Donor and Private Sector
Partners: SolTuna/Tri-
marine, AusAid, IFAD, State
and Peace-building Fund

Outcome 3: Increase local 
economic benefits from 
fishing industry by increased 
on-shore production capacity 
* 
SolTuna processing plant 
from 7,223 to 20,465 
metric tons per year 
SolTuna taxes paid 
increase from $0 to 
US$2.1 million per year 
SolTuna wages and
benefits paid increase
from US$3.3 million to

* 

* 

US$6.2 million (G)

Outcome 4: Increased
productivity in key cash crops 
(cocoa and coconut). 
* 
Increased cocoa 
production from 6,000 to 
8,000 metric tons/ year 

34

.

SolTuna employees
increase from 1,473
to 2,000, 65% of
which are women
(G)
* Data collection on
economic
opportunities for
women in fisheries
(G)

Agriculture
extension services
for cash crops
provided by
Ministry of

Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
Expected (FY13 - FY17) 

Milestones 

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Improving infrastructure 
and lowering costs 

(NDS 6) 

* A 20% increase in the 
number of households 
who have received and 
found agriculture advice 
useful (baseline is 0, 
impact evaluation will 
measure response to 
advice provided) 
30% increase in total 
value of turnover of (58) 
RDP-supported rural 
businesses 

* 

Low rates of access to and Outcome 5: Lower cost, 
high costs of 
more reliable electricity, from 
telecommunications, and 
cleaner energy sources 
electricity. 
9 Average outage for each 

*customer 

served on the 

* Engagement between 
public and private sectors 
does not effectively 
address constraints to 
developments. 

Honiara grid reduced from 
10 to 3 hour 
* Maintain or reduce 
domestic tariffs 
(US85c/kwh). 
m Power Purchase 
Agreement signed between 
hydropower developer and

SIEA 

Outcome 6: Improved access 

to and reduced cost of ICT 
services 
Increase in mobile 
penetration from 55% to 
80% of population 

35

Agriculture and
Livestock increased
from 7800 to 10,000
farmers, 40% of
which are women
(G)
* Agriculture
extension services
for food crops
increased from 8100
to 10,000 farmers,
moving from 60% of
which are women

(G)

9 SIEA system losses 
reduced from around 20% 
to 12% 
9 Electricity tariffs reviewed 

in FY 14 and new tariffs 

implemented by FY15. 
9 Construction begins on 
Tina River Hydropower 
generation facility 

Operations:
Solomon Islands Sustainable
Energy and Additional
Financing

(SISEP - P 1003 11)

(AF SISEP - P120781)
Tina River Hydropower
Development Project and
PRG (113417) and (P114317)
(FY15)
IFC Transaction Advisory for
Tina River Hydro Project

Telecommunications and ICT

Development Project ongoing

* New ICT policy 

and new

framework formulated
and adopted 
Donor Partners: Pacific
Independent 
Regional Infrastructure
telecommunications 
Facility Trust Fund (PRIF),
regulator maintained and AusAid

Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
Expected (FY13 - FY17) 

Milestones 

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

* Decrease in tariffs for 
local mobile calls, calls
to Australia and 128kpbs
internet access (baseline
Feb. 2010 tariffs TBD)

financed

* 

Outcome 7.Strengthen the 
business climate through: .regulatory 
* 
Implementation of 
additional 3 (from 
baseline of 5) doing 
business regulatory 
reforms, 

* 

E-Government
framework

developed
Public - private
Dialogue platform with
Dept. of Commerce
constituted

Strengthen resilience to 

impact of natural hazards 
and climate change 

(NDS 7) 

Climate change and 

Outcome 8: Improved 

disaster risks have serious 
impact on economy and 

livelihoods 

resilience of rural 
communities to climate 

change, natural hazards and 

18 Resilient Community- Operation: Increasing

Led Rural Pilot 
Investment projects 

completed (G) 

Resilience to Climate Change
and Natural Hazards Project

(CRISP-P129375)

catastrophic disasters 

a DDRCCA incorporated 
into national and 

* 

Establishment of a

climate and disaster risk 
information system (G) 

provincial planning in at 
least two provinces 

(baseline is 0)
Budget and financial 

i 

regulations accommodate 
disaster risk provisions 
(baseline is 0). 

AAA: Pacific Catastrophe
Risk Assessment and

Financing Initiative
(PCRAFI)

Donor Partners:

Japan (PHRD); Global
Environment Fund (GEF);
GFDRR

Strategic Area 2: Improving Public Service Provision

Improved targeting and 

management of government 
resources, 

Budget allocations and 

Outcome 9. Improved 

* Results of HIES, HIES 

processes within line 
ministries not supporting 

sectoral priorities, 

expenditure management and 
poverty focus in key sectors, 

including health and 

poverty profile, line 
ministry expenditure 

analysis, and health 

36

AAA: CEWG Dialogue,

jPoverty Mapping and Poverty
HIES Technical Assistance,

Profile, Line Ministry

Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
YInternational 

Milestones 

WBG Instruments and
Partners

(NDS 3, NDS 4, NDS 8) 

Improve access to services 
and living conditions in 
rural areas 

(NDS 1, NDS 5) 

* Outdated poverty data upon education. 
which to base policy 
decisions 
* No systematic budget 
process for planning, 
execution, and reporting in 
key ministries, 

* Number of budget 
submissions and ministry 
expenditure reports that
use new data analysis
tools (baseline is 0, target

is 3)

Provincial governments 
Outcome 10: Capacity for 
lack sufficient resources 
collective action and increased 
and capacity to respond to 
access to services for rural 
community service delivery communities, 
needs
* Community infrastructure 
provided by external 
agencies is often poorly 
maintained by communities 
* Geography makes it 
difficult to provide services 
to large parts of the 
country, and for those 
areas, the cost is high 

rural services such as:
Pre-primary and primary 
school, non-water supply 
health service, and water 
supply (G) 
At least a 5% increase in 
capacity for collective 

At least a 10% reduction 

sector financing analysis 
fed into government 
policy and budget 
planning processes. 

Expenditure Analysis, Health
Sector Support Program TA,
Education Programmatic TA
(TBC)

0 

300,000 beneficiaries 
(50% women) of 
completed community 
development sub- 

Operations: Solomon Islands
Rural Development Program
and Additional Financing
(RDP - P089297)

projects 
(RDP 
completed in all rural 

- FY1)
Donor Partners:

btraia 

i 

wrdsiece 
Price
Ptio 
popent
incorporated into 
provincial planning
system in 5 provinces

und EU,

( 

d T F Ce 

l

Increase employment 
opportunities for the urban 

poor, especially youth and 

Limitations in the formal 
labor market; 

- Disconnects between skills 

outcomes from education 
and labor market needs in 

action

coAt least a 5% increase in

pre-primary and primary

school attendance (G)
* At least a 10% increase
in participation in
community decision-
making on projects (G)
* 
Outcome 11: Increased 
access to employment 

opportunities for urban 

population 
At 

37

At least 5,000 
beneficiaries reached, 

averaging at least 30 

days of employment per 
year. (G) 

Operations: Rapid
Employment Project

(REP - P 114987)

(REP - AF - FY14)
(REP 
-FY1 5)

Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
Expected (FY13 - FY17) 

Milestones 

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

women. 

(NDS 1, NDS 2, NDS 5) 

both the formal and 
informal economy 
Urban poor, especially 
youth and women, are 
disconnected from the 
economy and society. 

* At least 300,000
additional labor days 
completed (in addition to 
324,000 completed by 
2012); 50% of 
beneficiaries are women,
33% youth. (G) 

Improved responsiveness of 
law and justice, and 
protection of women 

(NDS 1, NDS 2, NDS 8) 

* Weak state and non state Outcome 12: Government 
dispute resolution and 
support for establishment of 
conflict management 
functioning local justice 

capabilities. 
* Unresolved grievances 
potentially manifesting 

mechanisms. 
9 Support for community 
officers reflected in 

as conflict, 

* Limited capacity across 
service providers to 

address GBV/DV. 

provincial government

budget (baseline is 0). 

Outcome 13: Enhanced 
access to services for 
survivors of GBV 
c Pilot delivery modality 
completed and scaled up 
(baseline and targets TBD 
based on GBV service gap 
analysis - see milestone) 

38

AAA. Youth diagnostic
Social protection note
J4P conflict risks and dispute
management in urban areas.

Donor Partners:
Pacific Regional
Infrastructure Facility Trust
Fund (PRIF),
State and Peace Building
Fund (SPBF)

Operations. Community
Officers (CO) program,
Improving Services for

Victims of Gender Based and
Domestic Violence
(P143772)

AAA: Justice Delivered
Locally (JDL) further work

on sources of conflict and
grievance, dispute resolution
and conflict management
capabilities

Donor Partners: AusAID,
Institutional Development
Fund (IDF)

0 
0 
0 

0 
9 Community officer pilot 
established in 4 provinces. 

GBV Service gaps 
identified, agreed and 
communicated across 
relevant agencies and at 
least one pilot delivery
modality underway. 

Annex 2: Outcomes and Lessons Learned from the 2010 Solomon Islands ISN

1. 
As the World Bank Group's 2010 strategy was specifically designed as an interim strategy
rather than a full country partnership strategy, a full completion report was neither required nor
prepared. Nevertheless, outcomes and lessons learned during the ISN period have been carefully
reviewed in preparing the current Solomon Islands CPS.

ISN Engagement

2. 

The ISN highlighted three areas of strategic engagement for the World Bank Group:
(iv) 
Addressing barriers to growth;
(v) 
Enhancing the benefits of global and regional integration; and
(vi) 
Supporting improved public administration and management.

3. 
World Bank Group engagement in Solomon Islands has been highly selective, combining
strategic use of relatively modest IDA resources with trust funds and with IFC investments. The
current portfolio includes activities with a total of around $20 million in IDA commitments,
mobilizing almost $36 million in trust fund resources which have been fully integrated into all aspects
of strategy, planning, portfolio management, and results measurement. In addition, IFC investments
have totaled $35 million.

World Bank Group Portfolio in Solomon Islands as at March 2013

Activity 

Approved Prior to ISN
Rural Development Program (RDP) 
Health Sector Support TA 24  
Sustainable Energy 

Tina River Hydropower TA 
Mining Sector TA 
Rapid Employment Project 
Telecoms and ICT Development 
RDP Additional Financing 
Development Policy Operation 
Increasing Resilience to Climate Change
and Natural Hazards Project (CRISP) 

Total 
IFC Investments 

Goldridge Mining Ltd 

Year 

FY08 
FY08 
FY08 

FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY11 
FY12 

FY13 

FY10 

IDA 
($m) 

3.2 
1.5
4.0

3.2 
3.3 
3.0 
2.0

20.2 
IFC

35.026

TF Source

Australia, EU

Australia (PRIF) 25
SPF
Australia, SPF
Australia (PRIF)
IFAD, GFRP

Japan (PHRD)

TF 
($m)

5.9 

3.5 
0.8 
3.8 
4.2 
14.6 

2.7 

35.5

24 Project closed in December 2011
25 Australian trust fund financing provided through the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF)
26 Repaid in 2012.

39

4. 
Investments were supported by carefully focused technical assistance and analytical work,
as set out below. Bank analytical work has not only provided advice to government and a basis for
reform dialogue but also, in the absence of local universities or think tanks, contributed to better
informed and increased public debate on economic issues.

World Bank Group Analytical and Advisory Work 2010 - 2013

Addressing Barriers to Growth
Core Economic Working Group Dialogue
Solomon Islands Growth Prospects, Constraints and Policy Options
IFC Regulatory Simplification and Investment Policy Promotion (RSIPP) TA
IFC Access to Finance and Payment Systems Reform
IFC Gender and Investment Climate Reform Assessment
IFC MSME Enterprise Study
IFC Tourism Impediments Diagnostic Study
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Implementation TA
Tina River Hydropower benefits Sharing Analysis

Enhancing the Benefits of Global and Regional Integration
Labor Mobility TA (Pacific Wide)
Fisheries Engagement Strategy/ Pacific Regional Oceans Initiative (Pacific Wide)
IFC Strategic Community Investment Analysis - Gold Ridge Mining Ltd.
IFC Telecom Impact Study
Supporting Improved Public Administration and Management
Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES)
Public Expenditure Review
Line Ministry Expenditure Analysis
Rural Community Infrastructure and Service Delivery Analysis
Health Financing Options Note
Justice Delivered Locally (JDL)
Gender Institutional Development
Health Sector Public Financial Management Technical Assistance

5. 

Key lessons learned from World Bank Group engagement during the ISN period include:

* Playing to the Bank's strengths. By being selective and choosing not to be engaged in
certain sectors, the Bank was able to address key issues, especially given the thin capacity in
Solomon Islands. This was particularly important in a donor-rich context, where funds are
not necessarily the main limitation. In such a context, the Bank Group was able to add value
by focusing on core institutional strengths, including technical know-how (economy and
finance, extractive industries, telecommunications), and extensive operational experience
(community-driven development, energy, telecommunications).

* Given the central role the Bank has played in improved coordination and dialogue, Bank
in-country presence and engagement was important. An "on the ground presence" was
vital to support the scaling up of financing and analytical engagement, deepen coordination,
ensure successful project implementation, and engage in policy dialogue. Investing in donor
coordination at the project level from the outset is also important, and allows for trouble-
shooting and creates ownership and relationships that facilitate follow-on investments.
40

* "Face time" with clients and donors is expensive but essential. Successful engagement
with clients in Solomon Islands, as in other fragile contexts, is time-consuming, labor-
intensive and relationship based. Prioritizing implementation support builds capacity,
provides incentives to clients, and creates a platform for problem solving. This means that
staff costs are disproportionate to program size and population.

* Communication is vital. National institutions and counterparts have limited experience of
effective institutional communication. Communication needs to be included in project design,
continually monitored and supported by the Bank. Similarly, experience shows the
importance of developing succinct, clear messages from technical work for use by all parties
in the context of reform dialogue, particularly in the very small setting with significant
informal contact.

* Project management units have helped achieve results although there are risks in
hollowing out government capacity. In a small civil service in which key individuals have
multiple roles, depending on ministry staff alone to implement is not pragmatic. Leadership
and continuity is central to successful project implementation. 
In the Solomon Islands
context, however, political fluidity and rapid turnover in senior official appointments means
the Bank needs to plan for unexpected changes. Regular fiduciary training has helped
strengthen national capacity. Efforts should be made to reinvent and alter these trainings, as
well as introducing other innovations in implementation support.

* The success of community focused projects depends on the quality of the relationship with
the community. A generic feature of small traditional societies as in Solomon Islands is that
property rights, individual and community entitlements need to be understood in their
localized context shaped by customary 
laws and practices and community specific
perceptions. This requires intense, continuous and a specific type of engagement. If the
community does not support or understand the project, it will not move forward. At the same
time, interventions that do not have high levels of local ownership may lead to conflicts and
tensions.

* Private sector investments must address challenges of inclusive growth and integration
with the local economy. Private investments, and in particular foreign direct investment, is
generally viewed with suspicion by local communities, where the legacy of logging has
translated into the capturing of natural resources without any meaningful benefits flowing to
the broader population New investments (and in particular those related to natural resources)
must carefully take into consideration strategies to engage with local communities and
landowner groups, the fragility of the State to manage and mediate between the various
interest groups, and a general lack of understanding of how the private sector operates.

6. 
Despite the risks associated with a significant scale up in a fragile situation, the portfolio is
generally performing satisfactorily, and is achieving results. Especially given country environment
risk flags, difficulties 
in obtaining audits across the portfolio due 
to limited capacity, and
effectiveness delays, three out of four current IDA investments are classified as being at risk. Of
these, only the RDP is considered a problem project, with community projects projected to benefit
165,000 people by the planned closing date in late 2013, rather than the 300,000 originally
anticipated. Disbursements remain strong across the portfolio with a current disbursement ratio of
27%. Details of performance against the ISN results matrix is provided in the outcomes table below;
of 13 expected ISN outcomes, 8 have been achieved, 4 partly achieved, and only 1 not achieved.

41

Medium Term 
Country Goals 

ISN Expected 
Outcomes 

t 

{ 

ISN Expected 
GActivities 
Milestones 

Lending/Non-Lending 
Intended to
contribute to outcome

Status and Evaluation Summary

Strategic Area I: Addressing Barriers to Growth

Improved policy and 
regulatory 
environment leading 
to increased private 

sector growth 

Government includes 

policy measures to 
address constraints to 
growth in next national 
strategy 

Sources of Growth 

identifies binding 
constraints to inform 
Government's policy 
agenda and dialogue 

with public, private 

sector, and donors 

AAA/TA: Sources of 

Partly Achieved

Growth, PER, J4P, IFC 9 Growth performance averaged over 7%
Advisory Services 
between 2010 and 2012, although based on
(RSIPP, SME study) 
commodities.
TA: Mining TA 
9 Policy changes included in NDS but uneven.

Operations: IFC 

investments 

* Between 20 10 and 2012, SIG funded

development expenditures more than doubled.)

Increase in women 
entrepreneurs 

Improved Doing 

Business indicators 

Reforms implemented 

for: starting a business; 

Alternative Dispute 

Resolution for 

commercial disputes; 

promoting investment; 
registering property 
transactions 

AAA: Women and 
Sources of Growth 

IFC: Gender and 

Investment Climate 
Reform Assessment.

Achieved
9 The number of female owned businesses has

increased from about 130 to over 180 between

2012 and 2013

IFC: RSIPP, Tourism 

Achieved

impediments 

diagnostic study 

A 

Improved access to credit (Doing Business

20 10). Reforms included: (i) a unified credit

registry established, (ii) expanded range of

assets able to be used as collateral, and (iii) out

of court enforcement of creditors rights.
Doing Business 2012 listed Solomon Islands
as one of the leading reformers globally,
strengthening protection for investors and
streamlining insolvency. Solomon Islands

improved its Ease of Doing Business Rank

from 113 to 92 for the period of 2010-2012.
The implementation of the 2009 Companies
Act and the establishment in 2011 of an online
company registry has reduced the time
required to register a company from over 50
days in 2009 to 9 days.

42

Fiscal Stability 

Key 2010 - 2011 actions 
in GoSI PFM reform 
plan completed (budget 
system, forecasting, 
procurement) 

* Public expenditure 
AAA: PER, Debt 
review completed 
Management 
* CEWG sustains GoSI- Assessment, Line 
donor dialogue on 
Ministry Expenditure 
economic and PFM 
Analysis 
reforms linked to 
budget support 

Operations: DPO 

Improved cash flow 
* Public expenditure 
management such that 
review completed 
GoSI consistently able to * CEWG sustains GoSI- 
meet commitments 
donor dialogue on 
economic and PFM 
reforms linked to 
budget support 

AAA: PER, Debt 
Management 

Operations: DPO 

Improving 
infrastructure and 

lowering costs 

50%* mobile phone 
coverage 

Telecommunications 
commissioner 
appointed 

AAA: Energy Strategy 

Operations: Telecom 

Reform 

Tina River Independent 
Power Producer 

* SIEA moves from loss- AAA: Energy Strategy 
making to break even 

Achieved
* Government maintained a positive overall budget
balance between 2009 and 2012, although
significant fiscal consolidation in 2011 was
relaxed in 2012.
* Overall NPV of external public debt reduced from
23% of GDP in 2009 to a projected 13% in 2012.

* 950% of reform actions under EFRP progressing
(5200 accomplished).
* Improved consultation between MoF and line
ministries, based on WB analysis.

Achieved
* Budget formulation now linked to expenditure
outcomes from previous years. 2010, 2011, 2012
budgets fully funded.
* Payroll execution strengthened through separate
accounting warrants for each ministry, introduced
in April 2011, with the number of ministries over-

spending on payroll declining from 24 to 18

Community Service Obligation policy for SOEs
adopted in 2011, with explicit budget allocation
of SBD 24m
Publication of all contracts awarded by Central

Tender Board, including name of bidder and
amount of bid.

Achieved
9 
Second telecoms license awarded.
Telecoms commissioner appointed.

* Mobile phone coverage increased from 50,000

people in 2008 to over 300,000
Outcome Not Achieved, Milestone Met
* Financial performance of SIEA has improved.

mobilized 

Operations: SISEP, 

From a loss of SBD70m in 20 10, SIEA made an

* WBG TA for 
SEFP, TRHDP, IFC Tina 
development of rural 
River Transaction 
electrification strategy Advice 

audited profit of SBD53m in 2012, exceeding
project targets of a profit of SBD 25m by 2012.
* Steps to mobilize an IPP for Tina River are
proceeding, although estimated conclusion not

____________________________________ 

_____________________________________ 

before FY15.

43

Strategic Area II: Enhancing Benefits of Regional and Global Integration

Strengthening regional 
ties and optimizing 
benefits from trade, 
investment, and labor 
migration 

New socially and 
environmentally 
responsible investor(s) 
enter market 

9 IFC investment 
transaction (s) 
9 WBG TA supports 
establishment of PNA 
secretariat 

AAA: Labor Migration 
advice, 
Operations: IFC 
investment 

Mining sector policy, 
regulatory, and 
institutional review 
completed 

mobilizes 
mining sector TA 

TA: Mining Sector 

44

Achieved

-

-

-

9 IFC investment in Goldridge Mining Ltd.
supported the reopening of the mine in March
2011, consistent with IFC's Environmental and
Social Performance Standards.
* Substantial increase in mining output (mining
exports increased from 0.5% GDP in 2010 to
14% in 2012.
* Over 600 jobs created directly from Goldridge
i New environmentally and socially responsible
investors attracted:
Fisheries: TniMarine International taking
over the Soltai tuna cannery and National
Fisheries Development (NFD) operations.
Palm Oil: New Britain Palm Oil
/Guadalcanal Plains Palm Oil Ltd
(GPPOL) achieved RSPO sustainable
palm oil certified status in 2010.
Plantation Forestry: Nien Made
Enterprises, FSC (Forest Stewardship
Council) certified.
Achieved
SWBG 
Solomon Islands accepted as EITI candidate in
June 2012, and is disclosing revenues from
extractive industries as required
Mimng TA supported participatory stakeholder
engagement process to inform policy decisions
and strengthen MMERE Solomon Islands
participation in Australian Seasonal Workers
scheme started in December 2012.
Participation in NZ RSE scheme increased to
400 people in 2012.
* Solomon Islands complying with hard limits
under Vessel Day scheme, closing tuna fishery
temporarily in 2011 when VDS days used.

Strategic Area III: Supporting Improved Public Administration and Management

Improved expenditure 
management in health 
and education 

Effective delivery of 
core services 

New National Health 
Strategic Plan and 
Monitoring 
Framework, and 
Health MTEF 
completed 
NEAP Costing 
complete 

AAA: NEAP Costing, 
Education PER, Health 
Financing Options Study 

TA: HSSP-TA, 
Operations: RDP 
Component I & 11, Fast 
Track Initiative 

Improved systems and 
infrastructure for 
delivery of some 
agricultural extension 
services 

Provincial agriculture 
offices equipped to 
conduct training and 
outreach activities 

Operations: RDP 
Component I & 11, 

Addressing urban 
unemployment 

Increased state capacity 
to address urban 
unemployment thCough 
public works 

40,000 labor days 
created, gender 
disaggregated 

Operations: Rapid 
Employment Program 

Improved sub-national Policy options for local 
governance 
level justice services 
submitted to Ministry of 
Justice and Legal Affairs 

AAA/TA: J4P Justice 
Delivery Locally, PER, 
Center-Sub-National 
Options Paper, State 
Land Inventory 

* Justice Delivered 
Locally research 
delivered 
* AAA delineates 
options and 
consultation process on 
sub-national 

governance 

45

Partly achieved
* Under the HSSP-TA the proportion of health
sector expenditure on primary health services
and provincial health programs has increased
from 17% (estimated base at appraisal) to 29%
for FY 11 (target 22)
*Health costing study initially planned was
delayed, although now underway, and will
inform budget preparation and execution for
delivery of essential health services.
Partly Achieved
* The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock has
upgraded equipment, buildings, and human
resources, and is delivering on monthly
activity plans in each province.
* Increase in proportion of villagers with
improved access to effective agriculture
services from 2009 baseline of 2% will need to
be confirmed through surveys.
* RDP likely to directly benefit 165,000 people
rather than the 300,000 originally planned.
Achieved
* 324,000 person days of work generated
through REP as at March 2013. Women make
up 5 7% of participants, youth 51 %
* Approximately 5,000 trainees graduated from
Pre-Employment Training
Partly Achieved
* Rolling research and analytical activities
undertaken on local justice and policy options.
Dialogue with the Ministry of Justice and
Legal Affairs, judiciary and other ministries,
led to a pilot activity on a local level
governance mechanisms (community officers).

Task Force on Urban Public Land established.

Annex 3: Standard CAS Annexes
Standard CAS Annex A2: Country At A Glance

Solomon Islands at a glance 

3s51

East 
Asia & 
Pacific 

Lower
middle
income 

Keg Development Indicators 

Solomon 
Islands 

Age distribution, 2011

Mile 

Femrale

Population, mid-year (millions) 
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
Urban population (% oF total population) 

0.55 
29 
2.6 
20 

1,974 
16.302 
0.7 
49 

2,533 
20.842
1.6
39 

7E-B

49

GNI (Atlas method. US$ billions) 

0.6 

8.387 

4.488

GNI per capita (Atlas method. US$3 
GNI per capita (PPP, international $3 

1.110 
2,350 

4,248 
7,266 

1,772
3,837 

4 

4 4, 

,

1D 

El 

0 

S 

10

GDP growth (%] 
GDP per capita growth (%) 

9.0 
6.2 

8.3 
7.6 

5.5 
3.9

N 

ob: p*L5

(smost naeenf e-tAniale. 2MW~-2e1g

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP,%) 
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP,%) 
Life eHpectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

.. 
.. 

14 
33 
72 
17 
5 

30.2 
59.5
66
46 
24 

Under-5mortality rate (perl,000)

68 
18 
12 

Eo
so
40-

Adult literacy, male (Y of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacye 
female ( 
, 
of ages 15 and older) 
% 
Gross primary enrollment. male (% of age group) 
Gross primary enrollment, Female (%~ of age group] 

.. 

96 
91 
110 
112 

80
62
106 
102 

146 
144 

0
10

Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 

70 
32 

90 
66 

87 
47

S 

1ss 
ine 

ni

ctolerr. 

isat 

c as Aia & adk

Net Aid Flows 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2011

Net ODA and official aid 

45 

46 

68 

340 

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

Australia 
New Zealand 
European Union Institutions 

6 
1 
9 

11 
2 
6 

13 
5 
44 

254 
25 
25 

is
10
-

0 

.

Aid (% of GNI) 
Aid per capita (US$ 

41.3 
194 

22.0 
148 

15.7 
167 

61.4 
633 

.

-0

-is
-oa

Long-Term Economic Trends 

es6

Consumer prices (annual %. change] 
GDP implicit deflator (annual %. change] 

13.1 

8.7 

7.1 
10.7 

6.2
7.3

.. 

12 

- -GDP 

-GEPper 

cept

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$) 
Terms of trade indeH (2000 = 100) 

0.8 

2.5 

5.1 
100

7.6

.. 

.. 

1980-90 1990-2000 

2000-11

Population. mid-year (millions) 
GDP (US$ millions) 

0.2 
169 

0.3 
303 

0.4 
435 

0.6 
838 

3.0 

2.8 
3.4 

2.7
4.9

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

28.9 
5.0 
2.4 
66.1 

34.7 
12.7 

JRS 
RI 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

3.1 
5.3 
2.8 
3.9 

RJ
aP

8.0 

S 
!5 

-49

52.6 

JRg

Household final consumption eHpenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capital formation 

89.3 
25.2 
6.6 

81.9
39.2
14.6

25.1 

20.3 

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross savings

36.9 
79.3 

30.1 
64.7 

24.1 
38.6 

25.8
49.6

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

46

Solomon Islands

Balance oF Pagments and Trade 

2000 

2011

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2011

Total merchandise exports (fob) 
Total merchandise imports (ciF) 
Net trade in goods and services 

65 

145
Vl2 
-199

98 

Voker andowunit3fy

-18 

Current accounr balance 

-30 

-134qua3y

as a %~ of GOP 

-7.0 

-23.1 

R~f~~S

IRulear bw

Personal transfers and
compensation of employees (receipts) 

4 

2 

ntmercauptim

Reserves, including gold 

/y 

./f 

25 

so 

7S 

Ic

Centiral Govelrnment Finance 

021 

COW 

erMW3n-C11C)

Current revenue (including grants) 

13.1 

34.7 

s 

Lusence, 

Jw.Iscva
usnws 

Tax revenue 

11.6 

24.8

Current expenditure 

17.1 

27.2

Technologg and InFrastructure 

2000 

2011

Overall surplusldeficit 

-5.1 

2.5

Paved roads (% of total) 
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people) 
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports) 

2.4 

..

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
Individual 
Corporate 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

2 

51

.. 

.. S

E.ternal Debt and Resource Flows

EnVironment

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI) 

156 

256 
15 
-

Agricultural land (% of land area) 
Forest area (% of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area) 

3 
81.0 
0.1 

3
78.9
q/

3 

-

Total debt (% of GDP) 
Total debt service (% of exports) 

35.9 
7.6 

30.5 
7.1 

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters) 
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

.. 44. 

80,939

Foreign direct investment (net inflows] 
Portfolio equity (net inflows] 

13 
0 

146 
0

C02 emissions per capita (mt] 

0.40 

&qS

GDP per unit of energy use

(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

..

Conmposition of total external debt. 2011

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

.. 

129

Eh-st arRD1140 DA, 411
ERO 0

Vorld Bank Group portFolio 

2000 

2011

IBRO

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

0 
0 
0 

0
0
0

Interest payments 

0 

0

IDA

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Total debt service 

38 
1 
0 

40
0
2

Private Sector Development 

2000 

2011 

Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita) 
Time required to register property (days) 

-
-
-

42 
54.5 
87 

IFC .:9s:.es
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 
of which IFC own account 
Disbursements for IFC own account 
Portfolio sales. prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account 

-
-
-

35
35
35

Ranked as a major constraint to business 
(% of managers surveyed who agreed) 
n.a.
n.a. 

2000 

2011 

-

0

.. 

.. 

MIGA
Gross exposure 
New guarantees 

-
-

-
-

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP) 
Bank capital to asset ratio (%) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.

3115113

Development Economics. Development Data Group (DECDG).

47

Millennium Development Goals 

Solomon Islands

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years) 

Solomon Islands

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2011

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population) 
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population) 

..
..

Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%) 

..
16.3 

Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

.. 

.. 

11.5

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling

Primary school enrollment (net, %) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

87

Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group) 
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %) 
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24) 

60 
14 

73
18 

21 
85 

48

.

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%) 

84 

85 

90 

96

Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment) 
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 

31.
2 

0 

.. 

0

Goal 4: 
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 

42 

36 

31 

22

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 

34 

29 

25 

18

Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %) 

70 

68 

85 

73

Goal 5: 
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) 

150 
.. 
.. 

120 

120 

93

Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) 
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49) 

85 
11 

85 
7 

86
35

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases

Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)

Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 

312 

240 

185 

103

Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms) 

40 

41 

40 

70

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs

Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 

.. 
.. 

69 
30 
.. 

70 
31 

70
32

Forest area (% of total land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area) 
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita) 
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

83.0 
0.1 
0.5 
13.6 

81.0 
0.1 
0.4 

78.9
0.1
0.4
18.0

0.1 
0.5 

.. 

.. 

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people) 
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people) 
Internet users (per 100 people) 

1.5 
0.0 
0.0 

1.8 
0.1 
0.0 

1.9 
0.3 
0.5 

1.5
49.8
6.0

Households with a computer (%)

Education indicators (%) 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125 

100 

60

1 

5 

4

50 

50 

30

25 

20

0 

25 
a0 

1

2002 

2005 

2010 

01

1990 

1995 

200 

2011 

200 

2005 

2010

--- 

Primary net enrollment ratio

OFixed + moble subscribers
internet users

----

Rtio ofgids to boysin primary & secondary 
educationI 

OSolomon Islamd s DEast Asia & Pacific 

II 

II

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. 

3/15/13

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

48

Standard CAS Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Solomon Islands
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 4/30/2013

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number , 

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 8, C 

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervsion Resources (total US$)
Average Supervsion (US$/project)

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013

5 
1.5 
0.0 

0.0 

40.0 
36.3 
14.0 

5 
2.5 
0.0 

0.0 

60.0 
47.9 
26.2 

5 
2.7 
20.0 

21.4 

80.0 
89.3 
53.1 

4
4.1
25.0

37.2

75.0
80.5
33.5

Memorandum 
Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
9 
1
45.2 
1.3
55.6 
0.0
68.5 
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress(IP)
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

49

Standard CAS Annex B5: Poverty and Social Development Indicators

Solomon Islands Social Indicators

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(%' of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (USS) 
Consumer price index (20015=110) 
INCOME(CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source
(% of popfatin)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% of chHldren ages 12-23 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per l,1:I) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,00: population) 
Maternal (modeled, per 100,flUD live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

Latest single year 

Same regionfincome group

1980-85 

1990-95 

2004-10 

0.3 
3.2 
12.4 
6.3 

0.4 
2.8 
14.7 
5.2 

0.5 
2.7 
18.6 
4.2 

East 
Asia& 

Pacific 

1,961.6 
0.7 
45.9 
1.8 

Lower-
middle-

income

2,518.7
1.6
39.4
2.9

.. 

13 

91f 
43 

1,030 
152 

3,696 
131 

1,623
140

.. 

4.5 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

38 

.. 

57 
57 
58 

41 
52 

.. 
.. 
.. 

3.6 

.. 

5.1 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

69 
94 
65 

68 

69 

.. 

60 
59 
60 

32 
39 

.. 

110 
85 

82 

83 

81 

70 
94 
65 

68 
79 
12 

67 
66 
69 

23 
27 

202 

161 

1" 

70 

2.2 
3.8 

93 

93 
94 

91 
97 
84 

95 
94 
6 

72 
70 
74 

20 
24 

157 
115 
89 
91 

1.7
4.0

85

87

83

87
93
83

W

79
25

65
64
67

50
69

244
175
300
57

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zeroor less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCEI)97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2012.

50

Standard CAS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators, 2009-15 1/

Output and Prices 1/

Nominal GDP (millions SBD) 
Nominal GDP (millions US$) 
Real GDP (% change) 
Real GDP, excl. logging and mineral sectors (% change) 
Consumer price index (% change, period average) 

Government Operations (percent of GDP) 2/
Revenues and grants 
Revenues 
Grants 
Expenditures 
Recurrent 
Development 
Other 
Government budget balance 3/ 
Non-commodity primary balance 
Public debt 
Of which, dominated in foreign currency 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions) 4/
Current account balance 
(% GDP) 
Goods trade balance 
Exports 
o/w Logging 
Imports 
Services balance (Net) 
Income balance (Net) 
Current transfers (Net) 
Foreign direct investment 
(% GDP) 
Exports G&NFS (US$, % change) 
o/w Logging (US$, % change) 
Imports G&NFS (US$, % change) 
Foreign exchange reserves 
(months of forward imports) 

2009 
Actual 

4,815 
598 
-4.7 
-2.6 
7.1 

55.2 
30.5 
24.7 
53.5 
28.6 
25.6 
-0.7 
1.8 
-0.7 
33.9 
23.2 

-128 
-21.4 
-74 
165 
88 

239 

-35 
-166 
147 
117 
19.5 
-12.9 
-20.2 
-15.8 
146 
4.1 

2010 
Est. 

5,498 
682 
7.8 
5.4 
0.9 

62.6 
32.0 
30.6 
56.4 
28.2 
27.9 
0.3 
6.2 
-1.3 
28.5 
19.8 

-210 
-30.8 
-137 

224 
125 

360 

-81 
-173 
181 
236 
34.6 
40.6 
42.0 
59.2 
266 
6.4 

2011 
Est 

6,637 
915 
10.7 
7.3 
7.4 

60.3 
33.1 
27.1 
51.2 
25.6 
25.5 
0.0 
9.0 
-1.4 
22.2 
15.2 

-59 
-6.7 
-5 

418 
191 

423 

-49 
-178 
173 
141 
16.2 
68.6 
53.2 
11.4 
412 
7.6 

2012 
Est 

7,331 
997 
4.8 
3.5 
5.9 

54.2 
34.6 
19.6 
50.3 
28.5 
21.8 
0.0 
3.9 
-4.3 
17.9 
13.0 

-1 
-0.1 
47 
493 
180 

446 

-58 
-111 
120 
67 
6.7 
14.9 
-8.2 
6.6 
480 
8.5 

2013 
Proj. 

8,099 
1,067 
4.0 
5.5 
6.0 

53.3 
33.4 
19.9 
52.5 
28.2 
24.3 
0.0 
0.8 
-4.0 
16.0 
11.4 

-22 
2.0 
0 
489 
170 
488 

-66 
-123 
167 
27 
2.4 
0.4 
-3.3 
8.9 
530 
8.4 

2014 
Proj. 

8,883 
1,136 
3.5 
3.8 
5.0 

50.8 
32.9 
17.9 
50.2 
26.8 
23.4 
0.0 
0.6 
-3.7 
13.9 
11.1 

-77 
-6.5 
-7 
526 

158 
533 

-95 
-150 
175 
34 
2.9 
7.3 
-6.9 
11.6 
560 
8.6 

2015
Proj.

9,681
1,205
3.7
4.0
4.7

50.0
32.0
18.0
49.6
26.6
23.0
0.0
0.4
-2.8
13.8
11.3

-66
-5.3
-18
536

145
554
-83
-154
188
36
2.9
2.6
-8.4
2.2
590
8.6

Financial indicators 5/
Domestic credit to private sector (% change) 
-4.1 
-4.7 
4.0 
6.0 
7.0 
Lending rate (%) 
15.4 
13.5 
11.4 
11.0 
10.0 
Exchange rate (SBD$/US$, cop) 
8.06 
8.06 
7.3 
7.59 
7.82 
Real effective exchange rate Index (2005=100) 
120.6 
112.0 
125.4 
125.4 
125.4 
Percent change (%) 
6.9 
-7.1 
11.2 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
1. Data and projections are from IMF recent mission to Solomon Islands April 2013 and prior Country Reports No. 12/156 and No. 11/359,
Central Bank of Solomon Islands publications and World Bank staff projections. 2. Includes SDR allocations made by the IMF to the Solomon
Islands in 2009.

4.7 
11.5 
7.25 
124.5 

7.0
10.0
8.03
125.4
0.0

51

Standard CAS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Solomon Islands - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
2008 

Estimated 
2011 

Projected
2014 

Indicator 

2007 

2009 

2010 

2012 

2013 

2015

Total debt outstanding and 

177 

166 

156 

139 

130 

121 

113 

104 

96

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

Total debt service (TDS) 

3 

4 

2 

3 

3 

3 

2 

2 

2

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb

TDO/GDP 

30.2 

25.7 

25.9 

20.5 

15.5 

..

TDS/XGS 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Concessional/TDO 

82.1 

81.3 

83.9 

89.2 

90.3 

91.3 

92.1 

93.5 

94.1

EBRD exposure indicators (%)
EBRD DS/public DS 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Preferred creditor DS/public 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

DS (%)

BI3RD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Of which present value of 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

guarantees (US$m)

Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

IDA TDO (US$m)d 

46 

44 

44 

42 

41 

40 

39 

37 

36

IFC (US$m)

Loans

Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

52

Standard CAS Annex B8: Statement of JFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

Solomon Islands: IFC Investment Operations Program

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013*

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants 
IFC's Own Accounts only 

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only

OIL, GAS AND MINING 
Total 

35.00
3500

100
100 

Oriqinal Commitments by Investment Instrument (%I - IFC Accounts only
Loan 
100
Total 
100 

* Data as of March 01,2013

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

0

53

Standard CAS Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

CAS Annex B8 - Solomon Islands

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 4/30/2013

Closed Projects 

10

IBRD/IDA*

Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Cosed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Cosed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

12.89
0.00
6.00
10.62
18.90
10.62

3.88
0.00
3.88

Active Projects 

Project ID 

P114987 
P089297 
P100311 
P113148 
Overall Result 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements"

Project Name 

Development 
Oboectives 

SB - Rapid Employment Project 
SB-Rural Development Program 
SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy 
SB: Telecommunications & ICT Project 

S 
MU 
MS 
S 

Implementation 
Progress
S 
MU 
MS 
MS 

' 
' 
' 

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Revd

2010 
2008 
2009 
2010 

3.2 
6.2 
4 
3.25 
16.65 

1.30085 
-0.243429
0.00179192 0.358493 
-2.930628 
-1.73875
1.185897 1.3538659 0.293866
1.036853 
-0.02897
0.00179192 3.882093 
-1.849162 

-1.44489

54

Annex 4: Donor Coordination

Australia is Solomon Islands' largest development partner, with assistance of over A$220m
(US$230m) million in FY13. Approximately A$100m of this amount supports the police component
of RAMSI. Since 2003, Australian assistance has been made up of its bilateral cooperation (governed by
the Solomon Islands - Australia Partnership for Development 2009) and its contribution to RAMSI.
Australian bilateral and RAMSI support will be combined from 1 July 2013. Australia's future funding
will support four priority areas: (i) improved service delivery in health and education; (ii) improved
justice services, (iii) improved broad-based economic growth (including market access, transport, energy
and telecommunications), and (iv) 
improved governance (including economic, public sector and
democratic governance). Australia will continue to provide significant technical assistance including
around 25 advisers in the Ministry of Finance and Treasury, 30 across the justice institutions and 10
across health, education, infrastructure and agriculture. Consistent with the focus on improved
economic 
infrastructure, Australia financed the maintenance of over 400km of roads in 2012
enabling improved access to services and markets and providing over 200,000 person days of
employment. Australia is the lead donor in the health sector, helping to significantly reduce the
incidence of malaria and supporting immunization of children and maternal and child health
improvements, as well as providing clean water and sanitation to 15,000 people in 2012. Australian
support for education has facilitated the removal of school fees, ensuring approximately 150,000
children now attend primary school, as well as providing over 50 scholarships per year for tertiary
education in Australia. Across the region, Australia is now placing a major focus on gender through
the Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development initiative announced by the Prime Minister in 2012.
The Solomon Islands component is currently being designed and is likely to focus on prevention of
violence against women in rural areas. The Australian Government is co-financing the World Bank's
RDP and REP, supporting the J4P work program, as well as Bank-led efforts to introduce
competition in the telecoms market.

Japan has provided assistance to Solomon Islands since independence. 
Japan's 2012 Country
Assistance Policy focuses on the themes of: (i) overcoming vulnerability; (ii) strengthening economic
growth; (iii) improving medical services; (iv) education, particularly through scholarships; and (v)
environmental conservation and climate change adaptation. 
Japan has provided an average of
$12.5million in grant aid and technical assistance to Solomon Islands per year since 2005. Major
current investments include water supply in Honiara and Auki (total value Yen 2.1 billion or $23m),
the reconstruction of Gizo hospital (Yen 1.9 billion, $21million), and disaster preparedness (Yen 860
million, $9million). Japan is financing the World Bank climate change adaptation and disaster risk
management project as well as the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Scheme, for which Solomon
Islands is one of five pilots.

New Zealand (NZ) and Solomon Islands signed a Joint Commitment for Development in September
2011. NZ's aid allocation for Solomon Islands in FY12 was NZ$38m (US$32m), including support
through RAMSI. NZ is the lead donor in education, as a building block for sustainable economic
development. Almost 30 percent of NZ financing goes to education, helping to train over 1,700
teachers and contributing to successful improvements in primary school access and enrolments. NZ
assistance also includes a strong focus on transport infrastructure, including a NZ$25m investment to
rehabilitate Munda airport in Western Province. NZ support for fisheries is aimed at helping
Solomon Islands improve management of this important resource. Current technical assistance to the
Ministry of Finance and Treasury in revenue collection will transition from RAMSI into the bilateral
program from 1 July 2013.

55

Taiwan, China, has provided US$33m in general budget support since 2008 to finance the Rural
Constituencies Livelihood Fund which provides funds for parliamentarians 
to spend in their
electorates. Taiwan, China has also funded construction of government buildings and also supports
agricultural activities in rice, vegetables and pigs and medical personal, equipment and training for
the National Referral Hospital.

The Asian Development Bank endorsed a new 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) in
February 2012. The CPS focuses on four priority areas: (i) gender equity; (ii) governance and
capacity development; (iii) environmental sustainability and climate resilience; and (iv) encouraging
private sector development. Over this period, ADB expects to be able to make available about $40m
in grants and concessional credits (current ADB financing for Solomon Islands is 50/50 grants and
credits). ADB is working with Solomon Islands to establish a public-private partnership to land a
broadband cable to improve connectivity and reduce the price of bandwidth. ADB finance is also
focused on improving transport infrastructure, including roads and domestic ports, improving access
to electricity (with the aim of connecting over 2,000 new households in provincial centers to the grid
by 2016). ADB is a key partner in the CEWG and is providing budget support to encourage public
financial management reforms. Technical assistance is being provided to support the business
enabling environment, SOE reform and the National Development Strategy formulation and
implementation.

The European Union's Country Strategy for Solomon Islands 2008-2013 sets out a framework for
engagement under the 1 0 th European Development Fund (EDF). The EC anticipates making
approximately EUR 13.2 million (US$17 million) available during this period, focused primarily on
macroeconomic support, and rural development (including co-financing of the World Bank Rural
Development Program. A further EUR 3.3 million (US$4 million) is to cover unforeseen needs such
as emergency assistance. The European Investment Bank has also provided financing to encourage
private sector investment to reopen the Gold Ridge mine (in collaboration with IFC) and for
renewable energy Technical Assistance. The EU is looking to consolidate its activities in a planned
2014 strategy.

The International Monetary Fund is a key partner in leading dialogue on overall macro-economic
reforms. In December 2012, the IMF's Board approved a three year Extended Credit Facility (ECF)
arrangement for Solomon Islands, in an amount equivalent to SDR Im (US$1.6 million). This
followed an IMF program supported by a Standby Credit Facility arrangement. The IMF program
will be instrumental in tackling deep institutional and structural issues and is seen by the authorities
as critical for supporting Solomon Islands, which remains vulnerable to external shocks associated
with its undiversified export base, strong dependence on aid, and frequent natural disasters

The United Nations system is active in Solomon Islands, with UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNEP,
FAO, and WHO all implementing programs. UNDP has especially played a key role coordinating
partners following disasters, including the recent 2013 tsunami that hit Santa Cruz. UNDP is also
assisting Solomon Islands in climate change adaptation, as well as strengthening of aid coordination,
provincial governments, and parliamentary exchanges. The UN is proposing a new 'One UN' US$2
million gender program (2013-2017) focussing on formulating and implementing laws and policies,
women's political leadership, eliminating violence against women and children, and peace-building.

Current assistance by individual donors is set out in the attached matrix, using relevant heads of
expenditure in the Government of Solomon Islands' own budget framework for reporting on donor
engagement by sector.

56

Donor Engagement Matrix by Sector

Australia 

New
Japan Zealand 

ADB 

EU 

IMF 

UN 

WBG

Macro-economic Reform 

Agriculture/ Livestock
Development 

Commerce, Industry, and
Employment 

Communication and Aviation 

Education and Human Resource
Development 

Energy and Rural
Electrification 

Environment, Climate Change,
Disaster Risk Reduction 

Health and Medical Service 

Infrastructure Development
(Transport) 

Fisheries 

Forestry

Police and Correctional
Services 

Poverty Measurement and
Analysis 

Public Administration and
Provincial Governments 

Rural Development 

Water and Sanitation 

Women, Youth, and Children 

x 

x

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x

x

x

x

x

X

x

X

x

x 

x 

x 

x

x 

x

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x

x 

x 

x 

x

x 

x 

x

x

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

57

156'E 

158,E 

160,E 

1 62E 

164E 

166E 

168E 

170E

PAP U AOntong 
NEW GUINEA

Java Atol

PA PUA 

'

"'

6S 

6S

Roncador Reef

CHOISEUL

Cho,seul 

SOUTH 
PACIFIC
OCEANSNDS

SasEn 

SOLOMON

shor&l 

A LMALAITA 

Mono------ 

-

-

Mon 
S0s00 
0 r Kd 
angar 

no 

q 

ISABEL

Vella Lvellat 

S\$anta Isabel

8s 

Kolo 

Da\ 

8S

RanKnda 

New Georg,a 

Dd 

& 

Buala

New Georgia R 

angunu 

San Jorg&' 

paba 

Daringali

Group

Teeae 

.N99atokae 

CENTRALb 

FJon 

 Au 

, Malaita

WESTERN 

Russell Is 

Tula,Igie

Mava 

u 

Tarapaina
' Maramasike
Ulwa 

GuadOacanal HONIARA 

' 

Solomon 

Mt. Mokarakon4buruA 
AuAu 

Duff Is.

Solmon(2,447mj- Auff 

Is10.

10 S 

Prr 

10 S

Sea 

GUADALCANAL 

Hr 

MAKIRA 

Reefl,.

ralaraTinakula

Apaorak 

San Cristobal 

Noka

Lata 

Nendo

Mwoniwoo'

Santa Cruz Islands TEM O TU

0 

50 

100 

150 Kilometers
| 

| 

| 

| 

Beliona 

RENNELL AND 

*utupua

0 

50 

100 

150 Miles 

J 

BELLONA 

vnaO VanikoIo 

Ann

Rennell 

"Tinggoa 

Fatutoka

12'S

156'E 

158'E 

Tkp

Tikopia.

Indispensable

Reefs

SOLOMON
ISLANDS 

Coral 

Sea

o 

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS 

VANUATU

14S 

14'S

e 

PROVINCE CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL
MAIN ROADS

 

This mop ws produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundries, colors, denomintions and any other infoarmation
shon n this mop do not imply, en the part o The Worid Bank
Grnup, any judgment on the legal status of any tertory nr any
endorsement er acceptance o such boundaries. 

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES 

-

- -|INTERNATIONAL 

BOUNDARIES 

164 E 

1 

E 

170E

0C) 

________________

