Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 78500-KG

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

FOR THE

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

FOR THE PERIOD FY14-17

June 24, 2013

Central Asia Country Management Unit

Europe and Central Asia Region

International Finance Corporation

Eastern Europe and Central Asia Region

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Interim Strategy Note was discussed by the Board on August 2, 2011

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Kyrgyz Som (KGS)
US$1 = 48.64 Som
(June 24, 2013)

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
(January I to December 31)

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 

ADB 
BEEPS 

CPS 
DflD 

DPO 
DSA 
EBRD 

EC 
ECA 
ECF 
ERSO 
FDI 
FESTI 

FIRST 

GDP 
GFS 
GNP 
GTAC 

IBRD 

IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
IsDB 
ISN 
JEA 
JSAN 

Analytic and Advisory Activities 
Asian Development Bank 
Business Environment and Enterprise 
Performance Survey 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Department for International 
Development 
Development Policy Operation 
Debt Sustainability Analysis 
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
European Commission 
Europe and Central Asia 
Extended Credit Facility 
Economic Recovery Support Operation 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Fuel and Energy Sector Transparency 
Initiative 
Financial Sector Reform and 
Strengthening 
Gross Domestic Product 
Government Finance Statistics 
Gross National Product 
Governance Technical Assistance 
Credit 
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
International Development Association 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Islamic Development Bank 
Interim Strategy Note 
Joint Economic Assessment 
Joint Staff Advisory Note 

KfW 
MDGs 
MDTF 
MFOs 
MoE 
MoF 
MTBF 
MTDP 
NBKR 
NSDS 

NPLs 
OECD 

PEFA 

PER 
PFM 
PPL 
PPP 
PSD 
SAI 
SDR 
SIDA 

SME 
SOE 
TMIS 

TSA 
UCoA 
UNDP 
USAID 

Germany Development Bank
Millennium Development Goals
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Microfinance Organizations
Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Finance
Medium-Term Budget Framework
Medium-Term Development Program
National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic
National Sustainable Development
Strategy
Non-Performing Loans
Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public Finance Management
Public Procurement Law
Public Private Partnership
Private Sector Development
Supreme Audit Institution
Special Drawing Rights
Swedish International Development
Agency
Small and Medium Enterprises
State Owned Enterprise
Treasury Management Information
System
Treasury Single Account
Unified Chart of Accounts
United Nations Development Program
Unites States Agency for International
Development

11

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP
STRATEGY, FY14-17

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

A. Regional, Political and Social Context 
B. Recent Economic Developments 
C. Economic Prospects 
D. Poverty and Gender Profile and Trends 
E. Development Challenges and Opportunities 
F. Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy 

II. BANK GROUP COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

A. Background and Rationale 
B. Lessons Learned from previous CAS and Stakeholder Feedback 
C. Proposed Bank Group Strategy 
D. Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
E. Implementing Bank Group Strategy 

III. MANAGING RISKS 

BOXES

Box 1: 
Improving the Efficiency of Public Spending 
Box 2: Poverty and Inequality 
Box 3: Gender and Women's Empowerment 
Box 4: Climate Change in the Kyrgyz Republic 

TABLES

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators, 2010-17 
Table 2: Satisfaction with quality and efficiency of public services 
Table 3: Country Policy and Institutional Assessment-selected indicators 
Table 4: Ease of Doing Business 
Table 5: Indicative Work Program, FY14-16 

1

3

3
4

5
9
11
16

17

17
18
19
21
29

34

8
10
11
32

6
6
6
7
31

111

CHARTS

Chart 1: The State and Citizen 

FIGURES

Figure 1: Most Problematic Factors for Doing Business 

ANNEXES

Annex 1: 
Results Framework 
Annex 2: 
CAS Completion Report 
Annex 2.1: Summary of CAS Program Self-Evaluation 
Annex 2.2: Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries (FYO7-13) 
Annex 2.3: Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FYO7-13) 
Annex 3: 
Planned IDA Lending (by Area of Engagement and Fiscal Year) 
Annex 4: Development Partner Coordination 
Annex 4.1: Development Partner Coordination by Sector/Theme 
Annex 5: 
Consultations with Civil Society 
Annex 6: 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Annex 7: 
Review of Kyrgyz National Statistical System 

Annex A2: Country at a Glance 
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3: IDA Program Summary 
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program 
Annex B4: Summary of Non-lending Services 
Annex B5: Poverty and Social Development Indicators 
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

18

7

36
42
56
62
64
65
66
68
70
73
75

77
80
81
82
83
84
85
87
88

Vice President 
Country Director 

Country Manager 

Task Team Leader 

IBRD 

Philippe Le Hou6rou 
Saroj Kumar Jha 

Alexander Kremer 

Dinara Djoldosheva 

IFC 

Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Tomasz Telma 

Moazzam Mekan

Irina Kokaia/Iuliia 
Mironova 

MIGA

Izumi Kobayashi
Ravi Vish

Franciscus Johannes
Linden

The CPS benefited from contributions from the Kyrgyz Country Team, including Jyldyz Beknazarova,
Francisco Galrao Cameiro, Laurent Debroux, Sascha Djumena, Matthew Eldridge, Anatol Gobjila,
Saumya Mitra, Emanuel Salinas Munoz, Evgenij Najdov, Aly Zulficar Rahim, Sarosh Sattar, and Jose R.
Molinas Vega.

1v

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Background. This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) marks the Bank Group's return
to a standard assistance framework for the Kyrgyz Republic. Owing to uncertainties in the
country that followed the political turmoil and violence of April-June 2010, Bank Group
activities in FY11 were guided by a Joint Economic Assessment (JEA) 1 and during FY12-13 by
an Interim Strategy Note (ISN).2 The former concentrated mainly on the country's emergency
post-conflict needs for budget support, humanitarian aid, and 
infrastructure repair and
rehabilitation. The latter, recognizing that corruption, nepotism, and the misuse of public assets
had been fundamental, systemic causes of the mid-2010 crisis, focused on three themes:
governance; economic adjustment; and social stabilization, especially in the south of the country.
The ISN served as a bridge between the JEA's post-crisis recovery strategy and this full CPS.

ii. 
Recent Economic Developments. The country's economic performance over the last
decade has been volatile, reflecting several domestic and external shocks. Its economy remains
characterized by significant informality, reliance on a few sectors, and remittances. The prudent
fiscal stance adopted until 2008 was replaced by significant expansion-initially in response to
the 2008-09 global recession and later to the 2010 domestic crisis-resulting in budget deficits
averaging 5.4 percent of GDP during 2010-12, one of the highest in the Europe and Central Asia
region. Partly a result of volatile growth and periodic price shocks, poverty levels remain
significant.

iii. 
Economic Prospects. While a favorable regional economic outlook would be an
important pull factor for the Kyrgyz economy over the medium term, achieving and maintaining
growth rates of 5 percent or more will also require sound macroeconomic policies, increased
efficiency of public spending, and the development of a vibrant private sector. Governance
reforms, if implemented effectively, would also promote the economy's potential, including in
agriculture, regional trade and transit, and natural resources, while strengthening the country's
social fabric.

iv. 
Development Challenges. Despite important progress since 2011, 
the country's
overriding development challenge remains improved governance. This 
is reflected in the
government's recently issued National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS), 2013-17,
which adopts improved governance and reduced corruption as unifying themes and as the basis
for the country's economic and social development. The NSDS' development priorities also
include: maintenance of macroeconomic stability; an improved business environment and
investment climate; a strengthened financial sector; and the promotion of strategic industries
such as agro-processing, energy, mining, transport and telecommunications, and tourism.

v. 
Governance Focus. The CPS' strategic goal is to help reduce extreme poverty and
promote shared prosperity through support for improved governance. This governance-oriented

Kyrgyz Republic: Joint Economic Assessment-Reconciliation, Recovery, and Reconstruction, July 21, 2010,
prepared jointly by the WBG, Asian Development Bank (ADB), European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD), and International Monetary Fund (IMF).
2 Kyrgyz Republic: Interim Strategy Note, FY12-13, Report No. 62777-KG dated June 16, 2011

1

approach focuses on three dimensions of the relationship between the state and the citizen-as,
respectively, provider and consumer of essential public services, as enabler and developer of
private business, and as steward and user of natural resources and physical infrastructure, key
public goods. Thus, the Bank Group will partner the Kyrgyz authorities' commitment to make
the state more accountable to its citizens and, at the same time, strengthen citizens' voice in the
activities of the state.

vi. 
Three Areas of Engagement. Corresponding 
to these three dimensions, 
the CPS
proposes three broad areas of engagement-public administration and public service delivery,
business environment and investment climate, and the management of natural resources and
physical infrastructure. The rationale for selecting these three areas is: (a) more efficient public
administration and public services-especially those relating to lowering poverty, improving
accountability, enhancing human capital, and reducing ethnic, gender, and social disparities-are
preconditions for political stability, effective public expenditure, and long-term growth and
poverty reduction; (b) an improved business environment and investment climate, including a
more 
transparent, rules-based relationship between the state and the private sector, are
prerequisites for promoting competitiveness, diversification, and productivity as well as job
creation; and (c) better management of scarce natural resources and physical infrastructure, while
at the same time taking into account climate change, environmental sustainability, and regional
considerations, is crucial for improved poverty outcomes, in particular for the almost two-thirds
of the population that live in isolated rural and mountainous areas.

vii. 
CPS Program. Support for these three areas of engagement would be provided through
the existing portfolio, by new IDA lending averaging US$55 million annually (supplemented
where appropriate by trust fund financing), and by intensified analytical and advisory activities
that emphasize practical, problem-solving advice. A balance of investment and development
policy lending is envisaged, subject to a satisfactory macroeconomic framework and reform
implementation record. The planned shift to fewer, but larger investment lending operations
would permit greater selectivity, a more strategic focus on reforms and results, and continued
consolidation of the portfolio. It would also help reduce the burden on the government's limited
absorptive and project implementation capacity, as well as on scarce Bank Group staff
supervision resources. IFC's primary focus would be the second and potentially the third areas of
engagement, contributing to the CPS agenda by promoting private sector development through
investment and advisory services that encourage diversification and competitiveness. The
program is consistent with Bank Group corporate and ECA regional priorities and mandates,
includes cross-cutting thematic emphasis on fragility, gender, climate change, and social
accountability, and takes into account key lessons learned from the previous country assistance
strategy, which were validated during execution of the recently completed ISN.

viii. Risks and Risk Management. The CPS is predicated on decisive implementation by the
government of its medium-term NSDS, which in turn depends on continued consolidation of the
new constitutional settlement. In addition, the program is subject to four main types of risk-a
deteriorating macroeconomic 
framework, 
renewed 
political 
instability, 
ineffective
implementation capacity, and a fragile consensus on key reforms. Options for managing and/or
mitigating them are discussed in Section IV.

2

I. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

A. 

Regional, Political, and Social Context

1. 
Landlocked and largely mountainous, with a multi-ethnic population of about 5.5
million and a GNI per capita of US$880 in 2011 (Atlas methodology), the Kyrgyz Republic
is one of the two poorest countries in the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region. Located
within reach of the large Chinese, Russian and South Asian markets, it borders rapidly-growing
middle-income Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, the most populous country in Central
Asia. Due to its elevation and topography, barely 7 percent of the land area is arable, the rest
consisting of glaciers, mountains, and pastureland or steppe that support livestock grazing. 3 The
country's natural resources-comprising minerals, mainly gold, and water for hydropower
generation-are also limited. In the circumstances, realizing its modest potential-including for
export of hydroelectricity, as a nexus for regional trade and transport, and for tourism-will
depend inter alia on diversifying economic activities 
through 
increased private sector
development and upgrading the occupational skills and productivity of its young labor force.
Above all, however, it will require dramatic improvements in all aspects of the country's
governance.

2. 
While its economy and society may be the most liberal and open in Central Asia, the
Kyrgyz Republic experienced significant political and social instability during its second
decade of independence. In April 2005, after nearly 15 years in power, its first president was
forcibly removed from office following his disputed re-election. Five years later, in April 2010,
his successor was overthrown following widespread public demonstrations against corruption,
nepotism, and the misuse of public assets. A resulting power vacuum in the south of the
country-a mosaic of diverse ethnicities, languages, and traditions-aggravated longstanding
economic and social tensions which, in June 2010, exploded into three days of violence. These
events resulted in large numbers of dead and injured and extensive destruction of public
infrastructure and private property. They also undermined private sector confidence and
generated serious economic and fiscal pressures.

3. 
An interim administration headed by a coalition of opposition leaders drafted a new
constitution that shifted the balance of executive power from the presidency to the prime
minister, chosen by and responsible to the legislature. Parliamentary elections under the new
constitution were held in October 2010 and a four-party coalition committed to macroeconomic
stability and continued market-oriented reforms took office in December 2010. A presidential
election took place in October 2011 and the new president was sworn in on December 1, 2011.
Although the government collapsed in August 2012, it was promptly replaced by a new three-
party coalition, which has continued the policies initiated by its predecessor.

4. 
This narrative exemplifies, on the one hand, the historic constitutional transition
underway since mid-2010 but, on the other, the country's still fragile economic, political,
and social environment. The Kyrgyz economy is vulnerable to exogenous shocks, owing to its
reliance on one gold mine, Kumtor, which in 2011 accounted for over 10 percent of GDP and 43

Over 90 percent of its 198,500 km2 area is at least 1,000 meters above sea level and 30 percent higher than 3,000 meters.

3

percent of exports, and on migrant workers' remittances, which were equivalent to 30 percent of
GDP in the same year. Political instability and weak governance remain major challenges:
though ranked 70 out of 185 countries in the Bank Group's Doing Business 2013-following
aggressive attempts to improve the business climate-the Kyrgyz Republic is in the bottom third
of all countries on most internationally recognized governance and transparency indicators.
Finally, while reconstruction and repair of public and private properties continue in the south of
the country, the underlying causes of the June 2010 conflict-minority ethnicities' lack of
representation and voice, as well as poverty and unemployment-remain still to be fully
addressed.

B. 

Recent Economic Developments

5. 
The Kyrgyz economy's rate of growth has been volatile over the last decade.
Between 2003 and 2012, GDP growth averaged just over 4 percent annually, but with widely
varying year-to-year rates ranging from 8.5 percent in 2007 to -0.9 percent in 2012. This
volatility reflects periodic external and domestic shocks, the latest one being a glacier movement
at the Kumtor mine in early 2012, which caused a sharp drop in gold output. Nonetheless, the
rest of the economy grew by 5 percent in 2012, reflecting strong remittances as well as higher
public spending.

6. 
Characterized by significant informal activity, the Kyrgyz economy relies heavily on
the performance of a few sectors and remittances. Industry accounts for about 20 percent of
GDP (less if gold is excluded), mostly in low-value added manufacturing. Agriculture,
employing one-third of the labor force, contributes 20 percent of output but has been shrinking,
despite indicators that suggest it could be a growth driver. Services generate 50 percent of GDP
and, excluding the public sector, appear to have significant unrealized potential in areas such as
communications, trade and tourism. Overall economic activity relies heavily on remittances and
on public spending, which has boosted domestic demand. The large informal or shadow
economy is currently estimated by Kyrgyz authorities to be as high as 40-60 percent of GDP.

7. 
Fiscal policy has been expansionary in recent years. A generally prudent stance until
2008 was replaced by significant fiscal expansion-initially in response to the 2008-09 global
downturn and subsequently to the mid-2010 domestic crisis-in particular higher spending for
reconstruction in the south of the country and for increases in public sector wages, pensions and
social allowances. As a result, public expenditures rose from less than 30 percent of GDP in
2009 to almost 40 percent by 2012 and, despite a strong upturn in public revenues, the budget
deficit averaged 5.4 percent of GDP during 2010-12. The large concessional elements of public
debt, as well as debt write-offs, have so far moderated the risk to public sector solvency.

8. 
Inflation has been high and volatile in recent years, due partly to repeated spikes in
global food and energy prices. With food and energy a large share of imports and also of
households' expenditure, three global food price shocks over the past five years have resulted in
high and volatile inflation. The most recent started in the second half of 2012 and by February
2013 had pushed inflation to almost 8 percent. It also increased the number of food insecure
households to 25 percent. Besides these external shocks, the large fiscal deficit as well as some
loosening of monetary policy over the past year may also have kept core inflation high.

4

9. 
Although the current account deficit widened in 2012, pressures on the exchange
rate were avoided. The Kyrgyz Republic customarily runs a large trade deficit, financed mainly
by remittances. In 2012, the current account deficit increased to over 15 percent of GDP, as gold
exports plummeted and domestic demand remained strong.4 Foreign direct investment (FDI)
inflows, mostly reinvested earnings, have improved in recent years and, together with increased
borrowing, have sufficed to finance the current account deficit. They also prevented pressures on
the exchange rate and permitted an increase in reserves, which at the end of 2012 were
equivalent to 3.9 months of recorded imports.

10. 
Employment is concentrated in sectors that contribute little to growth and weak
governance and poor infrastructure continue to hinder competitiveness. During 1998-2008,
labor has moved away from high productivity, 
formal sectors, such as mining and
manufacturing, to low productivity sectors with high levels of informality such as agriculture and
services, in particular construction, trade, and tourism. At the same time, labor costs have risen
faster than productivity and several manufacturing industries, such as electrical and office
machinery, metals, textiles, and transport equipment have become less competitive. Moreover,
despite numerous regulatory reforms in recent years, these have not yet translated into actual
improvements in the business environment.

C. 

Economic Prospects

11. 
The authorities project GDP growth approaching 8 percent by 2015, which may be
over-optimistic. Under the baseline scenario, neighboring economies in Central Asia and China
are expected to continue growing, providing an important pull factor for the Kyrgyz economy.
However, the authorities project investment rising by 10 percent annually, reaching over 30
percent of GDP by 2015. Given past performance, 
the overall investment climate, and
infrastructure constraints, as well as current trends, these growth rates appear ambitious and the
CPS envisages a more conservative, yet steady, economic performance.

12. 
Growth in 2013 and part of 2014 will be driven by a recovery in gold output, a
favorable regional economic outlook, and remittances. This will contribute to a lower current
account deficit which is expected to be fully financed by FDI and external borrowing. Output
expanded by 7.6 percent in the first quarter of 2013 and this trend is forecast to continue for the
rest of the year.

13. 
Beyond this rebound effect, growth will be driven by increased efficiency of public
spending and development of a vibrant private sector, including small and micro
enterprises. Given current fundamentals (education, infrastructure, macroeconomic policies,
etc.), growth is projected to average about 3 percent annually over the medium- to long- term.
With sound macroeconomic policies and effective implementation of the structural reforms,
growth could potentially increase to over 5 percent annually aided by private sector development
that could realize the country's potential-including in agriculture, trade and natural resources-
and ensure more productive use of remittances. Table 1 below presents selected economic
indicators, actual and projected, for the period 2010-17.

4 Large errors and omissions (possibly due to unrecorded re-exports of oil to Tajikistan) imply that the current account deficit
may be smaller than the official number.
Bank staff estimates from growth forecasting tool based on Loayza (2004).

5

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators, 2010-17
(in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2010 
Act. 

2011 
Act. 

2012 
Est. 

2013 
Proj. 

2014 
Proj. 

2015 
Proj. 

2016 
Proj. 

2017
Proj.

Real GDP growth, in % 

-0.5 

6.0 

-0.9 

7.4 

7.5 

5.3 

5.0 

5.0

Gross Domestic Investments 

27.4 

25.5 

25.4 

25.6 

25.8 

26.2 

26.7 

26.9

Inflation 

8.0 

16.6 

2.8 

8.6 

7.2 

6.6 

6.0 

5.7

Public sector
Revenues 

30.5 

31.8 

34.5 

32.0 

32.1 

31.8 

32.0 

32.0

Expenditures 

36.8 

36.4 

39.9 

37.3 

36.1 

35.5 

35.0 

34.8

Current spending 

31.0 

30.9 

32.4 

30.8 

29.3 

28.3 

27.4 

27.2

Capital spending 
Balance 
Public debt 

5.8 
-6.3 
59.7 

5.5 
-4.6 
50.1 

7.5 
-5.4 
51.5 

6.4 
-5.3 
50.6 

6.8 
-4.0 
48.5 

7.2 
-3.6 
47.6 

7.6 
-3.0 
46.5 

7.6
-2.8
45.0

External sector

Exports ofG&S 
Imports of G&S 

51.6 
81.7 

54.5 

55.1 
102.3 

54.9 

53.4 

52.3 
79.7 

51.4 

50.5
75.3

81.6 

88.6 

82.5 

77.5 

Current account balance 
FDI 

-6.9 
9.1 

-6.6 
11.2 

-15.4 
5.7 

-8.0 
3.8 

-6.0 
4.8 

-5.6 
4.6 

-4.2 
4.3 

-4.0
4.2

External debt 

85.8 

88.5 

75.6 

73.4 

68.0 

65.1 

61.4 

57.9

Source: Ministry of Finance and World Bank staff estimates.

14. 
Governance reforms that improve the efficiency of public spending will be critical
for growth, inclusion, and stability. Current fiscal trends are unsustainable and the medium-
term fiscal framework envisages a significant adjustment. Still, public investment needs to
remain high in order to address infrastructure bottlenecks; and improved quality and efficiency
of public service delivery are required to raise human development indicators which, according
to the 2010 Living in Transition Survey (cf Table 2), fall well below the average for the ECA
region. Improved efficiency and quality of public expenditure, including on education, energy,
health and social protection, could help resolve these competing priorities. This will require
addressing governance issues, including public finance management, revenue administration,
transparency and accountability-all areas where, based on selected indicators in the country's
2012 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA), there is substantial scope for
improvement (cf Table 3). Box 1 below discusses public spending in more detail.

Table 2: Satisfaction with quality and efficiency 
of public service delivery 
(% of respondents) 

Table 3: Country Policy Institutional Assessment:
-selected 
indicators
(on ascending scale from 1 to 6)
CPIA Indicator 

KG 

ECA 

KG 

ECA

Health 
Education 
Traffic police 
Official documents 
Vocational education 

53.0 
58.0 
21.0 
36.0 
56.0 

61.4 
73.2 
45.9 
67.4 
70.3 

A. Economic Management 
B. Structural Policies 
C. Social Inclusion / Equity 
Equity of Public Resource Use 
Social Protection and Labor 

4.0 
3.7 
3.6 
3.5 
3.5 

4.0
3.8
3.9
3.8
3.7

6

Social security 

Unemployment benefits 
Civil Courts 

46.0 

44.0 
5.0 

51.7 
45.1 
41.6 

Source: 2010 Living in Transition Survey 

Environmental Sustainability 
D. Public Sector Mgmt and Inst. 
Property Rights & Rule-based 
Governance
Source: World Bank

2.5 
3.1 
2.5 

3.6
3.5
3.2

15. 
A strong private sector development agenda, under the broad theme of governance,
could unleash the potential of the economy. CPIA scores point to especial weakness in natural
resource governance compared with ECA and IDA averages, and the rural sectors could
contribute more significantly to growth and jobs, if key constraints-affecting, for example,
pastureland management, water resource management, farm and land consolidation, and
agricultural extension services-are addressed. Second, growing regional 
integration and
improved infrastructure and trade institutions could support the growth of the country's vibrant,
but largely informal trade and transit sector. Third, the country's natural resources, including
gold, can generate important foreign exchange inflows, if a sound framework for their utilization
is established. A significant part of the government's National Sustainable Development
Strategy, 2013-17 (NSDS), including actions supported by this CPS, address improvements in
governance that are needed to realize the potential of these sectors, including reforms in state
property management, licensing, the regulatory and supervisory framework, tax administration,
and, more broadly, the public sector's role in the economy. Addressing these issues effectively,
including policy instability, corruption, government instability, and bureaucracy, would alleviate
the four main obstacles to doing business in the Kyrgyz Republic, according to the World
Economic Forum's (WEF) 2012-13 Global Competitiveness Report (cf Figure 1), as well as
Kyrgyzstan's comparatively weak CPIA score for rules-based governance. Together with
improved energy and transport infrastructure and better operation and maintenance of public
assets, this would relieve connectivity issues affecting the entire country-such as unreliable
electricity supply, poor access to remote areas, and high costs of internal transport-and help
boost productivity.

Figure 1: Most problematic factors for doing 
business

(percent of respondents)

Table 4: Ease of Doing Business

Policy instability 

Corruption 

Gov't instability

Gov't bureacracy 

Access to finance 

Skills 

0 

3 

6 

9 

12 

15 

18 

Ease of Doing Business 

Starting a Business 
Construction Permits 
Getting electricity 
Registering Property 
Getting Credit 
Protecting Investors 
Paying Taxes 
Trading Across Borders 
Enforcing Contracts 
Closing a Business 

Rank
70

15
67
177

11

12

13
168
174
47
155

Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Report, 2012-2013 

Source: Doing Business 2013

16. 
The financial sector could support growth if opportunities emerge and bottlenecks
are removed. Following the financial crisis caused by the 2010 turmoil, the banking system has

7

stabilized with strong growth in both assets and deposits and improving indicators of stability
(e.g. non-performing loans, capital adequacy, and liquidity). Resolution of the Zalkar Bank 6 and
other banks still under stewardship, as well as the central bank's enhanced supervision and
ability to intervene, should help increase intermediation and make financing available for good
projects.

17. Migrants can also contribute to the country's development. More than 10 percent of
the Kyrgyz population is migrant workers, mostly in Russia, who together send home up to about
30 percent of GDP in the form of remittances. While these flows are important in sustaining
consumption and alleviating recipients' poverty, there is less evidence that they are contributing
to investment or development. Typical migrants are young, male, with little education or
qualifications, who work in often hard manual jobs with little or no legal or other protections.
Improving these migrants' skills, making it easier for them to send and receive remittances, and
implementing a "diaspora engagement strategy" could help strengthen the domestic economy
and facilitate knowledge exchange with positive impacts on development.

Box 1: Improving the efficiency of public spending

Fiscal consolidation will be critical for macroeconomic sustainability. In 2012, the fiscal deficit was 5.4 percent of
GDP, one of the highest in the ECA region, due largely to the increase in public spending to almost 40 percent of GDP,
compared to under 30 percent in 2008. However, WB/IMF DSA, concluded in June 2011 and updated in November 2012
as a part of IMF Program review, confirms that debt sustainability remains moderate. Ensuring macroeconomic stability
will require reducing the deficit to 2-3 percent of GDP over the medium term, in line with the fiscal framework agreed with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This will strengthen public debt sustainability, reduce the economy's vulnerability
to external shocks, and facilitate a more accommodative monetary policy and credit to the private sector. At the same
time, the quality of fiscal consolidation will be important to ensure that it supports growth and the country's social policy

objectives.

Consolidation from the revenue side may be limited. The Kyrgyz Republic's tax burden is already moderate to high
and its tax revenues are close to, or above potential. Recent high revenue trends may not be sustainable as gains from
improved tax administration and one-off effects, such as the revenue smoothing agreement with Kumtor and higher
customs due to re-export of oil, are exhausted. However, policy changes could improve incentives and the distributional
impact of taxation, although a more thorough revenue analysis is needed to inform this dialogue.

Quality consolidation will require tackling inefficiencies in public spending. Public sector wages and social
protection have driven expenditure growth in recent years, while spending on goods and services also remains high. An
important challenge will be to restrain the growth of wages by avoiding ad-hoc increases and gradually consolidating
employment through civil service reform. Reforms in education, including school rationalization and measures to improve
quality, can save resources while enhancing outcomes. Better targeting of social benefits to the poor can generate further
savings, while pension reforms should ensure the sustainability of the system. Savings on goods and services (at around 10
percent of GDP, the country 
is an outlier internationally) can come from restraint on non-priority spending and
procurement reforms.

Under this scenario, the fiscal position and ability to absorb shocks would be significantly strengthened. Public
investment could be maintained at relatively high levels of 6-7 percent of GDP, while debt is expected to decline to slightly
above 40 percent of GDP by the end of the CPS period.

Contingent quasi-fiscal liabilities are sizeable. The quasi-fiscal deficit in energy alone is estimated at around 3
percent of GDP and there may be contingent liabilities in other sectors as well (e.g. banking, utilities). A strong reform

18. 
Core inflation should gradually moderate as macroeconomic policies are adjusted,
though headline inflation may remain elevated. Fiscal consolidation and carefully managed
monetary policy will reduce price pressures. However, adjusting energy prices and those of other

6 Zalkar Bank was created following the nationalization of the AUB Bank by the interim government after the 2010 events.

8

regulated utilities to cost recovery levels may prevent a reduction in overall inflation. In addition,
headline inflation spikes reflecting global food and energy prices cannot be ruled out.

19. 
The current account deficit should gradually narrow and greater reliance on non-
debt creating flows would moderate sustainability concerns. Exports are expected to grow as
gold output recovers and as currently positive trends in other exports are amplified through
reforms. According to a recent IMF assessment, the real exchange rate appears to be in line with
the economy's fundamentals. Imports will also grow as the country upgrades its capital stock and
integrates better into global trade. Remittances are projected to continue growing at around 10
percent annually, helping to narrow the current account deficit to around 4 percent of GDP by
the end of the CPS period.7 Under a high reform scenario, the country is well positioned to
attract increasing inflows of FDI. Globally, flows to emerging markets are expected to recover
and, given its proximity to China, access to markets in Russia and Kazakhstan, and low labor
costs, the Kyrgyz Republic could benefit.8 Large infrastructure projects in energy, roads,
railways and telecommunications could also attract FDI under the right conditions.

20. 
Significant risks to this outlook remain, however, both external and internal.
Externally, the global economic outlook remains uncertain and an eventual sharper slowdown in
either Russia and/or Kazakhstan could reduce remittances and undermine Kyrgyz growth and
external balances. Second, fluctuations 
in the world price of gold add another layer of
uncertainty: if recent declines continue, Kyrgyz fiscal and external accounts could be affected.
Third, the political situation in the region remains fragile and could become more so after 2014.
Finally, and most important, the government's ability to address and implement difficult reforms
has yet to become manifest. Despite its declared commitment to fiscal consolidation and reforms,
tough decisions are still needed. While the reforms laid out in the NSDS are encouraging, they
need to be enacted and implemented effectively.

D. 

Poverty and Gender Profile and Trends

21. 
After a decade of rapid decline-from 63 percent in 2000 to 32 percent in 2009-
poverty increased to 37 percent in 2011.9 This was partly the result of slower growth
following the 2008-09 global downturn, but mainly due to the social unrest of mid-2010-the
temporary closure of borders with Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan disrupted cross-border trade, the
supply of agricultural inputs, and tourism-as well as food price increases. While the reversal of
energy price hikes and the retention of increases in public sector wages, pensions, and social
allowance enacted earlier in 2010 mitigated the impact, urban poverty nonetheless rose faster in
2010-11 than in rural areas. From 2004-11, growth benefited poor more than affluent households
and, as a result, the Gini coefficient declined from 0.33 to 0.24. Meanwhile, most Kyrgyz human
development indicators compare well with those of other low-income countries. It was one of the
top five 'medium human development' countries that in 2012 ranked better on UNDP's Human

7 These projections are in line with those for the ECA region in the Migration and Development Brief Issue 19, dated
November 20, 2012.
Capital Flows to Emerging Markets, Institute for International Finance, January 2013.

The Kyrgyz Republic's poverty line, defined by its National Statistics Committee, is based on a basic needs
approach that estimates the costs of a consumption basket, excluding rent.

9

Development Index (HDI) than on gross GNI per capita.1 0 Box 2 below discusses poverty and
inequality in more detail, based on ongoing programmatic poverty studies.

22. 
The Kyrgyz Republic's scores on international gender indices are high 
for
education, but low for economic and political empowerment. The country has a non-
discriminatory legal framework-a 2008 law, the 2010 constitution, and a new national action
plan and strategy guarantee equal rights and opportunities to women and men-but declining
employment opportunities and, since independence, a renewed emphasis on women's domestic
responsibilities have constrained their economic activities. While Kyrgyz women are involved in
business more than the average in the ECA region, their participation in the formal labor market
in 2009 was only 48 percent, compared to 71 percent for men, and slightly lower than in 2003.
Moreover, partly because women in the formal labor market tend to be employed mainly in the
relatively low paid public education and health sectors, their average earnings in 2010 were only
about 64 percent those of men. Overall, the main gender-related challenges are threefold: first,
reversing the still elevated maternal mortality ratio; second, closing the gap between male and
female labor force participation; and third, reducing the disparity in wages. Addressing these
challenges will require a multi-pronged approach focusing on overall improvements in the
business environment and labor market." Box 3 below highlights the results of a 2011 Bank
Group country study on gender and women's empowerment.

Box 2: Poverty and Inequality

Despite the impact of the 2008-09 global economic downturn, growth benefited poor more than affluent
households during 2004-11. As a result, inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient declined from 0.33 to 0.24. Though
poverty increased from 32 percent in 2009 to 37 percent in 2011-partly the result of slower growth following the global
downturn, but mainly due to the social unrest of 2010 and food price increases-inequality did not, which may reflect
government measures to increase public wages, pensions, and social allowances as well as the reversal of energy price hikes
earlier in 2010. Decomposition of inequality in declared income identifies earnings from self- employment, pensions, and
social benefits as income sources that decrease inequality.
Regional disparities remain an important issue due to the large gap in living standards between Bishkek, the
capital, and the rest of the country. In 2011, 18 percent of Bishkek's population lived below the poverty line, compared to
40 percent in the rest of the country. Analysis of welfare disparities between Bishkek and neighboring Chui oblast, on the
one hand, and all other oblasts, on the other, shows that the latter lag behind due to the concentration of people with a higher
standard of living in Bishkek/Chui and because people there are more productive for a variety of reasons, such as better
access to infrastructure and markets and the quality of the education and health systems.
Notwithstanding economic growth and poverty reduction, access to water supply and sanitation has declined
steadily over the past 20 years-with pronounced differences according to place of residence and poverty status-due to
unsatisfactory operations and maintenance, poor asset management, and underinvestment. Thus, 13 percent of the rural
population, all of them are poor, still gets water from unprotected sources and a further 33 percent are more than 100 meters
from a water source. Marked differences are also observed in urban areas, with the likelihood of having to use a public water
pump six times higher for poor than for non-poor households. In 2011, for example, only 11 percent of urban poor had
access to running water, down from 33 percent in 2005, and only 63 percent of non-poor, down from 71 percent in 2005.

Source: World Bank staff estimates, based on Kyrgyz Integrated Household Survey (KIHS)

23. 
The Kyrgyz Republic is on track to meet its poverty, environmental sustainability,
and global partnership Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). However, according to the
last progress report, its targets for universal education, health, and gender are unlikely to be

10 Human Development Report 2013, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Cf ADB/UNDP/WB Gender Assessment, 2012.

10

achieved. 12 While the country's literacy rates among young people are very high, the resources
needed to meet the 100 percent target for all boys and girls to complete basic secondary
education appear 
to be 
insufficient. 
Its health-related MDGs, however, are 
the most
problematical. Infant and child mortality have both been declining, but at a rate slower than
needed, and the number of newborn deaths has actually increased due to insufficient and/or low
quality neonatal care. Maternal mortality also remains high, although the quality of the reported
data is uncertain. Likewise none of the HIV/AIDS, malaria, or tuberculosis targets are likely to
be achieved, with both HIV and tuberculosis rates particularly troublesome. Finally, as already
noted, men tend to occupy higher-paid managerial or specialist positions and women are
typically employed in lower-paid jobs in education, health and social services. Thus, the gender
equality and women's empowerment goal is also considered unachievable. Further details of the
country's progress towards meeting its MDGs are contained in the attachment to Annex Al.

Box 3: Gender and Women's Empowerment

There are noticeable gender differences in human capital and access to economic opportunities between
men and women in the Kyrgyz Republic. Paradoxically, the erosion of human capital over the past two decades

has in many respects affected men more than women. For example, their life expectancy has fallen relative to

women's, potentially a result of life style choices by men such that they are more likely to abuse alcohol, tobacco,
and drugs; and they are more likely to suffer from tuberculosis, sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS.
There are nevertheless important issues affecting women as well: maternal mortality remains high and households
tend to prioritize men's health needs over women's.
Although the gender gap in educational qualifications is growing-with relatively fewer men than women
attending secondary professional vocational schools and universities-different specializations at the tertiary
level favor men, which later become reflected in the labor market. For example, female university students tend to
choose majors leading to relatively low paying public sector jobs, most notably in education, while 70 percent of
male students majoring in construction, transport and veterinary science end up in better paid private and public
sector occupations.
Despite their higher human capital endowments, women's access to economic opportunities is lower than
men. Women are less likely to be employed and, when employed, they earn on average 30 percent less than men.
There is a high level of occupational segregation, with women working in traditionally female, less well-paid jobs,
which may reflect their greater compatibility with family responsibilities. Lower average wages and fewer years of
service in turn increase women's risk of poverty in old age. Finally, women are less likely to be in positions of
economic power or owners of capital: they account for only about 20 percent of all Kyrgyz entrepreneurs; and they
are under-represented in management in both business and government. However, these data may not capture the
fact that many women, as well as men, work in the informal economy.

Source: Kyrgvz Republic: Gender Disparities in Endowments and Access to Economic Opportunities, World Bank, Report No.

72291, June 26, 2012

E. Development Challenges and Opportunities

24. 
Since mid-2010, the Kyrgyz authorities have made important progress towards
restoring economic, political, and social stability. The new constitutionally-mandated division
of responsibilities between the presidency, the prime minister, and the parliament continues to
hold, though the transition to more inclusive, open, and representative government-including
the novel experience of coalition rule-is at an early stage. It is also susceptible to occasional
volatility. Second, macroeconomic stability has been largely maintained, even if fiscal
consolidation, with budget support from IDA, the IMF and other development partners, still

12 2nd Progress Report on Millennium Development Goals, UNDP, Kyrgyzstan, 2010.

11

poses a major challenge. Third, physical reconstruction continues in the south of the country
through compensation to conflict-affected communities, as well as through other measures to
help re-establish livelihoods, re-start private businesses, and revive investment and trade.
However, social reconciliation remains very much a work in progress, with the fundamental
causes of the conflict remaining still to be fully addressed.

25. 
Despite 
these 
laudable achievements, 
the country's overriding development
challenge remains improved governance-in state institutions and in virtually all aspects of
the economy and society. Weak governance and entrenched corruption were major stress
factors underlying the political and social upheavals of 2005 and 2010. State capture, links
between civil servants, business interests, and politicians, the misuse of public assets, corrupt
practices 
in procurement, and 
institutional and systemic weaknesses 
in public finance
management had together eroded public trust in government institutions at all levels. The
authorities have thus accorded high priority to developing a comprehensive anti-corruption
program with a broad inter-sectoral focus. Its effective implementation will require political
leadership and will and, at the bureaucratic level, determined management, including the creation
of results-based monitoring systems with learning feedbacks to inform any needed changes in
design. Given the tendency of Kyrgyz government agencies and ministries 
to function
independently, a particular focus on institutional coordination and development will also be
required.

26. 
If the Kyrgyz Republic's economic and social development agenda is viewed
through the single lens of improved governance, three wide-ranging areas of activity come
into focus as key challenges and opportunities in the medium- and longer-term. These are:

(a) strengthening public administration and public services, especially those relating to lowering
poverty, improving accountability and oversight, enhancing human capital, and reducing ethnic,
gender, and social disparities; (b) improving the business environment and investment climate,
both necessary prerequisites for promoting competitiveness, diversification, and productivity;
and (c) managing scarce natural resources such as forests, pastureland, and water, and
maintaining physical infrastructure, while at the same time taking into account climate change,
environmental sustainability, and regional considerations. These three challenges and the
opportunities they present for addressing them are discussed briefly in paragraphs 27-38 below.

Strengthening Public Administration and Public Services

27. 
A decade-long effort to improve public finance management supported by several
development partners has to date yielded only modest results, largely because of residual
vested interests that seek to dilute public accountability. Actions to build a 'leak-proof'
treasury, an enforceable budget code, effective public audit and oversight, and a transparent
public procurement system need more attention to detail and a results focus. While there has
been some progress in public asset management, the government's role as owner and manager of
public companies needs to be strengthened. Moreover, corporate governance in state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) falls far short of internationally accepted practice, with management and
accounting that is weak and not subject to market forces. Going forward, it will be important to
introduce rules of contestability and profitability targets, with dividends paid to the state budget,
and to review ownership arrangements. Meanwhile, the privatization program, essentially stalled
for several years, needs to be re-designed to permit greater private participation in, if not full

12

private ownership of communications, utilities, and several other sectors. A rules-based,

transparent approach to licensing in mining is also needed, with concessions awarded through
open tenders. Finally, ongoing civil service reforms-to ensure merit-based recruitment and
retention of qualified staff, as well as to reduce corruption-need to be broadened and deepened.

28. 
Effective implementation of recent executive and legislative initiatives to reform the
judiciary and court system will require sustained political will. Judicial independence and
high professional standards for judges, as well as modem court management systems and the
administration of judicial reforms, will necessitate the creation of new institutions and practices
and a clear focus on results.

29. 
Improved governance needs to encompass the delivery of essential public services,
such as education, health, and social protection. While public spending on education
increased from 3.9 percent to 7.1 percent of GDP during 2001-11, outcomes in terms of quality
have been unsatisfactory. National assessments show that fully half of all fourth and eighth grade
students score below basic competency levels in mathematics, reading, and sciences. According
to the recent public expenditure review, there are at least five areas where inefficiencies, due
mainly to weak financial management and poor governance, need to be addressed: ensuring
tighter control of future wage growth; reducing the unit costs of pre-primary and vocational
education to those in general education; improving procurement; limiting administrative, non-
teaching positions in general education; and rationalizing the general education school system. In
addition, 
there needs 
to be increased school autonomy and accountability 
through de-
centralization and per capita financing. Not least important, the content of vocational and
technical education needs to be revised to address actual skills shortages and labor market needs.

30. 
Despite some recent improvements, health indicators remain poor and, as noted
earlier, the country's MDG goals are unlikely to be achieved by 2015. Besides maternal and
child mortality concerns, overall mortality remains high, reflecting the high incidence of non-
communicable diseases, such as cardiovascular, cancer, and other tobacco and alcohol-related
illnesses and injuries. Reforming the health insurance fund to introduce modem management
practices and efficiency is a priority, as is the need for increased autonomy to health care
providers to improve resource allocation. The role of the Ministry of Health as steward,
exercising broad oversight, needs to be strengthened through changes in legislation, human and
institutional capacity building, and more competitive salaries. Effective purchasing requires a
relaxation of rules governing the use of budget funds. Finally, the country's social assistance and
protection system, still dominated by large numbers of categorical transfers, does not reach those
most in need. A broad-based reform that would improve the targeting of benefits to the poorest,
most vulnerable groups is currently under discussion and needs to be implemented, taking into
account overall fiscal constraints.

Improving the Business Environment and Investment Climate

31. 
The Kyrgyz economy is constrained by its narrow production base and its reliance
on gold mining, as well as migrant workers' remittances. Moreover, the state is dominant in
communications, industry, and public utilities and still exerts a powerful influence in banking.
Recent growth has been mainly capital-driven and a steady decline in total factor productivity

13

has reduced rates by several percentage points, most obviously in construction and industry.
Overall 
labor productivity is less than one-third that of Russia, owing to weak internal
competition, exacerbated by low skills, inadequate incentives for technological innovation, and
outdated management practices. Corporate financial reporting standards and practices, as well as
transparency and the public availability of reliable financial data, need significant strengthening.
The international comparison of competitiveness indicators cited earlier (para. 15) revealed
deficiencies in terms of policy uncertainty, corruption, government instability and bureaucracy,
as well as limited access to financing, weak property rights, and taxes. Overall productivity has
also been affected by inferior equipment and machinery, reflecting low levels of technology
transfer and absorptive capacity at the enterprise level. Goods market efficiency is also weak due
to anti-monopoly policies, customs services, and tax rates. Local business sophistication is
negligible because of a limited local supplier base and the low breadth of value chains,
exacerbated by the poor quality and availability of infrastructure.

32. 
Financial institutions remain underdeveloped and access to finance, particularly for
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), continues to be very limited. Credit
to the private sector is below 15 percent of GDP, compared to the 47 percent average of
developing countries 
in the ECA region-an 
indication of the 
low 
level of financial
intermediation. Furthermore, barely 14 percent of small firms in the formal sector have access to
credit-many do not have the type or quality of collateral that banks require-and ultimately
their opportunities for growth and development are limited. Alternatives to bank financing and
microfinance remain underdeveloped.

33. 
Notwithstanding these natural and man-made constraints, the country's relatively
open economy, alongside its energy export and regional trade and transit potential, could
facilitate efforts to diversify. Maintaining low tariffs and an open trade r6gime with reduced
customs costs will thus be vital. In this context, the trade diversion and increased imported input
cost effects of the country's proposed accession to the Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia customs
union need to be studied with care, especially given CIS members' free access to these three
markets.

34. Meanwhile, agriculture, agro-processing in particular, and livestock have good
prospects, in principle, although improved policies will be needed to strengthen their
international competitiveness. This will entail policy reforms centered on expanding access to,
and increasing the effectiveness of agricultural extension and research services, pastureland
management and improvement, animal health and veterinary services, and food safety, as well as
farm and 
land consolidation, 
irrigation 
infrastructure, and water resource 
institutions.
Encouraging greater private sector participation 
is also needed 
to strengthen 
farmers'
organizations, develop small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises, design appropriate
financial instruments (including for supply chain finance, rural credit, and crop insurance), and
invest in storage and distribution.

Managing Natural Resources and Physical Infrastructure

35. 
Owing partly to the Kyrgyz Republic's elevation, geography, and topography, the
governance and management of its natural resources present particular challenges.
Extensive high altitude glaciers, the source of its water, and limited forests and pastureland are

14

all particularly vulnerable to climate change. The country is also susceptible to natural disasters
such as droughts, earthquakes, and landslides, whose frequency require strengthened risk
reduction and response capacity. Environmental sustainability is also an issue, in particular the
expansion of pastureland capacity and the exploitation of forest resources within community-use
structures. At the same time, carbon dioxide intensity, high energy inefficiency, and the health
burden of industries need to be addressed: present policy instruments offer few incentives for
industries to invest in modernizing production.

36. 
Landlocked, mountainous, and with limited international connectivity, managing
the country's energy and transport infrastructure pose similar challenges. Diversified
growth based on exports will require a reduction in economic distances, greatly improved
connectivity, and lower transport costs, both within the country and through regional corridors.
In this context, smoother functioning of land border crossing points and an improved institutional
framework for modem asset management are needed if the country is to realize its potential as a
nexus for regional road and rail transit. In addition, improved planning and management of road
investments, including new decision-making tools to facilitate resource allocation, could increase
efficiency-in particular, a shift towards more spending on maintenance. This would also require
new approaches, including attracting private investment and, where appropriate, community
participation.

37. 
Severe power shortages occur during winter peak periods as supply lags demand
and decades of poor maintenance cause outages. With the lowest tariffs in the ECA region,
Kyrgyz energy enterprises are poorly resourced to fund routine operations and maintenance, let
alone new investments. There is no independent regulator and the electricity transmission and
distribution system, rife with corruption and political interference, suffers from large commercial
and technical losses. The collapse of the Central Asia energy trade market and challenging
relations with neighboring countries in water and energy resources management are leading to
costly, sub-optimal outcomes, such as in-country 
transmission 
investments for defensive
purposes. The water resources sector also suffers from backlogs in maintenance and investments,
poor metering, and inefficient management.

38. 
Since 1991, managing the country's natural resources and physical infrastructure,
formerly part of an integrated and centrally planned and managed system, has involved
important regional dimensions. For example, as an upstream riparian, regional coordination
and cooperation in the use of trans-boundary energy and water resources is obviously a high
priority. Under the proposed CASA-1000 transmission project, the Kyrgyz Republic together
with Tajikistan could become a major exporter of summer surplus electricity to South Asia.
Similarly, transport, especially roads and railways, human and animal health, climate change,
and the environment are also areas where regional approaches have become increasingly
important. Thus, the Kyrgyz Republic is a strong advocate of closer, more effective regional
cooperation and dialogue 
inter alia through 
its membership 
in the Eurasian Economic
Community. It also participates 
in the ADB-sponsored Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation (CAREC) program; plays an active role in various regional bodies such as the more
broadly based Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO); and, since 2011, has been involved in
the Central Asia Energy-Water Development Program 
(CAEWDP), which 
focuses on
strengthening energy and water security through national projects and regional activities.

15

F. 

Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy

39. 
The government's priorities and medium-term strategy are described in its National
Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS), 2013-17, issued earlier this year. Part 1 of the
document, admitting frankly that previous country development strategies (in 2001, 2003, and
2009) had largely failed due to "... bad governance, corruption, and criminalization of certain
state institutions..." establishes governance and state-building as the NSDS' overarching theme.
In particular, it calls for creating a state governed by the rule of law, including a strengthened
legal system, constitutional stability, the creation of a legal culture, democratic elections,
combating corruption, developing local self-government, and reforming the judiciary and law
enforcement services. It also envisages measures to promote national unity, based on the rights
of the country's various ethnic groups, and to strengthen the Kyrgyz Republic as a state based on
civic identity, or citizenship, not on ethnicity. In other words, this part of the NSDS presents a
vision of improved governance and reduced corruption as a unifying theme, and the foundation
of the country's economic and social development. As such, it is a logical next step in the
national governance transition set in motion by the new constitution approved by a two-thirds
majority of the population on June 27, 2010.

40. 
The second part of the NSDS outlines the country's economic development priorities
for the period 2013-17. These include maintenance of macroeconomic stability, an improved
business environment and 
investment climate, a strengthened 
financial sector, and 
the
development of the economy's strategic industries and sectors, including: agro-processing,
energy, mining, transport and telecommunications infrastructure, and tourism. In addition to the
ambitious GDP growth objectives already noted earlier (paras. 11-20), the NSDS also sets a
number of socio-economic targets for the five-year period, including the following: a doubling in
GDP per capita from US$1,200 to US$2,500; an increase in average life expectancy from 69 to
73 years; the creation of 350,000 additional jobs, implying that each family would have at least
one wage earner; an increase in the average annual wage from KGS 11,500 to KGS 26,000; and
a reduction in poverty from 37 percent to 25 percent. The authorities initiated a nationwide
consultation process in January, 2013.

41. 
To implement the NSDS' vision, the government published very recently a policy-
focused medium-term development program. This program, in effect an update of the
medium-term program that has guided the country's macroeconomic and development policies
since mid-2010, will also cover the five years 2013-17, coterminous with the terms of the current
president and parliament. Viewed together, the NSDS and the revised program reflect the
collective vision of all three branches of the state and provide a framework for development
partners' cooperation.

16

II. 

BANK GROUP COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A. 

Background and Rationale

42. 
By the early 2000s, the Kyrgyz state was gradually becoming an instrument not only
to ensure national security and provide essential public services, but also to channel
economic rents to a new political 
lite. At the macro level, the main sources of these rents
included energy, narcotics, public revenues, and state assets, including state-owned enterprises.
At the micro level, people's livelihoods depended upon their ability to 'negotiate' access to
employment, land, markets, water, and social services. Although the first president's involuntary
departure in April 2005 briefly raised hopes for change, his successor made things worse by
further centralizing power and resources within a narrow clique, including his own immediate
and extended family. This not only alienated the emerging urban middle class, but by early 2010
had also created huge popular resentment. As the post-conflict JEA stated: "... Over the recent
past, the president concentrated power in his administrative apparatus, reduced the national
assembly to a cipher, and circumvented ministerial forms of government. Thus, checks and
balances all but disappeared, consultation over policies and accountability was greatly reduced,
and governance standards fell." The violent overthrow of the second president and his
government in April, 2010 may thus be viewed as the population's response to what had become
a national crisis of governance.

43. 
Since then, the Kyrgyz authorities have re-affirmed their understanding of the
essential links between improved governance, inclusive growth, and poverty reduction. In
particular, they recognize that the country's future stability depends upon the population seeing
tangible improvements in governance-a view that the Bank Group's 2012 conflict filter study
validated and that is reflected inter alia in the government's NSDS, 2013-17, which adopts
improved governance and reduced corruption as unifying themes. It also constitutes the rationale
for this CPS, whose strategic goal is to help reduce extreme poverty and promote shared
prosperity through support for improved governance, with particular emphasis on three broad
areas of engagement: public administration and public service delivery; business environment
and investment climate; and natural resources and physical infrastructure.

44. 
The reasons for selecting these three areas of engagement, depicted graphically in
Chart 1 below, may be summarized as follows. First, more efficient public administration and
public services-especially 
those relating 
to 
lowering poverty, 
improving accountability,
enhancing human capital, and reducing ethnic, gender, and social disparities-are preconditions
for political stability, effective public expenditure, human capital formation, and thus for long-
term growth and poverty reduction. Though public expenditure has risen to 40 percent of GDP
since 2005 and spending on education, health and social protection is high by international
standards, results have not been commensurate because of its composition and management. As
recent and ongoing Bank Group studies have confirmed, better control over the huge public
component of aggregate demand is critical for its productivity. Second, an improved business
environment and investment climate, including a more transparent, rules-based relationship
between the state and the private sector, are prerequisites for promoting competitiveness,
diversification, and productivity as well as job creation. The NSDS emphasizes the importance
of the business environment in relation to the growth potential of sectors such as agro-
processing, mining, textiles, and cross-border commerce, while the CPIA highlights the deficit in

17

rules-based governance relative to ECA and IDA averages. Third, better management of natural
resources and physical infrastructure as essential public goods, while at the same time taking into
account climate change, environmental sustainability, and regional considerations, is crucial for
improved poverty outcomes, in particular for the almost two-thirds of the Kyrgyz population that
live in isolated rural and mountainous areas. Recent analytical work, such as the 2013 climate
change 
issues paper and spatial analysis of household survey data, have highlighted the
relationship between natural resources management, local community governance, and poverty
outcomes, while the CPIA highlights the country's lagging performance on natural resource
governance.

Chart 1: The State and Citizen

The State

Supply-side reforms

Better public 
administration 
and services 

Better 
business 
environment 

management
of natural
resources and
infrastructur 

O

Demand-side accountability 

O

... as user of public 
services 

The Citizen

... as 
entrepreneur 
and job-seeker 

... as user of natural
resources and
infrastructure

B. 

Lessons Learned from Previous CAS and Stakeholder Feedback

45. While 
the previous FYO7-10 CAS pinpointed political 
instability, ineffective
reforms, and weak institutions as key risks, it underestimated their extent and cumulative
impact. With the benefit of hindsight, it is now clear that the previous CAS, whose completion
was disrupted by the April-June 2010 crisis, misjudged the threats posed by systemic stress
factors such as corruption, nepotism, and the misuse of public assets, as well as inter-ethnic
tensions exacerbated by poverty in the south of the country. Reflecting this experience and the
analysis of the 2011 World Development Report 
(WDR) on Conflict, Security and
Development-which advocated deepened political economy and social stress analysis, closer
examination of institutional deficits, and the design of 'inclusive-enough' approaches-the
FY12-13 ISN committed to applying a conflict and fragility filter instrument to all projects in the
portfolio. Since then, this instrument has been used to help adjust the design and targeting of all
ongoing and proposed new operations, in particular those located in the three conflict-affected
southern oblasts.

46. 
Other more specific lessons learned from the previous CAS, which experience under
the ISN has validated, include the need for improved flexibility, balance, strategic focus,

18

and partnerships. First, Bank Group responses to dynamic, rapidly changing economic,
political, and social conditions-whether advisory or operational-need to be flexible. As risks
increase, in-depth analysis of the operating environment and of possible implications for Bank
Group activities becomes crucial. Second, despite the Kyrgyz Republic's uneven record of
development policy lending in the mid-2000s, experience since FY11 suggests that CPS
programs need to strike a balance between development policy operations (DPOs) that support
implementation of fundamental reforms and individual investment projects that aim to alleviate
poverty and promote institutional change. Moreover, DPOs can be an important convening and
coordinating instrument, especially in countries such as the Kyrgyz Republic where political
consensus on particular reforms may be fragile. Third, CPS programs need a sharper, more
strategic focus, leading to better selectivity, fewer projects of larger average size in order to
optimize potential impact, and lower staff supervision costs. Finally, while partnerships can
enhance aid coordination-the FYO7-10 Joint Country Support Strategy provided a useful
platform-increased efficiency and effectiveness also require explicit agreement on policy and
operational objectives, support areas, and instruments.

47. Meanwhile, the results of a client survey undertaken during February-March 2013
to inform CPS preparation indicate clear support for Bank Group involvement in public
sector governance and reform. Almost 40 percent of respondents said that public sector
governance was the country's top development priority, followed by 35 percent who cited
corruption as its biggest challenge. Energy, jobs, and rural development were also mentioned as
priorities for poverty reduction and sustainable growth. Moreover, 30 percent of respondents said
that public sector governance was the most useful area for the Bank Group to focus on and that
government inefficiency was the greatest obstacle to reform.

48 
Likewise, stakeholder consultations at the national and local levels during March-
April, 2013 offered several important insights for the preparation of this CPS. In particular,
the CPS' overall focus on governance and its three planned areas of engagement where the
government or state interfaces with its citizens found wide support among participants. Support
for the business environment and investment climate agenda was strongest among the private
sector, while improving public administration and public service delivery was strongest among
representatives of civil society. Consultations at the sub-national level proved useful in providing
an appreciation of the scope for tackling inter-regional disparities. The results of the client
survey and stakeholder consultations are summarized in Annex 5.

C. Proposed Bank Group Strategy

49. 
The strategic goal of this CPS is to help reduce extreme poverty and promote shared
prosperity through support for improved governance. Thus, the Bank Group will partner the
Kyrgyz authorities' commitment-announced first at the July 2010 Donors' Conference and
reaffirmed in its recently issued NSDS-to reform the relationship between the state and the
citizen: that is, to make the state more accountable to its citizens and, at the same time, to
strengthen citizens' voice in the activities of the state. This governance-oriented approach would
focus on three dimensions of the relationship between the state and the citizen-as, respectively,

1 Annex 2: Kyrgyz Republic-FYO7-10 CAS Completion Report.

19

provider and consumer of essential public services, as enabler and developer of private business,
and as steward and user of natural resources and physical infrastructure, key public goods.

50. 
CPS support for improved governance would center on the three broad areas of
engagement described above-public administration and public service delivery, business
environment and investment climate, and natural resources and physical infrastructure. It
would be provided through the existing portfolio, by new IDA lending totaling about US$55
million annually (supplemented where appropriate by trust fund (TF) financing), and by
intensified analytical and advisory activities (AAA) 
that emphasize practical, problem-solving
advice and effective dissemination rather than extensive analysis or broad-based studies.

51. 
The country context demands careful attention to the choice of instruments. The
strategy envisages a balanced approach, using DPOs to convene support for legal, regulatory and
institutional reform at the center, while demand-side, local and community governance would
also be supported by investment lending operations at the grassroots level and by the Kyrgyz
Republic's participation in the Global Program for Social Accountability (GPSA). If the
authorities are able to maintain a satisfactory macroeconomic framework and an acceptable
reform implementation record, up to half of new lending would be in the form of annual
development policy operations (DPOs). If not, the available resources would be re-allocated to
augment existing or new investment operations already in the pipeline. In addition, the potential
for using the new 'program for results' lending instrument will be explored, for example in the
area of business environment improvement. However, strengthening of country systems in
procurement, currently under way, and in financial management may be necessary prerequisites.
In any case, lessons from the current TF results-based pilot in child and maternal health would be
taken into account. As regards AAA, recent experience suggests that broad strategic analysis
alone has little traction, perhaps because of frequent changes in the country's leadership and
limited coordination. The preferred approach will thus be for AAA 
that involves "hands-on"
technical assistance for specific reforms, or linkages to Bank Group-financed DPOs and
investment operations.

52. 
Accordingly, the indicative lending program provides for 2-3 IDA operations,
including one DPO, annually, i.e. up to 4 DPOs and 4-8 sector investment lending
operations over the four year period. Based on recent experience, DPOs have become a key
instrument to support implementation of structural reforms over the medium-term. In particular,
they play a critical convening role in framing supply-side governance reforms, helping build
policy consensus within the government, and strengthening coordination and implementation
structures and practices. Consistent with the CPS' strategic goal, the main focus of the new
programmatic series of DPOs would be governance. In addition to the current emphasis on
accountability, anti-corruption, and transparency-including structural reforms in energy, the
judiciary, public financial management and the business climate-the agenda and road map for
later DPOs may extend to areas crucial to social equity and stability, in particular education,
health, pensions, and social protection, with the aim of strengthening institutions and improving
outcomes of public spending in the context of continued fiscal consolidation. The policy
framework would draw upon the analysis and recommendations of the programmatic poverty
studies and public expenditure review currently underway, upon recommendations emerging
from IFC's advisory services, as well as policy dialogue with the authorities under the ongoing
education and health and social protection operations.

20

53. Within this architecture, trust funds will play a specific and well-defined role. Since
2010, there has been strong government demand for "hands-on" technical assistance for a range
of supply-side governance reforms. At the same time, there are potentially high returns to the
financing of community mobilization and demand-side accountability activities. However, given
strong parliamentary resistance to the use of IDA financing for technical assistance and the Bank
Group's own constrained budgetary resources, 
technical assistance would be provided in
partnership with other development partners and the IDF. Trust funds for governance reforms
will help implement DPOs while trust funds for social accountability will support both DPO-
linked reforms and investment projects. During IDA17, the Bank Group will continue to
leverage IDA resources with trust funds such as the Global Agriculture and Food Security
Program and the Results-Based Financing Facility.

54. 
Finally, IFC's primary focus, jointly with IDA, will be on the second and potentially
the third areas of engagement. IFC will contribute to the CPS agenda by promoting private
sector development through investment and advisory services that focus on improving the
investment climate, broadening access to finance, and increasing private sector participation in
the economy, particularly in agribusiness, infrastructure and, potentially, mining, with the goal of
encouraging the Kyrgyz economy's diversification and competitiveness. Specifically, IFC's
advisory services will remain focused on helping improve the business enabling environment,
while exploring a greater role in energy efficiency and renewable energy, including opportunities
for public-private partnerships (PPPs). IFC-financed analysis will also continue to inform the
design of DPOs and IFC-financed enterprise surveys will strengthen demand-side accountability
by providing feedback from enterprises to government. In the financial sector, IFC aims to
increase MSMEs' access to finance by enhancing the regulatory framework, strengthening
financial institutions (including for microfinance), and providing short-and long-term capital to
local banks. In the real sector, IFC aims to help improve corporate business practices, while at
the same time pursuing opportunities to invest, particularly in agribusiness, mining, and
infrastructure. Subject to the availability of suitable opportunities, including the opening of
infrastructure 
to private and foreign investments as well as improved corporate disclosure
standards, IFC could commit up to US$10 million annually in the financial sector, up to US$15
million annually 
in 
infrastructure, and up 
to US$5 million annually 
in agribusiness,
manufacturing, and services. Commitments for advisory services, financed by Austrian, Dutch,
Swiss, and United Kingdom trust funds, could total about US$5 million.

D. 

Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities

Area of Engagement 1: Public Administration and Public Service Delivery-the state as
provider and the citizen as consumer of essential public services

55. 
The Kyrgyz authorities' main goal in this area, outlined in the NSDS (Chapter 2.6),
is to restore the public's confidence 
in the three branches of government-executive,
judicial, and legislative. Specific objectives include: first, creating a modem, professional
system of public administration, including law enforcement and the judiciary, at the national,
regional and local levels; second, improving the efficiency, integrity, and quality of essential
public services; and third, strengthening accountability and transparency in the management of
public assets and finances, including reducing corruption and overlapping functions. To achieve
the latter, the NSDS calls for more inter-action between national and local government bodies,

21

on the one hand, and civil society institutions, on the other, both at the policy formulation stage
as well as in monitoring reform implementation. Against this background and based partly on the
government's multi-sectoral Governance and Anti-corruption Action Plan adopted in 2012, the
CPS program includes a mix of advisory, knowledge, and lending activities intended to help
achieve two country development goals: (a) creating a robust public administration (including
strengthened, more transparent public finance management) and reforming the judiciary; and (b)
expanding access to, and improving the efficiency and quality of education, health, and other
essential public services.

Country Development Goal: Creating a robust public administration and reforming the
judiciary.

56. 
Creating a more robust public administration would be supported by six operations,
five ongoing and one proposed, as well as related analytical and advisory activities. The

five ongoing operations are: Governance Technical Assistance (FY04), Public Finance
Management Capacity Building, and Capacity Building for Economic Management (FY09), and
two recently approved ones: an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant for Capacity
Building for Public Sector Internal Audit; and the first Development Policy Operation-DPO-1.
The IDF grant assists Ministry of Finance efforts to strengthen the institutional framework for
public sector internal audit and improve the knowledge and skills of internal auditors. The DPO-
1 supports implementation of reforms in two complementary policy areas: (a) strengthening
governance and fighting corruption, including through preparation of a judiciary reform action
plan and public finance management reforms relating to budget transparency, procurement, and
public accountability; and (b) sharpening competitiveness and attracting private investment,
including through removing barriers that hinder business registration and activity, restructuring
the energy sector, critical for both economic growth and the population's welfare, and bolstering
financial system stability. Though the policy framework of future DPOs may extend to other
areas, as already noted above, public financial management will remain a constant focus, as will
the energy sector which, given its weak governance, opaque regulatory environment, and lack of
transparency, is crucial to the authorities' entire anti-corruption and governance effort. Finally, a
proposed 3rd Village Investment Project (FY16) would focus in particular on strengthening local
governance and transparency by bringing together community-driven development approaches,
social accountability mechanisms, and local government strengthening.

57. 
These six operations are supplemented by two major ongoing analytical and
advisory activities. The purpose of the Programmatic Public Expenditure Review (FY13-14) is
to make recommendations on the fiscal adjustment needed to reduce and then stabilize the
budget deficit and public debt at sustainable levels in the medium-term; and the Programmatic
Poverty Studies (FY13-16), financed partly by the United Kingdom's DflD, aim to enhance data
quality and access and to strengthen national analytical capacity. In this connection, the Bank
Group recently helped the National Statistical Committee (NSC) prepare a new, long-term
national strategy for statistics development, 2012-20 and, during the CPS, it will remain
engaged, together with other development partners, in efforts aimed at upgrading the quality and
reliability of official statistics in general. This is important not only in terms of enhancing public
accountability and transparency, but also to upgrade the basis for improved policy formulation
and for monitoring reform implementation.

22

58. 

Reforming the judiciary would ultimately be supported by a proposed Judiciary
Modernization operation. Based on the recommendations of a diagnostic study completed in
2011, financed partly by Switzerland, and the judiciary reform action plan currently under
preparation supported by DPO-1, this operation 
is expected to finance the rehabilitation
upgrading of court facilities, 
the development of modern legal information systems, and
measures to improve court management and, more broadly, the administration of justice.

Country Development Goal: Improving the efficiency and quality of essential public services.

59. 
Improving the efficiency, governance, and quality of essential public services would
be supported by operations in education, health and social protection, and rural water
supply and sanitation. In education, the ongoing 2 nd Education Reform project, financed by
Russian Education Aid for Development (READ), supports the strengthening of the national
student assessment system; and the recently approved Sector Support for Education Reform
project supports two priorities in the Ministry of Education & Science's medium-term action
plan, namely: reforming the curriculum for primary and secondary education; and enhancing
school-level autonomy and accountability. A proposed 3rd Global Partnership for Education
(GPE) project would finance increased access to pre-primary education for children aged 4-5
years and adoption of a revised pre-school curriculum based on already approved early learning
development standards. These three operations are underpinned by several recently completed
analytical and advisory activities, including a comprehensive education sector policy review
undertaken jointly with OECD and a benchmarking of policy in four areas (teachers, student
assessment, school accountability, and early childhood development), as well as the ongoing
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review. Complementing these efforts, IFC would seek
opportunities for private sector investment and participation in education, focusing on vocational
and higher education, promoting South-South investment flows, and support for increased
competition and higher benchmarks for education service delivery.

60. 
In health, the recently approved 2nd Health and Social Protection SWAp operation
supports implementation of the government's 2012-16 Den Sooluk health strategy in four
priority areas for health improvement. These are: cardiovascular diseases, maternal and child
care, tuberculosis, and HIV. The same operation also aids government efforts to improve the
efficiency 
and effectiveness, 
including 
the 
targeting, of social protection 
services.
Complementing the SWAp, a Health Results-Based Financing project (financed by the Health
Results Innovation Trust Fund), pilots a hospital-level, performance-based payment scheme that
aims to improve the quality of maternal and child health care. In addition to these operations, two
studies are planned for FY16: a Health Sector Review; and a Social Protection study that would
address long-standing equity and targeting concerns affecting policies and programs in this area
and, in addition, provide context for a proposed Social Protection operation in FY17. Finally, the
ongoing (and recently re-structured) Rural Water Supply and Sanitation project (FY09) seeks to
improve access to potable water and hygiene, sanitation, and water-related practices in rural
communities. In this connection, if requested by the authorities, IFC would be ready to assist
with privatizations and/or concessions in municipal public services and utilities, including health
facilities, in order to encourage private participation in these areas and ultimately improve
service efficiency and quality.

23

Area of Engagement 2: Business Environment and Investment Climate-the state as
enabler and the citizen as developer of private business

61. 
As noted earlier, a more open and efficient business environment would help foster
private and financial sector development, to which the NSDS devotes significant attention.
(Chapters 8 and 9). Noting that the country's investment climate is inadequate, the NSDS calls
for: reforms in customs, investment, and tax policy; measures to facilitate micro, small, and
medium enterprise (MSME) development and improve their competitiveness; and actions to
strengthen state property management, including the governance of state-owned enterprises
(SOEs) and the corporate financial reporting framework. NSDS plans for financial sector
development focus mainly on the banking system, where the central bank is in the process of
updating its prudential regulatory and supervisory policies in the wake of the global and
domestic crises of 2009-10, but they also include measure to promote micro-credit, private
pension funds, and the nascent insurance and securities' markets.

Country Development Goal: Promoting financial and private sector development.

62. 
Reflecting the country's banking crisis of 2010 and low penetration indicators, IDA
and IFC's joint program in the financial sector aims to maintain stability and improve
access to finance. The Financial Sector Development project seeks to: strengthen the legal,
regulatory, and supervisory framework for banks, micro-finance organizations, and credit
unions; equip the central bank with a new data management system to increase the efficiency of
its banking supervision function; expand financial services through the Kyrgyz post office
network; and modernize the moveable collateral and debt resolution r6gimes. In addition, the
Bank Group will start a new programmatic technical assistance activity to develop consumer
protection and address priorities for financial sector development, in collaboration with other
development partners. Meanwhile, under the second phase of its Azerbaijan-Central Asian
Financial Infrastructure Advisory Project (ACAFI), IFC will train staff of credit bureaus, public
registries and movable collateral registries to improve their knowledge and enhance institutional
capacity, and build financial intermediaries' capacity in risk management, credit underwriting
and secured lending. To help expand MSME access to finance, IFC's Transformation for
Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) Project will continue to support the strengthening of MFIs'
institutional capacity, help them transform into deposit-taking institutions or banks, and extend
their outreach, especially to rural communities. Complementing these efforts and to improve
access to finance specifically for farmers and aggregators, IFC will launch a Central Asia Agri-
Finance Project which will help introduce customized agri-finance lending and guarantee
products and establish better links between farmers, aggregators, and financial intermediaries.
The recently launched Housing Microfinance Advisory Project seeks to improve the housing of
low-income groups by introducing new home improvement loan products through local MFIs.
As for investment, IFC will continue working with existing clients, predominantly MFIs,
focusing on: credit lines to MSMEs; risk management practices through advisory services and
specific lending products; and provision of short-term trade finance.

63. 
Promoting private sector development, especially regulatory reform activities aimed
at improving the business environment and investment climate, would also be a joint IDA-
IFC effort. First, with the ultimate goal of investment climate improvement, IFC's new
Investment Climate Project is designed to help enhance the policy framework, simplify business

24

inspections, and 
improve 
the business environment for agri-business. 
Its agri-business
component, supported by IFC's regional Food Safety Program, is designed to help develop a
food safety framework and harmonize agribusiness regulations with WTO standards with the aim
of enhancing agricultural products' export potential. Jointly with IDA, the project will also
support the roll out of a Gender and Governance Survey to assess the reform implementation gap
for agribusiness and generate proposals to address any findings that disproportionately affect
women. Second, 
IFC's recently 
launched Central Asia Tax Project, focuses on 
tax
administration reform, 
including further 
improvements 
in risk-based approaches 
to 
tax
inspections, tax reporting simplification, as well as VAT administration. Third, under the second
phase of its Central Asia Corporate Governance Project (CACGP II), IFC will continue efforts
to help build a sustainable private sector through better corporate governance of enterprises and
banks and, at the policy level, through a strengthened regulatory framework. As regards
investments, IFC intends to increase its activities in the real sector, if opportunities arise,
particularly in agribusiness. Advisory work on resource efficiency and food safety will
accompany these investments where appropriate.

64. 
CPS support for financial and private sector development would also be provided
by four proposed studies. A proposed FY14 study on the implications for efficiency and
diversification of the Kyrgyz Republic's planned accession to the Belarus-Kazakhstan-Russia
Customs Union would help inform pending decisions in this area. Second, a planned FY14
Investment Climate Study, to be implemented as part of the government's IDF-financed Private
Sector Development Action Plan, would recommend second generation reforms to address
continued shortcomings. The objectives of the IDF-financed project itself are to: strengthen
coordination and communication between government agencies, 
the private sector, and
development partners; to design a private sector development strategy and action plan; and to
enhance the authorities' policy implementation and supervision capacity. Third, a proposed study
on Raising Factor Productivity and Promoting Diversification (FY15) would respond to
government interest in measures and policies required to diversify the economy. Fourth, the
purpose of a small Mining Sector Business Environment study is to define gaps that most
urgently need assistance in terms of mining policy and governance. Finally, a study designed to
measure the shape and size of the large informal sector would be undertaken in FY15.

Country Development Goal: Increasing the efficiency and competitiveness of agri-business.

65. 
Increasing the efficiency and competitiveness of agriculture would be supported by
a proposed agribusiness investment climate study. Despite the Kyrgyz Republic's reputation
as a producer of high quality fresh and processed fruit and vegetables, less than 20 percent of its
agricultural produce is processed. Agribusiness development is hampered by institutional, policy,
regulatory, and infrastructure impediments and, in addition, individual producers face challenges
in satisfying changing consumer preferences and more stringent export requirements. A proposed
policy note-Improving the Agribusiness Investment Environment-would review the obstacles
to agribusiness development and identify options for their removal. A joint venture with IFC, the
analysis would cover key aspects impacting competitiveness and development and identify
governance-related reforms (regulatory, tariff, taxation, etc.) that could potentially be included in
future development policy operations. In addition, it could identify areas for possible joint IDA-
IFC investment as well as provide guidance to other development partners and private sector
investors on capacity building and associated investment needs. Meanwhile, to support the

25

development of food supply chains, IFC could prepare feasibility studies and seek private
investors to finance, build and operate a series of refrigerated warehouses for agricultural
produce.

Area of Engagement 3: Natural Resources and Physical Infrastructure-the state as
steward and the citizen as user of natural resources and public assets

66. 
The Kyrgyz Republic is a party to 13 international conventions or treaties that
commit 
its signatories 
to sustainable development and environmental protection.
Moreover, at the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), it
supported "green economy" priorities such as improved, more efficient management of natural
resources such as forests, pastureland, and water and of physical assets such as energy and
transport infrastructure, while at the same time taking into account the need to mitigate and adapt
to climate change. Against this background, a planned FY15 study would take an integrated
approach to the management of forestry, pastureland and related water resources, propose policy
reforms, and also provide the framework for the five operations in these areas outlined below
(paras. 67-70).

Country Development Goal: Improving management of agriculture, forestry, livestock,
pastureland, and water resources, including extension and other support services, for
sustainable development

67. 
CPS support for improved governance of the country's water resources would be
provided through the proposed National Water Resource Management Project (NWRMP).
Financed by a Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) trust fund, the FY14 NWRMP would: (a)
strengthen national water management capacity, implementation of the 2006 Water Code and
2013 National Water Council roadmap, including capacity building to strengthen Kyrgyz
contributions to international meetings on regional water issues and regional data sharing; (b)
improve irrigation services delivery, thereby increasing water use efficiency from river basin to
field level; and (c) support water users' associations (WUAs), related users' organizations, and
farmers to improve water management.

68. 
The proposed Agriculture Productivity and Nutrition Improvement Project (APNIP)
would reinforce the NSDS' goal to increase agricultural productivity and food security
(Chapter 10.1). Financed by the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), the
FY14 multi-sectoral APNIP would finance: (a) rehabilitation of on-farm irrigation infrastructure
as well as bottlenecks in main canals; (b) agricultural advisory services and training; and (c)
nutrition interventions. Women would benefit from all three interventions: an estimated 20
percent of the 36,000 smallholder farms expected to benefit from improved irrigation systems are
headed by females; about half of these farms would receive advisory services and training,
including cultivators of household plots who are mostly women; and nutrition interventions
would target women and children specifically.

69. 
The proposed Pasture Management Improvement Project would advance NSDS goals
for environmental protection and social stability (including food security) in rural
communities. The 2009 Pasture Law established the principle of community-based pasture
management and the recently completed Agricultural Investments and Services Project financed
the establishment and training of pasture committees (PCs) nationwide, the demarcation of

26

pastureland boundaries, and the implementation of community-based pasture infrastructure
subprojects. Based on three seasons' experience, the remaining challenges include making PCs
more accountable and inclusive, upgrading their technical competence, and building them into
financially sustainable institutions-the main purpose of the proposed FY15 project. Specific
objectives would be: to ensure fair access to pastureland; to increase livestock owners' incomes;
and to arrest long term pasture degradation.

70. 
CPS support for better management of forests and to mitigate climate change would
be the focus of a proposed Forestry and Climate Change Management Project. Working with
local communities and state-owned forest enterprises (leskhozes) to improve governance of
forests and pastureland, this FY16 operation, for which GEF co-financing is envisaged, would
help 
improve the integrated, participatory, and sustainable management of these natural
resources. In particular, it would support policy reforms designed to increase local communities'
role in the governance of forests and ecosystems and mechanisms to improve their livelihoods
and reduce poverty, by such means as the sustainable harvesting of non-timber forest products
and forest-pasture leasing to livestock producers. In some areas, the project may support targeted
payments for environmental services with high climate change mitigation and adaptation value
and thus generate co-benefits for local communities directly and also indirectly through
improved ecosystem services such as reduced land degradation in forest areas and preservation
of habitat and biodiversity.

71. 
Finally, the CPS would support the Kyrgyz Republic's participation in a proposed
regional animal health project. Since animal diseases are the main cause of restrictions on
exports of livestock within the Central Asia and, in particular, to Europe, Russia, and the Middle
East, this regional 
approach to animal disease control would help improve the Kyrgyz
Republic's competitive position in international livestock markets.

Country Development Goal: Ensuring energy security and developing export potential.

72. 
Efficiency, governance, and transparency are key elements of the NSDS' goal to
achieve energy security and develop the country's energy export potential (Chapter 10.2).
This will involve reducing large commercial and system losses, curbing corruption by vested
interests, and modernizing the financial and operational management of the state-owned
enterprises responsible for generation, transmission, and distribution. Thus, the purpose of the

proposed Electricity Supply Accountability and Reliability Improvement Project (FY15) would
be to reduce losses and revenue leakages in the service area of SeverElectro, the distribution
company that serves Bishkek, by improving governance and by establishing a transparent
accountability framework in the company. It would finance investments in metering and billing
infrastructure and commercial management designed to trim the company's commercial losses,
boost its cash flow, and improve its financial viability. It would also finance urgently needed
rehabilitation of Bishkek's old and poorly-maintained distribution infrastructure. If successful,
the project could be a model for the country's three other distribution companies. At the same
time, the current DPO-1 will support strengthened energy sector accountability and transparency,
including in particular the management of revenue flows from existing energy exports as well as
those that would be generated by the proposed regional projects, such as the Central Asia-South
Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA-1000) discussed below (para. 74).

27

73. Meanwhile, two knowledge products would broaden and deepen the Bank Group's
energy policy and broader governance dialogue with the authorities. The energy chapter of
the ongoing Programmatic Public Expenditure Reviews will present policy scenarios (including
different 
investment alternatives) 
for 
improving 
the sector's financial and operational
performance so as to facilitate informed decision making by the government and, in turn, inform
the dialogue and design of future development policy operations. Second, the Heating and
Energy Efficiency Assessment aims to help the authorities address winter power shortages by
identifying alternative heating options and related energy efficiency measures 
in urban
residential and public buildings, including recommendations for streamlining policies and
reforming the sub-sector's institutional framework. In addition, aiming to advance the energy
efficiency and renewable energy agenda, IFC plans to establish a Regional Renewable Energy
Advisory Program, in which the Kyrgyz Republic would be eligible to participate. Its purpose is
to help governments improve the regulatory framework for renewables and support IFC and non-
IFC projects through provision of sectoral expertise, market assessments, product design and
financial structuring.

74. 

Developing the country's energy export potential would be supported through two
regional operations currently under preparation. The proposed Central Asia-South Asia
Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA-1000), a joint venture with IFC, would make
possible exports of electricity from the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan to Afghanistan and
Pakistan, thereby enhancing regional cooperation and trade. It would also support accountability,
governance, and transparency reforms by improving the management of energy export revenues.
At the same time, the proposed Chemin-Almaty transmission line-a high return project that
would permit large volumes of seasonal trade with Kazakhstan in both directions-could be
financed by private investors, with possible IFC and/or MIGA assistance. To complement these
activities, IFC will also explore other opportunities in hydropower, including through direct
investments by its InfraVentures Fund, 14 sub-national finance and PPPs, and particularly in small
hydropower plants (HPPs).

Country Development Goal: Expanding national and regional transport connectivity.

75. With cargo and passenger traffic increasing at up to 10 percent annually, the NSDS'
goal for transport and communications is to improve the population's access to markets for
goods and services within the country as well as regionally. This will entail inter alia the
rehabilitation of five regional road corridors, within the framework of the Central Asian Regional
Economic Cooperation (CAREC), as well as better operation and maintenance of the country's
road infrastructure, including the regulation of vehicle weights. The NSDS also anticipates
creating a more favorable environment for private investment in road transport infrastructure
through public-private partnerships.

76. 
The proposed Central Asia Road Links-Kyrgyz Republic adaptable program loan
(FY14) would finance rehabilitation of priority road sections in Osh and Batken oblasts
linking the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. It would also support improved highway

14 Responding to the dearth of bankable transactions in IDA countries' infrastructure, IFC's Board authorized the establishment
of Infra Ventures, a US$100 million 5-year Fund, designed to facilitate IFC support for private and public-private partnership
infrastructure projects in IDA countries.

28

operation and maintenance practices, including the piloting of multi-year contracts by selected
road maintenance units, based on agreed performance standards. By encouraging more efficient
and transparent use of public assets, this would also enhance governance. Additionally, road user
satisfaction surveys would help foster government accountability for the effectiveness and
quality of services. Three knowledge products would augment this operation and the ongoing
National Road Rehabilitation Project (Osh-Batken-Isfana): first, an Institutional Development
Grant (IDF) is supporting the introduction of quality management systems; second, a Trade
Facilitation Facility (TFF) is assessing the feasibility of a proposed rail link between China and
Uzbekistan through the Kyrgyz Republic; and third, a planned new study would focus on the
management of road assets and development of resilient designs. Meanwhile, IFC has been
asked to review strategic options for the future management of Bishkek's airport at Manas and is
currently preparing a proposal for advisory services and eventual sub-sovereign lending.

Country Development Goal: Ensuring sustainable urban development and communal
services.

77. With about 37 percent of the population now living in urban areas, overall access to
essential public utilities such as clean water and sanitation has been declining. Poor
communities bear the greatest burden since, unlike the more affluent; they cannot afford to
purchase private, more costly services. Sustainable interventions will also better address the
country's high vulnerability to natural hazards and mainstream climate adaptation and disaster
risk management measures. The long-term vision for sustainable urban development includes
integrating it with disaster risk management, including proper land planning, enforcement of
disaster resilient building codes, critical infrastructure retrofitting, disaster response, and post-
disaster reconstruction support.

78. 
Ensuring sustainable urban development and communal services would be
supported by a proposed Urban Development and Communal Services project (FY17). It
would finance municipal infrastructure investments, including water supply and sanitation, solid
waste management, and other social infrastructure, and specialized technical assistance and
capacity building programs. Informed by analytical work planned for FY15 and structured to
facilitate 
the mobilization of co-financing, 
the project would promote 
integrated urban
development in selected cities or towns, with provisions for climate resilience, disaster risk
management, energy efficiency, and gender. It would also contribute to improved governance by
strengthening the capacity of local governments in beneficiary communities and boosting the
financial performance, sustainability and accountability of service providers, with key outcomes
including expanded coverage and enhanced quality of services for targeted communities and
improved performance of local governments and service providers.

E. 

Implementing Bank Group Strategy

79. 
The provisional IDA lending program comprises fourteen operations over the four
years FY14-17, including Kyrgyz components of three regional operations. Five would
support public administration and public service delivery, one regional operation would
indirectly contribute to the business environment and investment climate, and eight would
concentrate on natural resources and physical infrastructure. Actual IDA allocations will depend
on: (i) the country's own performance; (ii) its performance relative to that of other IDA

29

recipients; (iii) the amount of overall resources available to IDA; (iv) changes in the list of active
IDA-eligible countries; (v) terms of financial assistance provided (grants or loans); and (vi) the
amount of compensatory resources received for MDRI." These amounts are expected to be
supplemented by trust fund financing from various sources.

Managing Program Implementation

80. 
The planned concentration of new lending in fewer, but larger operations, including
annual DPOs, 
is arguably a high risk-high return approach. On the one hand,
concentration on fewer but larger investment lending operations will permit greater selectivity, a
more strategic focus on results, and continued consolidation of the portfolio; second, it will help
reduce the burden on limited government absorptive and implementation capacity, as well as on
scarce Bank Group staff project preparation and supervision resources; and third, not least
important, DPOs have become a key instrument in catalyzing the passage of key structural
reforms and bolstering their implementation, helping build policy consensus and strengthening
coordination within the government. The latter is crucial, given the multi-dimensional nature of
the governance agenda. On the other hand, if the authorities are unable to maintain a satisfactory
reform implementation record and/or macroeconomic framework, DPOs would be seriously
impacted and, in the worst case, overall lending could be significantly downsized. Though
remaining vigilant to this risk, the CPS does not include a formal low-case scenario and the
lending program will be managed with flexibility in order to respond to any major change in the
operating environment. In this event, available resources would be re-allocated to existing or
new investment operations already in the pipeline, with an emphasis on community and demand-
side governance.

81. Meanwhile, the existing portfolio remains well aligned with the CPS' strategic goal
and priority areas of engagement. As of end-December, 2012, it comprised 15 projects with a
net IDA commitment of US$274.4 million. With the recent closure of several long-standing
projects, it is currently undergoing much needed consolidation, declining from 19 projects
totaling US$248 million in mid-2010 at the end of the last CAS-a trend that the planned
concentration of new lending on fewer, larger operations during FY14-17 will reinforce.1 5 While
portfolio quality overall, including the 23 percent disbursement ratio, is judged satisfactory, five
operations are currently 'problem projects'. Their status and several generic issues affecting
portfolio performance were addressed at a country portfolio performance review (CPPR) with
the government held last January. The key findings and agreed next steps, including action plans
covering generic issues and individual operations, are summarized at Annex 7. These action
plans form the basis for quarterly mini-CPPR follow up meetings with the government, focused
on resolving 'problem projects'. Meanwhile, IFC's committed portfolio totals US$23.3 million,
comprising 7 clients in hydropower and manufacturing, and it is performing satisfactorily.

15 Compared to the last CAS, when IDA commitments during FYO7-10 averaged US$9 million, IDA operations planned for
FY14-17 average US$16.5 million, including Kyrgyz contributions to three regional operations, or US$15.7 million, excluding
them.

30

Areas of 

Engagement 

Current Portfolio 

Planned Lending and TA 

Table 5: Indicative Work Program, FY14-171

Governance TA (FY03) 
Public Finance Mgt. Capacity 
Building TA 
Capacity Building for Economic 
Public 
Mgt. (FY09) 
Administrati Development Policy Operation 

on & Public 

(FY13) 

Services 

Development Policy Operations 
(DPOs)-FY14,15,16 & 17 
Public Procurement Capacity Building 
(FY14) 
Governance (FY14) 
Statistical Capacity Building (FY14) 

Judiciary Reform (FY16) 

Social Protection Project (FY17) 
Potential investments in private health 
and education (JFC) 

Health & Social Protection 
SWAp (FY11) & 2 nd Health & 
Social Protection (FY13) 
Health Results-Based Financing 
Pilot (FY13) 
Sector Support for Education 
Reform (FY13) 
Education Reform-2 (FY13) 
Rural Water Supply & 
Sanitation (FY09)
Social Protection (FYa7)
Financial Sector Development 
(FY12) 

Agriculture Productivity and Nutrition 
Improvement (FY14) 

JFC portfolio ( 6 clients in fmnan- Regional Animal Health Control- 

Business 

cial and manufacturing sectors) 

Environment 

& 
Investment 
Climate 

Kyrgyz contribution (FY15) 

Capital Markets Development 

Potential investments in financial, 
agribusiness and manufacturing sectors 
(PFC) 

Advisory, Knowledge, and

NILTA Products

Programmatic Poverty
Studies
Programmatic Public
Expenditure Review
Public Sector Action Plan
Governance in Local Social

Services (FY15)

Health Sector Review
(FY16)
Social Protection: Equity &
Targeting (FY16)
High Level Human
Development Review
(FY14)
Regional Water Supply &
Sanitation-KG (FY14)

Private Sector Development
Action Plan (ongoing)

Customs Union-

implications for KG (FY14)

Agribusiness--Challenges &

Opportunities (FY14)
Factor Productivity &
Diversification Strategy
Measuring Informal Sector
(FY15)

Investment Climate (JFC)

Central Asia Taxation (IFC)
Housing Microfinance (JFC)
MFJs Transformation (JFC)

Cold Storage (JFC)

Central Asia Corporate
Governance (JFC)
Central Asia Financial

Market Infrastructure (IFC)

Central Asia Agri-Finance

(IFC)

Natural 
Resources & 

Physical 
Infrastructur 
e 

Water Mgt. Improvement 
(FY06) 
On-Farm Irrigation (FY09) 
2 nd Village Investment (FY13) 

2

Energy Emergency Assistance 
(FY1 1) 

Emergency Recovery (FY11) 

National Road Rehabilitation- 

Osh-Batken-Isfana (FY1 0) 

Bishkek & Osh Urban 
Infrastructure (FY1 2) 

investment in hydropower 

National Water Resources Mgt. (FY14) 
Pasture Mgt. (FYo5)
Pasture Management (FY1A5) 
Forestry & Climate Change
Forestry & Climate Change Mgt. (FY16) Mgt. (FY 6)
ind 
3 rd Village Investment (FY16) 
Central Asia Energy &
Support to Community Seed Funds 
Water Development

(FY14) 
Social Cohesion thru Community-based

(CAEWDP)

Devt. (FY14) 
C Asia Regional Roads (FY14) 
CASA-1000 (FY14) 

Heating & Energy Efficiency
Assessment
Power Sector Note (FY14)

Electricity Supply Acct. & Rel. 

Tariff Design Methodology

Improvement (FY1m5) 
(FY14)
Urban Planning & Development (FY17) 
Power Sector Financial Mgt.
Potential investments in hydro-power and Assessment (FY15)
IIFC 

mining (IFC)

16 Current and planned activities in italics are, or are expected to be financed by trust fund sources.

31

Cross-cutting Themes-Gender, Climate Change, Social Accountability

82. 

The CPS program is consistent with IDA, Bank Group corporate, and ECA regional
priorities and mandates. Regarding gender, the design of all new operations would be subject
to basic gender sensitivity analysis and at least four-Pasture Management, Forestry & Climate
Change Management, 3 rd Village Improvement, and Urban Planning & Development-have the
potential to be deeply gender informed, i.e. their design and implementation would address
gender disparities and reflect enhanced integration of gender considerations. At the same time,
IFC will explore possibilities for investments in companies managed or owned by women. As for
climate change, the Bank Group plans through its current portfolio but more importantly in
future operations to assist in addressing climate adaptation and mitigation challenges-for
example in agriculture, energy, forestry, and health care. Box 4 below outlines the main elements
of the CPS' approach to climate change.

Box 4: Climate Change in the Kyrgyz Republic
Owing to its high exposure and low adaptive capacity, the Kyrgyz Republic's is one of the countries most
vulnerable to climate change in the ECA region. Multi-model forecasts for higher temperatures and increased
variability of precipitation point towards a deterioration of ecosystems, an expansion in semi-arid and arid areas,
significantly reduced glacier cover, and lower soil productivity and eroding biodiversity. A higher incidence of
climate-related natural disasters is also projected. According to the country's 2 nd National Report to the International
Panel for Climate Change, agriculture, energy, forestry including biodiversity, healthcare, and natural disasters are the
areas most vulnerable to climate change, requiring climate-informed action.
The Bank Group is already involved in mainstreaming the climate change agenda into the Kyrgyz
development dialogue. Its activities include: advocacy and awareness raising, knowledge sharing of adaptation
approaches and strategies, institutional strengthening, and support for framework legislation, regional trans-border
cooperation, and analyses of stress factors. In addition, several ongoing operations in agriculture and water resources,
energy, and health, as well as the Central Asia Hydro-meteorology Modernization Project, have climate change
adaptation co-benefits.
During the CPS, at least four new operations are likely 
to be explicitly climate-informed-Pasture
Management, Forestry & Climate Change Management, 3 rd Village Investment, and Urban Planning & Development.
In addition, although two proposed energy projects-Electricity Supply Accountability & Reliability Improvement and
CASA-1000 do not aim discretely for climate change outcomes, their focus on improved accountability, efficiency,
and governance will clearly have climate change adaptation co-benefits.

83. 
Enhanced approaches to social accountability and demand-size governance would be
mainstreamed into the design of all future projects. Addressing demand- and supply-side
governance together facilitates the use of enhanced approaches to social accountability. This
would empower Kyrgyz citizens, giving them greater control over decisions that affect their
lives, strengthen public outreach efforts, and improve the efficiency of infrastructure and services
available to the poor. Projects with the most potential for application of demand-side governance
are those aimed at ensuring high levels of citizen engagement and participation in project design.
Thus, while all projects would pay attention to the basic principles of demand-side governance-
accountability, participation, and transparency-at least five-Electricity Supply Accountability
and Reliability Improvement; Pasture Management; Forestry and Climate Change Management;
Third Village Investment Project; and Urban Planning and Development-have the potential for
to social accountability and demand side governance. During CPS
enhanced approaches 
implementation, other projects may also be added. Finally, the Kyrgyz Republic is one of 12
countries participating in the Global Partnership for Social Accountability (GPSA). With

32

indicative funding amounts to eligible CSOs ranging from US$500,000 to US$1 million, the
GPSA is a new, potentially important instrument for CPS support to the country's governance
and social accountability agenda.

Civil Society, Partnerships and Development Coordination.

84. 
Although government coordination and management of external aid by is weak,
especially 
since mid-2010, cooperation among key development partners remains
exemplary. 
Its most obvious manifestations are the Development Partners' Coordination
Council (DPCC), which meets monthly to discuss common issues, and DPCC sector working
groups, which convene as needed to coordinate activities and approaches to policy dialogue with
the Kyrgyz authorities. In this connection, the FYO7-10 Joint Country Support Strategy (JCSS)-
an initiative by five development partners including the Bank Group to harmonize their activities
and advance the goals of the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness-has been succeeded
by a more inclusive, less binding Joint Statement of Partnership between the Kyrgyz Republic
and Development Partners that was signed towards end-2012. This Joint Statement, to which 10
development partners have subscribed, outlines agreed principles and values for implementation
of the authorities' NSDS. Annex 5 summarizes key development partner coordination issues and
activities by sector and thematic area.

85. With perhaps the most liberal economy and open society in Central Asia, the
Kyrgyz Republic is known for its relatively free press and vibrant civil society. Not
surprisingly given the country's recent history, many CSOs and the media focus on governance
issues, especially corruption, public accountability, and transparency, as well as climate change,
community development, the environment, gender, and poverty. Since mid-2010 in particular,
the government has solicited CSOs' advice on development strategies and programs and CSOs in
turn are represented on ministry and government agency supervisory councils. They also play an
in important role in identifying policy and institutional development issues and, through the
Bank Group's Country Office in Bishkek, in contributing to the design, implementation, and
monitoring and evaluation of Bank Group-financed investment projects. This CPS anticipates
broadening and deepening the Bank Group's relations with CSOs.

Monitoring and Evaluation

86. 
Expected outcomes of the CPS are expressed in the results framework attached at
Annex 1. Based on discussions with the government and consultations with other stakeholders,
it is organized around the CPS' over-arching governance theme and the three priority areas of
engagement: public administration and public service delivery; business environment and
investment climate; and natural resources and physical infrastructure. These three areas are then
disaggregated into eight country goals and related outcomes that the CPS program expects to
influence and a larger set of intermediate outcomes or milestones that will be used to track
progress periodically. The matrix also identifies the lending, advisory and analytical, and
technical assistance interventions that are intended to contribute towards the achievement of CPS
outcomes.

87. While the results framework 
is designed 
outcomes, its application is intended to be flexible. 

to monitor progress and measure
It provides an initial sense of strategic

33

direction for Bank Group assistance, but should be thought of as being flexible and subject to
change if evolving government priorities or external developments so warrant. A Progress
Report slated for end-FY15 would adjust, update, and extend the results framework as needed to
reflect activities planned for FY16-17 and a Completion Report would be prepared during the
second half of FY17.

III. MANAGING RISKS

88. 
The CPS is predicated on decisive 
implementation by the government of its
medium-term NSDS, which in turn depends on continued consolidation of the new
constitutional settlement. In addition, the CPS program outlined above is subject to four main
types of risk-a deteriorated macroeconomic 
framework, 
renewed political 
instability;
ineffective implementation capacity; and the fragile consensus on certain key reforms.

89. 
Deteriorating macroeconomic framework. While the Kyrgyz Republic is unlikely to
be impacted directly by developments in the euro zone, its economy remains vulnerable to
possible exogenous shocks from a weaker global and regional outlook, as well as specific short-
term risks. Lower growth in Russia and Kazakhstan, for example, resulting from either contagion
effects from the eurozone or a fall in international oil prices, could reduce remittance flows and
weaken external demand for Kyrgyz exports. Second, the country relies significantly on imports
of food and fuel and thus remains vulnerable 
to 
inflationary pressures stemming from
international food and fuel price increases. In the short-term, the main potential risks are that
gold output in 2013-14 does not fully recoup the shortfall experienced in 2012 and/or that other
sectors such as agriculture and energy underperform. If either or both were to materialize, public
revenues would drop and incomes would be negatively impacted. The Bank Group would
address a deteriorating external environment or less than adequate policy responses by adjusting
the program either to meet urgent financing needs, if appropriate, or, alternatively, to reduce
planned budget support. Meanwhile, the government's structural reform agenda aims over the
medium-term to help diversify economic activity away from its reliance on gold by encouraging
the private sector, enhancing human and physical capital, and strengthening market institutions.

90. 
Renewed political instability. 
The dispersion of responsibility under the 2010
constitution, patronage rivalries, an assertive parliament, significant street protests and coalition
politics circumscribe 
the government's ability 
to take difficult but necessary decisions.
Moreover, while reconstruction continues in the south of the country, the underlying causes of
the June 2010 conflict-minority ethnicities' lack of representation and voice, as well as poverty
and unemployment-remain still to be fully addressed. The potential linkage of political
volatility at the national level with social tensions, especially in the south, could therefore
potentially undermine a still tenuous peace. Underlying these vulnerabilities, corruption
continues to be a major concern, preventing the private sector from operating effectively,
adversely impacting public sector incentives, and undermining the government's credibility and
legitimacy. While political instability and risks are beyond the Bank Group's ability or mandate
to influence, CPS support for ongoing governance reforms are designed to help mitigate these
risks indirectly by reinforcing the state's accountability and legitimacy. Specifically, support for

34

measures 
to combat corruption, 
improve public accountability, and enhance transparency
include: developing and supporting implementation of an anti-corruption strategy; reforming the
judiciary; strengthening the public finance management system, including accounting controls
and information security; designing a budget code and procurement reforms; and improving the
business environment for private sector growth.

91. 
Ineffective 
implementation capacity. 
Implementation of the reform agenda 
is
constrained by at least two factors: insufficient human, institutional, and technical capacity to
design policy measures and, once enacted, to carry them out; and limited ability to build
consensus and coordinate action across the key economic and social agencies and ministries. In
particular, project approvals are often 
the subject of protracted discussion between 
the
government and the legislature. The authorities are aware of these challenges and are working to
address them by strengthening the institutional framework and augmenting their technical
capability. In this context, the Bank Group will continue to emphasize public outreach and
communications, particularly with the parliament, and, together with other development partners,
provide technical assistance and support for capacity building.

92. 
Fragile consensus on certain key reforms. While there is overall understanding within
the political leadership that the country's future stability depends upon the population seeing
tangible improvements in governance, translating this into sustained commitment for, and
implementation of key reforms remains a challenge. The country's ongoing transition to more
inclusive, open, and representative government is still at an early stage and coalition rule is
inherently unstable. While 
the fragile consensus on certain key reforms prolonged the
preparation of DPO-1, development policy lending nevertheless plays a critical convening role
by framing supply-side governance reforms and fostering inter-agency coordination.

35

Results Framework: Ongoing and Confirmed Program

FY indicates Board Approval Year

ANNEX 1

Institutional Outcomes in 

Milestones and Outputs 

CPS Outcomes 

Instruments and Partners

Area of Engagement 1: Public Administration and Public Service Delivery
Establish a robust system of public 
Public Sector Reform 
administration and reforming the 
Roadmap adopted and its 
judiciary (NSDS, 2.6) 
implementation monitored 
regularly 

Effective implementation of 
strategic Judicial action plan 

Progress in institutionalizing 
Bank lending: Annual DPOs with
a more meritocratic public 
strong goverance content; Capacity
administration 
Building for Economic Management
Baseline: World Economic Forum 
(FY09); Judiciary Reform (FY16)
score on favoritism in decisions of AAA: Govemance TA (FY03);

govemnment (rank 136 out of 144) 
Target. 120 out of 144 

programmatic poverty studies
(planned); public sector action plan;
govemnance reforms - second

* 

mproving access to 
generation, including justice reform
affordable civil justice 
(FY14); Programmatic Public
Baseline: 0.64 score (2012-2013 
Expenditure Reviews
World Justice Project Rule of Law Trust Fund: Public Financial

Index - sub-indicator 7. 1: "People Management Capacity Building

can access and afford civil 
justice") 
Target. 0.7 (2017) 

Expanding access to, and increasing 
the efficiency and quality of 
education, health, and other public 

services (NSDS, 4.1-4.5) 

* 

Number of local officials and 
community members trained in 
budgeting and planning principles 

Increasing villages with 
access to improved social and 
economic infrastructure 

and procedures. 
Baseline: 20,000 (2007) 
Target. 90,000 (2015) 

Baseline: 1000 (2007) 
Target: 2000 (2017) 

Number of schools supplied 

on the percentage of 

with package of teaching-leamning 

materials, 
Target: 100% (2016) 

Grade 4 students that master the 

competency required by the 
curriculum in reading. 

Baseline: 40% (2012) 

multi-donor trust fund; Public
Procurement Capacity Building
(FY14); Statistical Capacity Building

(FY14)

Bank Lending: Second Village
Improvement Project (FY1 3); Rural
Water Supply and Sanitation (FY09);

Health & Social Protection SWAp
(FY1 1) & 2 nd Health & Social
Protection (FY1 3); Sector Support for

Education Reform (FY63)
IFC Investments: Potential
pIncrease 

investments in private health and

education providers
AAA: Social Protection: on

1Targeting and Equity (FYI6); Poverty

36

Institutional Outcomes in 
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

Milestones and Outputs 

CPS Outcomes 

Instruments and Partners

studies (planned); Health Sector
Review (FY16); High Level Human
Development Review (FY14);
Regional Water Supply and Sanitation
(FY14); Govemance in Local Social
Services (FY15)
Trust Funds: Health Results-Based

Financing Pilot (FY1 3); Support for

improved Leaming through Pre-
school Education (EFA-FTI); 2 nd
Education Reform (through READ)
Partners: Russia; EFA-FTI

Target 45% (2017) 

Mortality rate from 
cardiovascular disease (40-59 
years, per 100 000) 

Baseline: 310 (2011) 

Target: 287 (2017) 

Share of Social Assistance
spending on poverty-targeted
program(s)

Baseline: 15% (2011)

Target 35% (2017)

Share of the poorest quintile
population covered by Social

Assistance.
Baseline: 28% (2011)

Target 40% (2017)

* 
Number of training-certified 
primary grade teachers who 
follow the revised curriculum and 
apply improved teaching-leaming 
practices. 
Baseline: None (2014) 
Target: 9,000 (2016) 

* 
Improved access of the 
patients to preventive care 
measured by % of detected cases 
of hypertension (HT) at the 
primary health care level. 
Baseline: 27% (2011) 
Target: 50% (2016) 

* 
Reduce exclusion errors in 
targeting of MBPF transfers
Baseline: 71% (2011) 
Target: 60% (2016) 

* 
Social assistance (SA) 
beneficiaries of MBPF, Monthly
Social Benefits (MSB) and Cash
compensations with records in the
unified SA Beneficiary Registry.
Baseline: 0% (2011)
Target. 100% (2016)

Area of Engagement 2: Business Environment and Investment Climate
Promoting financial and private 
Improved legal and 

* 

sector development (NSDS, 8.1-8.6 
and 9.1-9.6) 

regulatory framework for 
financial infrastructure as a result 
of enactment of a new Law on 

_ Credit Reporting, which stipulates 

* 

Improved access to finance 

for MSMEs as measured by a 
volume of outstanding MSME 
loans provided by MFIs supported 

by IFC 

TBank Lending: Financial Sector

Development Project (FY2);
AAA: Strategy to Raise Factor
Productivity and Promote

Diversification (FYI5); Programmatic

37

Institutional Outcomes in 
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

Milestones and Outputs 

CPS Outcomes 

Instruments and Partners

mandatory provision of 
information to the credit bureaus 
without borrowers' consent, and 
amendment of the existing 
legislation to align it with a new 
Law. 

* 
New tax reporting forms 
introduced to reduce filling and 
payment frequency and reporting 
procedures. 

* 
The tax code and the 
supporting legislation are 
amended and enacted to improve 
VAT refund procedures, simplify 
VAT reporting procedures, and 
introduce more equitable MSME 
regime. 

* 
A new framework for risk- 
based streamlined business 
inspections and technical 
regulations is implemented by 
pilot agencies. 

* 
The development of a PSD 
strategy, associated action plans, 
monitoring and evaluation 
indicators, and a communication 
plan.cost 

pln.non-tax 

* 
Identification of drivers of 
gaps between laws and 

and the

Baseline. US$150 million (2011) 
Target: US$200 million (2016) 

Increased private credit 
bureau coverage (% of adults) 

Baseline: 24.6% (2012) 
Target. 30.0% (2016) 

Increased number of 
registrations in collateral registry 

Public Expenditure Review
(planned); Trade - Implications of
Proposed Customs Union
Membership (FY14); State-Owned
Enterprises (planned); Private
Investment Climate Study (planned);

Joint WB-IFC Activity: Improvement
of legal framework for moveable

collateral (ongoing)
IFC Advisor: Azerbaijan-Central
Asia Financial Infrastructure Project
Phase 11 (ongoing); Transformation

Baseline: 42,000 per annum (2013) 

for MFIs (ongoing); Housing

Target. 62,000 per annum (2016) 

Microfmance (ongoing); Central Asia
Tax Project (ongoing); Investment
Climate Project (planned); Central
Reduced tax compliance cost Asia Corporate Governance Project in
for businesses as measured by the 
the Kyrgyz Republic (CACGP 11)
average labor costs associated 
(planned)
with tax accounting and 
IFC Investments: potential

mandatory reporting per business 

per year 
Baseline. SOM 34 thousand (2013) 
Target. 10% lower in real terms 
(2016) 

Decreased regulatory 
compliance cost and improved 
quality of the business inspections 
in pilot agencies as measured by 

inspection compliance 

Baseline: US$1.8 million (2011)

Target: 10% lower costs in real
term (2016)
Target:)implementation 

investments in financial sector (loans,

equity, trade finance lines, credit lines
for SMEs, risk management products)
and in real sector companies.
Trust Fund: Strengthening banking
supervision and consumer protection

frameworks (SECO); IDF grant for

Private Sector Development Action
Plan; USAID TF on measuring and
reducing regulatory discretion for
female entrepreneurs in Central Asia
Partners: ADB, USAID, SECO, UN

in the area of Tax Inspections

38

Institutional Outcomes in 
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

Milestones and Outputs 

CPS Outcomes 

Instruments and Partners

identification of the differential
experience of male and female
entrepreneurs; development and
implementation of policy
responses to reduce this gap; and
the measurement of the impact of
the interventions.

Increasing the efficiency and 
competitiveness of agriculture 
(NSDS, 10.1) 

* 

Percentage of farmers in 
project areas adopting improved 
technologies (including resilience 

* 

Increase in gross value of 
output in the participating farms 
of 30% 

to climate risk) 
Base: 0 (2011) 
Target: 45% (2015) 

* 
A new Food Safety 
framework is established; Food 
Safety standards and certification 
regulations are effectively 
amended in line with WTO 
standards and best international 
practices. 

* 
Modern cold storage 
facilities are built in up to five 
locations, which are selected 
based on IFC feasibility studies 

* 
Expanded cold storage
capacity
Baseline: up to 3,000 mt (2013)
Target: up to 20,000 mt (2017)

Bank Lending: Agribusiness and
Marketing (ongoing); Agriculture
Investments (ongoing); Second On-
farm Irrigation Project (ongoing)
Joint WB-IFC Advisory: Improving
the Agribusiness Investment Climate
IFC Investments: Potential
investments in agribusiness and
MSME credit lines for on-lending to
farmers;
IFC Advisory: Food Safety and
Resource Efficiency Regional
Advisory Platforms (ongoing), Cold
Storage (ongoing), Central Asia Agri-
Finance Project (planned)
Trust Fund: Agriculture Productivity
Project and Nutrition Improvement -
FY14 (GAFSP); Agricultural
Productivity Assistance Project -
FY11 (Global Food Crisis Response
Program)
Partners: Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP)

39

Milestones and Outputs 

Institutional Outcomes in 
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS
Area of Engagement 3: Natural Resources and Physical Infrastructure
Ensuring Energy Security and 
New commercial 
Developing Export Potential 
management system established. 
(NSDS, 10.2) 

* 

Expanding domestic, regional, and 
international development 
transport connectivity (NSDS, 10.4) 

* 

0 
National road safety program 
launched 
Number of kilometers of 
roads rehabilitated along the Osh- 
Batken-Isfana road corridor 
Baseline: 0 (2010) 
Target: 60T(2015) 

Increase share of rural 
population with access to an all- 
season road 
Baseline: 76 (2010) 
Target 78 (2017) 

CPS Outcomes 

Instruments and Partners

* 

Energy loss reduction, 
measured through total 
distribution loss 
Baseline: 22% loss (2012) 
Target: 15% loss (2017) 

Bank lending: Electricity Supply
Accountability and Reliability
Improvement Project (FY14); Energy
Emergency Assistance (FY11);
Emergency Recovery (FY11)
IFC Investment: Potential investments
in HPPs
AAA: Energy Chapter of the Public
Expenditure Review (ongoing);
Heating and Energy Efficiency
Assessment (FY14); Power Sector
Note (FY14); Tariff Methodology
Design Study (FY14)
IFC Advisory: Regional Renewable
Energy Advisory Program
Trust Funds: ESMAP, CAEWDP
Partners: KfW, ADB, JICA
Bank Lending: National Road
Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana)
Project (ongoing); Bishkek and Osh
Urban Infrastructure (FY12); Central
Asia Road Links - Kyrgyz Republic
(FY14)
AAA: Management of road assets

and development of resilient design
(planned)

Trust Funds: Institutional

Development Grant (IDF) for
Introduction of Quality Management

System; Trade Facilitation Facility
(TFF) for Technical Advisory
Services on a proposed new rail link
China-Kyrgyz-Uzbekistan
Partners: JICA, EAD, ADB

40

Institutional Outcomes in 

Milestones and Outputs 

CPS Outcomes 

Instruments and Partners

Improving the management of 
agriculture, forestry, mineral, 
pastureland, and water resources, 
including extension and other 
support services, for sustainable 
development (NSDS, 5.1-5.2, 10.3) 

Number of WUAs where 
minimum maintenance 
expenditure for sustainable 
operation identified and used in 
setting the ISF. 
Baseline: 0 (2008) 
Target: 115 (2015) 

Water distribution to farmers Bank Lending: Second on-farm
within 80 percent of the 
irrigation project (FY09); water
rehabilitated systems closely 
management improvement project
matches the crops' irrigation 
(FY06); Forestry and Climate Change
water demands. 
Management (FY16); Pasture
Baseline. 10 WUA systems(2008) Management Improvement Project
Target 104 WUA systems (2017) 
(FY15); Village improvement

(FYI 3/FYi16); Rural Water Project
(planned)

* 
Number of Pasture 
Committees with satisfactory 
implemented Community Pasture 
Management Plans 
Baseline: 0 (2008) 
Target: 300 (2017) 

* 
Institutional structure for 
IWRM established and 
functioning with prepared 
National Water Strategy and river 
basin plans (2014) 

* Mining Tender Procedure in line 
with good international practice is 
developed; 
* Mining Industry Investment Guide 
is developed. 
* Improved international 
transparency rates through 
confirmation of KR EITI Full 
Compliance Status by second 
validation in 2015. 

On-farm irrigation and drainage 
systems will be rehabilitated and 
managed in an efficient manner 
(Target: 27,000 ha 2017) 

Number of Pasture Committees 

with increased pasture 
performance rating. 

Baseline. 0 PCs (2008) 
Target 300 PCs (2017) 

9 Transparent and competitive 
Mining Tenders in line with 
intemational best practices held on
Togolok deposit and other mineral 
deposits in 2014-2015;

IFC Investment: Potential investments
in private mining companies
AAA: Pasture Management (FY15);
Forestry and Climate Change
Management (FY16)
Trust Fund: National Water

Resources Management Project (SDC
financed), Agriculture Productivity

and Nutrition Improvement Project
(GAFSP financed); Central Asia
Energy and Water Development
Program (CAEWDP); Extractive
Industries - Technical Advisory

Facility (EI-TAF) Mining Sector

Technical Assistance Project (Bank-
Executed); Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative Multi-Donor
Trust Fund (EITI-MDTF) - Recipient
Executed Project; EITI-MDTF Civil
Society Organizations Direct Support
Program - Bank Executed Project

Partners: Switzerland, GAFSP, EBRD

41

ANNEX 2

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY, FYO7-10 AND

INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE, FY12-13

Completion Report

Date of CAS: May 23, 2007 (Report No. 39719-KG)-Board discussion June 19, 2007

Date of CAS Progress Report: October 1, 2009 (Report No. 48300-KG)

Date of ISN: June 16, 2011 (Report No. 62777-KG)-Board discussion August 2, 2011

Period covered by CAS/ISN Completion Report: August 2007-December 2012

CAS Completion Report prepared by: Dinara Djoldosheva (IDA) and Oksana Nagayets (IFC), with
inputs from Saumya Mitra, David Pearce, and the Kyrgyz Country Team

Background

I. 

Executive Summary

i. 
The WBG's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the period FYO7-10 1 7 was part of a
broader initiative by five development partners18 to harmonize their activities in the country and
advance the goals of the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Anchored in the Kyrgyz
Republic's coterminous Country Development Strategy (CDS), the CAS program's four priority areas
were: (a) economic management to support sustained growth; (b) improving governance, upgrading
public administration, and reducing corruption; (c) building human and social capital; and (d) ensuring
environmental sustainability and natural resources management.

ii. 
A Progress Report issued towards the end of the CAS period" noted that the country's
overall governance environment had improved slowly, but that more concerted efforts were needed
to strengthen public accountability and enhance transparency. 
It also cited better development
partner coordination and increased use of country systems for project implementation as two significant
achievements of the Joint Country Support Strategy (JCSS). Responding to a government request for
budget support to counter the effects of the 2008-09 global downturn, the Progress Report proposed the
resumption of development policy lending in FY10 and beyond. In the event, although the first in a
planned series of three development policy operations (DPOs) was appraised in early 2010, processing

17 Kyrgyz Republic: Joint Country Support Strategy, 2007-10, Report No. 39719-KG dated May 23, 2007.
18 Asian Development Bank (ADB), Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), U.K. Department for International
Development (DflD), United Nations Agencies (UN), and World Bank Group (WBG). Germany, the European Union (EU),
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) subsequently joined the JCSS consultation and coordination process.
19 Kyrgyz Republic: Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report, Report No. 48300-KG dated September 16, 2009.

42

had to be suspended due to the overthrow of the government in April 2010 and the eruption of violence in
the south of the country in June 2010.

iii. 
Given the uncertainties that followed these events-just before the end of the CAS-a Joint
Economic Assessment (JEA) prepared by the WBG and three other partners in mid-2010 helped
mobilize pledges of over US$1.1 billion for the country's post-crisis recovery and reconstruction.20
It also guided WBG activities during 
the transitional FY 1-concentrating on budget support,
humanitarian aid, and infrastructure repair and rehabilitation-and served as background for preparing an
Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for the period FY12-13. 21 Besides focusing on the country's continuing
economy recovery and social stabilization needs, the ISN retained the preceding CAS' emphasis on
governance, public administration, and corruption-stress factors underlying the 2010 crisis. It also paved
the way for returning to a standard assistance framework and preparation of a full CAS. In the
circumstances, this Completion Report assesses outcomes of the original FY07- 10 CAS and, at the same
time, takes into account developments since end-FY10, including the first eighteen months of the FY12-
13 ISN. 22

Program Outcomes

iv. 
The Completion Report rates the achievement of outcomes foreseen in the CAS and ISN
programs as moderately satisfactory. The reasons for this assessment are as follows. First, CAS support
for macroeconomic management and financial and private sector development sustained broadly positive
CDS outcomes in these two areas. However, despite attaining project-specific targets for irrigation,
pastureland management, animal health, and agro-processing, these had little influence on the CDS goals
for agricultural productivity and output which were probably unrealistic and, in any case, barely changed.
Moreover, CAS contributions in energy were only partly effective and progress towards the CDS goal of
financial viability remained slow. Second, although governance, public administration, and corruption
remain long-term, systemic challenges, CAS and especially ISN support contributed to significant, albeit
incremental progress in all three areas, especially public financial management during FY12-13. Third,
results in terms of building sustainable human and social capital were disappointing. While the CAS
provided support for important financing, institutional and service delivery reforms in both education and
health, these have had negligible impact to date on the quality of services or on MDG outcomes.
Similarly, progress towards improving the social protection system's efficiency and effectiveness remains
at best a work in progress. Finally, CAS interventions to support improved environmental sustainability
and help mitigate natural disasters were satisfactory.

WBG Performance

v. 
Overall, the design and content of the CAS, the related JCSS, and the ISN were highly
relevant and closely aligned with the country's development strategy. However, links between broad-
based CDS goals and CAS/JCSS-specific indicators and outcomes were often inconsistent, indirect, or
unclear and the quality of the results framework was uneven. New operations took into account lessons
learned from preceding ICRs, especially institutional development experience.

20 Kyrgyz Republic: Joint Economic Assessment-Reconciliation, Recovery and Reconstruction, July 21 2010, prepared jointly
by the WBG, together with ADB, the European Bank for Reconstruction & Development (EBRD), and the IMF.
21 Kyrgyz Republic: Interim Strategy Note, FY12-13, Report No. 62777-KG dated June 16, 2011.
22 It is based inter alia on: portfolio implementation performance reports; the last two Implementation Status and Results Reports
(ISRs) of each active project as well as Implementation Completion and Results reports and Project Performance Assessment
Reports of projects that closed during the CAS and ISN periods; in-country interviews with selected client counterparts; and
self-assessments by the WBG's Kyrgyz country team.

43

vi. 
The WBG response to the sudden domestic political crisis in mid-2010, when the country at
times appeared to be on the brink of civil war, was extremely quick and very effective. Within less
than three months, it re-oriented its program, mobilized US$56 million of incremental IDA resources, and
delivered two emergency operations totaling US$80 million in September 2010. Simultaneously, it took
the lead in assessing the country's post-crisis external financing requirements, together with three other
development partners, and helped organize an international conference 
in July 2010 where 
the
international community pledged about US$1.1 billion over a 30-month period, July 2010-December
2012. The Joint Economic Assessment also provided a strategic framework for external support during
2010-12.

vii. 
The Completion Report rates the WBG's performance in terms of program implementation
as satisfactory. In particular, its rapid response during and since the mid-2010 crisis must be considered
highly satisfactory. Relatively strong performing areas were: macro-management, financial and private
sector development, and governance, including public finance management. Relatively weak performing
areas included energy, and education, health, and social protection. Development partner coordination
was by and large satisfactory, although there remains room for improvement in addressing the broader
global aid effectiveness agenda.

II. 

Progress toward Country Development Goals

1. 
The Kyrgyz Republic's macroeconomic outcomes during the second half of the CAS period
(FY09-10) were adversely affected by two shocks-the global economic and financial downturn of
2008-09 and the domestic political turmoil of mid-2010. In 2007-08, GDP growth averaged 8 percent
annually, twice the rate recorded in 2004-06 and significantly higher than the CDS goal of 6 percent. In
2009, it slowed to 2.9 percent, due mainly to reduced demand for the country's exports and much lower
remittances-the two main effects of the global recession. These were partly mitigated, however, by a
bumper harvest and a fiscal stimulus equivalent to 7 percent of GDP. By early 2010, having weathered the
global crisis relatively well, the economy began to recover but, following the overthrow of the
government in April and the outbreak of inter-ethnic violence in the south of the country in June, it
contracted by 0.5 percent.

2. 
In 2011, the economy rebounded quickly and, although a sharp drop in gold output
curtailed growth in 2012, the medium-term outlook-midway through the ISN period (FY12-13)-
is broadly positive. With physical security and political stability largely restored, the economy grew by
6 percent in 2011. Industry, especially gold and hydropower, was the main driver, with agriculture,
services, and trade also contributing. In 2012, by contrast, the economy contracted by 0.9 percent, due to a
sharp drop in output at the Kumtor gold, although, excluding gold, GDP increased by 5 percent, reflecting
strong remittances as well as higher public spending. Going forward, growth over the medium-term is
projected to average 5 percent annually, powered mainly by a revival in gold output and also by
agriculture, hydropower, and textiles. However, this positive outlook assumes continued government
commitment to, and effective implementation of structural reforms, especially those related to combating
corruption, improving governance, and facilitating financial and private sector development.

3. 
Poverty continued to decline towards the CDS goal for the period but, following the
economic slowdown of 2009 and the political turmoil of 2010, began to increase. According to
official data, the share of the population living below the poverty line fell from 40 percent in 2006 to 32

percent in 2009, well on track towards the CDS target of 31 percent. 23 However, it rose to 34 percent in

23

Kyrgyzstan's poverty line, defined by the National Statistics Committee, is based on a basic needs approach that estimates the
costs of a consumption basket, excluding rent.

44

2010 and further to 37 percent in 2011, partly the result of slower growth following the 2008-09 global
downturn, but mainly due to the social unrest of mid-2010, as well as food price increases. While the
reversal of energy price hikes and the retention of increases in public sector wages, pensions, and social
allowances enacted earlier in 2010 may have mitigated the impact, urban poverty nonetheless rose faster
during 2010-11 than in rural areas. Extreme poverty in the conflict-affected urban areas of Osh and rural
areas of Jalal-Abad also increased-to 17.5 percent and 9 percent respectively-leading 
to a
concentration (<45 percent) of very poor households in regions where high unemployment, low social
indicators, and thin public service coverage are already a source of community stress. Meanwhile, with
job creation lagging behind the growth of the economically active population, both employment and labor
force participation fell slightly during the period.

4. 

Progress towards other country development goals supported by the CAS, including those
for agriculture, energy, and financial and private sector development, varied widely. Although
overall macroeconomic management and performance were broadly satisfactory, results for key aspects of
the CDS' structural reform agenda-especially agriculture and energy but also financial and private sector
development-were modest and often unclear, owing at least partly to insufficient or poor quality data.
For example, despite the bumper harvest of 2009, agricultural output and productivity growth averaging
1.7 percent annually during 2007-10 barely advanced from the 2002-06 1.5 percent baseline; and,
development of a competitive food processing industry-a related CDS goal-remains a work in
progress. Similarly, energy-a constraint on the economy's growth potential and a drain on the budget-
remained a major challenge. Although electric power generation expanded by 22 percent in 2011, the
highest 
in five years, the comprehensive 
reforms 
initiated 
in 2009 failed due partly to weak
implementation but mainly owing to lack of political will. As for financial and private sector
development, the investment/GDP ratio increased from 22.6 percent in 2006 to 24 percent in 2010 as
projected, but private sector credit-13 percent of GDP in 2010 and below 15 percent in 2012-fell short
of the CDS goal of 17 percent for 2010.

5. 
Outcomes 
for the business environment and, more broadly, the country's overall
governance framework were uneven, though the current government appears committed to an
improved governance strategy. Ranked 7 0 th in the most recent Doing Business, the Kyrgyz Republic's
2013 result is the best in Central Asia and exceeds several middle income countries. On the other hand, its
scores vary widely across different dimensions of the business environment and there remains ample
scope for improvement, especially in areas such as reliable access to electricity, tax administration, cross-
border trade, contract enforcement, and bankruptcy resolution. Moreover, the gap between enactment of
laws, rules, and regulations and their effective implementation needs to be narrowed. Second, although
the Kyrgyz economy is one of the least competitive and most corrupt in the world according to several
internationally accepted governance indicators, in March 2011 the country was declared fully compliant
with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative's (EITI) global standards for improved transparency
in oil, gas and mining-one of only 11 countries to achieve this status to date. Third, despite some
advances 
towards creating an independent, more professional civil service, promoting greater
transparency in public finance management, and further deregulating the economy, their combined impact
was evidently insufficient to reduce, much less remove the corruption, governance, and lack of voice that
were underlying causes of the political turmoil in 2010. In this context, the focus of the government's
recently 
issued medium-term National Sustainable Development Strategy, 2013-17 on 
improved
governance and strengthened accountability is encouraging.

6. 
Finally, results in terms of building sustainable human and social capital and, in particular,
progress towards achieving the country's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) was mixed.
Although Kyrgyz human development indicators are better than many other low-income countries and the
country is on track to meet its poverty, environmental sustainability, and global partnership MDGs by
2015, its universal education, health, and gender-related indicators are lagging, according to the last
(2010) progress report. Despite high literacy rates, the resources needed to meet the 100 percent target for

45

all boys and girls to complete basic secondary education appear insufficient; infant and child mortality are
declining but slower than needed and maternal mortality has actually increased, although the quality of
the reported data is uncertain; and, though the country's scores on international gender indices are high
for education, they are low for economic and political empowerment. It seems unlikely therefore that the
country's education, health, and gender-related MDGs will be achieved. While the political instability of
2010 may partly explain these outcomes, the content and especially the quality of essential public
services-a major concern particularly in education but also in health-are also important contributing
factors.

III. 

Highlights of CAS Program Performance

Priority Area 1: Economic management for sustained and shared growth

7. 
The first priority area envisaged a mix of lending, advisory and analytical services, policy
dialogue, and technical assistance activities linked to six broad CDS objectives. These were: (a)
sound economic management; 
(b) expanded access 
to financial services; 
(c) 
improved business
environment and investment climate; (d) increased agricultural productivity and output; (e) easier access
to regional markets; and (f) enhanced energy sector financial viability.

8. 
CAS support for sound economic management focused on three clusters of activity. First,
the FY08 Capacity Building in Economic Management project facilitated reforms to develop a new, more
equitable and transparent civil service pay and remuneration system, to ensure that public service
recruitment and career development are merit-based, and to introduce public oversight of government
policies and activities through the creation of supervisory councils that include representatives of civil
society in individual ministries and agencies. Progress in these areas enabled achievement of the CAS
outcome for quality of public administration, whose CPIA score improved from 2.5 to 3 in 2010 and
2011. Second, the authorities made progress during the first two years in aligning CDS objectives more
closely to annual budgets and improving capacity for CDS monitoring and evaluation (with ADB-
financed technical assistance). Unfortunately, owing to the political events and violence in mid-2010, the
CDS monitoring and evaluation system is now defunct.

9. 
CAS assistance for expanding access to financial services was narrowly defined. The
Payments and Banking System Modernization project (FY04) supported establishment of a national
payments system which, by end-September 2011, had processed transactions valued at twice the original
2008 target. Two additional indicators of expanded access to financial services-the number of individual
bank accounts nationwide and the number of government employees receiving their salaries by direct
deposit to commercial bank accounts-were also achieved. On the other hand, although credit to the
private sector increased modestly, from 10.5 percent in 2006 to 13 percent by 2010, it remained below 15
percent in 2011-12 and thus short of the CDS 17 percent goal for 2010. Meanwhile, the Economic
Recovery Support Operation-a single tranche budget support operation approved early FY12-
supported the central bank's direct supervision and temporary administration of several banks that became
financially-distressed as a result of the 2010 crisis and also the reconstitution of the Deposit Protection
Agency (DPA) as an independent legal entity.

10. 
IFC helped expand access to finance by providing credit lines to banks for on-lending to
micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), as well as a variety of advisory services. By
end-201 1, its bank clients held outstanding MSME portfolios of totaling US$277 million, compared to
US$99 million at end- 2007. Some credits were channeled to agriculture and thus improved access to
finance for farmers and rural MSMEs. IFC also undertook advisory work in housing finance, leasing, and

46

microfnance and contributed to a new banking code, especially relating to corporate governance. Key
outcomes in housing finance included standard mortgage practice requirements, streamlined registration
of property and mortgage transactions, and improved mortgage lenders' institutional capacity. IFC's
Microfinance Transformation Project is working with three institutions accounting for 70 percent of the
market, having helped one of them - Bai-Tushum - to acquire a deposit-taking license in 2010 and to
became the first microfinance organization in Central Asia, which in 2012 obtained full banking license.

Meanwhile, IFC's Azerbaijan-Central Asia Financial Infrastructure Project helped draft a law on credit

bureaus, provided capacity-building support to the country's only private credit bureau, and promoted the
use of credit risk mitigation tools by banks and financial literacy among the borrowers.

11. 
The Kyrgyz authorities' efforts to improve the country's business environment and
investment climate were facilitated in part by several CAS outcomes. The Reducing Technical Barriers

for Entrepreneurship and Trade Project (FY07) supported the acquisition of two state-of-the-art

laboratories by the Kyrgyz Center for Standards and Metrology, the upgrading of the Ministry of Health's
epidemiology laboratory, and the establishment of the Kyrgyz Accreditation Center. According to recent
reports, the latter is making good progress towards formal recognition by the International Laboratory
Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC). Second, CAS 
indicators quantifying progress towards improved
property rights and landowners' ability to borrow-a strategic goal of two Land and Real Estate
Registration projects (FY00 and FYO9)-were comfortably achieved. Third, IFC's Investment Climate
advisory project helped introduce and implement risk-based inspections and assisted the State Tax Service
draft a development strategy and implementation plan for 2012-14, as well as tax administration related
legislation. To address the country's inadequate financial disclosure requirements, IFC undertook a study
to identify the main policy constraints and causes of low formalization and poor tax compliance. Its
corporate governance advisory work helped introduce best practice amendments to the Law on Joint
Stock Companies, to improve investor protection, and to strengthen corporate governance in selected
companies. Lastly, IFC direct investments in the real economy sought to introduce better business
practices in the enterprises concerned and to attract other financiers, thereby generating demonstration
effects.

12. 
CDS goals to double agricultural productivity and output were to be influenced by four
CAS interventions. The first-improved sustainability of irrigation supported by the second On-Farm
Irrigation project (FYO7)-was partly achieved. Although 85 of 320 Water Users' Associations (WUAs)
nationwide have collection rates of 90 percent or more, an in-depth study of four WUAs indicated that fee
levels covered only between 25-33 percent of the amount needed to ensure proper maintenance. It also
noted that irrigation water was not being used effectively. The second-enhanced efficiency of
pastureland use supported by the Agricultural Investments and Services project (FYO8)-was fully
achieved. Following enactment of a new Pasture Law in 2008, the number of fully operational Pasture
Users' Unions nationwide more than doubled compared to the 2006 baseline, easily exceeding the CAS'
40 percent target. Likewise, efforts 
to improve animal health-another component of the same
Agricultural Investments and Services project-were largely successful, with a >50 per cent drop in the
incidence of brucellosis in humans in targeted communities and the extension of the program to include
five additional diseases. However, there are no data readily available to determine whether the share of
agricultural output processed locally-the fourth CAS outcome indirectly supported by the Agribusiness
and Marketing project (FY05) and by IFC-has increased. Notwithstanding these project-level successes,
they had little or no impact on CDS goals for agricultural productivity or output which, probably
unrealistic, barely changed, except from the bumper harvest of 2009.

13. 
Better transport infrastructure to improve access to regional markets-measured by an
increase in the share of the national road network classified as being in fair or good condition-was to be
facilitated by prioritizing maintenance on 95 per cent of the country's roads by 2010 using economic
criteria, and by the rehabilitation of key regional corridors in the Fergana Valley. While the National
Road Rehabilitation project (FY10) contributes directly to improving key regional corridors and thus to

47

the broader CDS' regional market access goal, there are no data readily available to verify whether the
detailed maintenance target was achieved.

14. 
The CDS goal of improving the energy sector's financial viability-measured by increased
access to fuel for heating, a 2.5 percent increase in energy output, and reduced system losses-was to be
supported by one CAS outcome, which was partly achieved. On the one hand, system losses remained at
about 40 percent, well above the CAS target of 14 percent for 2010, although metering in several pilot
projects demonstrated their potential for limiting commercial loses and increasing the efficiency of energy
use. On the other, the cash collections to billing ratio increased significantly-from 58 percent in 2006 to
79 percent in 2010-albeit remaining well below the CAS target of 94 percent target as well as the
industry norm of 95-98 percent. Meanwhile, 
the Economic Recovery Support Operation (FY12)
supported implementation of the authorities' energy sector transparency initiative, adopted in July 2010,
which included measures designed to reduce corruption, improve the energy system's financial viability,
and enhance public accountability including: (a) the creation of transparent, rules-based mechanisms for
managing and monitoring financial flows, especially electricity export proceeds in escrow accounts; and
(b) 
the enactment of performance agreements between the energy regulatory authority and energy
companies.

Priority Area 2: Governance, public administration, and corruption

15. 
To bolster government efforts aimed at 
improving governance, upgrading public
administration, and reducing corruption, the CAS addressed two CDS objectives. The first,
improved accountability and transparency in public financial management, was to be measured inter alia
by an increase in the Kyrgyz Republic's score on Transparency International's (TI) Corruption Perception
Index. The second, an increase in the share of mining in GDP, was to be monitored by increased growth
in mining from a baseline of 3.2 per cent annually in 2006 to 5 per cent annually in 2010.

16. 
Improved accountability and transparency in public financial management. Results to date
under the FY09 Capacity Building in Public Financial Management project include: a stronger budget
process with improved indicators for accountability and internal management; increased predictability of
the annual budget as a result of the medium term budget framework; implementation of the treasury
management information system (ongoing under the FY03 Governance Technical Assistance project);
and intensified interaction between the government and the population on fiscal issues. In addition, with
support under the Economic Recovery Support Operation (FY12), the government has restored
accountability and responsibility for public investments to the Ministry of Finance (MOF), where all
capital spending is now part of the budget and subject to parliamentary approval. Moreover, the MOF
now publishes all approved and revised budget laws, the medium-term budget framework, and monthly
and annual budget execution reports on its website; the treasury likewise publishes detailed budget
execution reports and other public financial statements; and since 2011 the newly empowered parliament
conducts budget hearings, with budget committees that involve civil society organizations, professional
associations, the media, and independent experts. Finally, all external grants and loans to the Kyrgyz
Republic, including from IDA, are now subject to parliamentary approval, further proof of progress
towards improved governance and transparency in the management of public revenues. Thus, despite the
slight deterioration in the Kyrgyz Republic's score on Transparency International's (TI) Corruption
Perception Index-arguably an inappropriate CAS indicator and in any case an imperfect yardstick of
performance-there has clearly been significant progress in this area, especially during the last two year
ISN period.

17. 
The second CDS objective was to increase the share of mining in GDP. In support of this
goal, the CAS and ISN provided advice through two studies: one on the policy changes needed to increase
foreign direct investment in Kyrgyz extractive industries, based on international best practice; the other on

48

appropriate policies and procedures for the tendering of mineral deposits. A second contribution
comprised technical assistance to the Kyrgyz Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (KEITI).
Whereas only six companies were reporting at the outset, the number increased to 26 in 2008, 46 in 2011,
and 57 in 2012, the latter covering almost 95 percent of total extractive industries' revenues. The number
of government agencies involved has also risen to 35. With these results and the country's achievement of
full EITI compliance in early 2011, governance and transparency in mining have evidently improved, but
remains a work in progress. Meanwhile, although the share of mining in GDP, mainly gold, increased to
about 10 percent, this was mainly due to the high price of gold in recent years.

Priority Area 3: Human and social capital

18. 
To build sustainable human and social capital, the CDS defined four goals: (a) ensuring equitable
access to quality health care; (b) guaranteeing access to and the quality of basic and upper secondary
education; (c) improving the social protection system's efficiency and effectiveness; and (d) expanding
access 
to clean water and sanitation. The first, second, and fourth of these objectives supported
Kyrgyzstan's MDGs for reducing child mortality and improving maternal health, achieving universal
primary education, and ensuring environmental sustainability. CAS support for human and social capital
development consisted of financing for health, education, rural water supply and sanitation, village
investment, and small towns' infrastructure, related analytical and advisory services, and technical
assistance.

19. 
Equitable access to quality health care. The May 2011 joint annual review of the large multi-
donor-financed Health & Social Protection Project (Health SWAp) and the government's health reform
program (Manas Taalimi) confirmed gradual progress in areas such as better access to services overall,
reduced informal payments by patients, and improved efficiency of resource allocation (functionally and
geographically). However, only one of two planned CAS outcomes-health's 13 percent share of the
national budget-was achieved. The number of visits to family doctors in rural areas-a measure of
improved access to primary health case-averaged only 2.4 per person annually by end-201 1, well below
the access outcome planned for 2010. More importantly, while infant and under-5 mortality continued to
decrease slowly during the period, maternal mortality increased, implying that, as noted earlier, these two
important MDGs are unlikely to be reached by 2015. Thus, despite important advances in terms of health
financing, structural, and service delivery reforms over the last decade, these have not yet translated into
major change in the country's principal health status indicators.

20. 
Access to and quality of basic and upper secondary education. According to government and
IMF data, public spending on education fell from over 25 percent of the national budget in 2007, or 6.5
percent of GDP, to less than 19 percent in 2010, or 6 percent of GDP, although the latter remained in line
with the resource allocation outcome envisaged in the CAS. Yet, this significant allocation of resources,
which included external financing from IDA and other development partners, was hardly reflected in
either better access or enhanced quality: primary education enrolment and completion rates increased only
slightly between 2005-10-from 88 percent to 90 percent and from 86 percent to 88 percent respectively
(according to the Bank's WDIs); and, Kyrgyzstan's PISA scores, a proxy for the improved quality
outcome foreseen in the CAS, likewise improved only marginally-from an average of 306 in 2006 to
325 in 2009.24 In the circumstances, it is unlikely that the MDGs for primary education enrolment and
completion will be achieved. Against this background, a 2010 joint World Bank-OECD review of PISA
outcomes recommended a program of systemic, sector-wide reforms designed to reverse the trend of high
spending, low impact and poor results. These would encompass financing, governance and management

24 The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) is a study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) in member and non-member countries of 15-year-old school children's scholastic performance in
mathematics, reading, and science. First undertaken in 2000 and repeated every three years, its aim is to help improve
educational policies and outcomes.

49

of early childhood education; teacher education and development; teacher management, retention and
performance; school curriculum and assessment; vocational education and training; and higher education
and research.

21. 
Improving the social protection system's efficiency and effectiveness-to be measured by an
increase in the ratio of the unified monthly benefit (UMB) to extreme poverty from 37 per cent to 100 per
cent. Two planned CAS outcomes were designed to support this goal: (a) improved targeting of social
benefits, measured by an increase in the share of extremely poor households receiving guaranteed
minimum income (UMB); and (b) improved fiscal sustainability of the pension system. While the Kyrgyz
Republic spends over 5 percent of GDP on social protection, including 2 percent on social assistance, the
latter finances mainly categorically targeted programs. By contrast, coverage of the monthly benefit for
poor families-the only social assistance program targeted to the poorest-has actually fallen since 2007.
Thus, despite a decrease in the number of so-called categorical benefits, a reform supported under the
FY12 Economic Recovery Support Operation, the social safety net still plays only a limited role in
protecting 
the poor. Progress towards 
improving 
the social protection system's efficiency and
effectiveness remains at best a work in progress.

22. 
Access to clean water and sanitation. Owing to the inconsistency of available data, it is
difficult to determine whether, and to what extent, the Kyrgyz Republic is making progress towards its
MDGs for water and sanitation, which are to increase the share of the population with access to clean
water and improved sanitation from 67 per cent and 29 percent respectively in 2006 to 90 per cent and 40
percent in 2015. According to the Bank's WDIs, the respective shares were already 86 percent and 60
percent in 2005 and increased slightly to 88 percent and 62 percent in 2010, implying that the water MDG
may still be attainable and the sanitation MDG has already been achieved. Similarly, it is difficult to
assess whether one of the two planned CAS outcomes designed to support the water MDG goal-an
increase in the share of the rural population with access to clean water, from 50 per cent in 2006 to 75 per
cent in 2010-was achieved. On the other hand, while the financial viability of utilities and municipalities
remains weak, other measures of increased efficiency such as lower energy consumption, improved
billing and collections, and strengthened management capacity were recorded in 23 municipalities/utilities

supported in the Small Towns Infrastructure and Capacity Building Project.

Priority Area 4: Environmental and natural resources management

23. 
The only CDS objective in the fourth environment and natural resources management
priority area was the maintenance of pastureland management effectiveness-measured by IUCN
scorecards-at the 77 per cent baseline. One planned CAS outcome was designed to influence this
objective, namely an improvement in the survival rate of re-forestation from 10 per cent in 2006 to 50 per
cent in 2010. There are no data readily available to verify whether this outcome was achieved.

24. 
Three additional CAS interventions under the FY04 Disaster Hazard Mitigation project
were designed to support improved environmental sustainability. By end-2010, the relocation of
radioactive uranium tailings to safe repositories-thereby reducing the risk of exposure to radiation by
animals, humans, and plants in the area- was about 90 percent complete. Also, by end-March 2012, a
disaster hazard monitoring warning and response system was in place, with a response time of less than
one day. However, monitoring and warning systems that were vandalized in 5 of 10 vulnerable landslide
areas during the political disturbances of 2010 still need to be replaced.

50

Program Outcomes

25. 
The Completion Report rates the achievement of outcomes foreseen in the CAS and ISN
programs as moderately satisfactory. The reasons for this assessment are as follows. First, CAS support
for macroeconomic management and financial and private sector development sustained broadly positive
CDS outcomes in these two areas. However, despite attaining project-specific targets for irrigation,
pastureland management, animal health, and agro-processing, these had little influence on the CDS goals
for agricultural productivity and output which were probably unrealistic and, in any case, barely changed.
Moreover, CAS contributions in energy were only partly effective and progress towards the CDS goal of
financial viability remained slow. Second, although governance, public administration, and corruption
remain long-term, systemic challenges, CAS and especially ISN support contributed to significant, albeit
incremental progress in all three areas, especially public financial management during FY12-13. Third,
results in terms of building sustainable human and social capital were disappointing. While the CAS
provided support for important financing, institutional and service delivery reforms in both education and
health, these have had negligible impact to date on the quality of services or on MDG outcomes.
Similarly, progress towards improving the social protection system's efficiency and effectiveness remains
at best a work in progress. Finally, CAS interventions to support improved environmental sustainability
and help mitigate natural disasters were satisfactory.

IV. World Bank Group Performance

26. 
The political upheavals of April-June 2010 disrupted formal completion of the CAS which,
after a transitional year of emergency responses to the crisis, was followed by an Interim Strategy
Note (ISN) covering FY12-13. They also delayed resumption of budget support lending planned for
FY10 to counter the impact of the 2008-09 global downturn, as well as food price shocks and a weather-
related domestic energy shortage. Linked to the new government's post-crisis medium-term development
strategy (2012-14), the ISN was built around three key themes: (a) improving governance, supporting
effective public administration, and reducing corruption-identical to the second priority area of the
FYO7-10 CAS; (b) recovery, reconstruction, and sustained growth; and (c) social stabilization-
community infrastructure, employment, social services-especially in the south. 
It provided for IDA
financing averaging US$60 million for 3-4 operations annually, i.e. US$120 million over FY12-13, partly
grant, partly credit.

27. 
Against 
this background, FY07-10 commitments 
totaled US$137.7 million 
for 15
operations-almost exactly as planned in mid-2007, albeit US$32.3 million less than the country's
revised IDA allocation of US$166 million reflected 
in the Progress Report. Health, social
development and rural water supply (US$40.8 million) and agriculture and rural development (US$35.9
million) together accounted for 56 percent of the total, followed by transport and urban development
(US$40 million or 29 percent), energy (US$13 million or 9 percent), and two technical assistance projects
(US$8 million or 6 percent). In terms of thematic priorities, two pillars accounted for 90 percent of the
total: economic management for growth totaling US$81.9 million, or 60 percent, and sustainable human
and social capital totaling US$40.8 million, or 30 percent. Five commitments totaling US$21.8 million, or
16 percent, were additional financing for five ongoing operations-Agricultural Investments and Services,
Health and Social Protection, Small Towns Infrastructure, 2nd Village Investment, and Energy Emergency
Assistance. Highlights of the non-lending program included: a livestock sector review completed in
FY07; poverty, public procurement, and country fiduciary assessments completed in FY08; an education
fiduciary assessment and ROSC (accounting and auditing) in FY09; and a farm mechanization and
agricultural productivity study in FY10.

51

28. 
In FY11, the WBG's rapid response to the crisis included leadership of a Joint Economic
Assessment (JEA), the convening of an emergency meeting of development partners, and new IDA
commitments totaling US$136 million. The centerpiece was a US$70 million Emergency Recovery
operation delivered in about three months, followed by US$66 million of additional financing for four
ongoing operations-National Road Rehabilitation (US$26 million), Disaster Hazard Mitigation (US$1
million), Health and Social Protection (US$24 million), and On-Farm Irrigation (US$15 million).
Besides the JEA, non-lending activities completed during FY10-1 1 included: a judicial system diagnostic
study; banking supervision and resolution; and a poverty update.

29. 

In FY12, under the ISN, IDA commitments totaled 58.8 million for three operations. These

were: Economic Recovery Support (US$30 million); Financial Sector Development (US$13 million); and
additional financing for Bishkek-Osh Urban Infrastructure (US$15.8 million). Non-lending activities
included initiation of a programmatic public expenditure review and programmatic poverty studies, as
well as work in agricultural policy, food security, and a conflict filter study. In FY13 to date, two
operations each in education and health have been approved, two IDA-financed and the other two by trust
funds, and a first Development Policy Operation is currently planned for processing in the fourth quarter.

30. 
IFC investments over the CAS and IS periods totaled US$48 million for 18 projects. Most
were in the financial sector, but also in manufacturing as well as an equity investment in hydropower
through InfraVentures. IFC investments significantly increased over the CAS period as a result of special
initiative for Central Asia launched in FY08, which helped raise total IFC commitments in the Kyrgyz
Republic from US$10 million in 6 projects during FYO4-07 to US$35 million in 9 projects during FY08-
11. While the anticipated increase in investments to US$25-30 million during FYO9-10 was almost
achieved, the ambition under the ISN to commit between US$20-40 million annually was not. This was
because the authorities' 
intention to open infrastructure and mining to private and foreign direct
investment, as well as to improve corporate disclosure standards, did not materialize. Moreover, perceived
political risks have increased, deterring new investors. As of end-2012, IFC's committed portfolio
reached US$30 million with nine clients, 95 percent of which is disbursed.

31. 
As of December 31, 2012, IDA's Kyrgyz portfolio comprised 15 active projects totaling
US$274 million, compared to 20 projects totaling US$268 million in mid-2007 and 19 projects
totaling US$248 million in mid-2010, the start and end of the original CAS. This recent trend towards
fewer operations of larger average size reflects a conscious effort by regional and country management to
consolidate the portfolio and the WBG's implementation support and supervision resources and thus
improve efficiency and effectiveness. While portfolio quality overall, including the disbursement ratio, is
judged satisfactory, four operations are currently "problem projects" (Financial Sector Development,
Governance Technical Assistance, Rural Water Supply, and Water Management Improvement) and six are
rated only 'moderately satisfactory' for both development objectives and implementation progress. The
portfolio's average age is 5.2 years-up from 3.5 years in 2008-with seven operations older than the
average, some as a direct result of the increased use of additional financing. In this context, seven credits
have been extended by more than 1 year, some doubtless a direct result of the turmoil in 2010. Five are
due to close by end-FY13 and three more by end-CY13. One new, potentially troubling portfolio issue is
the increase in the number and length of delays experienced in signing and declaring effective IDA credit
and grant agreements, partly due to additional steps required for their ratification by parliament.

32. 
IFC contributed to improving the business environment and strengthening the financial
sector and its performance is judged moderately satisfactory. This rating is supported by the strong
results achieved by IFC investments in the financial sector, evidenced by the indicators cited earlier, and
by the expansion in investments in the private sector. Accompanying advisory services focused on
improving the investment climate, strengthening financial sector infrastructure, developing housing
finance, 
leasing, and microfinance activities, and helping bring corporate governance practices to

52

international standards. IFC's response to the 2010 crisis included contributions by its investment climate
team to the JEA, an advisory engagement with Zalkar Bank, and a proposed new housing finance project.

33. 
Performance in terms of acting upon lessons learned from the previous (FYO3-06) CAS
and, in the FY12-13 ISN, from the FYO7-10 CAS has been uneven. For example, three related
lessons-the need for greater selectivity, for a less ambitious reform agenda, and, given the country's
weak implementation capacity, for simpler project design and conditionality-were not reflected in the
FY07-10 CAS' overly complex results matrix, which contained 24 outcome indicators and over 50
milestones or intermediate indicators linked to 13 country development (CDS) objectives. Second,
although the CAS initially foreswore development policy lending as a lever for policy change or reform,
based on unsatisfactory experience during FY03-06, by FY09 budget support was being planned for FY10
in response to the global downturn. While this was delayed until FY11, due to the domestic political
crisis, and reconfigured as a single tranche Emergency Recovery Operation, the ISN includes annual
development policy operations in both FY12 and FY13. Citing the 2011 World Development Report
(WDR), the ISN justifies these operations: (a) by the need for 'coalition building' as a critical determinant
of stabilization; and (b) the importance of assured, predictable financing as a way of mitigating the risk of
renewed instability. On the other hand, the ISN frankly acknowledges that the risks posed by economic,
political, and social stress factors were not adequately appreciated in FY09-10 and, in line with the 2011
World Development Report (WDR) on fragility and conflict, advocates deepened political economy and
social stress analysis, closer examination of institutional deficits, and clearer definition of 'inclusive'
strategies. 
In addition, both the CAS and especially the ISN recognized the need to engage with and
support non-government stakeholders as potential champions for reforms even where significant vested
interests remain.

CAS Design and Relevance

34. 
Overall, the design and content of the CAS, the related JCSS, and the ISN were highly
relevant and closely aligned with the country's development strategy. However, links between broad-
based CDS goals and CAS and/or JCSS-specific outcomes were often inconsistent, indirect, or unclear.
Moreover, despite the alignment and coordination imperatives of the CAS and related JCSS-implying
not only a common set of objectives but also a common accountability or results framework-the two
documents included separate results frameworks. In addition, CAS and corresponding JCSS intermediate
and outcome indicators were different in some areas, although their broad programmatic objectives were
broadly consistent. With these caveats, planned outcomes were by and large realistic, with many based
on already agreed project-specific results that were relatively undemanding and clearly intended to ensure
achievement. Annex 1 summarizes CAS outcomes, the lending and other activities that contributed to or
influenced them, and lessons and recommendations as evaluated by the country team.

35. 
Design of new projects/programs. New operations took into account lessons learned from
preceding ICRs, especially institutional development experience. Moreover, the potential for more
programmatic approaches to (e.g.) future education activities, as well as health and social protection
(ongoing), 
is under consideration. At the same time, the Bank's project processing cycle and the
government's internal procedures, especially the Kyrgyz legislature's process for approving externally-
financed operations, are not well aligned, leading to long delays in signing, effectiveness, and initial
implementation.

36. 
Relevance, quality, and dissemination of knowledge-based activities. Given the satisfactory
outcome of analytical and advisory services and technical assistance under the first and second (growth
and governance) pillars, knowledge-based activities were evidently highly relevant, of appropriate
quality, timely, and driven by client demand. The JEA was a particularly good and visible example of
these characteristics.

53

37. 
Responsiveness to changing country circumstances, priorities and demands. The Bank's
response to the sudden domestic political crisis in mid-2010, when the country at times appeared to be on
the brink of civil war, was extremely quick and very effective. Within barely 3 months, it re-oriented its
own program, mobilized US$56 million of incremental IDA resources, and delivered two emergency
operations totaling US$80 million in September 2010. At the same time, it took the lead in assessing the
country's post-crisis external financing requirements, together with six other development partners, and
helped organize an international conference in July 2010 where development partners pledged about
US$1.1 billion over a 30-month period, July 2010-December 2012. The JEA also provided a strategic
framework for external support during 2010-12.

38. 
Effectiveness of development partner assistance. According to a mid-2010 independent review
commissioned by the UK Department for International Development (DfID), the JCSS' achievements
were modest but significant 25. They included: a shared analysis of the country's context, problems and
prospects; a results matrix that helped align partners' assistance with the CDS; and a consultative process
that helped boost sectoral coordination, which remained largely ad hoc, however. On the other hand, the
environment for JCSS implementation had been difficult, with low levels of country ownership and
leadership, and progress towards improving aid effectiveness in line with the Paris Declaration-its
original impetus and inspiration-was at best mixed. Moreover, some partners, including the WBG, took
the view that the JCSS' main benefits emerged from the preparation process and that it had broadly
succeeded in improving coordination. Meanwhile, coordination and management of external aid by and
within the government remains weak, especially since the changes in 2010-11. 
In the circumstances, the
principal development partners concerned have decided to move on to a looser, less binding, and more
inclusive Joint Statement of Partnership between the Kyrgyz Republic and Development Partners, which
was signed towards end-2012. This document outlines agreed principles and values for implementation of
the authorities' new National Sustainable Development Strategy, 2013-17.

39. 
Effectiveness of risk mitigation. The CAS correctly identified the main risks to program
implementation-renewed political instability, inadequate commitment to reform, weak institutions and
operational capacity, and exogenous shocks-of which two materialized in FYO9-10: the global economic
downturn of 2008-09; and the violent overthrow of the government in 2010. While action to mitigate the
impact of the former was initiated promptly in early 2010, i.e. the resumption of budget support lending,
the subsequent political turmoil delayed its implementation, which was then reconfigured and merged
with the much larger JEA-sponsored emergency and economic recovery program to 
address the
aftermath of the political crisis.

WBG Performance

40. 
Overall, the Completion Report rates the WBG's performance in terms of CAS, JCSS, and
ISN program implementation as satisfactory. 
In particular, its rapid response during and since the
mid-2010 crisis must be considered highly satisfactory. Relatively strong performing areas were: macro-
management, financial and private sector development, and governance, 
including public finance
management. Relatively weak performing areas included energy, and education, health, and social
protection. Development partner coordination was by and large satisfactory, although there remains room
for improvement in addressing the broader global aid effectiveness agenda.

25 Kyrgyz Republic Joint Country Support Strategy: Internal Review and Perceptions Study, Agulhas, September 29, 2010.

54

V. 

Key Lessons and Suggestions

41. 
The CAS and related JCSS clearly underestimated the risks posed by systemic stress
factors, such as corruption and misappropriation of public assets, as well as social tensions,
especially in the south of the country. Reflecting the analysis and recommendations of the 2011 WDR
on fragility and conflict, the ISN suggested that future country partnership strategies be informed by
deepened political economy and social stress analysis, by closer examination of institutional deficits, and
by the design of more 'inclusive' strategies. In addition, the ISN made the following suggestions, which
remain valid:

* Responses to rapidly changing political and social circumstances need to be flexible: as risks-
whether economic political, or social-increase, in-depth analysis of the operating environment and
implications for the WBG is critical;
* CAS programs need to be a balance of budget support operations in support of basic policy reforms
and investment projects designed to alleviate poverty and promote institutional change;
* Development policy operations 
(DPOs) can be an important convening and coordinating
instrument, especially in countries where political consensus on reforms may be fragile;
* CAS programs also need a sharper strategic focus, leading to better selectivity, fewer projects of
larger average size, and reduced staff supervision costs; and
* Effective partnerships enhance the prospects for overall success-the JCSS provided a useful
platform-but agreement on assistance objectives, support areas, and instruments needs to be
deepened.

42. 
Other more detailed 
lessons and suggestions emerging 
from experience during
implementation of the CAS and ISN to date include the following. First, regarding approach: the
stress factors that triggered the 2010 crisis need to be taken explicitly into account in the design of future
CPSs; a flexible, more empathetic approach to the country's political economy, as well as to the
government's coherence, capacity, and ability to engage the WBG, would help ensure the right
knowledge products as well as more effective support for the development agenda; and programs work
best when focused on core policy actions linked to government priorities and timetables and when
supported by analytical work. Second, regarding process: with high project preparation costs due to weak
government capacity unlikely to decline in the immediate future, more attention is needed to realistic
processing timetables and projects' readiness for implementation; with improved political and policy
stability, the WBG needs to engage at the highest levels of government regularly, especially regarding
policy coordination and reform implementation; and a more structured government approach to policy
design and coordinated, accountable implementation of reforms is urgently required. Third, regarding
implementation: with credit and grant effectiveness and initial implementation recently hampered by
procedures that require three rounds of legislative approval, this needs to be factored into WBG
programming; and strategies and projects that require inter-ministerial/agency effort and/or coordination,
though often critically important, are at particular risk for major delay or failure.

Attachments:

Table 1: Summary of CAS Program Self-Evaluation

Table 2: Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries

Table 3: Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries

55

TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION 2 6

ANNEX 2.1.

PRIORITY AREA 1: PROMOTING ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT CONSISTENT WITH STRONG AND SUSTAINED PRO-POOR GROWTH (14)

CAS Outcomes and Outcome 
Indicators 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
that contributed to Outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for new CAS

Enhanced efficiency of public 
administration, as measured by 
CPIA indicator 15: 
Baseline: 2.5 (2006) 
Target: 3.0 (2010) 

Achieved-Rated 3 in 2010 & 2011 on all three 
dimensions, i.e. core administration (3); quality of 
policy implementation & regulatory management (3); 
and coordination in public sector human resource mgt. 
regime (3). 

* Capacity Building for Economic
Management
* Programmatic CEM and PER
* Comprehensive poverty assessment
* Corruption diagnostic (WBI)

Ongoing 

Cf above

Cf above

Cf above

Cf above

Ongoing 

Benchmarks for public finance 
mgt. reform agreed with
development partners
Closer link between annual 
budgets and CDS objectives, as
measured by PEFA indicator
Pl-12:
Baseline: D+ (2006)
Target: B+ (2010)
Implementation of measures to Ongoing 
support growth agreed between
government and private sector
Better statistical capacity for 
monitoring and evaluation of 
CDS 

Partly achieved-simplified CDS monitoring and 
evaluation system up in Ministry of Economic
Development & Trade, with technical assistance from
ADB. However, post-2010 conflict sustainability
unclear.

26 Data and assessments as of mid-FY10, before April-June 2010 political crisis which affected availability and reliability of information.

56

CAS Outcomes and Outcome 
Indicators 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

* Increase in number and value Achieved-as of end-September 2011, value of 
of transactions processed by 
transactions processed by national payments system 
totaled over 400 million soms, twice the original 2008 
national payments system: 
Baseline: 109,000 (2005) 
target. Meanwhile, estimated number of bank accounts 
Target: 
180,000 (2008) 
totaled over 750,000 or 50% higher than the revised 
* Increase in total number of 
target of 500,000 for 2010. Meanwhile, as of end- 
bank accounts: 
March 2011, number of government employees 
Baseline: 200,000 (2005) 
receiving salaries by direct deposit to their commercial

Target: 400,000 (2008) 

bank accounts had increased to about 64,000.

Lessons and Suggestions for new CAS

Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
that contributed to Outcome

e Payments and Banking System
Modernization Project (FY04)
e FSAP Follow-up on Access to Finance
e IF C investments and advisory services
in financial sector and legal and
regulatory framework for leasing and
housing finance

Partly achieved-according to Doing Business 2012, 
the number of documents required to import and export 
had decreased to 9 and 8 respectively-in line with the 
target. However, the 72 days and 63 days needed to 
import and export respectively, unchanged from 2011, 
remained well below the target. 

RTBET

Programmatic CEM
Judicial Reform Study
IFC advisory services on inspections,
licensing, permits, as well as corporate
governance

" Harmonization of regulat- 
ions with international 
standards 
" Reduced costs of import & 
export transactions 
Baseline: 18 docs and 127 
days (2006)
Target: 8 docs and 40 days

(2010)

Elimination of inspections
not required by new law

Improved property rights and 
landowners' ability to borrow, 
as measured by annual number 
of registered landreal estate 
sales, leases, and mortgages: 
Baseline: 88,000 (2006) 
Target: 120,000 (2010) 

Achieved-by mid-2012, 2.82 million land and real 
estate units had been registered in the Kyrgyz Land 
Information System (compared to the 2007 baseline of
2.4 million), with the numbers of registered mortgage
transactions and registered sales respectively 30% and
higher than the 2007 baseline, average transaction
time reduced to 1.1 from 4 days in 2007.

12 

Improved sustainability of 
irrigation, as measured by 
annual irrigation service fee 

collection rates: 

Baseline: 80h 
(2006) 
Target: 
95%t(2010) 

Partly achieved-while 85 Water Users' Associations 
(WUAs), or 270 of 320 WUAs nationwide, have 
collection rates of 9 0o 
or more, a study of 4 WUAS

indicated that fees cover only 1/4-1/3 of amount needed

to maintain system properly and that irrigation water
was not being used effectively, due to inadequate
measuring tools and farmers' ignorance of crops' water
requirements.

M 

iLand and Real Estate Registration
Project

On-farm Irrigation Projects
Water Mgt. Improvement Project

57

CAS Outcomes and Outcome 
Indicators 

Improved efficiency of 
pastureland use, measured by 
% of land transferred to local 
pasture users' associations: 
Baseline: 25% (2006) 
Target: 40% (2010) 

Improved animal health, as 
measured by 50% reduction in 
incidence of brucellosis in 
humans: 
Baseline: 75-150 
Target: 
35-75 

Increase in share of agricult- 
ural output processed: 
Baseline: 12% (2005)
Target: 
17% (2010)
Maintenance of 95% of 
regional/national roads prior- 
itized by end-2010 using 
economic criteria

Increased energy efficiency, 

measured by: reduced system 
losses; and by increased 
collections 2006-10: 
Baseline: 40% & 58% 
Target: 14% &94% 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Achieved-in 2008, new Pasture Law delegated 
responsibility for pasture management to communities. 
By 2011, 245 Pasture Users' Unions, or 54% of 454 
unions nationwide, were operational and about 580 
micro-projects had been implemented. 

Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
that contributed to Outcome

* Agriculture Support Services Project 
* Agricultural Investments and Services 
Project 

Achieved-initial results of nationwide rollout of 
brucellosis control program indicate >50% reduction in 
human cases in targeted communities. Program 
expanded to include 5 additional diseases including 3 
zoonoses (rabies, anthrax, and echinococcosis) 

* Agricultural Investments and 
Services Project 
* Avian Flu Project 
* Central Asia One Health Project 

Lessons and Suggestions for new CAS

* Sustainability of investments in public
goods such as pastureland requires
basic legal and institutional reform and
capacity building, including
commitment to CDD and long term
investment A nationwide approach is
rational
* Need for systemic approach to animal
health issues and coordination and
cooperation with Ministry of Health.
* Given potential trans-boundary impact
of disease outbreaks restricting trade,
need for better regional coordination
and cooperation.

Partly achieved-tbc 

No specific data available 

* Agribusiness & Marketing Project
* IFC advisory services and investments

* National Road Rehabilitation Project
* Village Investment Project
* Regional Trade/Transport Study

Partly achieved-at end-2007, system losses remained 

e Power & District Heating Project 

e Timing and sequencing of ambitious

about 400, unchanged from baseline, although pilot 
project demonstrated significant potential for reduced 
commercial losses through metering. Meanwhile, the 

cash collections to billing ratio improved to 79% 

(compared to industry norm of 95-980 o). 

e Heat Strategy Study 
e CAEWADP studies 
e Policy dialogue 

________________ 

sector reforms need to be geared to
overall macroeconomic and political
realities

e Bank and IMF conditionality needs to

be coordinated

PRIORITY AREA 2: IMPROVING GOVERNANCE, EFFECTIVE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, AND REDUCING CORRUPTION (5)

Predictability in availability of 
as measured by PEFA 
indicator P1ot-r16: 
Baseline: D (2006) 
Target: B (2010)

Partly achieved- 
aonds, 

e nSAC 

b 

and TAC
Economic Mgt. TA
* Programmatic PER
* Public expenditure tracking

58

CAS Outcomes and Outcome 
Indicators 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
that contributed to Outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for new CAS

Improved quality & timeliness of Achieved 
annual financial statements, as
measured by PEFA indicator P1 -
25:
Baseline: C 
(2006)
Target: B+ (2010)
Improved controls in budget 
execution, as measured by PEFA
indicator P 1-20
Baseline: D (2006)
Target: C+ (2010)
More transparent legal and 
regulatory framework for mining 
sector

Partly Achieved 

Partly Achieved-work in progress 

Improved governance and 
transparency in mining (annual 
publication of EITI data) 

Achieved-number of reporting companies increased 
from 26 in 2008 to 57 in 2012, accounting for almost
95% of extractive industry revenues. Kyrgyzstan
achieved full EITI Compliance status on March 1, 2011

PRIORITY AREA 3: BUILDING SUSTAINABLE HUMAN AND SOCIAL CAPITAL (8)
Enhanced access to primary 
Partly achieved-by end-201 1, average number of visits 
health care, as measured by 
to a family doctor had increased to 2.4 per person
number of visits to family doctor 
annually, which is more than 2006 baseline but short of
per person: 
the 2010 target.
Baseline: 2.2 (2006)
Target: 3.0 (2010)
Adequate financing of basic 
health care, as measured by its 
share of state budget: 
Baseline: 10.4%o (2006) 
Target: 
13.0% (2010) 

Partly achieved-according to Health SWAp, 2010 
target was achieved, although, according to WDI, health 
accounted for only 11%. Public spending on health 
overall was unchanged at 3% of GDP through 2010 
(WDI). Primary health care accounted for 38% of public
expenditure on health, up from 29% in 2005.

Cf above

Cf above

* TA for mining code revision
IFC investments

* 

* TA for EITI implementation

* Health SWAp

Public Expenditure Tracking
Survey
User surveys to track access to
health services (planned)

59

CAS Outcomes and Outcome 
Indicators 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Adequate resources for total and Achieved-public expenditure on education overall 
secondary education, as 
increased to 6.4% of GDP in 2007, declined to 5.9% in 
measured by public expenditure 
2008, increased again to 6.3% in 2009 and was 6% in 
as % of GDP: 
2010-the last year for which data are available. 
Baseline: 4.4% & 2.2% (2005) 
Target: 6.0% & 3.5% (2010) 

Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
that contributed to Outcome

e Rural Education Project
e Education for All Fast Track
Initiative Catalyctic Fund Grant
e Fiduciary Assessment of education

spending

* Programmatic Public Expenditure

Lessons and Suggestions for new CAS

Improved quality of education,
as measured by PISA scores 
Baseline: n.a. (2006). 
Target: thd (2009) 

Improved targeting of social 
benefits, as measured by 00 of 
extreme poor receiving 
guaranteed minimum income
benefit (UMB)
Baseline: 302( (2006)
Target: 50% (2010)

Partly achieved-although Kyrgyzstan's PISA scores in
2009 averaging 325 (reading-314, science-331,
math-330) were slightly better than the 2006 PISA
baseline averaging 306 (reading-285, science-3 1 ,
math-322), they were the worst in Europe and Central

Asia and significantly lower even than Kazakhstan's

which averaged 398.

No information available 

* Social Protection Strategy
u PPER
Economic Management TA

Improved fiscal sustainability of No information available 

Cfi above

pension system

Increased access to clean, 

potable water in rural areas, as 
measured by 0 of rural 

population: 

Baseline (2006)-50% 
Target (2010)-75% 

Not achieved-owing to lack of data, it is difficult to 

assess access to water and its quality in rural areas. In 
2008, it was estimated that about 66 percent of the rural 

population had access to clean, potable water.

Meanwhile, the pace at which rural water supply schemes
are being rehabilitated does not keep up with their
deterioration and, until recently, the government has not
given priority to these services.

e Rural Water Supply & Sanitation

Projects
* Village Investment Project

60

Lessons and Suggestions for new CAS

CAS Outcomes and Outcome 
Indicators 

More efficient water utilities, as 
measured by number of 
financially viable water utilities: 
Baseline: 0 (2006) 
Target: 12 (2010) 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Partly achieved-while the financial viability of utilities 
and municipalities remains weak, operational efficiency 
and energy consumption improved substantially. 
Specifically, 3/4 of 23 municipalities/utilities under the 
Small Towns Infrastructure & Capacity Building Project 
achieved or exceeded energy consumption targets and 
55% improved or achieved their operational efficiency 
targets. This was achieved through installation of new
technologies and high efficiency pumps, by strengthened
local government and utility management capacity, and

by significantly improved bill collections.

Lending and Non-Lending Activities 
that contributed to Outcome

e Small Towns Infrastructure &
Capacity Building Project (STICBP)
e Bishkek & Osh Urban Infrastructure
e PPER
* TA to improve local government
financial management and service
delivery

PRIORITY AREA 4: ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY AND NATURAL RESOURCES MANACEMENT(4)

Improved re-forestation 
activities, as measured by re- 
forestation survival rate: 

Baseline: 1000 
(2006)
Target: 
50% (2010)

No information available 

Reduced exposure to radiation 
b 
Substantially achieved-by end-2010, relocation of 
from uranium tailings by 
radioactive uranium tailings to safe repositories was 
animals, humans, and plants; 
about 90M complete. Also, by end March 2012, disaster
f Increased effectiveness of 
hazard monitoring warning and response system was in
disaster hazard monitoring 
place, with response time of less than 1 day. However,
warning and response system. monitoring and warning systems in 5 of 10 vulnerable
" Real-time landslide 
landslide areas vandalized during 2010 political
monitoring and effective 
disturbances need to be replaced.
warning system

* Bio-diversity & Natural Resources
Mgt. Project
* TA carbon finance development

Disaster Hazard Mitigation Project
(FY04)

61

TABLE 2: PLANNED LENDING AND ACTUAL DELIVERIES (FYO7-13)
CAS PLANS (05/23/07) 
STATUS (as of 06/30/10)

ANNEX 2.2.

2007 

Reducing Technical Barriers to Enter'ship & Trade 
2nd Village Investment Project 
2nd On-farm Irrigation 

Subtotal: 

Statistical Capacity Building 
Bishkek & Osh Urban Infrastructure 
2008 Agricultural Investments and Services 

Capacity Building Economic Management 

IDA 
5.0 Approved 07/13/06 (Gr. H2470) 
15.0 Approved 08/03/06 (Gr. H2500) 
16.0 Approved 06/19/07 (Gr. H3120) 
36.0 
1.0 Dropped
15.0 Approved 03/18/08 (Gr. H3580) 
10.0 Approved 04/29/08 (Gr. H3710 ) 
Approved 06/13/08 (Gr. H3900)-Add. Financing 
Approved 06/12/08 (Gr. 3910)-Add. Fin. Health & 
Social Protection 
4.0 Approved 07/01/08 (Gr. H3880)

Subtotal: 

Subtotal: 

30.0 

Subtotal: 

66.0 

IDA
5.0
15.0
16.0
36.0

12.0
9.0
4.0
6.0
3.0

34.0

70.0

5.9
11.0
1.8
10.0
28.7
8.0
25.0
2.0

35.0
63.7
133.7

62

Total FYO7-08: 
CAS PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (10/01/09) 
2nd Land & Real Estate Registration 08 
Energy Emergency Assistance 08 
2009 Add Fin.-Small Towns Infra. & Capacity Building 
2nd Rural Water Supply & Sanitation 

Subtotal: 

Add. Fin.-2nd Village Investment 09 
Nat'l Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana) 09 
2010 Add. Fin. Energy Emergency Assistance 
Education SWAp 
Programmatic Lending Operation 

Subtotal: 
Total FYO9-10: 
TOTAL FY 07-10: 

Total FYO7-08: 
STATUS (as of 06/30/10)
6.0 Approved 07/15/08 (Gr. H3800) 
11.0 Approved 11/25/08 (Gr. H4290) 
4.0 Approved 04/02/09 (Gr. H4550) 
10.0 Approved 04/21/09 (Gr. H4620) 
31.0 
7.0 Approved 11/03/09 (Gr. H5190) 
20.0 Approved 11/03/09 (Gr. H5200) 
2.0 Approved 11/19/09 (Gr. H5340) 
15.0 Forwarded to FY13
10.0 Dropped
54.0 
85.0 
121.0 

Subtotal: 
Total FYO9-10: 
TOTAL FY 07-10: 

Subtotal: 

2011 

ISN PLANS (06/16/11) 
Economic Recovery Support 
Financial Sector Development 
2012 Add Fin-Bishkek-Osh Urban Infrastructure 

Subtotal: 

2 nd Village Investment 
Sector Support for Education Reform 
2 nd Health & Social Protection 
Development Policy Operation-I (DPO-1) 

2013 

Sub-total 
Total FY12-13: 

Emergency Recovery [09/30/10] 
Add. Fin-National Road Rehabilitation [06/28/11] 
Add. Fin-Disaster Hazard Mitigation [06/09/11] 
Add. Fin-Health & Social Protection [06/09/11] 
Add. Fin-2nd On-farm Irrigation [06/28/11] 
Subtotal FY11: 

STATUS (as of 05/03/13)
30.0 Approved 08/02/11 
13.0 Approved 03/08/12 
15.8 Approved 01/12/12 
58.8 
4.2 Approved 12/20/12 
16.5 Approved 03/05/13 
16.5 Approved 05/03/13 
30.0 Negotiations pending
67.2 
126.0 

Subtotal: 

Sub-total 
Total FYO9-10: 

70.0
26.0
1.0
24.0
15.0
136.0

30.0
16.0
15.8
58.8
4.2
16.5
16.5

37.2
96.0

63

ANNEX 2.3.

TABLE 3: PLANNED NON-LENDING SERVICES AND ACTUAL DELIVERIES (FYO7-10)
CAS PLANS (05/23/07) 
STATUS (06/30/10)
Poverty Assessment Update 
Cf 2008 below
Country Procurement Assessment(CPAR) and Country Reports 42391-KG-Public Procurement System Assessment-and 42392-
Fiduciary Assessment (CFA) Update 
Country Fiduciary Assessment Update-issued 11/10/07
Financial Sector Assessment-Update 
Report 4116-KG-Joint 
IMF/WB Financial Sector Assessment-issued
09/01/07

2007 

Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) follow-up 
Poverty Assessment 

2008 

Report 46533-ROSC: Accounting and Auditing- 
issued 11/10/08
Report 40864-KG-Poverty Assessment (2 Volumes)-issued 10/19/07

2009 

2010- 
2013 

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (10/01/2009) 
Heating Strategy 
Fiduciary Assessment Education 

Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)

Corporate Governance ROSC

Judicial System Diagnostic 

STATUS (as of 06/30/2011)

Completed
Report 46652-Education Sector Fiduciary Capacity-issued 09/08
Report 53536-Farm Mechanization & Agricultural Productivity-issued

12/01/09

Report 61906-Judicial System Diagnostic-issued 06/08/11

Banking Supervision and Resolution 
Conflict Filter 
Programmatic Poverty Studies 

Programmatic Public Expenditure Review 

Completed
Completed
Ongoing

Ongoing

64

Planned IDA Lending, FY14-17 (by Area of Engagement and Fiscal Year)
[TOTAL: US$239 million-IDA17: US$172 million]

ANNEX 3

(1) BY AREA OF ENGAGEMENT

PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION & PUBLIC SERVICES
Development Policy Operations (FY14 (2), FY15, FY16, FY17) 
Judiciary Reform 

BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT/INVESTMENT CLIMATE
Regional Animal Health Control-Kyrgyz contribution 

NATURAL RESOURCES/PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation-2 Additional Financing 
Pasture Management 
Electricity Supply Accountability & Reliability Improvement 
Central Asia Road Links-Kyrgyz contribution 
CASA-1000 (regional)-Kyrgyz contribution 
Forestry & Climate Change Management 
3rd Village Investment 
Social Protection 
Urban Planning & Development 

Total (16 operations, including 3 regional): 

(2) BY FISCAL YEAR 

FY14 (4)

Development Policy Operation-I 
Development Policy Operation-2 
Central Asia Road Links-Kyrgyz Republic 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation-2 Additional Financing 

FY15 (5)
Development Policy Operation 
Regional Animal Health Control-Kyrgyz contribution 
Pasture Management 
Electricity Supply Accountability & Reliability Improvement 
CASA-1000-Kyrgyz contribution 

FY16 (3)
Development Policy Operation 
Forestry & Climate Change Management 
3 rd Village Investment 

FY17 (4)
Development Policy Operation 
Judiciary Reform 
Social Protection 
Urban Planning & Development 

IDA

122.0
12.0
134.0

5.0

2.0
12.0
12.0
15.0
16.0
12.0
12.0
7.0
12.0
100.0

239.0

IDA

25.0
25.0
15.0
2.0
67.0

24.0
5.0
12.0
12.0
16.0
69.0

24.0
12.0
12.0
48.0

24.0
12.0
7.0
12.0
55.0

Total FY14-17 (16 operations, including 3 regional): 

239.0

65

ANNEX 4

Kyrgyz Republic-Development Partner Coordination

Overview

1. 
In 2011, according to OECD-DAC data, net overseas development assistance (ODA) to the
Kyrgyz Republic totaled about US$523 million, compared to US$380 million in 2010 and US$313
million in 2009. This significant increase reflected special assistance pledged at a July 2010 meeting of
development partners in Bishkek to finance the country's emergency post-conflict needs for budget
support, humanitarian aid, and infrastructure repair and rehabilitation. In 2011, the bilateral share of gross
ODA was 45 percent, down from 56 percent and 57 percent in 2010 and 2009 respectively. Net ODA as a
share of GNI increased from 7 percent in 2009 to 9.3 percent in 2011. ADB, EU, IDA, IMF, and IsDB
were the top five multilateral contributors during 2010-11 and Germany, Japan, Switzerland, Turkey, and
United States, the leading bilateral donors. Program assistance, health and population, and humanitarian
aid were the three largest components of bilateral aid during 2010-11. Besides Russia, other non-OECD
countries such as China, India, and Iran have also becomes increasingly important sources of official aid
and investment.

Development Partner Coordination

2. 
All the main bilateral aid agencies are represented in Bishkek, as are the principal multilateral
institutions-ADB, EBRD, EDB, EU, IMF, IsDB, and the United Nations Specialized Agencies. A
Development Partners' Coordination Council (DPCC), established in 2001, meets monthly to coordinate
activities and policy dialogue with the Kyrgyz authorities.

3. 
During the February 2003 Rome Conference on Harmonization, the Kyrgyz Republic was
selected as one of several pilot countries. Since then, key development partners have learned to better
coordinate and harmonize procurement procedures, oversee financial management and monitoring, share
project implementation units, and conduct joint country portfolio reviews. For example, IDA and ADB
have jointly assessed the country's public procurement system. In health, five agencies-DfID, KfW,
SDC, SECO, as well as IDA-support a large SWAp operation, and several are involved in coordinated
activities supporting governance, public sector management, and public financial management. The
policy framework for IDA-financed DPOs is coordinated with similar support provided by ADB, EU and
the IMF. Finally, as part of a broader regional initiative to enhance Bank Group collaboration in Central
Asia, IDA and IFC recently developed a joint business plan for all five countries, including the Kyrgyz
Republic.

4. 
From 2007-10, six development partners including IDA programmed their activities within the
framework of a Joint Country Support Strategy (JCSS)-an initiative designed to advance the goals of the
2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. While a mid-2010 independent review commissioned by
one of the partners confirmed that the JCSS' achievements were significant-they included a shared
analysis of the country's context, problems and prospects, a results matrix that helped align partners'
assistance with the country's development strategy, and a consultative process that helped boost sectoral
coordination-progress towards improving aid effectiveness and efficiency was mixed. On the other
hand, some partners, including IDA, took the view that the main benefits emerged during its extended
preparation, which had itself broadly succeeded 
in improving coordination. In the circumstances,
development partners decided to pursue coordination and harmonization goals through a looser, less
binding, and more 
inclusive Joint Statement of Partnership between the Kyrgyz Republic and

66

Development Partners that outlines agreed principles and values for implementation of the country's
current medium-term development program. This document was signed by 10 development partners and
the Kyrgyz government in October, 2012.

Summary of Key Development Partner Activities

5. 
ADB is one of the Kyrgyz Republic's major development partners and all its assistance is from its
concessional Asian Development Fund (ADF). As of 30 September 2012, ADB had committed 34 loans
totaling US$816.2 million and 16 grants (15 ADF and one GEF) worth US$299.1 million. ADB is the
largest external funder in education and transport. Its active portfolio of 13 projects totaling US$480.9
million comprises nine ADF loans totaling US$220.2 million and 11 ADF grants totaling US$260.7
million. ADB has also provided 79 technical assistance projects amounting to US$44.15 million. A strong
advocate of regional economic cooperation, the Kyrgyz Republic is an active participant in the Central
Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) Program. ADB cooperates extensively with civil society
organizations to strengthen the effectiveness, quality, and sustainability of the services it provides.

6. 
EBRD has been active in the Kyrgyz Republic since 1995 and as of end-October 2012, had
signed 88 projects with a net cumulative business volume of 415 million. Its annual business volume has
steadily increased in recent years, rising from 12 million in 2008 to 86 million in 2010 and 66 million
in 2011. EBRD's current private sector portfolio accounts for 77 percent of the total, well above the
Bank's 60 percent mandated ratio. In September 2011, EBRD's Board approved a new country strategy,
whose key priorities are supporting local private enterprises, in particular micro, small, and medium sized
enterprises 
(MSMEs), alongside support 
to strengthen 
the financial sector and develop critical
infrastructure.

7. 
United Nations (UN) support to the Kyrgyz Republic, under the overarching goal of peace and
stability towards sustainable development, focuses on three inter-related areas: peace and cohesion,
effective democratic governance and human rights; social inclusion and equity; and inclusive and
sustainable job-rich growth for poverty reduction. The resources expected to be mobilized for this five-
year program, 2012-16, total about US$186 million, of which US$51 million or about 27 percent is
allocated for peace and cohesion, US$72 million or 39 percent on social inclusion and equity, and US$63
million or 34 percent on inclusive and sustainable growth.

8. 
European Union (EU) support to the Kyrgyz Republic totals 156.2 million or around US$200
million (excluding humanitarian aid) during 2007-13. It focuses on agriculture and rural development,
conflict mitigation and good governance, education, and social protection. Education and social protection
account for about 45 percent of the total (in the form of budget support), agriculture and rural
development for about 17 percent, and governance almost 15 percent. In addition, the EU committed
242 million or around US$315 million in grant aid for regional 
integration, development and
stabilization in Central Asia during the same five year period.

9. 
The International Money Fund (IMF) approved a three year US$102.3 million Extended Credit
Facility (ECF) to the Kyrgyz Republic In June 2011. The ECF supports the authorities' efforts to restore
and maintain macroeconomic stability, rebuild policy buffers, promote inclusive growth in a low-inflation
environment, achieve medium-term fiscal consolidation, address weaknesses in the financial sector,
bolster reserves, and catalyze critical donor support. The IMF, together with other development partners,
is also providing technical assistance in the areas of public financial management, tax policy and
administration, and financial sector issues.

The matrix attached 
to this Annex 
coordination by sector or theme.

indicates 

the current arrangements for development partner

67

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC-Development Partner Coordination by Sector/Theme

ANNEX 4.1.

Chair/Focal Point 

Development Partner

Sector/Thematic Group 
Social Development
Education
* 
International 
Council 
in 
(IACE) 
* Global 
Partnership 
Education (GPE) 
* Working Group 

Advisory Chair: Vice Prime Minister 
Education Co-Chair: UNICEF 
Chair: Deputy Minister of Education 
for Chair: EU, UNICEF 

ADB, AKDN, EU, GIZ, SCUK, SFK, UCA, UN
(UNESCO), USAID, and WB
ADB, AKDN, EU, SCUK, SFK, UN 
UNICEF), USAID, WB, PIUs
ADB, AKDN, EU Delegation, GIZ, JICA, SCUK, SFK,
TIRI, UCA, UN (UNESCO), USAID, WB

(UNESCO,

Health
* Health SWAp-Joint Annual
Reviews of KG Health 
Strategy 
* Semi annual Development
Partners meetings 
* Monthly Joint Financiers 
meetings
* Country Multi-sectoral
Coordinating Committee
(CMCC)
Social Protection 

Private/Financial Sector
Business Environment
* 
Investment Council 

* Microfinance/ Financial 
Sector Development 
Energy
* Working group 
* Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative 

Chair: Minister of Health 
Co-chairs: WB Task Team Leader 

AKDN, DFID, GIZ, JICA, KfW, Swiss Embassy, UN
(UNAIDS, UNFPA, UNICEF, WHO),WB

Chair: Minister of Health
Co-Chair: Head of CCM Secretariat, 

AKDN, DFID, UN (UNRC, UNAIDS), WB

Co-chairs: EU and UNICEF 

AKDN, EU Delegation, GIZ, HelpAge, JICA, KfW,
SCO, UN (UNICEF), WB

Chair: EBRD 

Chair: KfW 

Co-chairs: ADB and USAID 
EITI Secretariat 

ADB, EU, GIZ, JICA, OSCE, Swiss Embassy, USAID,
WB
AKDN, EBRD, EDB, GIZ, KfW, Swiss Embassy,
USAID, WB

ADB, EBRD, EDB, EU, JICA, KfW, OSCE, Swiss
Embassy, UN (UNDP), USAID, WB
EBRD, SFK, WB, NGOs

68

Sector/Thematic Group 
Agriculture

Agriculture, Food Security and
Rural Development
Working Group 

Environment
Disaster Preparedness and Risk 
Reduction 
Governance

Public Finance Management 
Reconciliation, Conflict 
Prevention and Peace-building 
(RECAP) 

Rule of Law 
Infrastructure
Water Supply 
Transport 

DFID, EU Delegation, SCO 
Co-chairs: EU, OSCE, UN RCCA 

Youth 

Chair: Ministry of Youth 

Shelter, Reconstruction/ Urban 
Development 

Co-chairs: OSCE, UNDP and WB 

Civil Society 

Co- chairs: OSCE and USAID 

Local Self Government 

Swiss Embassy, UNDP 

Co-Chairs: OHCHR, USAID 

Chair/Focal Point 

Development Partner

Co-chairs: FAO and WFP 

AKDN, CACILM, EU, FAO, GIZ, JICA, Swiss Embassy,
UN (FAO, UNDP, UNIDO), USAID, WB,

Chair: UN 

AKDN, EU, GIZ, JICA, OSCE, Swiss Embassy, UN
(UNDP, UNHCR, OHCHR, UNFPA), WB

ADB, BE, EU Delegation, IMF, Swiss Embassy, WB
AKDN, DFID, EU Delegation, EFCA, FAO, JICA,
OHCHR, OSCE, Swiss Embassy, UNDP, UNHCR,
USAID
AKDN, EU, Germany, GIZ, JICA, OSCE, Swiss
Embassy, SKF, UN (UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA,
UNESCO), USAID, WB
AKDN, DFID, EDB, EU, FMCC, German Embassy,
ICRC, JICA, KfW, Swiss Embassy, UNHCR, USAID,
WB,
AKDN, EU Delegation, OSCE, SFK, Swiss Embassy, UN
(UNDP, UNIFEM), WB
AKDN, EU Delegation, OSCE, Swiss Embassy, SFK, UN
(UNDP, UNIFEM), WB
GIZ, OHCHR, USAID, WB

Co-Chairs: UNICEF, WB 
Co-Chairs: ADB, EDB, JICA 

ADB, AKDN, EBRD, EDB, JICA, Swiss Embassy, WB
ADB, EDB, EBRD, JICA

69

Kyrgyz Republic-Consultations with Civil Society

ANNEX 5

A. 

FY13 Client Survey

27

Background

1. 
During February-March 2013, a client survey of the Bank's activities in the Kyrgyz Republic was
undertaken-the first since FY06. Its objectives were threefold: (a) to better understand how the Bank's
stakeholders in the Kyrgyz Republic perceive its role and performance; (b) to obtain systematic feedback
on a range of country-specific operational issues; and (c) to help inform the FY14-17 Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS)

Process

2. 
Survey participants included national and local government officials at all levels, consultants and
contractors working on Bank Group-supported projects and programs; and representatives of bilateral and
multilateral development partners and a wide range of Kyrgyz non-governmental, civil society
organizations (CSOs), including the media, the private sector, and public policy research institutes. The
survey questionnaire-administered by courier, email, and regular mail-comprised over 100 questions
covering: general issues facing the country; overall attitudes towards the Bank; the Bank's effectiveness
and results, knowledge and research, and communications and information sharing; and perception about
its future role in the country. Of 300 stakeholders invited, 166 or 55 percent actually participated, of which
CSOs and local government officials each accounted for about 20 percent and national government
officials about 5 percent.

Summary of Results

3. 
Overall, the Bank is viewed positively in several areas related to results on the ground.
Governance-related issues emerged repeatedly, with nearly 40 percent of respondents saying that public
sector governance and reform are the country's top development priority, followed by 35 percent who
cited corruption as its biggest development challenge. Energy, jobs, and rural development were also
mentioned as priorities for poverty reduction and sustainable growth. Importantly, the survey indicates
clear support for Bank involvement in these areas: almost 30 percent of respondents said that public sector
governance and reform are the most useful area for the Bank to focus on, followed by education, energy,
growth, and rural development. Given their concern with governance and corruption, stakeholders not
surprisingly consider government inefficiency as the greatest obstacle to reform.

4. 
Overall ratings for the Bank's effectiveness are fairly positive-6.1 on a ten point scale. Though
most valued for its investment lending, capacity development is viewed by almost 50 percent of
respondents as the institution's most effective instrument. Similarly, respondents' views on how the Bank
collaborates with the government and other development partners are quite positive, albeit less so with
non-governmental groups. Overall, the survey suggests that the Bank's greatest weaknesses, as perceived
by stakeholders, relate to its flexibility and speed. In this connection, ratings in priority areas such as

27 Kyrgyz Republic: The World Bank Country Survey, FY13-Report ofFindings, May 2013.

70

corruption, jobs and energy, are relatively low, as are those for education, governance, growth, and rural
development.

5. 

One quarter of survey respondents claimed that reforms are slow because the Bank is not
sufficiently sensitive to political realities and also because of government inefficiency. Related to this,
more than a third said that for the Bank to achieve added value, it should reach out more to non-
governmental groups and enhance public disclosure of its activities. In practice, since broad-band, high
speed internet access and penetration remains still very modest in the Kyrgyz Republic, Bank knowledge
products may need to be disclosed, distributed, and shared in ways other than, or in addition to the internet
in order to reach more stakeholders. Finally, the issues that emerged most consistently, especially from
non-ministerial respondents, related to the complexity of borrowing from the Bank, as well as to its
flexibility, speed, and the accessibility of its staff especially those from headquarters.

B. 

CPS Multi-stakeholder consultations

Objective

6. 
The goal of the public consultations, held in Bishkek, the capital, and in three regions, Osh,
Karakol and Naryn during March-April, 2013, was to discuss the general direction of the Bank Group's
proposed new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), as well as the specific activities planned during the
FY14-17 CPS period. During the process, Bank staff met with about 200 representatives of civil society
organizations, professional associations, the business community, members of Parliament, as well as with
other development donors active in the country.

Governance

7. 
Governance was a recurrent theme in all four consultations. Participants expressed concern about
the low capacity of government institutions at all levels, the unsatisfactory quality of public services such
as education, health, social protection, and water supply & sanitation, and the limited role and voice of
local communities in decision making. Poor governance and extensive corruption at all levels was the
main impediment 
to the country's development and the reason for citizens' dissatisfaction with
authorities.

Business climate

8. 
Complaints were expressed about the lack of financial resources, especially for agribusiness, the
high interest rates charged by micro-credit institutions and commercial banks, and corrupt practices at
business registration offices. Farmers' representative expressed the view that scaling up small businesses
to medium- or large enterprises was not possible due to the unfavorable tax r6gime and excessive
inspections by multiple government bodies.

Role of local communities

9. 
During the last decade, 481 Water Users Associations (WUA), 1,700 Rural Health Committees
(RHC), 454 Pasture Committees, and 35 Community Drinking Water Users (CDWU) have been
established, trained and become active throughout the country. Representatives of these community-
driven development organizations believe that local communities have matured, understand their role, and
are now ready to take responsibility for improving living standards and for managing of physical assets
along with local governments. They would like to be more involved in the design, preparation,
implementation, and oversight of development projects financed by the Bank Group, although most still
need to learn about best practices and capacity building.

71

Information Sharing

10. 
Lack of communication between ministries and agencies at the national level and between
government bodies at all levels and local communities contribute to citizens' dissatisfaction with on-going
reforms. Participants strongly believe that the Bank Group can play an important role in strengthening
communications with all stakeholders in the country. They also welcomed Bank Group efforts to increase
access to information on its activities and suggested that communications components be included in the
project preparation and implementation process. Remote regions of the country that do not have easy
access to the Internet appreciate meeting field missions and receiving hard copies of reports.

Focus on results

11. 
Measurable, tangible, and visible results on the ground have a substantial influence on people's
opinions concerning the Bank Group's relevance and effectiveness. It therefore needs to put greater
emphasis on project monitoring and on facilitating and strengthening civil society participation in
oversight activities. Greater transparency and accountability in government agencies would also contribute
to better results.

Conclusion

12. 
The consultations were a venue for a meaningful exchange of views with the government and
with various stakeholders on the critical development challenges facing the country as well as policy
options and programs to address them. They also helped increase government and public understanding of
the Bank Group's work in the Kyrgyz Republic. The CPS' focus on governance and its three priority areas
of engagement where the government or state interfaces with its citizens-public administration and
public services, business environment and investment climate, and natural resources and physical
infrastructure-found wide support among participants.

72

Kyrgyz Republic-Country Portfolio Performance Review

ANNEX 6

1. 
From 2003-09, IDA country portfolio performance reviews (CPPRs) with the government were
conducted jointly with ADB, IsDB and KfW, focusing on results-based management and overall
development outcomes. Since the events of 2010 and partly due to frequent ministerial changes, the
government's capacity to manage its externally-financed development portfolio has declined significantly
and, as a result, IDA decided to revert to the traditional CPPR format, concentrating on key generic and
project-specific issues impeding effective implementation. Against this background, CPPR preparation
began in September 2012, together with the Ministry of Finance's Public Investments and Technical
Assistance Department, following which Country Office staff prepared an agenda of key issues for
discussion. A one-day wrap-up meeting was held on January 22, 2013 at the Ministry of Finance (MOF).

Key Findings

2. 
The CPPR identified and discussed the following five generic issues affecting overall portfolio
and individual project performance: (a) the government's protracted internal procedures for negotiating,
signing and ratifying IDA grants and credits, 
in particular those required by the new, post-2010
legislature; (b) insufficient supervision by project implementing agencies, including follow up of agreed
next steps; (c) poor project governance-an increasing number of cases had been reported to the Bank
Group's INT department; (d) extension of closing dates; and (e) financial management, in particular the
delayed submission of audit reports.

3. 

The CPPR recommended the following actions to address these issues:

* 

* MOF to initiate changes 
in government procedures aimed at avoiding the need 
for
parliamentary clearance for IDA credit/grant negotiations and signing. Bank to allow at least
three weeks for internal clearances by government.
Implementing agencies to be more pro-active in project supervision/implementation, 
to
report on the performance of 'problem projects' to the Council on Macroeconomic Policy and
Investments. Bank visiting missions to discuss and agree draft aide-memoires during their
stay, to leave copies with counterparts before leaving the country, and to send final,
management-approved aide memoires within two weeks of mission completion.
* Government to develop performance evaluation criteria for PIU staff to raise accountability of
their staff. Bank to provide training on GAC issues.
* Government and Bank teams 
to pay more attention to implementation risks and plan
implementation taking into account the seasonal character of civil works; PIUs to synchronize
procurement, disbursement and activities plans; implementing agencies to monitor their
implementation and manage contract implementation. The MoF to closely monitor projects
closing within next 12 months. The WB to provide training on contract management.
* PIUs to commence selection of auditors in advance (e.g. in August for the following year's
reporting period) and, starting 2013 and to sign three-year contracts. Bank to conduct review
of audit firms during April-May annually, so that updated list of eligible firms is available by
August each year.

73

4. 
The CPPR also discussed several procurement-related issues, including: (a) project readiness for
implementation and the need for advance contracting of procurement consultants using retroactive
financing and/or the Project Preparation Facility (PPF); (b) the need to down-size tender evaluation
committees to 3-5 technical specialists and complete bid evaluations 3-4 weeks after bid opening; (c) the
need to reduce and harmonize multiple, duplicate procurement-related inspections with ongoing public
procurement reforms (d) the need to ensure that in employing public officials as consultants the Bank
Group's Guidelines should be followed; (e) the need for the MOF to track ongoing contracts and for PIUs
to develop schedules of contract payments and share with MOF, in order to delays in payments to
contractors or vendors; (f) 
the need for the MOF and central bank to issue transparent instructions to
commercial banks regarding bid security, advance payment security and performance security; and (g) the
need for the Bank to provide training in contract management to PIUs and implementing agencies' staff,
and for the latter to include contract management in operational manuals for all new projects.

5. 

Following the wrap up meeting, joint action plans covering portfolio generic issues and individual
projects were prepared, with the former to be discussed and approved at the February 2013 meeting of the
Council on Macroeconomic Policy and Investment. The action plan covering individual projects will be
available in electronic format on the MOF's web site for use by the MOF, project implementing agencies,
and the Country Office in tracking implementation of agreed actions. It will be updated by the Country
Office regularly to reflect project progress. This innovative approach is intended to encourage greater
ownership and accountability by implementing agencies, as well as to provide the MOF with a user-
friendly and convenient monitoring tool.

Next Steps

6. 
Finally, the CPPR agreed on the following next steps to guide the country portfolio performance
review process in future:

* MOF and Bank to solicit commitment from ADB, KfW, and IsDB to joint portfolio reviews
focusing on developmental impact every two years;
* MOF and Bank to conduct IDA portfolio reviews focusing on generic issues annually;
* MOF and Bank to conduct risk management portfolio review focusing on problem projects
quarterly; [First meeting took place on April 30, 2013, the next meeting is scheduled for
September 2013.]
* MOF to post on its web site individual project action plans, to be updated regularly by
Country Office operations team;
* Government to approve draft action plan on portfolio performance improvement, based on
findings of 2013 CPPR; and
* Government to review status of problem projects at Council on Macroeconomic Policy and
Investment quarterly.

74

ANNEX 7

Review of Kyrgyz National Statistical System

1. 
The Kyrgyz Republic's national statistical system (NSS) is one of the most important information
systems of the country alongside the collection of fiscal and administrative data at the ministerial level. In
1991, the Kyrgyz Republic inherited an official statistical system which was a "regional" segment of the
Soviet Union's state statistical system. The country transformed it into a complete and fully independent
national statistical system of a sovereign state. The Kyrgyz Republic's NSS has also successfully passed
the process of transition from a system oriented towards the needs of a centrally planned economy, based
on the "Material Product System" (MPS) standards. Its national official statistical system is now adjusted
to the needs of a market-driven economy.

2. 
The existing system of official statistics has successfully finalized the process of modernization
and realized the objectives defined in the Statistical Master Plan for 2005 - 2009. By 2011, the Kyrgyz
Republic's NSS has fully completed the transition to a model of official statistics implementing
international methodological standards. In particular, the country adopted and implemented the System of
National Accounts (SNA) early in its transition process. From the methodological perspective, all the
main areas of official statistics are fully harmonized with international standards of the United Nations,
some of them in the version adopted by the EU.

3. 
In the second decade of the 21st century, the Kyrgyz Republic's official statistics faces new
challenges. These challenges are the consequence of the influence of internal and external factors
including those of a social, economic and technological nature.

4. 
Though acknowledging the past achievements, the Kyrgyz Government is well aware of the
weaknesses and challenges facing the country's NSS. These challenges were broadly identified in the
National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS), 2012-2020. They include: (i) weak capacity
within the National Statistical Committee (NSC), and statistics producing Govermment ministries,
departments, and agencies (MDAs); (ii) limited technical ability; (iii) constrained financial resources; (iv)
poor statistical coordination within the NSS; and (v) outdated mechanisms for dissemination of statistics
produced by the NSC and MDAs.

5. 
To address these challenges, the NSC and MDAs need to improve their ability to produce timely
and reliable statistics, and have to build public trust in official statistics. In particular, the NSC will need
to establish itself as the leading producer, and provider of cost-effective, timely and quality statistics.
There is also a need to enhance NSC's capability to carry out its mission as the principal collector,
aggregator and disseminator of statistics and the coordinator of the NSS. To achieve this, NSC has to
strengthen its capacity to make statistics quickly, easily, and widely available by designing a data access
and dissemination mechanism for the NSS that will enable: (i) policy makers to use these statistics for
evidence-based decision making; (ii) GOKG and also the public to monitor targets set by the Government
including the reform program and indicators of socio-economic development and poverty reduction; and
(iii) development partners get data for monitoring performance indicators and targets (such as the MDGs),
and the IDA 15-16 Results Measurement System.

6. 
The government is committed to sustained improvement in the production, availability and use of
statistics by taking a comprehensive solution to the above challenges. The NSDS for 2012-2020 was
developed and adopted as the guiding document for the development of the NSS. The first Law "On State
Statistics" was adopted in 1994; in March 2007 the new version of the Law was adopted. Currently the
work is under way on further development of the Law "On State Statistics" that will put principles
guiding the NSS more in accordance with the fundamental principles of the UN and the recommendations
of the Global Assessment of the national statistical system of Kyrgyzstan is being prepared with the
support of Statistics Division of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE).

75

7. 

The NSDS is comprehensive and intended to build on what already exists. It covers statistics
needed to monitor and evaluate the poverty reduction strategies. It also will address legal and institutional
issues, identify technical assistance and training needs, estimate the costs of implementing the strategy
and explain how these costs will be financed. The plan was developed to cover the entire country's
statistical system (both vertically and horizontally). The needs assessment covered data users, producers,
providers and research institutions as well as the providers of financial and technical assistance. The
eight-year Plan covers stakeholders at both the national, regional and district (rayon) levels (who were
consulted as part of the process). The World Bank team provided technical support for development of the
NSDS and stays in close contact with the NSC, donors active in the area of statistical capacity building
and other stakeholders.

8. 
While NSC is very active in attracting the donor support (both financial as well as technical
assistance) in improving the quality and innovation of statistical work, the donor assistance is fragmented
and lacks comprehensive approach to modernization of the statistical system of the country. International
agencies are interested in improving sectoral statistics as these data are also needed for monitoring of
programs and projects in specific areas. For example, UNFPA, UNICEF and WHO provide technical
support in area of social indicators related to children, gender, and health development. There are two
projects that explicitly target NSC activities on a larger scale: TA from the Statistics Norway and from
FAO/WFP. Both projects aim at improving data collection and processing related to agricultural sector to
strengthen the production and use of food security indicators.

9. 
The proposed CPS for FY14-17 is looking at the statistics as a part of the overall agenda for
governance. The readily available high quality statistical information will strengthen evidence-based
policy making and public oversight of the government actions, strategies and targets of the country's
social and economic development towards medium term and long term vision. The project financed by
ECASTAT TF will provide the key relevant indicators for formulating, updating, monitoring and
evaluating the strategies and targets of the country's social and economic development towards medium
term and long term vision. Thus, indicators and the data for monitoring performance will be improved by
strengthening the national statistical system.

76

ANNEX A2

Country At A Glance: Kyrgyz Republic

Europe &
Central 
Asia 

Key Development Indicators 

Kyrgyz 
Republic 

Low
income 

Age distribution, 2010

(2011) 

Male (*.) 

Female (*.)

Population, mid-year (millions) 
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
Urban population (%of total population) 

5.5 
200 
1.2 
35 

405 
23,614 
0.4 
64 

796 
15,551
2.1
28 

7579

4549

30.34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI percapita (PPP, international $) 

5.0 
900 
2,070 

2,947 
7,272 
13,396 

421
528 
1,307 

1519
0-4

10 

5 

0 

10

GDP growth (%) 
GDP per capita growth (%) 

6.0 
4.7 

5.7 
5.3 

5.9 
3.7

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2005-2011)

Povertyheadcount ratio at$1.25aday(PPP,%) 
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (%of children under5) 

6 
22 
70 
27 
3 

0
2 
71 
19 
2 

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

59
70 
23 

so
70

60

Adult literacy, male (%of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacy, female (%of ages 15 and older) 
Gross primaryenrollment, male (%ofage group) 
Gross primaryenrollment, female (%ofage group) 

100 
99 
12 
100 

99 
97 
99 
98 

69 
54 
1C8 
101 

s
40
30
20

10-

Access to an improved watersource (%of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population) 

90 
93 

96 
84 

65 
37

0 

1990 

199 

200 

2010

0KyrgyzRepubli 

0#N/A

Net Aid Flows 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2011 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid 
Top 3 donors (in 2010):

.. 

21 

215 

373 

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

1 

25 
5 
15 

56 
25 
24 

15
1o
5

0 
0 

Aid (%of GNI) 
Aid per capita (US$) 

.. 
.. 

0.9 
5 

16.7 
44 

8.4
68 

-10

-15
-20

Long-Term Economic Trends 

-25

95 

05

Consumer prices (annual %change) 
GDP implicit deflator (annual %change) 

.. 

1208.8 
7.9 

18.7 
27.2 

16.6
22.5 

.. 

----

GDP 

-

GDP per capita

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$) 
Terms oftrade index(2000 = 100) 

.. 
.. 

0.0 
112 

47.7 
10 

46.1
81

1980-90 1990-2000 
2000-41
(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions) 
GDP (US$ millions) 

3.6 

4.4 
2,674 
(%ofGDP)
34.2 
35.8 
27.7 
30.0 

4.9 
1,370 

5.5 
6,199 

2.0 

1.1 
-4.1 

1.0
4.4

.. 

.. 

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

36.7 
31.4 
19.5 
31.9 

18.6 
30.8 
20.6 
50.6 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

1.5 
-10.3 
-7.5 
-4.9 

0.1
1.5
0.1
9.1

Householdfinalconsumptionexpenditure 
Generalgov'tfinalconsumptionexpenditure 
Gross capital formation 

.. 
.. 
.. 

71.1 
25.0 
24.2 

65.7 
20.0 
20.0 

83.4 
18.2 
25.5 

.. 
.. 
.. 

-6.5 
-8.8 
-4.2 

7.4
0.9
8.6

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross savings 

.. 
.. 
.. 

29.2 
49.6 
9.8 

41.8 
47.6 
14.7 

54.5 
81.6 
19.5

.. 
.. 

-16 
-8.2 

5.4
10.0

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a.Aid dataarefor2010.

77

Balance of Payments and Trade 

2000 

2011

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob) 
Total merchandise imports (cif) 
Net trade in goods and services 

511 
559 
-81 

2,271
4,275 
-1,712

Voice and accountabhity

Pollical stabilty

Current account balance 
as a%of GDP 

-75 
-5.5 

-406
-6.6 

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and 
compensation of employees (receipts) 

Rule of lw

9 

1,275 

Control of corruption

Reserves, including gold 

263 

1,835 

0 

25 

50 

75 

100

Central Government Finance 

2010 

Countrs percentile rank (-10)

02000 

higher val-m iaptybetterrmtngs

(%ofGDP)

Current revenue (including grants) 

18.5 

31.6 

Source Kaufrnann-Kraay-Nstruzzi, Wod Bank

Taxrevenue 
Current expenditure 

15.1 
20.8 

23.1
30.9

Technology and Infrastructure 

2000 

2010

Overall surplus/deficit 

-9.6 

-4.6

Paved roads (%of total) 
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 10 people) 
High technologyexports
(%ofmanufacturedexports) 

91.1

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
Individual 
Corporate 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

8 

106

14.8 

1.0

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, M DRI) 

1,938 
178 
-

5,486 
413 
-

Agricultural land (%of land area) 
Forest area (%of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area) 

56 
4.5 
6.9 

55
5.1
6.9

Total debt (%of GDP) 
Total debt service (%of exports) 

141.5 
28.1 

88.5 
8.1 

Freshwater resources percapita (cu. meters) 
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

9,808 

9,093

Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 
Portfolio equity(net inflows) 

-2 
0 

77 
0

C02 emissions per capita (mt) 

0.92 

1.2

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

3.1 

3.7

Composition of total external debt, 2010

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

490 

559

Short-tem, 195 IBNDA0649

World Bank Group portfolio 

2000 

2010

(US$ millions)

Other multi- 

IBRD

ateral, 646 

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Interest payments 

-

-

-
-

-
-

Bilateral, 1,1 

-

-

US$ millions 

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Total debt service 

377 
52 
3 

660
28
20

Private Sector Development 

2000 

2010 

Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to start a business (%of GNI per capita) 
Time required to register property(days) 

-
-
-

10 
3.5 
5 

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 
ofwhich IFC own account 
Disbursements for IFC own account 
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account 

31 
31 
0 

26
26
13

Ranked as a majorconstraint to business 
(%of managers surveyed who agreed) 
n.a. 
n.a. 

2000 

2010 

5 

4

.. 
.. 

33.7
32.7 

M IGA
Gross exposure 
New guarantees 

75 
0 

10
6

Stock market capitalization (%of GDP) 
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

0.3 

2.7 

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011data are preliminary. 
.indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.

5/6/13

78

Millennium Development Goals 

Kyrgyz Republic

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years) 

Kyrgyz Republic

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day(PPP, %of population) 
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (%of population) 
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%) 
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5) 

1990 
<2 

.. 

10.6 

.. 

1995 
18.6 

.. 

2.5 
8.2 

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primaryschool enrollment (net, %)92 
Primary completion rate (%of relevant age group) 
Secondaryschool enrollment (gross, %) 
Youth literacy rate (%of people ages 15-24) 

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio ofgirls to boys in primaryand secondaryeducation (%) 
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%of nonagricultural employment) 
Proportion of seats held bywomen in national parliament (%) 

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortalityrate (per 1,000) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 
Measles immunization (proportion ofone-yearolds immunized, %) 

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 10,000 live births) 
Births attended byskilled health staff (%of total) 
Contraceptive prevalence (%ofwomen ages 15-49) 

103 

.. 

100 

70 
58 
94 

73 
99 

.. 

103 
87 

.. 

49 

58 
48 
97 

98 
98 
60 

2000 
34.0 

8.4 

.. 

.. 

86 
93 
84 
100 

101 
46 
2 

47 
41 
98 

82 
99 

.. 

2010
6.2
33.7
7.7
2.7

88
97
84
10

99
51
23

31
27
97

71
99
48

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV(%of population ages 15-49) 
0.1 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 10,000 people) 
92 
Tuberculosis case detection rate (o/ all forms) 
# N/A 

0.1 
168 
# N/A 

0.1 
249 
# N/A 

0.3
128
# N/A

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Accessto animprovedwatersource(%of population) 
78 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population) 
93 
Forest area (%of land area) 
4.4 
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area) 
6.4 
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita) 
2.4 
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 
1.5 

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people) 
Mobile phone subscribers (per 10 people) 
Internet users (per 100 people) 
Computerusers (per 100 people) 

7.2 
0.0 
0.0 
# N/A 

Education indicators (%) 

125 

75 
50 

25 

1975 

200 

202 

2005 

Primarynet enrollment ratio

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)
10_- 

50 

25 

0 

80

60

50
40

30

20

78 
93 

.. 

6.8 
1.0 
2.4 

7.8 
0.0 

.1 

82 
93 
4.5 
6.9 
0.9 
3.1 

7.7 
0.2 

# N/A 

#N/A 

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

90
93
5.1
6.9
1.2
3.7

9.0
96.8
19.6
# N/A

-

Ratio ofgiris to boys in primary & secondary 
education 

OKyrgyzRepublk i 

#N/A 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2010 

2000 

n1

205

OFixed + mobile subscribers
Enternet users
EItre 
sr

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. 

5/6/13

'9

ANNEX B2

Kyrgyz Republic - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio
Performance

and Management
As Of Date
4/29/2013

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, C 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) ' 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ million) 
Average Supervision (US$ T/project) 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013

19 
3.8 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
30.2 

No 

110 

19 

4.5 
21.1 
28.4 
21.1 
28.4 
55.2 

No 
2.3 
110 

17 
5.1 
17.6 
10.5 
17.6 
10.5 
33.3 

Yes 
2.2 
110 

13

4.9

30.8
15.2
30.8
15.2
31.3

Yes
1.6
110

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
28 
634.8 

Last Five FYs
4
46.0

25.0 
16.0 

25.0
6.4

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress
(IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

80

ANNEX B3

Kyrgyz Republic - IDA Program Summary

As Of Date
4/29/2013

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal 

year 

Proj ID 

2013 

DPO1 

2014 

HEALTH & SP 2 
Result 
Programmatic DPO2 
Result 
Electricity Supply Accountability 
Result 
Overall Result 

2015 

US$(M) 

Strategic 

Rewards b 
(H/ML) 

Implementation

b Risks
(H/ML)

30.0

16.5
46.5
30.0
30.0
15.0
15.0
91.5

81

Kyrgyz Republic: IFC Investment Operations Program

ANNEX B3

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants 
IFC's Own Accounts only 
Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
Electric Power 
Finance & Insurance 
Pulp & Paper 
Total 
Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity 
Guarantee 
Loan 
Quasi loan 
Risk product 
Total 

* as of May 31, 2013

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013*

10.0 
10.0 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0 

9.8 
9.8 

74.4 
25.6
100.0 

13.0
0.0 
87.0 

10.6 
10.6 

5.7
94.3 

0.9
0.9

0.9

100.0 

100.0

0.0
94.3

5.7

100.0 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0
100.0

82

ANNEX B4

Kyrgyz Republic - Summary of Non-lending Services -

As Of Date 4/29/2013

Completion 
FY 

Cost
(US$000) 

Product 

Audience" 

Objectiveb

Recent completions
MTDS - Kyrgyz Republic 

2012 

53 

G, D, B 

KG

KYRGYZSTAN CONFLICT ANALYSIS /FILTER 

2012 

64 

B 

KG, PS

Gender Assessment 

2012 

27 

B, D, G 

KG, PD

FIRST: Kyrgyzstan NBFI Capacity Building Project 

2012 

G 

KG

Russia Education Aid for Development 
Kyrgyz: Corporate Financial Reporting 

2012 

25 

G 
G 

KG
KG

2012 

KG PSD Policy Dialogue 

2012 

82 

G 

KG

KG Financial Sector Monitoring 

2012 

68 

B 

KG

Underway

Poverty Analysis Program 

2013 

293 

G, B, D, PD 

KG, PD

Programmatic Public Expenditure Review 

2013 

103 

G, B, D, PD 

KG, PS

Information Matters - Transparency & Accountability 
Kyrgyz Republic: Mining Sector TA 
KG: Prep. of a New Stat. Master Plan 

2013 

780 

G 

KG

2013 

323 

G 

KG

2013 

72 

G 

KG

TF Enhance. of TSA for better protection 

2013 

G 

KG

AML/CFT TA to Kyrgyzstan 

2013 

43 

G 

KG

PSD Program 

2013 

217 

G 

KG

KG FSD Policy Dialogue 
Kyrgyz Republic Conflict Filter TA 
Public Sector Reform Roadmap 

2013 

18 

G 

KG

2013 

31 

G 

KG

2013 

27 

G 

KG

Planned

China-Uzbekistan Railway assessment [continuation] 

2014 

G, B 

KG

Measuring and Reducing Regulatory Uncertainty and Discretion for Female 
Entrepreneurs in Central Asia
Heating and Energy Efficiency Assessment [continuation] 

2014 

G, B, PD 

KG, PD

2014 

G, B, D 

KG

Programmatic Poverty Studies [continuation] 

2014 

G, D, B, PD 

KG, PD

Programmatic Public Expenditure Review [continuation] 

2014 

G, D, B, PD 

KG, PD

Trade - Implications of Customs Union 

2014 

G, B 

KG

KR Component of Regional Water Sanitation and Supply Study 
(SECO co-funding)
Agribusiness Challenges and Opportunities (joint with IFC) 

2014 

G, B 

KG

2014 

G, B, D 

KG

KR Component of Regional Climate Change Study 

2014 

G, B, D 

KG, PD

Energy Governance and Accountability 

2014 

G, B, D 

KG, PS

Private Sector Development Action Plan [continuation] 

2014 

G 

PS

High Level Human Development Review 

2014 

G, B 

KG

Public Sector Action Plan [continuation] 

2014 

G 

PS

Programmatic Poverty Studies [continuation] 

2015 

G, B, D, PD 

KG, PD

Integrated management of agriculture, pasture, 
forest and water assets
Strategy to raise factor productivity and promote diversification 

2015 

G, B 

KG, PD

2015 

G 

KG

Urban Planning & Development Study 

2015 

G, B, D 

KG

Measurement of Informal Sector 

2015 

G,B 

KG

Social protection -

targeting and equity 

2016 

G 

KG

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.

b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

83

Kyrgyz Republic - Poverty and Social Development Indicators

ANNEX B5

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per w oman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2005=100) 
INCOM EICONSUM PTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 

Low est quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

Latest single year 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2005-11 

4.0 
2.0 
38.4 
4.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

65 
61 
69 

69 
85 

296 
131 

.. 
.. 

4.6 
0.8 
36.3 
3.3 

.. 
.. 
.. 

360 
28 

53.7 

2.5 
57.0 

4.0 
6.2 

.. 
.. 
.. 

78 
98 
66 

97 
93 

.. 

66 
61 
70 

48 
58 

291 
143 
98 
98 

5.5 
1.1 
35.4 
3.1 

33.7
23.6
39.5

900 
195

36.2

6.8
43.4

3.9 
5.8 

88 
89 
88 

90 
99 
85 

97 
96 
3 

70 
66 
74 

27 
31 

305 
130 
71 
99 

Same regionlincome group
Europe &
Central 
Asia 

Low-
income

408.1 
0.4 
64.7 
1.8 

816.8
2.1
28.0
4.0

7,734 

571

3.9 
4.5 

93 
94 
93 

96 
99 
91 

94 
92 
1 

71 
67 
75 

18 
21 

269 
114 
32 
98 

2.2
4.2

80
82
78

65
86
57

77
79
23

59
58
60

63
95

292
255
410
47

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Inmunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

84

ANNEX B6

Kyrgyz Republic - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 

Estimate 
2011 

Projected
2013 
2014 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2012 

2015

100 
31 
19 
50 

100 
27 
24 
49 

100 
21 
27 
52 

100 
19 
29 
51 

100 
19 
31 
51 

100 
20 
26 
54 

100 
20 
28 
52 

100 
20 
30 
50 

100
20
33
47

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 

105 
25 

110 
27 

97 
29 

103 
28 

102 
24 

122 
24 

108 
26 

103 
26 

101
26

Government investment 

5 

5 

5 

7 

5 

8 

6 

7 

7

Private investment 

20 

22 

24 

21 

19 

17 

19 

19 

19

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

53 
84 

54 
93 

55 
79 

52 
82 

55 
82 

55 
102 

55 
89 

53 
82 

52
80

Gross domestic savings 
Gross nationalsavingsc 

-5 
21 

-10 
15 

3 
25 

-3 
19 

-2 
19 

-22 
8 

-8 
18 

-3 
20 

-1
21

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

3799 

5141 

4691 

4795 

6199 

6475 

7277 

8331 

9127

610 

770 

860 

840 

900 

1040 

1220 

1370 

1500

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 95 prices)

Gross domestic product at market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

8.5 
9.6 

8.4 
7.1 

2.9 
2.4 

-0.5 
-1.1 

6.0 
6.9 

-0.9 
-8.4 

7.4 
8.2 

7.5 
5.8 

5.3
3.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
7.5 
Total consumption 
1.6 
Private consumption 
1.8 

7.4 
9.8 
11.6 

1.7 
-12.9 
-15.4 

-1.7 
0.8 
1.5 

4.7 
6.8 
8.0 

-2.1 
2.9 
0.2 

8.2 
2.2 
1.8 

6.4 
1.9 
2.0 

4.3
0.9
1.6

Balance of Payments (US$)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

2011 
1338 
3206 
2614 
-1196 
1020 
-227 

3038 
2141 
4747 
3754 
-1709 
1477 
-437 

2694 
1835 
3682 
2814 
-988 
1208 
30 

2526 
1833 
3905 
2981 
-1379 
1391 
-332 

3387 
2271 
5099 
3962 
-1712 
1836 
-406 

3538 
2290 
6451 
4967 
-2913 
2062 
-994 

3996 
2614 
6446 
4979 
-2451 
2203 
-583 

4450 
2990 
6871 
5293 
-2422 
2295 
-500 

4774
3219
7273
5591
-2499
2391
-511

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-termloans (net) 
Official 

208 
50 
41 
9 

265 
35 
16 
19 

190 
283 
340 
-57 

438 
81 
109 
-28 

694 
208 
167 
41 

372 
263 
75 
187 

280 
461 
253 
208 

396 
345 
152 
193 

421
291
136
155

Private 

Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 

297 

240 

-211 

-84 

-388 

170 

-50 

-70 

-70

Change in reserves d 

-327 

-103 

-291 

-103 

-107 

189 

-108 

-171 

-131

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% ofGDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary

-31.5 

-33.2 

-21.1 

-28.8 

-27.6 

-45.0 

-33.7 

-29.1 

-27.4

25.8 

9.1 

-1.1 

-11.7 

15.7 

0.0 

18.1 

19.5 

15.1

Manufactures 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

11.0 

13.6 

-19.4 

-6.9 

14.9 

37.5 

7.1 

6.9 

6.4

(Continued)

85

Indicator 

2007 

Actual 
2008 

2009 

2010 

Estimte 
2011 

2012 

Projected
2013 
2014 

2015

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%)

PPrice indices(YR95 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms oftrade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

30.2 
26.4 
3.8 
4.8 
1.3 

30.3 
33.3 
141.3 

185.0 
218.1 
84.8 
94.9 

10.2 
14.9 

29.0 
26.6 
2.4 
5.2 
0.4 

25.8 
12.6 
104.3 

271.3 
323.5 
83.9 
104.3 

24.5 
22.2 

31.8 
30.5 
1.3 
5.1 
7.4 

28.4 
17.9 
-11.6 

235.0 
299.5 
78.5 
109.6 

6.8 
4.0 

30.1 
31.0 
-0.8 
5.8 
3.1 

31.4 
21.1 
48.3 

265.9 
354.8 
74.9 

104.7 

8.0 
10.0 

31.6 
30.9 
0.7 
5.5 
3.3 

27.8 
14.9 
82.6 

284.7 
393.5 
72.4 
92.9 

16.6 
22.5 

34.2 
32.4 
1.8 
7.5 
3.9 

32.4 
23.8 
84.4 

287.1 
297.5 
96.5 
87.8 

2.8 
7.4 

31.6 
30.8 
0.8 
6.4 
3.5 

33.6 
18.6 
59.7 

277.5 
311.0 
89.2 
87.2 

8.6 
6.5 

31.8 
29.3 
2.4 
6.8 
1.8 

34.5 
17.6 
82.9 

265.6 
309.1 
85.9 
85.2 

7.2 
6.5 

31.5
28.3
3.2
7.2
1.5

35.1
13.6
74.0

248.4
306.8
81.0
85.2

6.6
6.0

P.

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated budgetary central government data.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

86

Kyrgyz Republic
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 5/31/2013
(In US$ Millions)

ANNEX B7

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 

Equity 

*GT/RM 

Total 

Committed 

Own Account 

Partici -
pants 

Disbursed Outstanding

Own Account

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 

Equity

*GT/RM 

Total 

2012/ 13 CACI Hydro 
1997/ 99/ 2004/ 09/ 11/12 Demir Kyrgyz Int 
2011/12 Finca Kyrgyzstan 
2012 Kompanion 
2007/11 Magic Box 
2000/05/08 
SEF Altyn-Ajydar 
2001/05/07/09/11 
SEF KICB 

Total Portfolio: 

-

-
7.7 
5.9 
2.7 
0.3 
1.7 

18.2 

-
0.6 
-

-

-

-
3.0 

3.5 

0.6 
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.8 
0.3 
-

-

-

0.6 

0.6 
8.5 
6.1 
2.7 

4.6 

0.6 

1.1 

23.3 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-
7.7 
5.9 
1.7 
0.3 
1.7 

17.2 

-

0.6 
-

-

-

-
3.0 

3.5 

-

-

-

-

-

-

0 

-

-
0.7 
0.1 
-

-

-

0.6 
8.4 
6.0 
1.7 
0.3 

4.6 

0.8 

21.5 

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

Partici -
pants

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

87

Kyrgyz Republic - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date
4/29/2013

ANNEX B8

Closed Projects 

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

39

205.47

0.00
293.92
92.11
499.40
92.11
123.28
0.74
124.02

88

Active Projects

Project Name 

BISHKEK AND OSH URBAN 
INFRASTRUCTURE
CAPACITY BLDG ECON MGT 
EMERGENCY RECOVERY 
GOV TA 
HEALTH & SOC PROT 
KG Financial Sector Development Project 
NATL. ROAD REHAB (Osh-Batken-Isfana) 

Project 
ID 

P104994 

P108525 
P123044 
P071063 
P084977 
P125689 
P107608 

P096409 OIP-2 

P110267 
P108178 

RURAL WATER SUPPLY & SAN 2 
SECOND LAND & REAL ESTATE 
REGISTRATION
Sector Support for Education Reform 

P113350 
P098949 VIP 2 

P088671 WATER MGMT IMPRVMT 
Overall Result 

Last PSR 

Supervision 
Rating
DO 
IP 

S 

MS 
MS 
MU 
MS 
MU 
S 
MS 
MU 
MS 

# 
S 
U 

MS 

MS 
MS 
MU 
MS 
MU 
S 
MS 
MU 
MS 

# 
MS 
MU 

Fiscal 
Year

2008 

2009 
2011 
2003 
2006 
2012 
2010 
2007 
2009 
2009 

2013 
2007 
2006 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Disbursements at

Expected and Actual

IBRD 

IDA GRANT Cancel Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd

27.8 

3 
70 
7.775 
45 
13 
51 
31 
10 
5.85 

16.5 
27.2 

19 

327.1 
25

15.3614 

0.6570747 

-0.80097

0.976504 
11.17064
2.676204 
16.33547 
13.27651
21.67124 
15.12624 
3.829249 
0.116956 

16.39128
4.326672 
2.023811 
123.2822 

1.0675545

1.6236852 
-13.8666 

1.623685
2.266667

10.885262 
0.3977174 
2.7808181
0.413152 

17.9686
-1.2141

0.294009

-9.056846 
0.7358745 
-65.15677 

-1.05685
0.735875
19.81692

89

