d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 20072 HO

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

January 27, 2000

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Lempira (L)
1 US Dollar = L14.0 (November 1999)

FISCAL YEAR
January I to December 31

MAIN ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AIN 

APL 
CABEI 
CG 
CSGs 

CNBS 

DEI 
ECLAC 
ESAF 

Integrated Child Assistance (Atenci6n Integral a la Ni iez)

Adaptable Program Loan
Central American Bank for Economic Integration
Consultative Group
Civil Society Groups

National Banking and Insurance Commission (Comisi6n Nacional de Bancosy Seguros)

OED's Development Effectiveness Index
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility

FEHS 

FIAS 

FONAC 

GEF 
GINO 
HIPC 
1DB 

Honduran Social Investment Fund (Fondo Hondurehlo de Inversi6n Social)

Foreign Investment Advisory Services

National Convergence Forum (Foro Nacional de Convergencia)

Global Environmental Facility
Gender Innovation Program
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Inter-American Development Bank

INCAE 

INTERFOROS 
LIL 
LSMS 
MECOVI 

Central American Management Institute (Instituto Centroamericano deAdministraci6ny
Economia)

Network Organization of CSGs and NGOs
Learning and Innovation Loan
Living Standards Measurement Survey
Program to Improve Living Standards Measurement Surveys (Mejoramiento de las Encuestas

PRAF 
PROHECO 

Family Assistance Program (Programa de Asistencia a las Familias)
Community Education Program (Programa Hondureiho de Educaci6n Comunitaria)

MOE 
MOF 
MOH 
MOT 
NAFTA 
OED 
PAHO 
PFP 

RLMP 
SME 
SMP 
TA 
UNDP 
WBG 
WBI 
WHO 

de las Condiciones de Vida)

Ministry of Education
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Transport; Communications and Public Works
North American Free Trade Agreement
Operations Evaluation Department
Pan American Health Organization
Policy Framework Paper

Rural Land Management Project
Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises
Staff Monitored Program
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development Programnue
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

IDA 

IFC

Vice President 
David de Ferranti 
Vice President, Investment Operations 
Chief Economist Guillerrno Perry 
Director, LAC 
Country Director Donna Dowsett-Coirolo Manager 
Task Manager 
Ian Bannon 
Task Manager 

Jamal-ud-din Kassu n
Karl Voltaire
Bernard Sheahan
Toshiya Masuoka

HONDURAS
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table of Contents

Executive Summary ........................................................ 

Introduction .........................................................

I. Social and Economic Conditions Prior to the Hurricane .........................................................

i-iii

1

2

II. Honduras' Development Challenge: Rebuilding with Social Equity ................................................... 3

A. Poverty Reduction and Social Development .........................................................
4
Toward a Poverty Reduction Strategy .........................................................
4
Human Capital and Social Safety Nets ..................... 
....................................
5
Rural Development and Rural Poverty ..................... 
....................................
9
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Development .................................................. 11

B. Reviving and Accelerating Growth .........................................................
Rebuilding Infrastructure ........................................................ 
Strengthening the Financial Sector ........................................................ 
Private Sector Development ........................................................ 

11
12
13
14

C. Sustainability ........................................................ 
15
Macroeconomic Stability and Debt Sustainability ........................................................ 15
State Modernization, Institution Building and Decentralization ..................................... 16
Improving Governance ........................................................ 
17
Environmental Sustainability ........................................................ 
18
Risk Management and Disaster Preparedness ........................................................ 
19

III. The Country Assistance Strategy ........................................................ 
The Last CAS: Lessons and Impact ........................................................ 
Overall CAS Approach ........................................................ 
Lending Levels and Composition ........................................................ 
Portfolio Status, Lessons and Strategy ........................................................ 
Advisory and Analytical Activities ........................................................ 
Selectivity and Donor Coordination .................. 
...................................... 

IV. Civil Society Dialogue, Monitoring and CAS Risks ......................... 

............................... 

20
20
21
21
22
24
24

25

Text Tables

Table 1: Poverty Trends, 1991-98 (% of households below poverty line) ................................................. 3
Table 2: CAS Lending Scenario Triggers ........................................................ 
22

Annexes

Annex A: Honduras at a Glance
Annex Bi: Honduras: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
Annex B2: Honduras: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Honduras: Bank Group Summary
Annex B4: Honduras: Summary of Nonlending Services
Annex B5: Honduras: Poverty and Social Indicators
Annex B6: Honduras: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Honduras: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Status of Bank Group Operations in Honduras
Annex B9: Honduras: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Annex C: Poverty and Social Conditions in Honduras
Annex D: The Effects of Hurricane Mitch on Honduras
Annex E: OED: Emergency Assistance Recommendations and Overall Evaluation
Annex F: Honduras: Donor Support and Relations with IDB
Annex G: CAS Dialogue with Civil Society

COUNTRY MAP

Executive Summary

i. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Honduras was discussed by the Board in July
1993. A new CAS was under preparation when Mitch struck in October 1998, but the process was
interrupted as the World Bank Group (WBG) and the Government mobilized to cope with the emergency.
The CAS preparation was resumed in the Spring of 1999, when it became clear that the devastation
caused by Mitch required a major reformulation of the assistance strategy. At the same time, and as part
of Honduras' likely participation in the HIPC Initiative, the WBG began to discuss with Government the
need to prepare an outcome-oriented and participatory Poverty Reduction Strategy that would underpin
the HIPC process and guide the poverty reduction efforts of the Government and the donor community.

ii. 
The September 1999 Development Committee discussion of the Enhanced HIPC Initiative also
endorsed the proposal to underpin future debt relief, and more broadly the strategy for IDA and ESAF
lending, with a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, to be prepared by the Government in a participatory
and transparent process. The World Bank, the IMF and the IDB, as well as other international partners
may contribute diagnostic, analytical and process support to the preparation of the Poverty Reduction
Strategy, as requested by the authorities. The Honduran Authorities have expressed their commitment to
preparing such a poverty reduction strategy and have launched the process. A progress report on the
preparation of the poverty reduction strategy, including the participatory process associated with it, will
be prepared and circulated to the Board at the time of the HIPC Decision Point, expected during the first
half of calendar 2000.

iii. However, given the urgent need to provide a revised franework for WBG assistance in the light of
the aftermath of Mitch, the Government and the Bank have agreed that it would be useful to present to the
Board now the CAS that has been under preparation over the past few months. It was felt that the CAS,
the process followed in its preparation and the Board discussion of the document, would define both the
framework for WBG support to the country and help to framne Honduras' participation in the HIPC
Initiative and the work planned to develop its Poverty Reduction Strategy.

iv. The CAS has been prepared as the country struggles to rebuild following the devastation caused by
Hurricane Mitch. Honduras faces a formidable challenge, not only to rebuild a shattered economy, but
also to lay the basis for a more prosperous and inclusive nation. Mitch has made the development agenda
more complex, but it is also inducing some positive changes-greater awareness of the need for
decentralization, a new dynamic in relations between the Government and civil society, a sharper focus
on the transparency and govemance agenda, and the need to reduce the country's vulnerability in all its
dimensions.

v. 
The CAS was prepared in close consultation with the Government and following a productive
dialogue with civil society representatives. In addition, the design of the CAS draws from OED lessons
and the results of our own assessment on implementation of the previous CAS.

vi. The devastating effects of Mitch required the WBG to provide emergency support and refocus its
assistance strategy to support the Government's reconstruction and transformation program. While this
has necessarily entailed a reassessment of development priorities, it is also providing an opportunity to
advance in many aspects of the reform agenda. The overall thrust of the strategy is to help Honduras
rebuild, while laying the basis for a stronger economy and a more equitable distribution of the benefits
from growth. The overriding priority is the development and implementation of a comprehensive and
outcome-oriented poverty reduction strategy, with a strong emphasis on improving the quality of human

-

ii 

-

capital, strengthening the social safety net, supporting indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples
development, mainstreaming gender, and stimulating sustainable rural development. The strategy
supports faster growth, as an essential complement to poverty reduction, through infrastructure
rehabilitation, strengthening the financial system and private sector development. It also seeks to ensure
that progress can be sustained, through a stable macroeconomic framework and debt sustainability,
institution building, governance, improved environmental management and disaster preparedness.

vii. The CAS proposes a base case lending scenario of $317 million over FYOO-02. A high case would
amount to $367 million by adding one adjustment operation to support financial sector reforms. Triggers
to move into the high or low case include progress on poverty reduction, governance, structural reforms
and portfolio quality. Progress on poverty reduction would be measured in line with indicators to be
agreed within the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy under preparation. The trigger on
governance will be based on IDA's assessment of the Government's handling of reconstruction assistance
and steps to strengthen internal and external control mechanisms. The high case trigger is in line with the
reform conditionality to be agreed under the respective adjustment operation. The lending level under the
low case will depend on the extent of the deterioration in performance and the sectors where we judge
that progress would still be possible. In principle, under a low case scenario IDA would reduce lending
by as much as one half of the proposed base case and seek to concentrate support on human development
and poverty reduction. IDA's proposed lending portfolio is designed to support the overarching priority
of poverty reduction and social development. About two-thirds of the proposed FYOO-02 base case
lending directly supports human capital, social safety nets, development of indigenous and Afro-
Honduran peoples and the rural development/rural poverty agendas. This project portfolio composition is
a conscious choice, resulting from intensive discussions with the Government, a careful assessment of
IDA's comparative advantage and value added, and the expected role of other donors.

viii. 
IFC, like IDA, moved quickly to try to assist Honduras after Mitch, mainly trying to help existing
clients deal with the need to restructure their operations. IFC is presently re-assessing its approach in
Honduras, which to date has involved a small number of interventions to support early private power
generation and larger manufacturing and agribusiness firms. Priorities for IFC support include: (i)
assisting Honduras to extend private participation in infrastructure; (ii) strengthening the financial sector
and broadening access to capital; (iii) helping to improve the enabling environment for the private sector;
and (iv) selectively providing direct financing, particularly in industry, services and agribusiness.

ix. Experience in Honduras suggests the critical need to support reforms only after they have become
part of broad, longer-term reform programs which are also validated by some measure of consensus with
civil society. To address this issue, the CAS proposes to: (i) rely, where appropriate, on APLs and LILs
to support longer-term reformn efforts and test innovative approaches; (ii) draw lessons from pilot
activities in ongoing operations to demonstrate success and support broader reforms; and (iii) as agreed
during the CAS dialogue, enhance the consultations and consensus-building efforts with civil society and
key stakeholders, including prior agreement on clearly defined and time-bound consultation processes.

x. 
The poverty agenda, public expenditure reform, a strategy for infrastructure rehabilitation and
private sector development will be the key analytical pieces to support CAS objectives. The major formal
output will be a Poverty Update (FYOI), but more important will be the process and technical support to
prepare the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. Key aspects will include assistance to improve
the data base on poverty and living conditions, monitor poverty, and support a consultative process with
civil society to elaborate the poverty strategy and the outcome and progress indicators. Less formal
policy advice and dialogue will assist the Government in the design of a longer-term rural development

-

iii -

agenda, which would be an essential component of the poverty reduction strategy. The second major
formal piece will be a Public Expenditure Review, focusing on the social sectors and the link between the
poverty agenda and improved public sector efficiency. A parallel Infrastructure Assessment will assist
the Government adopt a comprehensive strategy for infrastructure development, rationalize the state's
role in the sector and provide an overall framework to coordinate donor efforts. The fourth major piece
will be a Diagnosis of the Business Climate by FIAS, identifying major areas for reformn and including
consensus-building efforts to support the reforms.

xi. 
The proposed CAS faces three major risks. First, the sheer magnitude of the reconstruction task
may divert somewhat the Government's attention from the longer-term reform and poverty reduction
agenda. While the reconstruction of Honduras is indeed a massive task, the Government has continued
efforts to advance the reform agenda and has initiated preparation of a poverty reduction strategy in
consultation with civil society. Second, an adverse external environment could severely impact
Honduras' fragile economy. Third, project implementation will become more difficult, as the public
sector's implementation capacity comes under increasing strain. The Government is aware of this risk
and, in coordination with donors, is working to strengthen institutional and implementation capacity. In
addition, the Government will increasingly seek the support of and delegation to other actors in order to
improve the country's implementation capacity. Although the proposed strategy includes support to
improve institutional capacity and strengthen project implementation, maintaining the satisfactory
implementation of IDA's portfolio will remain a challenge throughout the CAS period. On balance, we
believe these risks are reasonable and manageable, especially considering the impact of Mitch and the
enormous reconstruction and transformation challenge ahead of Honduras.

xii. The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* Are the proposed CAS priorities an appropriate response to the development challenges facing
Honduras in the wake of Hurricane Mitch?

* 

* 

Is the proposed link between CAS priorities, CAS implementation and the Poverty Reduction
Strategy under preparation adequate?

Is the proposed mix of lending and nonlending instruments adequate and in line with the WBG's
capabilities and comparative advantage?

* 

Is there sufficient flexibility in the CAS to respond to country circumstances and possible risks?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

Introduction

1. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Honduras was discussed by the Board in July
1993. A new CAS was under preparation when Hurricane Mitch struck Honduras in October 1998. The
draft CAS did not propose a major change in strategy, which concentrated heavily on poverty reduction
and sustainability, but did have a greater focus on the quality of human capital, targeted poverty
interventions, rural development, enviromnent and institutional strengthening. These priorities remain
valid, but the physical, social and economic havoc wreaked by Hurricane Mitch required a more
substantial reformulation of the World Bank Group (WBG) assistance strategy. In addition, Honduras is
expected to qualify for the HIPC Initiative, and as part of this process, the Government has initiated
preparation of an outcome-based Poverty Reduction Strategy in consultation with civil society. By the
time of the HIPC Decision Point, expected during the first half of 2000, the Government plans to be well
advanced in the preparation of its Poverty Reduction Strategy, including the consultation process, and to
reflect this progress in an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to be presented to the Board at the
time of the Decision Point. The WBG, the IMF and the IDB, as well as other international partners may
contribute diagnostic, analytical and process support to the preparation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy.

2. 
The effects of Hurricane Mitch carry important implications for the country's development agenda
and WBG support. First, many of Honduras' development gains were set back decades-if nothing else,
the investments required to rebuild infrastructure will take years and will divert resources away from
activities that would have been undertaken otherwise. This raises issues of investment strategy and
sequencing that impact IDA's support-the volume of lending has increased, a large part of which has
been allocated for emergency assistance; there are likely to be secondary emergency problems over the
coming years, requiring flexibility in the WBG's response; our involvement in the infrastructure sector
will be larger than we had envisioned prior to Mitch; and there will be a need to intensify efforts to
strengthen the Government's absorptive and implementation capacity, as public sector institutions are
trying to carry out a more ambitious and time-sensitive set of activities.

* 

3. 
Second, Mitch has, and will continue to have, a profound impact on the way we and other donors
do business in Honduras. These changes, however, are positive:
* The disaster changed the dynamics between central and local authorities, as the latter were forced to
take on roles and responsibilities that they would otherwise have had little space to exercise. A full-
fledged decentralization agenda is yet to emerge, but the process has been energized after Mitch.
In the same way, Mitch is changing relations between the Government and civil society-both
because the Government found it needed to work much more closely with civil society groups in the
emergency phase but also in response to donor expectations. The process is not always smooth, as
both sides search for common ground, but the dialogue between the Government and civil society has
progressed in a way that might not have happened in the absence of the crisis.
* The transparency and governance agenda has become more prominent. This was an important issue
for Honduras before Mitch, with the Government drawing attention to it in the early days of this
administration, but there has been a marked change in the attention it is receiving and a recognition
that there is no turning back from credibly addressing the need for improved governance.
* Systemic risk and the country's vulnerability to natural disasters were made painfully evident by
Mitch. The need to manage risk in all its dimensions has become an overarching theme in Honduras'
development agenda and the assistance priorities of the donor community.

2 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

In the end, poverty reduction remains the overwhelming challenge, but the specific issues the country
faces are now qualitatively different and as a result, the volume, to some extent the content, and certainly
the design and mix of instruments which the WBG and other donors use, will be different.

L Social and Economic Conditions Prior to the Hurricane

4. 
Honduras is the third poorest country in LAC, with GNP per capita of $730 (1998), a high
incidence of poverty and low social indicators. Contributing to high poverty and weak social indicators,
have been the lack of economic dynamism, coupled with recurrent macroeconomic imbalances, a very
skewed distribution of income and assets, and the poor quality of investments in human capital. Although
Honduras avoided the civil conflicts that ravaged Central America during the 1980s and early 1990s, it
was pulled in indirectly as a staging ground for the conflict being fought along its border with Nicaragua.
Thus, as with other post-conflict societies in the region, successive administrations throughout the 1990s
have endeavored to strengthen democratic institutions, increase transparency and establish civilian control
over the armed forces and national police.

5. 
Economic Developments. The macroeconomic performance of Honduras has tended to be
vulnerable to electoral cycles. As with its predecessors, the Reina Administration (1994-98) inherited an
impending fiscal and external crisis brought on by expansionary policies in the run-up to the election.
Supported by an ESAF arrangement, the Government stabilized the economy and revived growth during
1994-95, but further progress proved difficult in 1996 and the Government was unable to agree with the
Fund on the third year of the ESAF. Largely reflecting political pressures related to the electoral cycle,
the Government considered that the fiscal effort that would have been required to bring performance back
on track during 1997 would not be feasible. In early 1997, the Fund and the Government agreed on a
Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) to re-establish a record of performance during 1997 that would lay the
basis for negotiating a new ESAF with the incoming Administration in 1998.

6. 
Honduras' economy had been improving steadily during the two years before Mitch struck, having
met or exceeded the targets in the SMP. Growth rebounded to 5.1 percent in 1997 and was on pace for
5.5 percent in 1998. The current account deficit fell from 4.8 percent of GDP in 1996 to 3.9 percent in
1997. After stagnating in 1995-96, average real wages increased by about 10 percent in 1997 and a
further 3 percent in the first three quarters of 1998. Annualized inflation fell from 26 percent in 1997 to
13 percent in September 1998. In April 1998, the Government adopted a fiscal package to further reduce
the fiscal deficit, which had fallen to 2.9 percent of GDP in 1997. The measures increased social
spending, lowered income tax rates to bring them in line with the rest of Central America, and phased out
taxes on net assets and exports. To finance the increased spending and tax reductions, the sales tax rate
was increased from 7 to 12 percent. Preliminary data for the first nine months of 1998 indicated that
fiscal performance was in line with a fiscal deficit target of 2.5 percent of GDP.

7. 
The Government was also making steady progress in its structural reform program. In April 1998,
a single regulatory agency was established for the electricity sector-a key requirement for establishing a
tariff structure based on long-run marginal costs and to support privatization; a strategy for privatization
of electricity distribution was approved in August and a decree authorizing privatization of the telecoms
company was approved in September. The decree complemented the previously-approved privatization
law, by strengthening transparency and accountability provisions in the bidding process. In November,
Congress approved legislation to permit private concessions for the construction and management of
infrastructure (mainly roads) and encourage private investment in mining and tourism. In the financial
sector, measures were adopted in 1998 to strengthen the regulatory framework, including new regulations
on capital adequacy, loan classification, connected lending, and external borrowing.

8. 
Poverty. Although the economy was improving, poverty levels remained high. Depending on the
source and definitions, between half and two thirds of Honduran households are poor. The Bank's 1994

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

3

Poverty Assessment' estimated that in 1993 more than one half of Honduran households lived in poverty,
of which almost one-third lived in extreme poverty. Other sources estimated that about two-thirds to
three-quarters of households were poor (see Annex C for a discussion of measurement, definitions and
trends). Income inequality is high, with a Gini of 0.54. Most of the poor live in rural areas-according to
official data, about 60 percent of poor households and 70 percent of extremely poor households live in
rural areas. In addition, there are wide rural-urban disparities in social indicators and service access.

Table 1: Poverty Trends, 1991-98 (% of households below poverty line)
Poverty Level 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
Rural 
80 (60) 
76 (54) 
77 (56) 
71 (53) 
72 (53) 
Urban 
68 (47) 
62 (39) 
55 (31) 
63 (40) 
63 (41) 
Total 
75 (54) 
70 (47) 
67 (45) 
67 (47) 
68 (48) 
Memo item:
GDP Growth 
3.3 
5.6 
6.3 
Note: Figures in brackets are extreme poverty estimates.
a. Poverty estimates are pre-Mitch. GDP growth in 1998 is the projected growth rate before Mitch struck.
Source: EHPM, and staff estimates.

1996 
75 (66) 
61 (39) 
69 (54) 

3.7 

-1.3 

4.2 

1997 
72 (60) 
59 (35) 
66 (49) 

1998a
69 (55)
57 (36)
63 (46)

5.1 

5.0

9. 
Official estimates indicate a reduction of overall poverty levels between 1991 and 1998, from 75
percent to 63 percent, and from 54 percent to 46 percent in extreme poverty (Table 1). While extreme
poverty in urban areas fell between 1991 and 1998 from 47 percent to 36 percent, extreme poverty in
rural areas decreased more modestly from 60 percent in 1991 to 55 percent in 1998. As analyzed in the
Poverty Assessment and in Annex C, there appears to be a strong link between economic growth and
poverty. During the early 1990s, the Government began implementing reforms to stabilize the economy
and remove structural constraints to growth. It also introduced compensatory programs to mitigate the
social impact of adjustment during the transition to a higher growth path. Success in structural reforms
was uneven and macro stabilization suffered some reverses during the 1990s, with the result that growth
was below potential. Official estimates indicate that there was a marked drop in poverty from 75 percent
to 67 percent between 1991 and 1993-especially in rural areas, probably in response to the first round of
reforms and price liberalization (para. 33)-but poverty stagnated in the mid-1990s as growth faltered.
As economic growth rebounded, poverty declined again during 1996-98, falling from 69 percent to 63
percent. Although Mitch clearly had a devastating effect on social conditions in Honduras, the exact
impact on overall poverty levels is uncertain. Our very rough estimates suggest that poverty could have
increased by up to 6 percentage points, to about 69 percent in 1999. These estimates, however, are highly
tentative and will need to be further refined before a post-Mitch poverty baseline can be established, and
will be reflected in the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to be prapered by Decision Point.

II. Honduras' Development Challenge: Rebuilding with Social Equity

10. Country Vision. Honduras' development challenge is to rebuild its shattered economy with
greater social equity. During the immediate aftermath of Mitch, donor and WBG efforts focussed on
helping the Government deal with the most urgent needs. As the country moves into the longer-term
reconstruction phase, the challenge will be not just to bring Honduras back to where it was before the
disaster struck, but to transform Honduras into a more inclusive and prosperous nation. Underlying this
transformation is a vision of Honduras as a more equitable and productive country, sharing more widely
the benefits of growth, with a dynamic private sector capable of competing in the global economy, while
reducing the vulnerability of its people and infrastructure to natural disasters, and sustainably managing
and protecting the country's valuable natural resources.

' World Bank (1994). Honduras: Country Economic Memorandum and PovertyAssessment, Report No: 13317-HO

4 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

11. Mitch had a devastating impact on Honduras. As discussed in Annex D, an estimated 5,660 people
died, over 8,000 disappeared and 12,270 were injured. Infrastructure damage was extensive, including 60
percent of main and secondary roads (1,600 km) and about 100 bridges. Health and education facilities
suffered considerable damage, and about 661,760 people lost or suffered major damage to their houses.
Mitch has made Honduras' development challenge more difficult, but it is also providing opportunities to
advance on the country's longer-term development agenda. The Government's Plan for National
Reconstruction and Transformation sets out a comprehensive agenda and vision for rebuilding and
transforming the country. Key to the realization of this vision will be: (i) adoption and implementation
of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy; (ii) ensuring a swift economic recovery and shifting the
economy into a higher growth path; and (iii) ensuring that these efforts are sustainable. Honduras'
development agenda and the proposed WBG support are organized around these three broad themes of
poverty reduction, revival of growth and sustainability.

A. Poverty Reduction and Social Development

Toward a Poverty Reduction Strategy

12. With the emergency phase over, Honduras must set in motion the policies and reforms that will
allow the economy to grow with greater social equity and with a greater contribution to the reduction in
poverty. The country has considerable economic potential, but a better integration between economic and
social policies is required to maintain high economic growth and sustainably reduce poverty. This makes
Honduras' poverty reduction challenge even more formidable, but at the same time presents a window of
opportunity to rebuild with social equity. The Government plans to seize this opportunity and, with
support from the WBG and other international partners, is in the process of developing a comprehensive
and outcome-based poverty reduction strategy to underpin the reconstruction effort.

13. The Government's approach to poverty reduction was under discussion with IDA when the disaster
struck. In addition to encouraging higher growth, it focused on: (i) improving the delivery and quality of
basic social services; (ii) improving the efficiency and targeting of safety net programs; (iii) indigenous
and Afro-Honduran peoples development; and (iv) stimulating rural development to raise incomes and
employment. The Government's approach built on the recommendations of IDA's 1994 Poverty
Assessment, which placed emphasis on growth, especially in rural areas, improved quality and access to
social services, and a strengthened social safety net. While these priorities were and continue to be
appropriate, the Government also had become aware that it needed to develop and adopt a more
comprehensive and longer-term poverty reduction strategy, including clear outcome indicators and
progress benchmarks. At the same time, it realized it needed to improve the measurement and monitoring
of poverty and social conditions.

14. Government institutions recognize the crippling effect of the lack of reliable poverty estimates on
policy work, and the need to establish an agreed methodology to monitor poverty trends and intermediate
indicators. The destruction wrought by Mitch has drawn further attention to the need for a sound data
base. Updated poverty maps and a national poverty profile reflecting the effects of Mitch will be
prepared as key inputs for the development of a the Poverty Reduction Strategy and its monitoring.
Moreover, Honduras' entry into HIPC will require the country to redirect resources to social and poverty
programs, and demonstrate that these programs effectively reach the poor.

15. WG Support Poverty reduction is the overriding objective of the Honduras country assistance
strategy. The WBG will support, with analytical work, advice and technical assistance, Government
efforts to develop and implement a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. As a first step, it will
assist the Government to improve household survey data collection, dissemination and analysis through
the MECOVI project-a partnership between IDB, ECLAC and the WBG to improve survey capacities in
LAC. Over the medium term, we will also focus on addressing deficiencies in other data sources and
institutional weaknesses, working with USAID and UNDP who are assisting in the preparation of the

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

5

2000 National Census. The improved data base will be used to prepare a Poverty Assessment, which will
update IDA's 1994 report and support the Government in the elaboration of a poverty reduction strategy.
This work will be carried out in partnership with IDB, the IMF and the local UNDP office, which has
been supporting analytical and policy work on poverty and social development. The Poverty Update will
include a comprehensive analysis of urban poverty and, as discussed below, be complemented by a
parallel effort to assist the Government prepare and implement a rural development strategy. In addition
to this broad analytical and strategic support, the assistance strategy concentrates heavily on supporting
the other elements of the Government's poverty reduction and social development strategy.

Human Capital and Social Safety Nets

16. Social Policies. Prior to Mitch, public spending on the social sectors at almost 8 percent of GDP,
was high relative to income. A comparison of Honduras with 52 countries controlling for income levels
carried out by IDA2 showed strikingly different results regarding the performance of the health and
education sectors. The share of GDP allocated to health in Honduras was close to the international
average but its results in terms of life expectancy were better than average. In contrast, the share spent on
education was higher than the international average, but literacy was below average (illiteracy of 27
percent is more than double that for LAC). The evolution of other social indicators also suggests that
there is a need to focus on the quality and equity of service provision, and that the more urgent challenge
is in the education sector. Mitch, in turn, placed enormous strains on social sector and safety net
institutions, first to deliver emergency assistance and then to re-establish basic systems (e.g., schools,
clinics, rural roads, water systems). Mitch, and the way in which Government agencies responded to the
emergency, also helped to bring into sharper focus the need for reforms, especially in terms of increasing
community/parental participation (basic education) and effective decentralization (basic health, FHIS and
disaster preparedness). The challenge will be to move rapidly to support the momentum toward reform
while still helping the Government to deal with immediate needs such as the physical rehabilitation of
primary schools, the restocking of health posts and infrastructure repairs in small, isolated communities.

17. The Role of Women. As discussed throughout the CAS, Honduras has made substantial progress
in addressing gender issues. There have been significant increases in girls' school attendance rates,
women's access to pre-natal care has improved and some legislation that directly discriminated against
women has been revised. As pointed out in the civil society dialogue, however, much remains to be done.
Women's health status continues to be low because of their reproductive function and maternal mortality
remains unacceptably high. A significant proportion of births are high risk because institutional delivery
rates are low, pre- and post-natal care is limited and of poor quality, the use of family planning methods is
low, and a high proportion of births occur among very young women. Women's labor market
participation rates are still relatively low and substantial gender wage differentials exist. Women in rural
areas, and indigenous and Afro-Honduran women are especially disadvantaged, with more limited access
to education, health, and child-care services. Female-headed households, one in four nationally, have a
greater propensity to be poor. Although women and children benefit from a number of compensatory
programs, there is a need to expand their income and employment opportunities. Civil Society Groups
(CSGs) believe that greater efforts are required to change stereotypes and modify cultural behaviors that
negatively affect women, especially through the education system. They also believe there is a need to
strengthen the institutional framework supporting the role of women and gender issues in development.
In line with the CAS dialogue recommendations, an effort has been made not to present the role of
women as a separate development issue, but to mainstream it into the broader assistance strategy.

18. Education. Honduras has made considerable progress in primary education, especially in tripling
the number of students attending primary schools since 1970. Gross primary enrollment at 112 percent is
slightly higher than the LAC average. Pre-primary education has expanded substantially reaching one
third of children, but almost 75 percent of pre-primary schools are located in urban areas. Educational

2 World Bank (1995). Honduras: Reforming Public Investmnent and the Infrastructure Sectors, Report No. 14084-HO.

6 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

attainment is 4.2 years of formal schooling per person, up from 3.8 years in 1990. The main problem,
however, is low quality. Primary education suffers from low educational achievement, high repetition
and drop out rates, and low completion rates. The net result is that for every 100 students who enter 1I
grade, less than 8 finish 12t grade. Net enrollment drops markedly at the secondary level to 22 percent, is
heavily concentrated in urban areas (92 percent), and secondary education quality is widely regarded as
low. Education spending is also regressive given the high share allocated to public tertiary education and
the almost negligible cost recovery at this level. The education attaimnent of women has reached levels
similar to those of men. At present, there are almost no gender differences in overall literacy, and female
enrollment surpasses that of males at the preschool and secondary levels. In primary education, the net
enrollment of girls is slightly higher than boys. Illiteracy, however, is high among indigenous and Afro-
Honduran peoples, especially women. Over 7 percent of Honduras' school age population is from groups
whose mother tongue is not Spanish, of which over one-third are not enrolled in pre-or primary schools.

19. Poor educational outcomes have their roots in low teaching quality, shortages of books and
teaching materials, administrative deficiencies, insufficient classroom time due to teacher absenteeism,
weak supervision and low parental and community involvement. Even when resources have been made
available to improve educational inputs, the tendency has been for these inputs to reach schools
independently of each other. Thus, the challenge is implementing a national strategy which ensures the
provision of an integrated package: 
training teachers on pertinent curriculum content and modem
pedagogical practices, applying the training in the classroom, guaranteeing the suprly of instructional
materials, and evaluating the performance of students to adjust training, curriculum, pedagogy and
instructional materials. In general, finding strategies and incentives to make teachers more efficient in the
classroom-especially in rural, marginal and poor schools-is an ongoing priority in Honduras.

20. While Honduras has been able to increase primary education enrollments, two key challenges are,
first, to increase enrollments in pre-primary and in secondary education, and, second, ensuring that
students are retained and complete each education level. Rural areas have found it increasingly difficult
to open schools, attract qualified teachers and retain students in school. With IDA support, the
Government has adopted a community participation model in pre-primary and primary education,
drawing on the successful experience underway in the region (El Salvador and Guatemala). These
experiences suggest that community management of teachers, supported by a more flexible and
decentralized Ministry of Education, has a positive impact on enrollments, attendance (students and
teachers) and additional years of schooling, especially in rural areas. Following Mitch, the Government
believes it now has the opportunity to move more aggressively with these reforms and plans to accelerate
the introduction of its Community Participation in Education Program (PROHECO). The Government
has set ambitious targets by 2001, including the creation of 1,250 PROHECO schools, covering 50,000
children in poor rural communities lacking pre- and primary schools. So far, the initial target of 500
schools for 1999-2000 has been surpassed-624 community committees have been created, 585 new
schools are functioning, and 26,000 new students attend schools in 13 departments and 114
municipalities. By introducing the PROHECO model in new schools, the Government expects that as the
reforms begin to show results, there will be demand from other communities and it will be able to build
consensus for an expansion to all pre- and primary schools in rural areas, and for some form of
community participation in urban schools, especially in marginal and high-poverty areas.

21. Secondary education enrollment and quality improvements have lagged prinary education. IDB
has been working to improve access and quality at the secondary level, while Germany is providing
substantial support across the sector. An increased collaboration is being developed between the two
Banks and key bilateral donors, to explore the curriculum and content articulation between basic and
secondary education, the benefits of the community participation model and other rural education access
strategies for the secondary level, and institutional improvements for the management, supervision and
support across the entire education system. There is also a need to improve the allocation of education
spending overall to increase efficiency and targeting on the poor.

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

7

22. The Government assigns top priority to education reform, viewing it both as a key component of its
longer-term poverty reduction strategy, but also as critical to attain the vision of a dynamic and
productive economy able to compete in an increasingly globalized market place. The Government is
aware that extremely low secondary enrolment rates and low quality in tertiary and vocational education
are a major impediment to increased productivity and competitiveness. FLAS, for example, points out that
although the maquila sector has been very successful, better education and training of the labor force is
needed to move into higher value added manufacturing.

23. Health. Honduras has made relatively good progress in health. Life expectancy has increased
from 54 years in 1970 to 67 (65 for men and 69 for women) currently. Infant mortality has fallen. from
110 per 1,000 live births in 1970 to 45 currently. Among children under one year, the immunization
coverage for smallpox, polio, DPT and BGG is 94 percent, which is remarkable for a country with much
of its population living in rural and often isolated areas. The number of pregnant women who received
pre-natal care increased from 65 percent in 1985 to 84 percent currently. These improvements have been
the result of general socio-economic progress, especially increases in education, urbanization and access
to safe water and sanitation, and considerable external financing which has made possible a marked
expansion in coverage, especially in primary and preventive health. As a result, public health spending is
relatively equitable.

24. Despite these achievements there are a number of important weaknesses. Overall health coverage
is still only 75 percent, leaving one in four Hondurans without adequate access. The health status of
women, especially mothers has lagged. Maternal mortality at over 200 per 100,000 births remains high
(higher than Guatemala and Nicaragua). About 9 percent of these deaths are due to abortions and about
80 percent due to infections. Teenage pregnancy remains a serious problem and the total fertility rate at
4.3, although down from 7.5 in 1970, remains high. WHO estimates HIV prevalence of 1.47 percent and
Honduras accounts for over one half of AIDS cases in Central America. The contraceptive prevalence
rate, at 47 percent of women aged 15-49 remains low. Child malnutrition also remains a serious problem.

25. The Government is aware that Honduras' health problems are the result, not so much of the
quantity of the resources available, but of their efficient allocation. Many of the sector problems are
related to the centralization of the Ministry of Health, inefficiencies in the budget system, inappropriate
incentives to increased efficiency and weak linkages between hospitals and lower levels of the health
system. In addition there is a need to improve the procurement system for medicines and reform the
social security agency which is also involved in the provision of health services. Prior to Mitch, the
Government was preparing with IDA support a long-term reform program for the health sector aiming to
decentralize health financing, improve the budget system, and reform procurement. As in the education
sector, the Government believes that the need to rebuild health facilities provides a good opportunity to
push harder on system reforms in the sector. As a result of the need to cope with the Mitch emergency,
there is now a clearer understanding of the need to strengthen linkages between health system levels, but
also to consider increased decentralization and delegation of authority. For example, a relatively simple
system of radio communications established under the ongoing IDA project proved very effective in the
aftermath of Mitch in maintaining isolated communities linked with the health system and coping with
emergency health situations. These systems need to be reinforced not just for emergencies but as part of
wider reform efforts to improve the reach and quality of health service delivery.

26. WBG Support. To address immediate education and health sector needs, IDA moved quickly to
reallocate funds within the ongoing Education Project and prepare a supplementary credit for the Health
Project. While this is assisting the Government to cope with immediate needs, IDA is also working with
the Government to define and implement longer-term reform programs in education and health. In
education, we would seek to support PROHECO, expand quality and coverage in the pre- and primary
levels, improve teacher training, student assessments and the curriculum, as well as institutional reforms
to improve efficiency and capacity throughout the system. As part of the curriculum reform effort,
textbooks and teaching materials will be analyzed to remove gender biases and stereotypes, and an effort

8 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

will be made to track the retention and educational attainment of girls in primary education. In health,
IDA has been working to support improvements in the efficiency of resource allocation, greater emphasis
on primary health, increased coverage in under-served rural areas, more effective nutrition interventions,
increased decentralization, and separation of the health and pension systems. Within this approach, an
important priority has been to improve the health status of women, including reproductive health and
access to family planning services. While IDA will continue to support health sector reforms, over the
coming year we will be assessing the modality of such support, given that donor financing for the health
sector has expanded considerably after Mitch. Options under consideration include a traditional
investment project, an APL, a stand-alone Health TA project, or technical policy support to incorporate
reforms in the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. The proposed reform strategies in education
and health have the potential to produce a marked improvement in coverage and the quality of service
delivery. At the same time, our experience in Honduras has clearly shown that IDA needs to undertake a
considerable investment in developing consensus, ensuring that reforms are country-owned and part of a
broader national vision. For this reason, we propose to proceed gradually with reforms in these two
sectors, working with our Governmuent counterparts and civil society to build consensus around the
reform programs.

27. Safety Nets. The social safety net in Honduras is composed of two main programs: PRAF
(Family Assistance Program) and FHIS (Honduran Social Investment Fund). 
PRAF directly
compensates vulnerable groups through five core programs: 
the School Bond "or primary school
children; the Maternal Child Bond for pregnant and lactating mothers, and children under five; the Bond
for the Elderly; the School Pack Program, for primary students; and the Program for Development of
Women, to assist women in micro enterprise development and training, including the establishment of
230 community banks. These programs have increased steadily and appear to be reaching intended
beneficiaries, but two important concerns remain. First, despite substantial resources spent on food and
nutrition programs, malnutrition remains high and well above what could be expected at Honduras' GNP.
There is a growing realization that social safety net programs alone will not address the nutrition problem
or even most of it. A pilot program in Honduras (AIN or Atenci6n Integral a la Niiez) 
is showing
impressive results by focusing on preventing mild and moderate malnutrition rather than concentrating on
treating severe malnutrition (Annex C). Second, the Government and civil society are concerned that
while transfer programs constitute and important safety net, over the longer run they may create excessive
dependence on income and in-kind transfers. Thus, as part of its poverty reduction strategy, while
continuing to support well-targeted transfer programs, the Government aims to focus increasingly on
programs that can enhance the productivity of poor households, relying on income and employment
generation as a more sustainable way to reduce poverty.

28. FHIS was established in 1990 as a temporary agency to help mitigate the impact of adjustment on
the poor. As with other social funds, FHIS initially concentrated on the financing of small-scale social
and economic infrastructure works, but it also started playing a more active role in the Government's
social safety net by supporting a number of social development initiatives. This broadening of
responsibilities was formalized and gathered momentum when the FHIS mandate was changed in 1995,
from a focus on short-term to medium-term social investment. A key change was a new mandate to place
greater emphasis on community participation and strengthening of local governments, in line with the
Government's decentralization objective. While FLIS has become the principal, and in some cases, the
only Government instrument for financing small-scale, community civil works, it has also supported
important social programs. These include: health and hygiene training, nutrition, early childhood
education, attention to vulnerable or underserved groups (street children, women, the elderly, the
disabled, and indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples), and cultural identity (cultural preservation and
indigenous culture). In most instances FHIS does not itself manage these programs, but seeks to pilot or
act as a catalyst for new initiatives which subsequently become sustainable on their own (e.g., PRAF) or
can be transferred to other agencies, municipalities or NGOs (e.g., cultural heritage, street children). A
recent evaluation showed that FHIS is doing a good job of ensuring women's participation throughout the
project cycle, as well as in the hiring of women in construction projects.

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

9

29. 
Institution strengthening and increased local participation are key FHIS aims. Supported by an
ongoing IDA credit, FHIS is currently implementing a Pilot Program for Local Institutional Strengthening
to increase local participation in project planning, implementation and maintenance. Efforts to increase
community participation will also aim to ensure that communities and beneficiaries have a greater say on
the selection of FHIS projects, the quality of the construction and their sustainability-areas of concern
identified in the CAS dialogue. FHIS is also implementing a Pilot Program to Strengthen Community
and Rural Water Systems, working with municipalities, beneficiaries and Government agencies to
improve coverage and sustainability in rural water. The aim of the pilot is to help develop a better policy
and institutional framework for the sector, which can eventually be absorbed by the water authorities

30. FHIS has played a critical role in the national emergency relief and rehabilitation effort. A recent
IDA evaluation of the role of FHIS during the emergency phase found that it was responding positively
and efficiently to the enormous challenges presented by Mitch and its aftermath. FHIS rapidly put in
place a regionally decentralized operating structure, simplified project preparation and authorization
processes, and expedited contracting and disbursements. This flexibility allowed FHIS to respond
quickly and effectively to the pressing needs of affected municipalities and communities. The
Government believes that there is an opportunity to build on this valuable experience. FHIS plans to
restart the Town Hall Meetings for Municipal Development (Cabildos Abiertos) in order to define
appropriate reconstruction programs at the municipal level. The first round of these Meetings, held prior
to Mitch, was an important first step in promoting more effective community and municipal participation.

31. WBG Support IDA's FHS IV project had just been approved when Mitch struck, allowing FHIS
to play a vital role in the emergency and the rehabilitation phase. Its active role and ability to channel
resources quickly and effectively to affected communities means that a follow-on operation will be
needed soon. Many of FHIS' major programs, which had to be postponed due to the emergency, will be
restarted under the follow-on operation, including its pilot programs to strengthen local institutions and
the development of viable rural water systems. WBG support is being coordinated with Germany and
with IDB, which is supporting FHIS and PRAF through a Social Sector Project. IDA is also undertaking
an evaluation of nutrition programs, the results of which will be incorporated into the Government's
poverty reduction strategy and the health sector reform program, including support for the AIN pilot
nutrition program. IDA will also continue to support FHIS programs targeting women, including
increased focus on indigenous and Afro-Honduran women through the Nuestras Raices program.

Rural Development and Rural Poverty

32. Most of Honduras' poor live in rural areas. Land distribution is highly skewed. Farms of over 100
ha account for 1.6 percent of all farmland but almost 40 percent of land area, while close to 83 percent of
farms are below 10 ha. A recent Bank study estimated a Gini coefficient for land of 0.68. Agricultural
productivity is low, with 80 percent of basic grain cultivation taking place on slopes. Although Honduras
has been implementing a land titling program since 1982, having granted more than 77,000 titles (of
which over 20 percent were female farmers) on formerly public lands, over 45 percent of farmers still
lack titles. (While there is no legal constraint on the titling of women landholders, couples without legal
marriage papers-a 
large proportion of rural households-are not eligible to apply for joint title.) A
recent Bank study3 estimated a very respectable 17 percent rate of return on land titling in Honduras, but
in addition to titling, there is an urgent need to improve registries and cadastral systems, without which
the benefits of titling can quickly erode. Access to credit remains limited and Government efforts to
reform the state agricultural development bank have had little impact in expanding credit services to
small-scale farmers and rural entrepreneurs. Communal revolving credit groups have expanded
considerably in recent years but they are fragile institutions with little capacity to weather cyclical
downturns and no linkage with the formal financial system.

3World Bank (1997). Rural Poverny in Latin America: Analytics, New Empirical Evidence and Policy, Report No. 16792-LAC.

10 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Stratey

33. During the 1960s and 1970s, the Government's approach to rural development focussed largely on
the agriculture sector, including heavy emphasis on farm-based area development projects in the late
1970s. Toward the end of the 1980s, faced with a serious macro crisis, the Government and donors
focussed on structural reforms to improve the functioning of markets and liberalize the economy,
especially during the first half of the 1990s. The reform program had an initial positive impact,
reactivating agricultural growth and raising the real incomes of the poor. An IDA study4 showed that the
real incomes of agricultural workers (three-fourths of whom are poor) grew at an average of almost 10
percent a year during 1990-93 As macro problems resurfaced in the mid-1990s and rural poverty began
to increase again, the Govermment began to rethink its approach, realizing that removing the anti-
agriculture bias and focusing solely on agricultural policies, would not solve the rural poverty problem.

34. As Mitch hit, the Government had been putting the finishing touches on its rural development
strategy, which sought to adopt a more comprehensive approach to rural development, going beyond
agriculture policies and seeking a better integration with social policies. Mitch, however, destroyed up to
70 percent of Honduras' basic crops, robbing the people not only of daily foodstuffs, but also critical
exports. The immediate priority in rural areas has been to restore food-production capabilities to
subsistence farmers, and repair infrastructure to provide access to markets and services. As rural farming
communities are gradually stabilized, foodstuff production restored, and work initiated to address
immediate vulnerabilities, the Government is re-focusing on the longer-term reform agenda. Its post-
Mitch strategy has three broad principles: targeting poor areas, strengthening decentralized institutions,
and sustainable watershed management. The Government's rural development program focuses on: (i)
land titling and registration to improve land security and the functioning of land markets; (ii) piloting a
market-assisted land reform program to reduce the skewedness of land distribution; (iii) establishment of
a Rural Investment Fund (PRONADERS) targeting marginal areas and poor producers; (iv) watershed
management and river course stabilization as part of natural resource risk management; and (v)
restructuring of forestry agencies, which are facing a governance crisis, to ensure sustainable exploitation
of forest resources. In addition, priority would be assigned to community infrastructure and social
services in poor rural areas, especially basic education.

35. WBG Support. In response to Mitch, the Rural Land Management Project (RLMP) was
restructured by reprogramming $5 million to finance emergency repairs to the flood control levees in the
Sula Valley, and $4 million to finance forestry and watershed activities through municipalities, in line
with the Government's decentralization objective, including $0.5 million for emergency seed and input
supplies. A proposed Municipal Watershed and Rural Development Project would support the
Government's decentralized program of watershed management and sustainable land use in the priority
areas affected by Mitch, aiming to reduce systemic risks and building on lessons from the emergency
response activities and the Upland Fund within the ongoing RLMP. Post-Mitch, civil society and donors
are concerned by the failure to adequately value forest resources, both for stability of land and water
catchments, and also because in terms of soil, land and forest coverage, Honduras has much more forestry
than agricultural potential, especially comparing forest management with extensive, low-return cattle
ranching in the agricultural frontier. The proposed Municipal Watershed Project, would promote
community and municipality-managed forestry activities for income generation and diversification as
well as for forest stabilization. Particularly in eastern Honduras, where the traditional indigenous
populations are concentrated, there is a good match between indigenous income generation and
sustainable forestry conservation. A proposed Land Administration and Land Fund Project would
support the soon-to-be-launched Pilot Land Fund and continuation of the land titling and registration
program included in the RLMP. The Pilot Land Fund will support market-assisted land reform, financing
land purchases for about 1,000 beneficiary families (IDA will not finance land purchases), providing
technical assistance and seeking to mobilize complementary commercial bank financing. Our previous
experience in the sector and the CAS dialogue clearly shows the need to build consensus on a longer-term

4 WorldBank (1995). Honduras: ImpactofPolicyReforms on theIncomes of theRural Poor, ReportNo. 14396-HO.

Honduras. CountryAssistance Strategy 

11

rural development strategy. To this end, and as part of project preparation, IDA will support an intensive
and participatory policy dialogue, based on a series of workshops and sector policy notes, to develop
greater understanding and support for a longer-term rural poverty and development reform agenda.
Although the Government has not been prepared to consider a reassessment of rural credit policies and
institutions, IDA will seek to support pilot activities to test alternative rural credit delivery mechanisms
and continue a policy dialogue to build consensus on the need for comprehensive reforms to improve
rural credit access by low-income farmers.

36. As part of our gender efforts and at the request of the Government, the Ministry of Agriculture will
participate in the Bank's GINO program, designed to identify institutional constraints to gender
responsiveness and institutional change processes that make organizations more accountable to male and
female clients. A broader research effort examining the impact of land market liberalization and the land
access of the poor in Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua, will include an analysis of gender impact.

Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Development

37. 
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples constitute about 13 percent of the population and belong to
9 ethnic groups, four of which (Lenca, Garifuna, Tolupanes, and Miskitos), account for over 90 percent of
the total. Although household survey data does not disaggregate indigenous and Afro-Honduran
populations, a social assessment carried out by IDA shows that they are extremely disadvantaged relative
to the non-indigenous population: the worst poverty indicators in the country are found in municipalities
which have large indigenous and Afro-Honduran populations; illiteracy exceeds 70 percent in some
communities and is worse for indigenous and Afro-Honduran women; 38 percent of school-age
indigenous and Afro-Honduran children are not enrolled in schools; health coverage is low, with 8,500
indigenous and Afro-Honduran people per rural health post and 30,000 per health clinic; and potable
water coverage is only 40 percent (Annex C).

38. WBG Support. CSGs strongly argued that indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples are
disadvantaged, but should not be treated as a separate vulnerable group in need of compensatory
assistance. Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples need to be fully integrated into a national poverty
reduction strategy. Emphasis was placed on education, the role of indigenous and Afro-Honduran
women, access to markets and employment, and the need to channel support in a manner consistent with
their own organizations and cultural systems. While communities value the efforts to design targeted
programs, they desire more direct involvement in decisions and programs that affect them, greater
capacity building of their own organizations, and increased support for productive activities. WBG
support for indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples development has been channeled though an IDF
Grant for capacity building and institutional strengthening in indigenous and Afro-Honduran
communities, focusing on project planning and execution, and the FH[S program Nuestras Raices. A
recent IDA evaluation of Nuestras Raices was positive but suggested a number of improvements,
including more effective support for community banking (Annex C). The ongoing Education Project is
implementing a pilot program to provide bilingual education, including translating teaching materials into
Garifuna and Miskito. At the request of the Government and in consultation with indigenous and Afro-
Honduran communities, IDA is considering a more integrated approach to be supported by a possible
Indigenous Development LIL and the second phase of the ongoing IDF Grant. This program will be
prepared in a participatory manner with indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples organizations.

B. Reviving and Accelerating Growth

39. Sources of Growth, External Environment and Medium-Term Prospects. Mitch brought to a
halt Honduras' economic recovery and its infrastructure base was set back decades. Economic growth
will turn negative in 1999, with considerable social consequences, especially in terms of unemployment.
Reviving economic growth is essential to the reconstruction effort and to ensure social and political
stability. While poverty reduction and social development are at the center of the Government's strategy

12 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

and the CAS, it is clear that without high growth it will not be possible to sustainably reduce poverty and
increase investment in human capital. The Government believes that Honduras has the economic and
human potential to make the vision of a more competitive and egalitarian society a reality. This potential
is best exemplified by the rapid development around the San Pedro Sula Valley, where a dynamic private
sector has expanded employment and the country' productive and export base, centered around textiles,
maquila (export processing) and agro-export industries. Honduran capital and management account for
about one-third of investment in the maquila sector, while the agro-export sector has successfully
penetrated foreign markets and contributed to an important diversification of the country's export base.

40. As a small open economy, a favorable external environment will be key to Honduras' sustained
economic recovery, especially the absence of major adverse shocks that would severely impact its flagile
economy. In recent years, Honduras has made considerable progress in establishing an open trade
regime, contributing to a gradual diversification of its export base. The Government hopes that together
with its Central American and Caribbean neighbors, Honduras will be granted NAFTA parity, thus
improving access to North American markets for its exports. Honduras has bilateral free-trade
agreements with Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Venezuela and, with other Central
American countries, is negotiating a free-trade agreement with Chile.

41. Honduras has considerable economic potential, and with a favorable external environment and
sound policies, it can sustain economic growth rates of 5-6 percent. Initially, reconstruction activities will
provide a strong economic stimulus, but over the longer term, growth will depend on a favorable external
environment and Honduras' ability to develop its considerable potential for sustainable tourism,
expansion of the agro-export sector, sustainable exploitation of forestry resources, development of
mining, increased foreign investment, private participation in infrastructure, and moving the maquila
sector into higher value-added production. Development of this potential is important not only to ensure
high and sustained growth, but also because most of these sources of growth tend to be labor intensive
and have strong linkages with rural areas, especially the tourism and agro-industrial sectors. The
Government is aware that over the long term, higher productivity and growth are the result of many inter-
related factors, including a healthier and better educated population, macroeconomic stability, a dynamic
rural economy, a more efficient public sector, as well as increased transparency, governance and the rule
of law. While these elements are part of the country's longer-term development agenda, the
Government's medium-term growth strategy and WBG support focus on: (i) rebuilding the country's
shattered infrastructure; (ii) strengthening the financial sector; and (iii) providing an enabling
environment to stimulate private sector recovery, investment and longer-term growth.

Rebuilding Infrastructure

42. Mitch washed away much of the progress that Honduras had made in improving its physical
infrastructure. Damage was particularly severe on roads and bridges, water systems and major urban
centers, especially the capital Tegucigalpa. The speed and effectiveness with which the physical
infrastructure can be rehabilitated will determine, to a considerable extent, the pace of economic and
social recovery. While the physical needs are considerable, the Government also plans to use this
opportunity to push ahead with reforms in the infrastructure sectors. Over the coming year, the
Government expects to complete privatization of the telecoms company, the concessioning of the four
international airports, privatization of power distribution, and promote the concessioning of new
highways and main roads. 
In addition to privatization, the Government will aim to improve road
maintenance through the establishment of a road fund, attract private sector participation in the provision
of water and sanitation services in large cities, and develop a viable rural water and sanitation system.
Although the Government has prepared an infrastructure reconstruction plan, it needs to have in place a
comprehensive policy framework and strategy for infrastructure development.

43. WBG Support. As a result of Mitch, the CAS proposes a larger involvement in infrastructure than
would have been the case before the disaster. The Roads Project was winding down when Mitch struck

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

13

and a follow-on operation was under preparation. In response to Mitch, IDA approved a supplementary
credit to assist with immediate road and bridge rehabilitation. The Government has requested WBG
support to prepare a long-term policy framework and strategy to guide infrastructure development and
improve coordination of donor efforts. 
In response, the WBG has initiated preparation of a
comprehensive Infrastructure Assessment, which will not only review infrastructure needs, but also
examine inter-sectoral issues, linkages with private sector development, benchmarking of infrastructure
indicators, and a broader set of issues that constrain efficient infrastructure development. IDB has
indicated its willingness to join in this effort. Also at the request of the Government, IDA is considering
an Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project which would provide a vehicle and a framework to mobilize
cofinancing and donor coordination. While it is expected that the project would have a major roads
rehabilitation component, it would also consider financing priority infrastructure needs not covered by
other donors. Under the roads component, IDA would continue to support strengthening and
restructuring of the Ministry of Transport (MOT), operation of the road maintenance fund and, through a
pilot program, the creation of road maintenance microenterprises, drawing on the successful experience in
Nicaragua. The microenterprise pilot would support creation of two types of enterprises: (i) enterprises
drawn from communities along the roads being maintained; and (ii) enterprises formed by staff made
redundant due to MOT restructuring. It would also support a program to reduce vulnerabilities to natural
disasters in the roads sector-a strong concern expressed in the CAS dialogue-based on detailed road
and bridge damage assessments currently underway as part of the Supplemental Transport Project.

44. 
IFC has so far invested in an independent power producer in Honduras (Elcosa), and a regional
power company (EGI) which invests in power projects in Central American countries, that could include
Honduras as the privatization process advances. IFC expects to support the Government's privatization
process through advice (e.g., power distribution) and investments (e.g., telecommunications, ports). IFC
is also supporting a study, with a Spanish Trust Fund, on the commercial feasibility and an inter-oceanic
transport link connecting ports in Honduras and El Salvador with a highway. The initial assessment
supports the possibility of a private port concession in Puerto Cortes.

Strengthening the Financial Sector

45. Although Mitch placed additional stresses on the financial system, there were already indications
of weaknesses in the system. Financial liberalization over the past decade encouraged a rapid expansion
of the financial system and a proliferation of intermediaries. Total assets in the system were equivalent to
about 75 percent of GDP at end-1998, of which the 23 private banks represented more than 90 percent.
Non-bank financial services, such as leasing, housing finance, pension funds, and long-term capital
markets remain underdeveloped and shallow. Rapid growth has produced a large number of small and
weak institutions, which coupled with inadequate regulatory capacity raises concerns about the strength of
Honduras' financial system and its ability to contribute to growth. CNBS (the Supervisory Agency) is a
relatively new institution and presently lacks the technical capacity and legal basis to fully supervise the
system. Important parts of the system have remained unsupervised, including credit cooperatives, credit
NGOs, community banks (cajas rurales), and private pension funds. In addition, a legal loophole has
prevented CNBS from supervising the stock exchange, where some banks are able to mobilize funds from
the public without being subject to provisioning norms. Commercial banks tend to be organized around
industrial/financial groups, leading to problems of connected lending and excessive exposure to single
creditors. Although the Authorities have issued new regulations on connected lending, capital adequacy
(raised to 10 percent), and foreign exchange exposure, banks have considerable time to comply and
sanctions need to be more forcefully applied. In addition, some prudential norms do not comply with
Basle criteria and there is no formal deposit insurance system.

46. WBG Support. Prior to Mitch, IDA had proposed to the Government the elaboration of a Financial
Sector Review to assess the state of the financial system and design a reform program. The Govermnent
welcomed IDA support but requested instead that it work with the IMF on a rapid program of assisted
supervisions for commercial banks and move in parallel with technical assistance to support Government

14 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

reforms. The program of assisted supervisions and technical assistance had just begun when Mitch struck
and will continue over the coming year. In the immediate aftermath of Mitch, the Central Bank instructed
financial intermediaries not to opt for across-the-board debt cancellations or automatic loan
reschedulings, instead addressing the problems on a case-by-case basis. It nonetheless requested IDA to
consider an operation that would inject liquidity to reactivate production and prevent a major deterioration
in bank portfolios. In the end, the Authorities found that the operation would not be needed as the system
was coping well with the damage and financial institutions were restructuring financing packages on a
case-by-case basis. The insurance sector was also able to cope with the disaster, largely because it had
extensively reinsured overseas.

47. The WBG will maintain its active involvement in the financial sector in partnership with the IMF.
A PHRD Grant and a Spanish Consultant Trust Fund are supporting a program of assisted supervision in
the banking sector, and preparation of a longer-term program of technical assistance to strengthen CNBS
and the legal framework. In addition, the Government has requested IDA support to strengthen the
financial sector through a Financial Sector Adjustment Credit and a TA operation. With IDA support, the
Authorities are preparing a financial sector reform program including: draft laws on capital markets,
insurance regulation, secured transactions and creation of a deposit insurance system, establishment of a
crisis resolution mechanism, further improvements in prudential norms and regulations to bring them in
line with international standards, including a schedule for bringing capital and provisioning requirements
in line with new norms. Honduras will also be part of a regional effort, currently underway in the
Caribbean, to determine ways in which the financial system, especially the insurance sector, can play a
more effective role in managing systemic risks from natural disasters. IFC's approach in the sector has so
far focused on the development of financial markets at a sub-regional level. It is supporting small and
medium-scale enterprise (SME) financing through Banco Cuscatlan (El Salvador-based) and invested in a
regional credit rating agency. As the regulatory and supervisory framework is improved in Honduras,
IFC will consider, on a case-by-case basis, direct investment opportunities in the sector.

Private Sector Development

48. Mitch inflicted large damage on the production and infrastructure base of the private sector.
Agriculture, the country's backbone, suffered enormous losses as did the agro-export sector-responsible
for much of Honduras' recent export dynamism. SMEs have been particularly affected, having less
access to credit markets and limited internal resources to cover rehabilitation needs. Over the longer-
term, the Government is making efforts to improve the business climate, with support from the
Harvard/INCAE/CABEI Competitiveness Project, direct support to small and medium enterprises, and
opening up the infrastructure sector to private capital and management. Also, much remains to be done to
streamline regulatory and administrative barriers to private investment, both to improve the investment
climate and to enhance transparency. A better investment climate also requires improvements in the
speed and predictability of the judiciary system.

49. WBG Support Support for private sector development and improving the investment climate will
be provided through a number of complementary activities. IDA's assistance will focus primarily on
support for privatization and strengthening the financial system. As the reconstruction phase advances
and the role of the private sector expands, adherence to core labor standards will also be reviewed. IFC is
providing support under an Italian/IFC Technical Assistance Trust Fund to support SMEs in Central
American countries including Honduras, in project and skill development, and identification of financing
sources. FIAS is preparing a Diagnosis of the Business Environment as a first step in a longer-term
program to assist the Government improve the investment climate. Its preliminary assessment suggests a
moderately positive business climate, confirmed by inflows of foreign direct investment, which have been
rising steadily in recent years and have averaged over 2 percent of GDP during the past two years. FIAS
has tentatively identified five sectors as good candidates for promotion: infrastructure, finance, tourism,
forestry and maquila. An important outcome of the FIAS Diagnosis would be the identification of
administrative barriers on private sector development, which in a later phase could form the basis for an

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

15

action plan to streamline regulations and make them more automatic and transparent. This would also
make an important contribution to broader efforts to improve governance and transparency in Honduras.
IDB will channel lines of credit to SMEs through the commercial banking system and support micro-
enterprise development through its Social Enterprise Program (including women and indigenous groups).

50. MIGA has actively promoted its products and services in Honduras, through its guarantee program
designed to encourage foreign investment by mitigating political risks, and its Investment Marketing
Services, which helps countries improve investment promotion. MIGA has supplied guarantees in the
power sector facilitating foreign investment amounting to $71 million. IPAnet and Privatization Link,
two specialized online forums developed and managed by MIGA, have and will continue to provide
information on the business climate to investors considering operations in Honduras. Currently there are
over 350 documents that can be referenced through these online forums. MIGA will support investment
promotion efforts in Honduras targeting foreign investment in higher value added export sectors
(especially maquila), infrastructure, and tourism.

C. Sustainability

51. The Government's development strategy must not only seek to meet the challenges described
above, but it must also ensure that achievements can be sustained. This is particularly important for
Honduras, given its uneven record in terms of sustaining economic policies and maintaining social
progress. Five aspects of sustainability will be critical for the country's prospects, both during the
reconstruction phase and in terms of meeting its longer-term development challenges: (i) ensuring a
stable macroeconomic framework and a sustainable external debt situation, without which high growth
and increased investment in human capital to reduce poverty will not be possible; (ii) modernizing the
state, strengthening its institutions, and advancing on decentralization, to lead the reconstruction effort
and improve implementation of development policies, projects and service delivery; (iii) improving
governance and transparency, to ensure effective use of reconstruction assistance, and improve
development effectiveness; (iv) environmental sustainability to protect Honduras' valuable natural
resources and reduce the effects of natural disasters; and (v) disaster preparedness through capacity
building and protection measures.

Macroeconomic Stability and Debt Sustainability

52. A quick return to macroeconomic stability will be essential to underpin the reconstruction effort
and re-establish conditions for accelerating growth. On March 26, 1999, the IMF Board approved a
three-year ESAF arrangement aimed at a quick and sustained economic recovery. The main targets of the
program are: (i) a recovery in growth to about 5-6 percent a year in 2000-01 following expected negative
growth of 2-3 percent in 1999; (ii) a reduction in the 12-month inflation rate to 13-14 percent by end-1999
and 8 percent by end-2001; and (iii) an international reserve position of 3.5-4 months of imports. The
Government recognizes that fiscal policy will be key to stabilizing the economy and promoting faster
growth. The 1999 budget aims to shift priorities toward emergency relief and the reconstruction of
infrastructure, containing the growth in non-emergency spending (especially wages and non-emergency
transfers) and strengthening revenues through improved tax administration and the phased adjustment of
utility tariffs. Although the fiscal deficit will widen markedly-from 1.4 percent of GDP in 1998 to 8.7
percent in 1999-it is expected to be financed almost entirely through concessional loans and debt relief
The fiscal deficit is projected to decline to about 5-6 percent in 2000 and 3 percent in 2001. Economic
performance has been broadly satisfactory during 1999, and all ESAF quantitative benchmarks for June
and September were observed.

53. WBG Support. IDA moved quickly to provide macroeconomic support following Mitch. The fast-
track Hurricane Emergency Project is assisting the Government to maintain macroeconomic stability
through the financing of imports associated with rebuilding social and economic infrastructure, and re-
establishing production levels in response to the economic damage caused by Mitch. In addition, at the

16 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

request of several donors, the Bank established the Central America Emergency Trust Fund which is
funded by donor grants to cover multilateral debt payments for Honduras and other hurricane affected
countries. Over the medium-term the Bank will continue to maintain an active policy dialogue and close
collaboration with the IMF in support of the Government's medium-term stabilization program, as
reflected in the ESAF, PFP and HlPC Initiative.

54. The Board of Executive Directors of the Bank and IFC discussed Honduras' Preliminary HIPC
Document, which presents the debt sustainability analysis and the proposed Decision Point, on December
14, 1999, and agreed that Honduras was eligible for assistance under HlPC and that a decision point in
2000 was appropriate if established conditions were met. By the Decision Point, the Government expects
to be well advanced in preparation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and the consultation process.

State Modernization, Institution Building and Decentralization

55. 
In response to a weak and overextended public sector, the Government has been implementing a
longer-term public sector modernization program, with the support of IDA and IDB. Mitch dealt a severe
blow to public sector institutions, including physical destruction of a number of ministries, and the
reconstruction effort will severely tax the public sector's administrative and managerial capabilities. No
significant changes have been made to the existing public administration structure in response to the
increased reconstruction demands-other than establishment of the Reconstruction Cabinet-and the core
Ministries, such as the Ministry of Finance, are now greatly overburdened as they try to prioritize,
coordinate and monitor an increased flow of assistance. The strengthening of public administration is a
key element of the Government's reconstruction program, framed within the broader public sector
modernization agenda. As discussed below, improving governance and transparency will be key, but
beyond this there is also a need to strengthen institutions throughout the public sector, which has become
even more urgent after Mitch. To a major extent, the fiscal discipline that will be needed to underpin the
macro framework, economic and social reconstruction, and implementation of the structural and social
reform agenda, will depend on the institutional capacity of the public sector.

56. The emergency caused by Mitch has brought to the fore the need to advance on the decentralization
agenda. Municipalities and local groups played a key and generally effective role in channeling
assistance to affected communities. CSGs pointed out that where communities were organized, the
response to Mitch was more effective. In a number of instances, Government agencies such as FHIS
adopted temporary decentralization approaches that allowed them to be more responsive to community
needs and speed up the delivery of assistance. While the Government agrees that the experience with the
emergency provides a good basis to build a longer-term decentralization strategy, it believes it must move
gradually and is concerned over the fiscal implications of broad based decentralization to the municipal
level. In recent years, as the Government has struggled to maintain fiscal stability, it has found it difficult
to transfer to municipalities the mandated 5 percent of net tax revenues. The Government believes that a
more comprehensive decentralization strategy, which would need to include a sustainable municipal
revenue base, could only be considered once it is able to deal with immediate rehabilitation needs and
provide a sounder fiscal basis for its own finances.

57. WBG Support. Institutional strengthening is a major CAS priority. Efforts through ongoing and
proposed projects will be intensified to build up institutional capacity in key public sector agencies,
especially those damaged by Mitch and where institutional capacity will be critical to implement reforms
(e.g., education, health, banking supervision, local governments). IDA will continue to support the
Government's public sector modernization and reform program through its ongoing adjustment and TA
operations. Beyond these ongoing efforts, however, the Government has identified an urgent need to
strengthen its capacity to manage the increased international aid flows in support of the reconstruction
effort. The WBG is supporting immediate institutional strengthening needs to deal with reconstruction
and aid management through a PHRD Implementation Grant. The Grant is assisting the Ministry of
Finance to set up a small unit to link aid coordination with the budgetary system and provide a continuous

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

17

information flow to guide the reconstruction process. Over the medium term, a proposed Economic and
Financial Management TA operation will seek to rebuild capacity in core ministries and provide support
to continue to deepen public sector reforms, especially in personnel policies and systems, governance and
accountability, regulatory systems for privatized sectors, and expansion of the integrated financial
management system The institutional capacity of the banking supervisory agency will be strengthened in
partnership with the IMF and IDB.

58. As discussed in the CAS dialogue, there is also a need to improve the efficiency of public spending
and to consider institutional support for gender equality. A Public Expenditure Review (PER), in
coordination with the Infrastructure Assessment and the Poverty Update, will analyze the efficiency of
public spending, especially the need for institutional reforms and to improve the targeting of public
expenditures on the poor. A proposed PHRD grant for Gender Institutional Strengthening will channel
support at the regional level. In addition, the Government has requested support through the Economic
and Financial Management TA Project to build capacity within the Ministry of Finance to adopt a gender
perspective in the evaluation and monitoring of public investments.

59. 
In terms of decentralization, IDA will continue to support effective decentralization of Government
agencies and strengthening the role of municipalities. It will coordinate efforts with other donors (IDB,
USAID, Spain, UNDP) who are supporting local participation and municipal strengthening programs.
This includes community participation in education, effective decentralization in health and FHIS
operations, strengthening of local governments and community participation through FHIS, and the
decentralization to municipalities of watershed management activities and sustainable land use. Over the
longer-term there is a need to improve and ensure a sustainable fiscal base for municipalities, structure
fiscal transfers to benefit poorer municipalities, and a clearer definition of their roles and responsibilities.
To this end, IDA will continue a policy dialogue with Government on the need for a longer-term
decentralization strategy, building on the experience and results of sectoral decentralization efforts.

Improving Governance

60. As Honduras advanced in its democratization process there were increasing concems, among civil
society and the Government itself, on the need to improve governance and transparency. Mitch
underscored the urgency of addressing this issue, not only to assure donors that their reconstruction
support would be handled transparently, but also as a key longer-term development issue. Improved
governance and transparency are key priorities in the Government's development agenda. There were
various attempts during the 1990s to address issues of governance but they were not sustained or were
perceived as political. All indications are that the immediate emergency relief phase was handled well
and transparently, especially through special audit teams under the direction of the Office of the
Comptroller General which inventoried, tracked and monitored the distribution of assistance. The
Government believes, however, that the transparent and efficient use of resources for reconstruction will
require a more concerted effort to strengthen internal and external audit mechanisms. At the same time, it
believes that if it succeeds in ensuring an efficient and transparent handling of the increased aid for
reconstruction, this can have a powerful demonstration effect allowing it and future administrations to
tackle more systemic and deep-seated issues of governance, transparency and impunity. This will be a
difficult process and the Government is aware that if it is to succeed against powerful and entrenched
interest groups, it must count on the support of civil society.

61. The Government's governance strategy focuses on ensuring a transparent and efficient handling of
reconstruction aid, and includes six key elements. First, with donor support, the Government is
strengthening the Comptroller's Office. Three international companies have been hired to assist in
auditing reconstruction projects. Second, the Government has prioritized reconstruction projects, which
will need to be betted and approved by the Reconstruction Cabinet before beginning implementation.
Third, with assistance from IDB, the Government has set up a Technical Commission, supported by an
international company, to oversee the procurement process, including the elaboration of standard bidding

18 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

documents and strengthening of the Office of Administrative Probity. Fourth, the Government also plans
to set up a General Project Inspection Unit to review the quality, financing and transparency of projects
under execution. Fifth, the Government is moving on two fronts to involve civil society. Through a
Presidential Decree it established the Commission for Civil Society Participation to monitor
implementation of the reconstruction plan. The Commission includes representatives of the Association
of Mayors, the Honduran Private Sector Council, the National Convergence Forum (FONAC), the
Citizen's Forum, and INTERFOROS. With the support of Denmark, the Human Rights Ombudsman's
Office is following up on the results of a preliminary Social Audit and the Government has undertaken to
take further corrective actions once the final report of the Social Audit is available. Sixth, with IDA
support, the Government is expanding the integrated financial management system throughout the public
sector, to increase the transparency of the budget process and financial management.

62. WBG Support. The CAS seeks to support improved governance and transparency, while
recognizing that this will be a difficult and longer-term process. The WBG's strategy in this area has a
number of inter-linked elements. First, we will intensify support for aspects of the public sector
modernization effort that can strengthen transparency and accountability in public administration. This
includes adoption of the integrated financial management system throughout the public sector, technical
support for a transparent privatization and concessioning process, as well as an improved and transparent
regulatory framework for privatized services and the financial system. Second, we are joining IDB and
other donors in strengthening existing control structures, especially to improve the audit capacity of the
Comptroller General's Office and the capabilities of the Office of Administrative Probity. As part of this
effort and at the request of the Government, IDA is participating with other donors in an effort to set up
special arrangements that can assure donors that funds are being used appropriately. Special care is being
taken to ensure that these arrangements work within existing institutional structures and that, when the
reconstruction phase is over, they leave behind greater capacity within the public sector. In addition,
FIAS expects to support a major effort to increase the automaticity and transparency of regulations that
affect the private sector, thus improving transparency. A parallel donor effort is underway in a number of
pilot municipalities to strengthen transparency and good governance. More broadly and focusing on the
longer term, we will support Government efforts to mobilize civil society and establish participatory
processes that can lead to a national integrity plan. As a first step, and with the support of WBI and IDB,
we organized a Regional Integrity Workshop in early February, which brought together representatives
from Central America, including Honduras, to share experiences and lay the foundation for the
development of national integrity plans.

Environmental Sustainability

63. The effects of Hurricane Mitch were exacerbated by Honduras' environmental problems. The
country is predominantly mountainous, with narrow coastal plains and numerous inland valleys. High
population growth, skewed land ownership, inappropriate land management and forestry policies, have
been responsible for the conversion of large areas of high forestry potential into less suitable activities.
This is causing a number of serious environmental problems, including deforestation, soil degradation,
water pollution, depletion of coastal and marine resources, and the loss of biodiversity. Over the past
three decades, Honduras has lost about 40 percent of its forests, principally as a result of an advancing
agricultural frontier, extensive livestock ranching, unsustainable logging and firewood extraction. More
than half of the cleared land was only suitable for forestry, so that deforestation has not led to sustainable
agricultural development and imposed high environmental costs. Increased rates of deforestation and loss
of vegetation cover have impacted adversely watersheds. Soil degradation is largely the result of illegal
logging, hillside farming by poor farmers who have no viable alternatives-at least one-quarter of land is
used in hillside farming and 3040 percent of the population is engaged in subsistence hillside farming-
and the use of chemicals in commercial flatland production. Water pollution is also severe, as a result of
uncontrolled use of chemicals in agriculture and the lack of adequate sewage treatment facilities. The
depletion of marine and coastal resources is a matter of increasing concern. The estuaries and mangroves
of both coasts are deteriorating due to over-exploitation and contamination. Coral reefs in the Atlantic are

Honduras: Country Assistance Strategy 

19

being destroyed at an alarming rate due to tourism, sedimentation and contamination. Honduras has
diverse ecosystems, with rich flora and fauna, particularly in its humid tropical and subtropical forests,
but the expansion of the agricultural frontier and deforestation pose a tremendous threat to its
biodiversity. Compared to other countries in the Meso-American Biological Corridor, Honduras has the
greatest block of continuous, intact tropical forest habitat, with considerable potential to tap global
environmental resources and develop sustainable tourism.

64. As awareness of Honduras' serious environmental problems has grown, Governments have been
taking steps since the early 1990s to address the most pressing issues, but results have been mixed.
Honduras' environmental agenda has been hampered by weak ownership and commitment at the central
level, in turn resulting in weak institutional capacity and enforcement capabilities. Progress has been
made in reorienting the public sector away from production and marketing of forest products, toward
management, regulation and protection of forest resources. The Government is also improving the
demarcation and management of biodiversity areas, carrying out outreach and education activities to raise
environmental awareness, and encouraging greater involvement at the local level-especially among
municipalities in fragile river basins. These efforts, however, have been inadequate to address the
country's serious environmental problems.

65. WBG Support. IDA's efforts to strengthen environmental institutions and policies were proving
largely ineffective as Mitch struck. Although there were important achievements in biodiversity
protection and work with municipalities, IDA's Environmental Institutions Project was floundering.
Mitch, however, cruelly demonstrated how easily progress could be washed away and the urgent need to
refocus the development agenda on environmental sustainability. Although IDA had been discussing
with Govermment ways to get the Environmental Project back on track, progress was hampered by lack of
leadership and commitment at the ministerial level. Recent changes in the Ministry and a stronger
mandate from the Government have improved prospects for refocusing on the environmental agenda.
The damage caused by Mitch, however, added an additional and urgent priority-protection of the
Choluteca River in the capital. To this end, and given the urgency of the works, IDA reprogrammed
about $6 million to finance cleaning, dredging and stabilization of the banks to prevent the devastating
landslides that caused widespread destruction in the capital. The remainder of the project will continue to
support programs that were proving effective, such as the work with municipalities and some urgent flood
prevention measures in poor communities, aiming to build capacity and ownership within the Ministry,
and strengthen environmental planing and management capacity in local governments.

66. 
In addition, WBG support for environmental sustainability will focus on: 
(i) Honduras' rich
biodiversity; and (ii) watershed management. The Bank will continue to support the ongoing GEF Meso-
American Biological Corridor, and is also considering a GEF project to protect the Mesoamerican Barrier
Reef System. The GEF project would be complemented by a Sustainable Coastal Tourism LIL, aimed to
assist Government and stakeholders ensure the environmentally sustainable development of the country's
rich tourism potential in coastal areas. As clearly demonstrated by Mitch, protection against future
disasters will require a more integrated approach to the management of large river basins. A proposed
Municipal Watershed Management and Rural Development Project would join forces with other donors
to improve management and protection of large river basin systems.

Risk Management and Disaster Preparedness

67. While the destruction caused by Mitch is without precedent in Honduras' modem history, the
Government is conscious that it must reduce the country's vulnerability to natural disasters and improve
its ability to handle future emergencies. In fact, just prior to Mitch, we had begun discussing with the
Government a program to strengthen the country's institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and
management. In the event, WBG's disaster preparedness team was able to offer on-the-ground advice
and assistance to the Government during the immediate emergency relief phase. The Government has
requested IDA support to put in place a strategy and institutional strengthening to reduce the vulnerability

20 

Honduras: Country Assistance Strategy

of critical infrastructure and settlements. Support either through a self-standing Disaster Preparedness
and Mitigation Project, or through components under other projects would include: (i) capacity building
to manage natural disasters; (ii) comprehensive damage and vulnerability assessments based on
watersheds, basins, and sub-basin-approaches; (iii) identification of flood-prone areas and protection
measures that should be adopted in parallel with infrastructure rehabilitation investments to prevent
catastrophic losses from future natural disasters; and (iv) other measures to reduce and manage systemic
risk. The project will build on a regional effort in partnership with IDB to support the Center for
Prevention of Disasters in Central America, through an IDF grant of $300,000 matched by an equivalent
grant from IDB and $1.1 million from the Japanese Trust Fund. The grants will support vulnerability and
risk assessments, training for public and private officials, carrying out small emergency response tests,
and raising awareness about ways to reduce risks at the local level. In addition, we are completing a
study on Gender and Post-Disaster Reconstruction in Honduras and Nicaragua. The findings and
recommendations will feed into the preparation of disaster management strategies and interventions.

m. The Country Assistance Strategy

The Last CAS: Lessons and Impact

68. OED Lessons. OED evaluations of country and IDA performance over the past five years, as well
as our own assessment, suggest a number of important lessons which guided preparation of this CAS. As
pointed out by OED (Annex E), Honduras has steadily improved its economic performance and had the
fastest improvement in outcomes among regional and worldwide portfolios, as reflected in OED's
development effectiveness index. Our internal assessment suggests somewhat disappointing progress in a
number of important areas, including: (i) the implementation pace of structural reforms; (ii) inadequate
social sector reforms and low social indicators in key areas; (iii) lack of a comprehensive poverty
reduction strategy; (iv) failure to reform rural credit systems and, more generally, to adopt a rural
development strategy fully integrated with poverty reduction efforts; (v) continued weaknesses in
environmental institutions and enforcement of policies and regulations; and (vi) streamlining gender in
WBG activities. In terms of IDA's portfolio, OED points out that while the development effectiveness
index has improved rapidly, it remains low and most IDA projects have had limited institutional impact.

69. 
Impact. Poverty alleviation was the overarching priority of the 1993 CAS. Official data suggests
that poverty decreased only slightly in the second half of the 1990s (from 67 percent in 1994 to 63 percent
in pre-Mitch 1998). As discussed in Annex C, economic growth explains an important part of the change
in poverty rates. Thus, WBG support for a revival of growth in the second half of the decade likely
contributed to the modest reduction in poverty. It can be argued, however, that the adoption and
implementation of a more comprehensive poverty reduction strategy would have had a stronger impact on
reducing poverty. The Government and the WBG probably placed too much emphasis on the FHIS as an
anti-poverty tool, and not enough on other elements of a poverty strategy, especially social sector reforms,
sustainable rural development, gender, and the development of indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples.

70. 
In our view, a key weakness has been the difficulty in generating a national consensus to underpin
and to make sustainable reform efforts. We have learned that reform programs or strategies developed
and imposed from above have little chance of succeeding or of surviving electoral cycles, no matter how
strong the commitment at the top policy-making level. This has clearly been the case in agriculture
(especially rural credit and forestry), education and health, where progress has been modest and reforms
haltingly implemented. In agriculture, succeeding Governments carried out important reforms but little
progress has been made in developing a viable rural credit system or strengthening the forestry sector. In
education and health, while IDA projects and policy dialogue have supported reforms at the margin, until
recently there was little progress in shifting the central paradigm from service expansion to quality
improvements. In Honduras' four-year electoral cycle, it becomes critical to support reforms only after
they have become part of broad, longer-term reform programs which are also validated by some measure

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

21

of consensus with civil society and within the bureaucracy that will be required to carry them out. To
address this issue, the CAS proposes to: (i) rely, where appropriate, on APLs and LILs to support longer-
term reform efforts and innovative approaches; (ii) draw lessons from pilot activities under ongoing
projects-land administration, environment, education and FHIS-to demonstrate success and support
broader reforms; and (iii) as agreed during the CAS dialogue, enhance the consultations and consensus-
building efforts with civil society and key stakeholders, including prior agreement on clearly defined and
time-bound consultation processes. In addition, an ongoing Gender Review of the Honduras Portfolio is
analyzing the portfolio and will recommend moving away from focusing only on the role of women to a
gender approach that considers instead the relative roles of women and men.

Overall CAS Approach.

71. The devastating effects of Mitch required the WBG to refocus its strategy to support the
Government's medium-term reconstruction program. While this will necessarily entail postponing or
delaying some of the less urgent longer-term development issues, we will also seize opportunities to
advance the reform agenda. The overall thrust of the strategy is to help Honduras rebuild, while laying
the basis for a stronger economy and a more equitable distribution of the benefits from growth. The
overriding priority is adoption and implementation of an outcome-based poverty reduction strategy, with
a strong emphasis on improving the quality of social services, strengthening the social safety net,
indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples' development, mainstreaming gender, and supporting sustainable
rural development. The strategy supports faster growth, as an essential complement to poverty reduction,
through infrastructure rehabilitation, strengthening the financial system, and private sector development.
It also seeks to ensure that progress can be sustained, through a focus on macroeconomic stability,
institution building, governance, improved environmental management and disaster preparedness.

72. As discussed earlier, Honduras has a very unequal distribution of income and assets. International
experience, especially in LAC, suggests that inequality tends to improve very slowly. The longer term
country vision underlying the proposed strategy involves a more equal and inclusive society, but we must
be realistic in terms of the progress that can be achieved during this CAS period. While a number of
proposed activities are designed to improve equity-especially better access and quality of pre- and
primary education, support for land security and the pilot Land Fund, improved targeting, and
development of indigenous communities-these efforts can only be expected to have a modest impact on
overall inequality, especially over the medium term. Rather, they represent first steps that, if sustained,
can show what can be achieved through a more inclusive development strategy. The planned Poverty
Update will provide a deeper analysis of inequality and its causes which, coupled with measurable
progress in the areas mentioned above, can begin to lay the foundations for a more equitable society.

Lending Levels and Composition

73. Lending Scenarios. IDA lending to Honduras over the period FY94-98 amounted to $169 million
(excluding 5t Dimension) for six operations. Lending in FY99, before Mitch struck, amounted to $53
million (FHIS IV and PROFUTURO). IDA increased lending in FY99 by an additional $230 million on
an extraordinary basis to assist Honduras with the immediate consequences of the disaster. This included
a Hurricane Emergency Project ($200 million) and supplementary credits for the Health ($10.4 million)
and Roads ($20 million) Projects, bringing total FY99 lending to $283.7 million. In order to support the
reconstruction effort and based on Honduras' continuing satisfactory performance, the CAS proposes a
base case lending scenario of $317 million over FYOO-02. A high case lending scenario would amount to
$367 million (excluding 5h Dimension) by adding one adjustment operation, to support broad reforms in
the financial sector. Triggers to move into the high or low case are presented in Table 2. Progress on
poverty reduction would be measured with respect to the quantitative outcome and intermediate indicators
that will be included in the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to be prepared in early 2000.
The trigger on governance and transparency would be based on IDA's assessment of the Government's
handling of reconstruction assistance and implementation of the agreed steps to strengthen internal and

22 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

external control mechanisms (paras. 61-62). This assessment will be qualitative and carried out in
consultation with the group of donors supporting the Government's transparency program. The trigger to
move to the high case would be a strong macroeconomic performance, especially sound fiscal policies,
and agreement on a comprehensive reform program in the financial sector (priority reform areas are
discussed in para. 47), which would form the basis for the proposed Financial Sector Adjustment Credit.
The level of lending under the low case would depend on the extent of the deterioration in performance
and the sectors where we judged that progress would still be possible. In principle, we expect that under a
low case scenario IDA could reduce lending by as much as one half of the proposed base case, and seek
where possible to concentrate support on human development and poverty reduction. Satisfactory
portfolio performance would include: (i) number of problem projects not to exceed 25 percent during a
year; (ii) agreement and satisfactory progress in implementation of action plans for problem projects; and
(iii) a disbursement ratio not lower than 20 percent in a year.

Table 2: CAS Lending Scenario Tnggers
Low Case 

Base Case 

High Case

The low case would be triggered by one 
of: 
* Macro deterioration due to 
inappropnate policies or backtracking 
on structural reforms
. Lack of Government commitment and 
progress in implementing Poverty 
Reduction Strategy 
. Substantial lack of commitment to 
improving governance 
* Substantial deterioration in the portfolio 

To remain in the base case would require: Moving to the high case would require
the base case plus:
. Strong macroeconomic performance

* Macroeconomic 
framework acceptable 
to IDA

. Strong commitment and good progress 
in implementing Poverty Reduction 
Strategy 
* Satisfactory commitment and
performance in improving govemance
* Satisfactory performance in portfolio
implementation

. Agreement on and implementation of
key structural reforms to be supported
by adjustment lending

74. 
IFC has a fairly large portfolio in Honduras relative to the size of the economy. Since 1995, IFC
has approved investments totaling $132 million, including syndications, in private power generation,
large manufacturing, tourism and agribusiness. IFC, like IDA, moved quickly to try to assist Honduras
after Mitch, mainly trying to help existing clients deal with the needs to restructure their operations. IFC
is presently re-assessing its approach in Honduras, which to date has involved a small number of
interventions to support early private power generation and larger manufacturing and agribusiness firms.
Priorities for IFC support include: (i) assisting Honduras to extend private participation in infrastructure;
(ii) strengthening the financial sector and broadening access to capital; (iii) helping to improve the
enabling environment for the private sector; and (iv) selectively providing direct financing, particularly in
industry, services and agribusiness.

75. Portfolio Composition. 
In line with the overall assistance strategy, the composition of IDA's
proposed lending portfolio is designed to support the overarching priority of poverty reduction and social
development. About two-thirds of the proposed FYOO-02 base case lending directly supports human
capital, social safety nets, development of indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples and the rural
development/rural poverty agendas. This project portfolio composition is a conscious choice, resulting
from intensive discussions with the Government, a careful assessment of IDA's comparative advantage
and value added, and the expected role of other donors. This was especially relevant after Mitch, when,
given the widespread destruction caused by the hurricane, there could have been an understandable
temptation to pour resources into the infrastructure sectors.

Portfolio Status, Lessons and Strategy

76. Status. IDA has a portfolio of 11 projects, representing a total commitment of $603.8, of which
$231.7 is undisbursed. Poverty reduction and human development accounts for about 30 percent of
commitments, infrastructure for about 14 percent, public sector modernization, including adjustment for
about 20 percent, and import support provided under a fast-disbursing hurricane emergency project for 33
percent. The portfolio is relatively young-its average age is 3.5 years-and performance has improved

Honduras: CountryAssistance Stratey 

23

as the Government has sought to maximize the effective use of resources in the aftermath of Hurricane
Mitch. The FY99 disbursement ratio, or the ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed
balance of IDA's portfolio at the beginning of the year (for investment projects only) has increased from
28 percent in FY98 to 198 percent in FY99. Four projects were restructured to meet urgent rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs (Transport Sector, RLMP, Environmental Development and Social Fund IV),
providing $79 million in incremental resources for hurricane reconstruction. An additional $30.4 million
was made available under supplemental credits for the Health and Transport Projects.

77. Lessons. At the beginning of FY99, two projects were rated unsatisfactory (Environmental
Development and Basic Education). Both projects have been restructured to respond to new priorities-
to pilot the community-based education pilot (PROHECO) under the Education Project, and to finance
urgent clean-up works in the Choluteca River in Tegucigalpa under the Environmental Project-and
performance has improved. Prior to the hurricane, both projects suffered from weak implementation
capacity but also weak commitment to the reforms they supported.

78. OED notes that between 1993 and 1998, Honduras had the fastest improvement in outcomes
among regional and worldwide portfolios (Annex D). The share of satisfactory projects increased from
60 to 75 percent from 1993-95 to 1996-98. OED's Development Effectiveness Index (DEI)-a summary
of a project's outcome, sustainability, and institutional impact-reflects 
this improvement. The DEI
increased at a faster rate, but the level of effectiveness in Honduras (a DEI of 6.2 between 1996 and 1998)
remained lower than the same index for Bank projects in Central America, LAC, or the rest of the world.
Only one quarter of projects evaluated by OED were considered likely to be sustainable or to have
substantial institutional impact, which is far below regional and world averages. In its recent review of
the Implementation Completion Report for the Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit, OED rated it as
marginally satisfactory with a modest institutional development impact. OED, however, notes that
adjustment operations can lay the policy framework for follow-up investment operations, as demonstrated
by the Adjustment Credit and the RLMP. QAG rated the link between the two operations as best practice.

79. Notwithstanding the improving trends noted above, development effectiveness and overall
implementation capacity remain a concern in Honduras, especially in view of the greatly increased
external assistance being provided by the donor community in response to the hurricane. By and large,
IDA projects have not experienced systemic problems with: (i) counterpart funds; (ii) procurement
difficulties; or (iii) audit delays. Problems tend to occur in three major areas. First, effectiveness delays
are common-albeit improving-since IDA credits (as with all foreign borrowing) require Congressional
approval both before and after the credit is signed. These delays may occur even when credits are not
controversial or when they are urgently needed, especially at times when Congress has a busy agenda.
Second, as discussed in the CAS section on lessons learned, some operations have suffered from lack of
broad consensus. This lack of consensus becomes critical given Honduras' vulnerability to the electoral
cycle. Third, the public sector has weak implementation capacity, which often results in bureaucratic
delays. Although public sector capacity has improved in the 1990s, and is partly responsible for the
improvement in the portfolio, it remains a concern.

80. Portfolio Strategy. The CAS includes a number of measures to maintain the recent progress in
portfolio implementation, including:

Institution Strengthening. Improving the efficiency and institutional capacity of the public sector is
a key CAS objective. This will include: (i) continuation of the public sector modernization program;
(ii) institution strengthening prograns under ongoing and proposed operations (education, health,
transport and economic management); and (iii) a recently-approved PHRD Implementation Grant is
providing support to strengthen the Ministry of Finance's capacity to prioritize, coordinate and
manage the increased flow of international aid that is financing the reconstruction.

24 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

* Supervision. IDA's supervision effort will be intensified during the CAS period. We will continue
with annual (or semi-annual, as needed) Country Portfolio Performance Reviews, which have proven
effective in resolving implementation issues and addressing systemic problems.
 Resident Mission. The previous Facilitation Office has been converted into a full-fledged Resident
Mission and we are contracting staff with strong World Bank operational experience to support
project supervision and strengthen donor coordination.
* Lending Strategy. As discussed in the CAS, three approaches have the potential to help address most
of the implementation constraints we have faced, including: (i) rely on APLs and LILs to support
longer-term reform efforts and innovations; (ii) draw lessons from pilot activities to demonstrate
success and support broader reforms; and (iii) enhance the dialogue and consultation with civil
society and key stakeholders.

Advisory and Analytical Activities

81. The poverty agenda, public expenditure reform, a strategy for infrastructure rehabilitation and
private sector development will be the key analytical pieces to support CAS objectives. The major formal
output will be a Poverty Update, but more important will be the process and technical support offered by
the WBG in the preparation of the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. Key aspects will include
assistance to improve the capacity to carry out and analyze living standard surveys, monitor poverty, and
support a participatory process with civil society in elaboration of the strategy and the outcome and
progress monitoring indicators. Less formal policy advice and dialogue will assist the Government in the
design of a longer-term rural development agenda, which would be an essential component of the poverty
reduction strategy. The second major formal piece will be a Public Expenditure Review (PER), focusing
on the social sectors, linking the poverty agenda with improved public sector efficiency. A parallel
Infrastructure Assessment will assist the Government adopt a comprehensive strategy for infrastructure
development, rationalize the state's role in the sector and provide an overall framework to coordinate
donor efforts. The PER and the Infrastructure Assessment will build on the 1995 joint WBG/IDB report
on Reforming Public Investment and the Infrastructure Sectors. The Government was making steady
progress in implementing the report's recommendations, especially in terms of increasing private
participation in infrastructure, rationalizing the public investment program, and improving the targeting
and quality of social spending. This progress, however, was interrupted by Mitch, and there is now a
need to refocus the reform agenda within a broader and longer-term strategy that fully integrates the
poverty reduction and public sector modernization objectives. The fourth major piece will be a Diagnosis
of the Business Climate by FIAS, identifying major reform areas and including consensus-building efforts
to support the reforms.

Selectivity and Donor Coordination.

82. The WBG's assistance strategy is framed within the Government's Plan for National
Reconstruction and Transformation, presented at the Stockholm CG Meeting. The international
community is responding generously to support the country's reconstruction, with indications of support
at the Stockholm Meeting totaling $2.8 billion over 1998-03 (Annex F). With increased donor efforts and
limited IDA resources, it is imperative that the proposed CAS be highly selective. The assistance strategy
will be driven by the following selectivity criteria: (i) contribution to the CAS goals of poverty reduction,
growth and sustainability; (ii) the client's expressed needs, consistent with WBG capacities and CAS
priorities; (iii) the WBG's own comparative advantage; and (iv) burden sharing and improved
coordination with donor agencies. This criteria will guide the overall choice of WBG assistance tools, but
our support will also be driven by the need to ensure consensus and commitment to proposed activities.
In areas where these have yet to emerge-e.g., decentralization, reform in rural credit institutions-we
will rely on our policy dialogue to encourage consensus and commitment, while working on the building
blocks that can improve prospects for reforms. Based on these criteria and the expected role of other
donors, we do not, under normal circumstances, foresee direct IDA lending for: secondary, vocational or

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy 

25

tertiary education; food security; rural roads; urban development, water and sanitation, and housing; the
energy sector; the judicial sector; and lending to municipal governments.

83. CAS implementation will require strong coordination with other donors. A CG Meeting for
Honduras, chaired by IDB, is planned for February 2000 in Tegucigalpa. The Regional Stockholm CG
Meeting will be followed up with a regional meeting in Madrid in the second half of 2000. The Resident
Mission will play an active role in local donor coordination, especially through participation and support
for the technical donor coordination groups established in Tegucigalpa to support implementation of the
Government's National Plan for Reconstruction and Transformation. The Stockholm CG Meeting agreed
to a partnership of donors and the Government under six major objectives (vulnerability, transparency and
governance, decentralization, human rights, donor coordination, and debt sustainability). The CG
Meeting also established a group of 5 donors (US, Germany, Canada, Spain and Sweden) to provide
continuous follow-up and support for the reconstruction effort. Fifteen technical coordination groups
have been established to extend donor coordination to the operational level. These groups are coordinated
by one or more donors and include: education, health, transparency and governance, decentralization,
housing, municipal strengthening, disaster mitigation, rural water, roads, justice, macroeconomic
developments, agriculture, forestry and environment, food security, and microenterprises. We will
maintain our very good working relations with the IMF and IDB, as we support Honduras' stabilization
and adjustment program, HIPC and the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. There is close
coordination with IDB, a strong partnership in a number of areas (e.g., governance, disaster preparedness,
MECOVI, infrastructure) and a clear division of labor in cases where the two institutions are involved in
the same sectors (Annex F).

IV. Civil Society Dialogue, Monitoring and CAS Risks

84. Civil Society Dialogue. Mitch began to introduce a new dynamic in the Govermment's dialogue
and relations with civil society. The Govermment had already begun working with civil society groups in
its efforts to mobilize support for the HIPC Initiative, but the disaster provided more opportunities for
dialogue as the Government sought to respond to calls by the donor community to involve civil society in
the design of reconstruction programs. The process has not always been smooth, but there is a concerted
and constructive effort to open up spaces for dialogue and consensus building. With the full support of
the Government, the WBG carried out a CAS dialogue with civil society representatives, and has sought
to reflect civil society views and recommendations in the proposed CAS (Annex G summarizes the main
conclusions and recommendations of the CAS dialogue).

85. Monitoring CAS Implementation. Setting quantitative outcome and progress indicators to
monitor CAS implementation has proven difficult due to the devastation caused by Mitch. In most
instances, there is little reliable information on post-Mitch baseline indicators-including overall poverty
levels and social conditions-that would be needed to set quantitative CAS benchmarks. The
Govemment has initiated preparation of its Poverty Reduction Strategy in consultation with civil society,
including the development of outcome and progress indicators. A key step in this process will be the
development of baseline poverty and social indicators to reflect the impact of Mitch. Once completed, the
Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper will be the base to set benchmarks and output indicators
in the CAS Country Program Matrix (Annex B1).

86. CAS Risks. The proposed CAS faces three major risks. First, despite good intentions, the sheer
magnitude of the reconstruction task may divert somewhat the Government's attention from the longer-
term reform and poverty reduction agenda. While the reconstruction of Honduras is indeed a massive
task, the Government has continued efforts to advance the reform agenda and has initiated the process to
elaborate an outcome-based poverty reduction strategy in consultation with civil society. Second, an
unfavorable external environment could severely impact Honduras' economy, especially adverse terms of
trade shocks which could derail an incipient economic recovery and place a considerable burden on the

26 

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

balance of payments. Third, project implementation will become more difficult, as the same institutions
with limited managerial capacity will be attempting to do more, while responding to more complex
problems, a larger number of donors and high public expectations. The Government is aware of this risk
and, in coordination with donors, is working to strengthen institutional and implementation capacity. In
addition, the Government will increasingly seek the support of and delegation to other actors, such as
NGOs and specialized UN agencies, in order to improve the country's implementation capacity.
Although we are taking steps to improve institutional capacity across implementing agencies and
strengthen project implementation, some weakening in the quality of IDA's portfolio, compared with the
exemplary performance over the past twelve months, may be inevitable. To guard against this risk, IDA
will pay particular attention to the quality of the portfolio and Honduras' absorptive capacity during CAS
implementation. On balance, we believe these risks are reasonable and manageable, especially
considering the impact of Mitch and the enormous reconstruction and transformation challenge ahead of
Honduras.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:

Sven Sandstrom 

Washington DC

Honduras at a glance

Annex Al
Page 1 of 2

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

atin
Americs 
Honduras & Carib. 

Low-
Income 

Development diamond'

1998
Population, mid-year (nillions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas melhod4 USS) 
GNP (Atas nethod, USS billions) 
Average annual growth, 1992-98
Population (%) 
Labor force (X) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199298) 
Poverty (% of population below natonal poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total popula ton) 
Life expectancy at birth (yars) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 lIve bIrhs) 
Child malnutrition (% of chkiren under 5) 
Access to safe water (X of populaon) 
Illiteracy (% ofpopulaton age 15+) 
Grossprimaryenrollment (% otschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1977 
1.7 
23.1 
34.8 
18.6 
14.5 
-8.6 
1.8 
45.1 
17.9 

GDP (US$ biltons) 
Gross domestic investmentUGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savingstGOP 
Gross national savingsGOP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest paymentslGDP 
Total debtGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debtlexports

6.2 
730 
4.5 

2.9 
3.8 

50
46 
69 
36 
18 
77 
29 
111 
110 
112 

1987 
4.2 
17.4 
22.0 
13.5 
9.7 
-7.7 
2.3 
79.5 
34.1 

502 
3P940 
1,978 

3,51S 
520
1,844

L'fe expectancy

1.6 
2.3 

1.7 
1.9 

G 
GNP 
Per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

75 
70 
32 
8 
75 
13 
113 

1997 
4.6 
31.5 
47.0 
25.5 
24.6 
-6.9 
3.7 
101.4 
21.2 

31
63
69

74
32
108 
lDondUras
113 
103

Access to safe water

Low-Income group

1998
5.3
29.6 
45.3 
22A
23.0
-6.6 
3.4 
85.9 
17.9

Economic ratios

Trd
rade

Domestic 
Savings 
ngs

Invsten
Investment

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

197787 1988498 

1997 

1998 1999"03

2.2 
-1.0 
1.5 

3.4 
0.8 
2.1 

5.1 
3.4 
1.0 

3.0 
1.1 
1.8 

3.9 
1.6 
7.0

Indebtedness

-Honduras
Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and lnvestment(%)

30.6 
23.2 
15.1 
46.2 
68.9 
12.5 
39.3 

20.9 
23.0 
14.5 
56.1 
72.3 
14.2 
25.9 

20.2 
25.6 
15.5 
54.2 
60.2 
142 
52.9 

30

20
10

17.6 
26.8 
15.9 
55.6 o 
=t=9
63.1 
-10 
14.5 
52.4

93 

94 

A8

95 

GDI 

97 

O GOp

197787 1988498 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of exports and Imports I%)

2.2 
2.4 
2.2 
2.6 
2.5 
3.1 
-4.1 
-1.4 
2.2 

3.2 
3.7 
3.7 
3.4 
3.1 
-2.0 
8.3 
3.4 
3.8 

5.6 
4.7 
6.1 
52 
6.0 
-0.4 
1.1 
-1.9 
6.4 

Is
10

5
0 

-10
-15

-7.0 
9.0 
5.8 
5.9 
3.0
9.2 
6.0 
6.0 
4.0 0

97 se 

9 

8

Exports 

e 

Imports

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates,
^ The diamonds show four key indicatorm In the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex Al
Page 2 of 2

Honduras

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (%)

(%chag) 

40 -

Consumerprkes 
Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 

2.5 
2.8 

20.2 
22.7 

13.7 
13.7 

30 -
20

.1

12.2 

Govenmernt flnance 
(% o GDP, ncludes cunent grants) 

10C
0 l 

I

Curmnt revenue 

.. 
.. 
.. 

22.6 

31.3 

29.9 

03 

04 

9s 
DP deflator +-CPI

98 

07 

9e

Current budget balance 
OveraH surplus/defcit 

1.0 
-3.8 

6.9 
-1.3 

5.5 
-1.8

-G 

TRADE

(US$ rigillaw) 
Toal exports (fob) 
Bananas 
Coffee 
Manufactures 

1977 

1987 
822 
311 
200 

1997 
1,538 
212 
327 

1998 
1,605 
176 
430 

Export and Import levels (USS millions)
3.00o
2,00
,00.

.. 
.. 
.. 
..

Total imports (cld 

.

953 

2,149 

2,589 

l 

niJ

Food 

er 

139 

269 

346 

1.00 

I 

II_

Fuel andeonerg 
Capital goods 

.

119 
193 

234 
529 

221 
510 

500

.. 

0

092 
9 

93 

94 

08 
st

97 

Export price index (19954100) 
Import price index (1995.100) 
Terams of trade (1995u100) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

87 
81 
108 

98 
95 
103 

87

84 

OExports 

EltmportB

103

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

CurrentaccountbalancetoGDPratlo(%)

(USS mrillions)
Exports of goods and serAices 

581 

950 

2,176 

2,396 

0 
-2. 02 

-

Imports of goods and servicks 
Resource balance 

655 
-74 

1,072 
-122 

2,452 
-276 

2,775 
-379 

93 

94 

90 

96 

07 

00

-4

Net income 
Netcurrenttransfers 

-69 
0 

-235 
36 

-218 
174 

-206 
235 

4 
-8-

Current account balance 

-143 

-320 

-321 

-350 

-12 

_

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

209 
-87 

398 
-78 

601 
-280 

518 
-168 

-14

-1e

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS milions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaVUSS) 

.. 

114 
2.0 

591 
13.0 

824
13.4

2.0 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(USS n.vilDns) 
Total deit outstanding and disbursed 

ComposItion of total debt, 1998 (USS millions)

754 

3,300 

4,698 

4,548

IBRD 
IDA 

87 

575 
80 

275 

235G:43A25

33 

496 

579 

G:429 A235

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

106 
9 
0 

342 
59 
1 

505 
73 
5 

479 
68 
6

F: 423

c: 113

Composition of net resource flows
OlriCal grant 
OftTcial creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfdio equity 

9 
71 
69 
9 
0 

133 
124 
*41 
39 
0 

138 
348 
3 
128 
0 

193
123 
-40
99 
0

E 1,287

0m,488

World Bank program
Commitmets 
Disbursements 
Principal reparymens 
Net flows 
Interest pamens 
Nettransfers 

17 
25 
3 
22 
6 
16 

4 
25 
26 
-1 
34 
-35 

48 
95 
52 
43 
26 
17 

245 
68 
5s 

A - IBRD 
B - IDA 
C -IMF 

E - Biater
D - Other multlateral F - Priwt
G - Shorternm

18

23
-5

Development Economics 

9/7/99

Annex B1
Page 1 of 5

HONDURAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02

Development 
Objectives 

Povertv 
Redsuction 

Strategy, Data and 
Monitoring 

Human Capital

Educaton 

Diagnosis 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

WBG
Actions/Indicators 

A. Poverty Alleviation and Social Developmente

WBG Instruments

* Between half and two-thirds of 
Honduran households are poor. 
* Comprehensive, outcome-oriented 
poverty reduction strategy is lacking. 
* Weak statistical base on poverty 
conditions and living standards, 
exacerbated bv Mitch. 

* Prepare and begin implementation of 
comprehensive poverty reduction. 
strategy, in consultation with civil society. 
* Improve survey capacity and data base 
to monitor poverty and living conditions 
* Improve targeting of social investments 
and social safety nets. 

* Assist with preparation of Poverty Reduction Strategy, 
civil society consultation, and progress/outcome 
indicators. 
* Support to strengthen statistical and survey capacity, 
rebuild social/poverty data base. 
* Update Poverty Map to reflect post-Mitch conditions. 

Non-Lendina
* Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(FYO-001)
* Poverty Assessment Update (FY01)
* MECOVI Program (FY01-02)
* Social Capital and Poverty (informal,
strategic conpact. FY00)

* Overall primary coverage and public 
spending are high, but quality Is low 
and rural area under-served. 
* Parents not involved in education 
decisions. 
* Large number of schools need to be 
rehabilitated and re-equipped after 
Mitch. 
* Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples 
lack physical and language access. 
* Long-term strategy for the integrated 
development of the education sector Is 
lacking. 

* Long-Term Education Strategy. 
* Launch Community Participation in 
Education (PROHECO) Program. 
* Physical rehabilitation of damaged 
schools, opening new schools in under- 
served areas under PROHECO model. 
* Creation of 1,250 PROHECO schools, 
covering 50,000 children In poor rural 
communities lackidng pre- and primary 
schools by 2001 
* Strengthen MOE institutional capacity to 
support Education Strategy. 
* Improve quality by application of 
technical criteria for hiring and promotion
of teachers, and expand testing of
student achievements.

* Agreed Long-Term Education Strategy 
* Support for PROHECO program, including opening of 
1.250 PROHECO primary schools, covering 50,000 
children in underserved areas.
* Support administrative reforms in MOE to support 
PROHECO model, improved teacher selection and 
training, revised curricula and student achievement 
testing.
* Provide bilingual education, including textbooks, in tvo 
languages: Garifuna and Miskito, by 2000. 

Oncoina Prolects
* Education Reform Project
* FHIS IV

Proposed Prolects
* Education Reform APL (FYO0)
* FHIS V (FY00)

Non-Lendina
* Consensus-building activities to
support Education Strategy
(workshops, seminars, dissemination,
clvi society dialogue)

Health 

* There has been considerable progress 
* Long-Term Health Strategy. 
* Assist Govemment in the elaboration of Long-Term 
including notable improvements in life 
* Rehabilitate health Infrastructure 
Health Strategy. 
expectancy, Infant mortality, pre-natal 
damaged by Mitch. 
* Support rehabilitation and replenishment of essential 
care and Immunization coverage. 
* Adopt Departmental decentralization 
supplies In the health sector. 
* Health coverage, however, remains low 
program for the health sector. 
* Support Departmental decentralization program through
(only 75%), matemal mortality remains 
* Update human resources census in the 
technical assistance to rationalize management 
high, contraceptive prevalence is low 
health sector 
structure In MOH. 
and child malnutrition is high. 
* Adopt and implement cost management * Support assessment of AIN nutrition program and 
* MoH is too centralized, inadequate 
and needs-based cost recovery, 
expansion to 5 additional Departments.
Incentives to increase efficiency, weak 
* Maintain DPT coverage and expand 
Integration of different levels of health 
measles Immunization coverage. 
system, procurement system for 
* Evaluate results and national replicability 
medicines needs to be improved, the 
of AIN nutrition program. 
social securty system requires reform 
* Financially separate health and pensions 
and delinking from the health system. 
systems.
1. The Government has Intttetedpreparation oa PovertyReduction StrategyPaper, with the assistance o iDA, the IMF and lDB. In line w/m the WorldBankiIMF recorrnedatbons on a ptoposedenhancedrframework 
povertytducVon, the Government Is focusing on an outcome-orIented povertyreduction strategy, taking as a basis the Intemattonallyagreed 
for
tarfets forthe year2015 (tnternatlonal Develprment Goals), Pn7paraton of the
strategy and ffIe mon/torng o its Inip/et776taton w/l/lnvh a &badbased partipatory and consultatIve poss wlvh ol asodety representatives. /n elaborating 
the strategy and/n consuttatVon with cril sodely the
Government wil agree on a come set o outcome and Intemnedate indicators. In the case of Honduras, the process ofestablishing a baseine forsuch a setoflndlcatora is compltcated by the devastat7n caused by
Huakcne Mitch. Thus, as part of this effort and with the support of IDA and other donors, the Govemment Is also taking steps to strengthen Its data base and update post-Mitch information on poverty and IM4ng conditions.
Key In this effort w/ii be the 2000 Census, whih wad provide a rkh source of InfomratIon on ivng condtions after Mitch. The set d outcotnes and /ntemiedate Indlcators agreed as part 
the Governmenrs poverty
strategy, to be reflected In the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, will be fully Integrated Into the CAS Country Program Matrix and used by the Country Team to monitor, on a prbodic basis, progress In meeting Govemment
and CAS performance IndLcators.

Non-Lendina
* Consensus-building activites to
support Health Strategy (workshops,
seminars, dissemination, civil society
dialogue)

Onnoina Prolects
* Health and Nutrition, and
Supplemental Credit
* FHES IV

Proposed Prolects
* Health (FY01)
* FHiS V (FY00)

Development 
Objectives 

Social Safety Nets 

Development of
Indigenous and 
Afro-Honduran 
Peoples 

Gender 

HONDURAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02 (continued)

Diagnosis 

* FHIS has become an effective 
instrument to finance communRy 
infrastructure and, as evidenced after 
Mitch, it can respond quickly In 
emergencies. 
* FHIS worked well In a decentralized 
manner during the emergency and 
some of these lessons can be 
incorporated In is normal activies. 
* Need to Improve community 
participation and strengthen capacity 
and inolvement of local govemment. 
* Strengthen targeting on the poorest. 
* PRAF, the other component of the 
safety net, can be strengthened through 
better targeting and expansion of

successful 

interventions. 

* Indigenous and Afro-Honduran groups 
are extremely disadvantaged, with high 
poverty and low access to basic 
services. 
* Institutional and organizational capacity 
is weak. 
* Expansion of sustainable tourism 
potential in the Atlantic Coast would 
benefit indigenous/Afro-Honduran 
communities but steps are also needed 
to avoid negative effects, especially by 
ensuring that communities have a voice 
and participate in planned 
developments. 

* Honduras has made substantial 
progress in addressing gender issues. 
* Women's health status continues to be 
low; matemal mortality remains high. 
* Use and access to family planning Is 
relatively low. 
* Women are especially vulnerable to the 
effects of natural disasters such as 
Mich. 
* Gender stereotypes and cultural gender 
biases remain prevalent. 
* The institutional base to address 
gender issues needs to be supported 
and strengthened. 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

* Seek Congressional approval to extend 
life of FHIS, which under current 
legIsation, lapses in 2002. 
* Improve targeting of FHIS through an 
updated Poverty Map. 
* Improve community participation and 
involvement of local govemments in 
FHIS community projects. 
* Restructure internal organization to 
improve responsiveness to community 
needs, support decentralization and 
Improve efficiency of FHIS operations. 
* Review with tDB support the 
effectiveness and poverty impact of 
existing programs under PRAF.

WBG
Actions/lndicators 

* Support preparation of an updated Poverty Map, taking 
account of effects of Mitch and further update based on 
improved statistical base.
* Support the resumption of town hall meetings (cabldos 
abbftos) to strengthen communIty participation and 
involvement in setting priorties for FHIS support. Adopt
participatory local planning approach to set priorities 
and approve new projeds. 
* Support FHIS program to strengthen local govemment 
capabilities, community participation and coordinatlon of
FHIS projeds.
* Agree on FHIS measures and poridties to Improve its
poverty impact, based on the FHIS tmpact Evaluation
Study, currently underway.

* Nuestrs Rakes Program, implemented 
through FHIS, targeting benefits on 
indigenous/Afro-Honduran communities. 
* Education program to expand access 
and materials on bilingual education, 
focusing initally on the two largest 
language groups. 
a Sustainable tourism development in the 
Atlantic Coast to benefit indigenous/Afro- 
Honduran communities. 
* Strengthening organizational and 
instiutional capacity of indigenous/Afro- 
Honduran communities. 

* National Policy on Women, approved in 
1989. The Govemmental Office on 
Women created in 1994. 
* Reforms to the Penal Code in 1996 
strengthened penalties for rape. Family 
Councils were created under MoH to 
address Inter-faninly violence. Creation 
of Special Prosecutor's Offtce for Women 
to address crimes against women. 
* The current Administration has made a 
special effort to increase women 
participation in highest levels of 
govemment. 
* Strengthen social safety net programs 
(FHIS and PRAF) targeting women. 
* Develop capacity in MOF to adopt a 
gender approach to the evaluation and 

.mP.nhun.hI; U, u"s,,n-- E. 

* Continue to support Nuestras Rakces program through 
the FHIS. 
* Complete pilot program to provide bilingual education 
and translate education materials into Garifuna and 
Miskito.
* Complete Social Assessment in preparation for 
Sustainable Tourism project, focusing on the needs of 
indigenous communities that wi1 be affected and beneflt 
by expansion of tourism faclities in Atlantic Coast. 
* Prepare a program to strengthen indigenous InstHutional 
capacity and participatory processes under proposed
LIL for Indigenous Development. 

* Target improved educational attainment of gids, 
removing gender biases in education system, as part of 
Long-Term Education Strategy. 
* Reduce by 25% over 5 years current high level of
matemal mortality. 
* Improve quality and coverage of family planning 
services offered by MOH. 
* Adopt a gender focus on disaster preparedness and 
mMigation, strengthen FHIS programs for women.
* Improve gender responsiveness of IDA portfolio. 
* GINO program to improve gender responsiveness In key 
public sector agencies. 
* Review impact of land liberalization on vwomen. 
* Channel support to Gender Instiutions, InitiaNy at 
regional level. 
* Support capacity building in MOF on gender approach 
to evaluate and monHor public investment program. 

Annex B1
Page 2 of 5

WBG Instruments

Ongoina Prolect
* FHIS IV

Proposed Prolect
* FHIS V (FYO)

Non-Lending
* FHIS Impact Evaluation (informal,
FYOO)

_ 

__

Onoolno Prolect5
* Basic Education: Bilingual Education
Program
* FHIS IV: Nuestas Rabeas Program

Proposed Prolects
* Education APL: Indigenous education
component
* FHIS V: Nuestas Rages Program
* Indigenous Development LIL (FY01)

Non4Lendina
* Indigenous Development IDF
(ongoing)

Onaolna Protects
* Heaith and Nutrition Project
* FHIS IV

Prooosed Prolects
Health (FY01)
* FHIS V (FYOO)
* Education Reform APL (FY01)

Non-Lendina
* Gender Portfolio Review (ongoing)
* Study of Gender Impad of Mtch
(ongoing)
* Land Market Liberalization (research)
* GINO Program (proposed)
* IDF Grant to support regional gender
instiutlonality (proposed)
........ 
!. 
_,, 

,T, 

,''

HONDURAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02 (continued)

Development 
Objectives 

Ruial Development 
end Rurd Povertly 

Diagnosis 

* Rural poverty is higher and deeper. 
* Land distribution is highly skewed and 
land security needs to be improved. 
* Credit access remains limited. 
* Natural resource management needs to 
Improve, especially to mitigate natural 
disaster risks. 
* Infrastructure and social services are 
weak and hamper income and job 
creation in rural areas. 
* The management of forestry resources 
needs to become more efficient and 
transparent. 
* Emergency river course stabilization in 
key areas is required after Mitch. 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

WBG
Actionslindicators 

* Adopt longer-term Rural Development 
Strategy. 
* Improve land security and functioning of 
land markets. 
* Launch market-assisted land reform 
program to improve access to land. 
Target investments in poor and marginal 
rural areas through a Rural Investment 
Fund (PRODERS). 
* Adopt watershed protection approach to 
the management of natural resources. 
* Restructure forestry agency and resolve 
govemance problems. 

* Support Govemment to prepare Rural Development 
Strategy, Including consultation process with civil 
society.
* Prepare program of watershed management and 
sustainable land use In 5 key areas affected by Mitch. 
* Promote community and municipality-managed forestry 
activities for income-generation and sustainable forestry 
conservation. 
* Launch the Pilot Land Fund to support market-assisted
land reform, financing land purchases for 1,000 
beneficiary families. 
* Continue and extend the IDA-supported land titling and 
registration program. 

Rebuilding 
Infrastructure 

B. Reviving and Accelerating Growth

- Mitch caused widespread damage to 
Honduras physical infrastructure. 
* The rebuilding effort vwill initially boost 
grovwh, but unless infrastructure can be 
rapidly and efficiently rebuilt it vwil 
constrain future growth prospects. 
* Privatization and private management 
of infrastructure and public utilities 
needs to be speeded up. 
* Road maintenance needs to be 
improved. 
* Access and service quality need to be 
Improved in the water sector, rural and 
urban. 

* With donor support Govemment carrying 
out most urgent repairs to infrastructure 
network. 
* Adoption of Infrastructure Reconstruction 
Program, as part of the overall 5-year 
Reconstruction and Transformation Plan. 
* Proceeding over coming year with 
privatization and concessioning in 
telecoms, airports and electricity 
distribution. 
* Road Fund will be made operational to 
improve road maintenance. 
* Preparation of strategy for the 
municipalization and concessioning of 
urban water services. 

* Support critical infrastructure repairs focused on the 
roads sector. 
* Assist the Govemment prepare a longer-term framework 
and strategy for the development of the Infrastructure 
sector. 
* Support initial capitalization and technical opermion of 
Road Fund to improve road maintenance.
* Microenterprise pilot to create road maintenance 
enterprises. 
* Provide technical assistance for the Govemment's 
privatization program, Including bringing to the point of
saletconcession award by end-2000 the telecoms 
company, the four intemational airports, and the power 
distribution companies. 

Strengthening the 
Financial Sector 

* Financial system expanded rapidly, 
ahead of the country's regulatory and 
supervisory capacity. 
* Capacity to regulate and supervise the 
financial system is weak and leaves 
parts of the system unsupervised. 
* Mitch weakened some bank portfolios, 
but system appears to have coped well. 
* Credit access in rural areas is low and 
existing rural lending not integrated In 
formal financial system. 

* Govemment is implementing program to 
strengthen technical capacity to 
supervise and regulate financial system. 
* Adopted measures to tighten regulations 
and prudential norms, and increase 
capital requirements. 
* Setting up deposit insurance scheme. 

* Complete program of assisted supervisions In all 
commercial banks. 
* Develop and implement longer-term technical 
assistance program to improve regulatory frameywork for 
the financial sector. 
* Support implementation of structural reforms to 
strengthen and deepen financial sector.
* Strengthen capacity of domestic insurance sector to 
cover natural disaster risks. 
* Review prospects for reform of rural credit system under 
proposed financial sector reform program.

Annex B1
Page 3 of 5

WBG Instruments

Onaolng Prolect
* Rural Land Management

Proposed Prolects
* Municipal Watershed and Rural
Development (FY01)
* Land Administration and Land Fund
(FY01)

Non-Lendina
Consensus-building activities on rural
development strategy (vorkshops,
seminars, civil society dialogue)
* Study on Land Market Liberalization
and Land Access (regional research
including Honduras)

Onaoina Prolects
* Transport Rehabiltation and
Supplemental Credit
* Public Sector Modemization TA
* Public Sector Modemization
Adjustment Credit

Prooosed Prolects
* Infrastructure Rehabilitation (FY00)
* Economic Management TA (FYOO)

Non-Lendina
* Infrastructure Assessment (FYOO)
* IFC support for energy privatization
* IFC study of Inter-oceanic transport
link

Proposed Profect
* Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
(FY01)
* Financial Sector TA Credit (FYO0)
* Possible IFC regionaUdirect
investments

Non-Lendina
* PHRD Grant and Spanish Consultant
Trust Fund for assisted supervisions

HONDURAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02 (continued)

Development 
Objectives 

Private Sector 
Development 

Diagnosis 

X The business climate has improved 
substantially In recent years. 
* Private sector needs to be the engine of 
growth and increase export 
diversification. 
* Improvements in the business climate 
need to focus on removing barriers to 
domestic and foreign Investment, and 
improving the speed and predictability 
of judicial system. 
* Support for small and medium 
enterprises needs to be strengthened. 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

* 

* Govemment improving incentives to 
develop potential in tourism, mining and 
agro-exports. 
In partnership with private sector, the 
country's investment promotion effort will 
be strengthened. 
* As discussed above, 
privatization/concessioning program 
targets telecoms, airports, power 
distribution and public works 
concessions. 

WBG
Actions/Indicators 

* Technical assistance to support small and medium 
enterprises. 
* Diagnosis and Action Plan to Improve the Business 
Environment. 
* Reform program to streamline and make more 
transparent regulations that discourage domestic and 
foreign investment. 
* Improve information on the business climate for 
investors considering operations in Honduras. 

C. Sustainability

Macroeconomkc 
Stability and Debt 
Sustainability 

* Maintain macroeconomic stability to 
support reconstruction effort and 
longer-term economic growth. 
*Reduce extemal debt to sustainable 
levels and contribute to poverty 
reduction efforts. 

* Implement macroeconomic program 
agreed with IMF under ESAF 
arrangement. 
* Target economic growth of at least 5% 
annually from 2000 onward. 
* Seek Inclusion of Honduras in HIPC 
Initiative. 

State 
Modernizadon, 
Institution Building 
and 
Decentralization 

* Although progress has been made, the 
public sector needs to be modemized 
and its institutional capacity 
strengthened. 
* Mitch caused considerable physical 
damage to public sector institutions, 
and the reconstruction effort will strain 
the public sector's limited 
implementation and coordination 
capacity. 
* Public expenditures need to be 
rationalized as the emergency phase 
comes to an end, and in order to better 
support the Government's poverty 
reduction and social development 
objectives. 
* There has been progress in 
decentralization, but a longer-term 
agenda remains to be developed. 

*Implementation of the Govemment's 
Public Sector Modemization Program, 
which in addition to the privatization 
program, includes: 17% reduction in 
public sector posts, gradual 
decompression of public sector salaries 
to attract beiter qualified staff, 
implementation of Integrated Financial 
Management System, linking it with the 
human resource management and 
payroll systems. 
* Strengthening of the public sector's 
institutional and policy-making capacity 
to manage the reconstruction program 
and coordinate increased aid inflows. 
* Strengthening municipalities, 
decentralization and deconcentration 
programs in education, heaih and FHIS. 

*Through policy dialogue and advice support 
Govemment to maintain stable macroeconomic 
environment and sustain growth rate of at least 5% 
annually. 
* Support Honduras' participation in the HIPC Initiative, 
including Board review of Preliminary HIPC Document 
and completion of conditions to reach Decision and 
Completion Points.

* Complete satisfactory implementation of the 
administrative reform component of the Govemment's 
Public Sector Modemization Program. 
* Strengthen the capacity of the MOF to manage and 
coordinate increased aid supporting reconstruction
program. Set up small coordination unit, strengthen 
integration of aid flows into the budget planning and 
execution process, and develop management
information system to track and coordinate aid flows. 
Implement medium-term program to strengthen 
economic and financial management capabilities in 
MOF and key govemment agencies. 
* Carry out Public Expenditure Review in partnership with 
Government to rationalize and improve efficiency of 
public spending, especially in social sectors. 
* Support specific decentralization efforts (education,
heaith, FHIS, watershed management at municipal
level), while maintaining policy dialogue on need for
longer-term decentralization agenda.

Annex B'i
Page 4 of 5

WBG Instruments

Non-Lending
* IFC/ltalian Trust Fund for TA to small
and medium enterprises in Central
America
* Possible IFC investments In industry,
services and agr-business.
* FIAS Diagnosis of the Business
Environment
Action Plan to Remove Administrative
Barriers on private sector development
(FIAS)
* MIGA guarantees and information
support through IPAnet and
Privatization Link

Non-Lendin
* Policy dialogue, IMF coordination on
ESAF program
* IDA Commercial Debt Buyback
Operation
* HIPC Preliminary Document, Decson
and Completion Point Documents

Ongolna Prolects
* Public Sector Modemization TA
* Public Sector Modemization
Adjustment Credit

Proposed Protect
Economic Management TA (FY00)

Non-Lending
* PHRD Implementation Grant
* Public Expenditure Review (ESW,
FY01)
* Policy dialogue and support for
elaboration of longer-term
decentralization agenda

HONDURAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02 (continued)

Annex BI
Page 5 of 5

Development 
Objectives 

Imptoving 
Governance 

Environmental 
Sustainability 

Managing Rlsks 
and Disaster 
Preparedness 

Diagnosis 

* Improved govemance and increased 
transparency need to be key priorRies 
in Honduras' development agenda. 
*Increased volume of aid to support 
reconstruction needs to be handled 
efficiently and transparently. 
*National control agencies need to be 
strengthened both to support 
transparency In the reconstruction, but 
also to improve govemance over the 
long term. 

Govemment 
Strategy/Actions 

WBG
Actions/lndicators 

WBG Instruments

* Govemment has prepared and initiated 
* Join other donors to support national program 
implementation (with IDB assistance) of 
strengthening audit and procurement capacity. 
program to strengthen intemal/external 
* Strengthen through technical assistance the Office of
audit control mechanisms in the 
the Comptroller General and the Oflice of Administrative Proposed Prolect
reconstruction effort, and build domestic 
Probity. 
* Economic and Financial Management
capacRty 
in procurement and acquisiions. * Complete implementation of Integrated Financial 
TA (FY00)
* Control agencies will be strengthened, 
Management System to increase transparency of the
especially the Comptroller General and 
budget process and outcomes. 
the Ofrice of Administrative Probity. 
* Govemment commitment to act on 
recommendations of Social Audi.
* Strengthen judicial system by improving
physical facilites and training of judges.

Non-Lending
* WBI support, as part of regional effort,
to develop National Integrity Plan.

Onaolng Prolect
* Public Sedor Modemization TA

* Honduras faces serious environmental * Strengthen awareness and education on 
problems. 
the seriousness of Honduras' 
Deforestation, has had a severe impact 
environmental problems. 
on watersheds, as painfully 
* Develop a program for watershed 
demonstrated by Mitch. 
management, focusing iniialy on the 
* Honduras' rich biodiversiy is 
most vulnerable areas. 
threatened by expansion of the 
* Improve the management and 
agricutural frontier and inadequate 
demarcation of proteded areas and 
management of protected and buffer 
support efforts to enhance incomes of 
zones. 
communhies living In buffer zones. 
* Coastal and marine resources, 
* Protect the Mesoamerban Barrier Reef 
especialy in the Atlantic, are under 
System. in partnership vwith other 
threat. 
countries that share this eco-system. 

* Promote environmental awareness and innovative 
education techniques that can help build respect for the 
environment. 
* Protect the biodiversity in Honduras' porion of the
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor. 
* Implement watershed management programs in the 
most vulnerable areas, vmorking 
in a decentralized 
manner vih, municipalites and vulnerable community 
groups.
* Develop program to protect the Mesoamerican Barer 
Reef System, including supporting the Govemment in 
the preparation of a strategy and program to encourage 
sustainable tourism in the Atlantic Coast. 

* Honduras remains vulnerable to natural 
disasters such as Mitch. 
* The country's institutional capacity to 
manage disasters and adopt measures 
that could mitigate risks needs to be 
strengthened. 
* Beter disaster preparedness needs to 
be integrated with regional efforts. 
* Gender needs to be considered in 
preparing for disasters and in the 
management of relief and 
reconstruction efforts. 

* Although Rs initial focus has been on 
meeting the most immediate emergency 
needs and most urgent repairs, the 
Govemment betieves i must strengthen 
is capacity to prepare for natural 
disasters and manage risks. 
* Adopt gender perspective In disaster 
management and preparedness. 

* Prepare a longer-term program to strengthen the 
country's ability to prepare for natural disasters and 
miigate is effects. 
* Strengthen regional effort through the Center for
Prevention of Disasters in Central America. 
* Develop program to reduce vulnerability to natural 
disasters In the roads sector. 
* incorporate a gender dimension in disaster 
preparedness and management of emergencies, based
on ongoing WBG study. 

Onaolna Prolects
* Environmental Development
* PROFUTURO

Prooosed Prolects
* Municipal Watershed and Rural
Development (FY01)
* Sustain. Coastal Tourism UL (FY02)

Non-Lendina
* GEF Mesoamerican Biologil Corridor
(ongoing)
a GEF Mesoamerican Barrier Reef
System (proposed)

Onuolna Prolect
* Transport Sector Rehabiliation
Supplemental

Prooosed Prolect
* Disaser PreparednesslMRigation
Projedc or components in other
projects

Non-Lendina
* Grant support for the Center for
Prevention of Disasters in Central
America
* Regional effort to strengthen inmurance
sector and correct market failures

13

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

HONDURAS: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of projects under implementation * 
Average implementation period (years)b 
Percent of problem projects 2,c
by number 
by amount 
Percent of projects at risk d
by number 
by amount 
Disbursement ratio (%) 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision resources (total $) 
Average supervision ($/project) 

FY96 

FY97 

FY98 

FY99

12 
3.00 

25.00 
30.53 

37.50 
42.35 
25.34 

9 
2.50 

11.11 

7.14 

12.50 
9.81 
31.67 

8 
3.32 

12.50 

3.37 

37.50 
48.89 
27.72 

11
3.28

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
197.66

Yes 
817.69 
68.14 

No 
799.04 
88.78 

Yes 
499.20 
62.40 

Yes
1,159.28
105.39

Memorandum Item 

Since FY80 

Last Five FYs

Projects evaluated by OED
By number 
By amount ($ million) 
Percent rated U or HU
By number 
By amount 

32 
900.88 

21.88 
15.35 

12
410.68

41.67
28.81

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance 
(except for FY99).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the year,
investment projects only.
Generated 11/01/99.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 1

HONDURAS: Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IDA Base Case Lending Program, FYOO-02

FY 

Project 

00 Economic and Financial Management Technical Assistance 
Health Sector 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation 
Financial Sector Technical Assistance 
Honduran Social Investment Fund V 
Disaster Preparedness and Mitigationc 
Subtotal FY2000 

01 Education APL 
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Development LIL 
Land Fund and Land Administration 
Municipal Watershed Management and Rural Development 
Subtotal FY2001 

02 Coastal Resources and Sustainable Tourism Development LIL 
Subtotal FY2002 

Total FYOO-02 

Strategic 
Implementaton
$ Million Rewards (HIMIL)b Risks (HIM/L)b

M 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 

H 
M 
H 
H 

M 

15.0 
30.0 
60.0 
10.0 
60.0 
10.0 
185.0

35.0 
7.0 
40.0 
45.0 
127.0

5.0 
5.0

317.0

L
H
L
L
L
M

M
M
M
M

L

a. Proposed CAS base case lendlng program, excluding 
5m Dimension Resources.
b. For each project, the table indicates whether the strategic rewards and Implementaton 
risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M),
or low (L).
c. Either a self-standing project or components as part of other projects.

IFC and MIGA Program, FY96-99

Category 

IFC Approvals ($m) 

Sector (%)
Food and Agro-business 
Hotels and Tourism 
Infrastructure 
Manufacturing 
TOTAL 

Investment Instrument (%)
Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity a 
Other 

TOTAL 

MIGA Guarantees ($m) 
MIGA Pending Applications ($m) 

1996 

0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 

29.96 
0.00 

a. Includes quasi-equity 
types of both loan and equity Instruments.
Generated 11101/99.

Fiscal Year
1997 

25.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 
100.00 

60.00 
0.00 
40.00 
0.00 
100.00 

29.47 
0.00 

1998 

10.50 

0.00 
95.24 
4.76 
0.00 
100.00 

95.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
100.00 

25.92 
0.00 

1999

16.00

37.50
0.00
62.50
0.00
100.00

68.8
0.00
31.20
0.00
100.00

20.24
0.00

Annex B4
Page 1 of I

HONDURAS: Summary of Nonlending Services

Fya Costb 

Audience 

Objective

Economic and Sector Work

95 

Recent Completions
Country Economic Memorandum and Poverty 
Assessment 
Impact of Policy Reform on the Incomes of the 
Rural Poor
Reforming Public Investment and the Infrastructure 96 
Sector A Joint World Bank and IDB Study
Land Tenure Security and Productivity in LAC: The 
Case of Honduras and Paraguay
Improving Access, Efficiency, and Quality of Care 
in the Health Sector 

95 

97 

98 

247 Bank, Government, 
Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Donors, Public 
public debate
Bank, Government, Donors Knowledge generation

19 

169 

Bank, Government, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving

NA 

Bank, Government, Donors Knowledge generation

160 Bank, Govemment, 
Donors, Public 

Knowledge generation, problem solving,
public debate

Planned

Foml

Public Expenditure Review 

Infrastructure Assessment 
Poverty Assessment Update (and support for 
preparation of the Govemment's Poverty Reduction 
Strategy and the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper)
Diagnosis of the Business Climate 

Inform

Poverty Monitoring Capacity Building 
HIPC Initiative, Debt Sustainability Analysis 
Rural Development Policy Notes, Workshops, 
Dialogue and ConsuHation 
Gender and Post-Disaster Reconstruction: The 
Case of Mitch in Honduras and Nicaragua 

01 

01 
01 

150 Bank, Government, 
Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Donors, Public 
public debate
100 Bank, Government, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
150 Bank, Govemment, 
Knowledg generation, problem solving,
Donors, Public 
public debate

00 

80 

Bank, Government, Public Knowledge generation, problem solving,
public debate

01/02 
00/02 
00/01 

00 

100 Govemment, Public 
Knowledge generation, problem solving
100 Bank, Govemment 
problem solving
50 
Bank, Govemment, 
Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Donors, Public 
public debate
Bank, Govemment, Public, Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Donors 
public debate

50 

IDF Grants

Environment Development 
TA Extemal Debt Management 1 
Social Sector Management 
Indigenous Institutional Strengthening 
TA Extemal Debt Management 11 

95 
97 
98 
98 
99 

-
-
-
-
-

Govemment, Donors, Bank Knowledge generation, problem solving
Govemment, Bank 
Problem solving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Problem solving, knowledge generation
Govemment, Bank, Public Problem solving, public debate
Govemment, Bank 
Problem solving

Other

World Bank InstRute Courses 
00/02 NA Govemment, Public 
Knowledge generation
MECOVI Program to Strengthen Data Generation 00/02 NA Govemment, Public, 
Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Capabilities 
Donors, Bank 
public debate
Social Capital and Poverty (Compact Funding) 
01 
NA Govemment, Bank, Public Knowledge generation, public debate
Support for Center for Prevention of Disasters in 
00102 NA Govemments, Bank, Public Knowledge generation, problem solving
Central America 
public debate
Impact of Land Market Liberal. & Land Access of 
Knowledge generation, public debate
the Poor in Honduras, Mexico & Nicaragua 
GINO Program in Honduras 

TBD Bank, Government, 
Donors, Public
01103 TBD Govemment, Public 

Knowledge generation, problem solving

01 

NA = Not available; TBD = To be determined.
a. FY of completion.
b. Cost in $000.
c. Includes staff time to assist the Government prepare its Poverty Reduction Strategy, the consultation process, and the Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper to be prepared with the support of IDA, IMF and IDB.

ANNEX B5
Page 1 of I

Honduras Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same reglon/lncome group

Latin America & 

Low-

1970-76 

1980-85 

1992-97 

Caribbean 

income

POPULATION
Total populabon, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of populabon) 
Total fertlity rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

3.0 
3.0 
32.1 
7.1 

4.2 
3.2 
37.7 
6.0 

6.0 
2.4 
45.0 
4.3 

493.9 
1.4 
74.2 
2.7 

2,035.6
1.7
28.4
4.0

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

50.0
56.0

46.0

INCOME
GNP per capita (USS) 
Consumer price index (1995= 100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

400 
12 

790 
26 
22 

740 
149 
149

3,940 
123 

350
122

.. 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

53.7

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumpton) 

3.4

Highest quintile (% of income or consumpton) 

58.0

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 

.. 

.. 

2.8 

2.8 

1.0

Educaton (% of GNP) 

3.7 

4.2 

3.6 

3.7

Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

1.2 

.. 

.. 

7.4

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

.. 
.. 
.. 

91 
90 
93 

90 
89
91

91

Access to safe water
(% of populabon)
Total 

41 

50 
51 

77 
91 

75 
83 

69
80

Urban 
Rural 

.. 
.. 

49 

66 

36 

66

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 

.. 
.. 
.. 

53 
59 

89 
94 

93 
82 

74
76

OPT 

Child malnutriton (% under 5 years) 

.. 

18 

8

Ufe expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (1 549)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

54 
52 
56 

62 
59 
64 

69 
67 
72 

70 
66 
73 

59
58
60

104 
170 

62 
103 

36 
48 

32 
41 

82
118

361 
283 

306 
237 
300

193 
115 

189 
116 

274
255

.. 

1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

HONDURAS: Key Economic Indicators

Actuals 

Prelim 

Projected

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 200;!

National Accounts (%GDP, current mp)

Gross Domestic Product 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.1)
20.9 
18.7 
19.2 
20.6 
17.8 
17.4 
16.5 
15.6 
14.9
24.7 
26.7 
26.5 
24.4 
26.1 
25.3 
24.7 
24.0 
23.6
54.4 
54.6 
54.3 
55.0 
56.1 
57.3 
58.8 
60.4 
61.5

Total Consumption 

73.0 

72.9 

74.7 

74.5 

77.6 

86.6 

81.3 

78.9 

78.0

Gross Domestic Fixed Investment 
Government Investment 
Private Investment 

28.1 
10.7 
17.4 

23.0 
9.5 
13.5 

23.3 
7.5 
15.8 

25.5 
6.5 
19.0 

23.0 
6.1 
16.9 

25.5 
10.1 
15.4 

25.7 
8.2 
17.5 

26.5 
7.7 
18.8 

27.1
7.!5
19.6

Exports (GNFS)* 
Imports (GNFS)' 

35.7 
46.4 

43.8 
48.3 

47.1 
52.1 

47.0 
52.9 

45.3 
52.4 

41.2 
59.2 

42.6 
55.9 

45.0 
56.2 

45.9
56.1

Gross Domestic Savings 
Gross National Savingsb 

27.0 
23.8 

27.1 
23.0 

25.3 
22.1 

25.5 
24.6 

22.4 
23.0 

13.4 
15.1 

18.7 
20.7 

21.1 
23.2 

22.0
24.0

Memorandum Items:
Gross Domestic Product (Sm, current prices) 
Gross National Product (S p.c., Atlas method) 

3,428 3,960 4,081 4,632 5,292 5,474 5,930 6,410 6,92j
580 
600 
650 
700 
730 
790 
880 
940 
99)

Real Annual Growth Rates: (%, 1978 prices)
Gross Domestic Product 
Gross Domestic Income 

-1.3 
3.5 

4.2 
6.1 

3.7 
1.9 

5.1 
3.8 

3.0 
3.4 

-3.0 
-2.7 

6.0 
5.6 

5.8 
5.2 

5.3
5.2

Real Per Capita Growth Rates: (%, 1978 prices)
Gross Domestic Product, market prices 
Total Consumption 
Private Consumption 

-4.2 
-3.1 
-2.5 

1.1 
-1.7 
-1.2 

0.8 
2.5 
2.5 

2.1 
2.3 
3.8 

0.3 
0.9 
-1.7 

-5.4 
-2.3 
-2.8 

3.5 
-1.6 
-1.8 

3.3 
0.3 
0.2 

3.1
1.2
0.3

Balance of Payrnents (S million)
Exports (GNFS)o 
Merchandise (fob) 
Imports (GNFS)' 
Merchandise (fob) 
Resource Balance 
Net Current Transfers 

1,226 1,735 1,920 2,176 2,396 2,255 2,528 2,885 3,173
1,017 1,298 1,423 1,536 1,605 1,244 1,475 1,687 1,853
1,591 1,913 2,128 1,452 2,775 3,239 3,315 3,604 3,883
1,399 1,571 1,759 2,039 2,338 2,740 2,759 3,007 3,241
-365 
-178 
-207 
-276 
-379 
-984 
-788 
-719 
-711
83 
104 
130 
174 
235 
256 
274 
290 
304

Current Account Balance (before official grants) 

-477 

-337 

-336 

-321 

-350 

-890 

-672 

-584 

-573

Net Foreign Direct Investment 

42 

69 

90 

128 

99 

137 

139 

173 

13B

Long-term Loans (net) 
Official 

112 
118 

78 
29 

-8.8 
33 

39 
348 

83 
123 

259 
306 

136 
178 

121 
160 

104
139

Other Capital (net, including errors & omissions) 

348 

305 

352 

435 

336 

538 

453 

390 

432

Change in Reservesc 

-25 

-116 

-98 

-280 

-168 

-45 

-55 

-100 

-100

Memorandum Items:
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 
Current Account Balance (after official grants) 
Annual Growth Rates:
Merchandise Exports (fob) 
Primary 
Merchandise Imports (cif) 
POL and Other Energy 

-13.9 
-10.2 

-8.5 
-4.5 

-8.2 
-4.9 

-6.9 
-3.9 

-6.6 
-3.0 

-16.3 
-12.5 

-11.3 
-8.0 

-9.1 
-6.0 

-8.3
-5.3

18.8 
6.1 
13.5 
4.4 

27.7 
36.7 
12.3 
16.2 

9.6 
2.4 
12.0 
1.8 

7.9 
-5.6 
15.8 
3.4 

4.5 
10.8 
14.7 
-5.5 

-22.5 
-37.5 
17.2 
16.6 

18.6 
14.1 
0.7 
-10.6 

14.4 
13.7 
9.0 
10.6 

10.2
12.0
9.3
9.7

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

HONDURAS: Key Economic Indicators (continued)

Nonfinancial Public Sector Finances (%GDP)

Total Revenues, of which 
Tax Revenues 
Current Expenditures 
Capital Expenditure 

Overall Balance 
Foreign Financing 

Monetary Indicators
M21GDP 
(at current market prices) 
Growth of M2 
Private Sector Credit/Total Credit (%) 
Price Indices (1978 = 100)
Merchandise Export Price Index 
Merchandise 
Import Price Index 
Merchandise Terms of Trade Index 

Actuals 

Prelim 

Projected

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

28.1 
30.8 
18.5 18.1 
23.9 
23.2 
11.0 
10.3 

-6.9 
5.6 

-2.7 
4.6 

31.3 
16.8 
25.2 
9.7 

-3.6 
3.7 

31.5 
16.6 
24.4 
8.4 

-1.3 
2.9 

30.0 
18.4 
24.4 
7.4 

-1.8 
2.3 

27.0 
15.2 
24.7 
11.7 

-9.5 
6.2 

28.6 
16.8 
24.6 
9.6 

-5.5 
4.1 

29.6 
17.6 
24.1 
9.0 

-3.5 
3.4 

30.6
18.1
23.9
8.6

-1.9
2.8

28.5 
28.3 
31.4 
37.5 
37.0 
37.0 
37.0 
37.0 
37.0
30.3 
29.2 
41.1 
42.2 
36.3 
12.8 
18.0 23.9 
25.0
76.0 177.3 141.0 147.9 113.5 50.6 121.1 108.6 105.8

104.2 124.9 115.7 122.4 108.2 101.8 105.4 106.8 107.6
101.6 104.5 105.0 111.8 98.8 
95.2 
98.5 101.9 105.5
102.6 119.6 110.1 109.5 109.4 107.0 107.1 104.8 101.9

Real Exchange Rate ($/Lempiras)d 

59.0 

62.4 

62.6 

72.0 

62.4

Real Annual Growth Rates: (1978 prices)

Consumer Price Index (period average) 
Consumer Price Index (end of period) 
GDP Deflator 

21.7 
28.9 
28.9 

29.5 
26.8 
24.9 

23.8 
25.5 
22.4 

20.2 
12.8 
22.7 

13.7 
15.7 
14.1 

13.6 
13.0 
16.2 

10.4 
10.0 
7.5 

9.8 
8.0 
7.6 

9.1
6.0
7.1

a. GNFS denotes goods and non-factor services

b. Includes net unrequited 
transfers, excluding official capital grants.
c. Includes use of IMF resources.
d. An increase denotes appreciation.

BASE CASE ECONOMIC PROJECTIONS: Key Assumptions

Economic growth is projected to be negative in 1999 as a result of the damage inflicted by Hunicane Mitch. Growth would
recover strongly to 5-6 percent from 2000 onward as a result of reconstruction work, recovery in agriculture production and
non-traditional exports, and a pick up in private activity as the scope for private sector development is broadened and
privatization gathers momentum. Growth would be fueled by a higher investment rate, which is projected to increase to 27
percent of GDP by 2002. Domestic savings-negatively affected by the hurricane-related loss of real income-are expected
to recover more gradually, reaching 22 percent of GDP by 2002.

Fiscal policy will play a key role in helping meet the Government's macroeconomic objectives. The fiscal deficit will shoot up
to over 9 percent of GDP in 1999 as a result of Mitch, but will improve gradually to reach under 2 percent by 2002. The
current account balance (after grants), which will rise to about 12 percent of GDP in 1999, is also expected to improve
gradually as export capacity is restored and reconstruction import needs decrease, falling to about 5 percent of GDP by
2002. The Government's macroeconomic program targets a gradual fall in inflation (end-period), from 16 percent in 1999 to
6 percent by 2002.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

HONDURAS: Key Exposure Indicators

Total External Debt Outstanding

Total Debt Outstanding and Disbursed (TDO) (Sm) * 

Net Disbursements ($m) ' 

Total Debt Service (TDS) ($m) 

Debt and Debt Service Indicators (%)
TDOIXGS b 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaVTDO 

IBRD Exposure Indicators

IBRO DS/Public DS 
Preferred Creditor DS/Public DS C 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO ($m) d 
IDA DS/XGS 
IDA TDO ($m) d 

IFC Approvals (by FY, in $m)

Loans 
Equity and Quasi-Equity 

MIGA (by FY, in $m)

MIGA Guarantees 

Actuals 

Prelim 

Projected

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 200:1

4436 

4570 

4533 

4710 

5002 

4770 

4842 

4872 

4875

98 

43 

65 

433 

553 

564 

348 

505 

191 

505 

285 

543 

138 

530 

112 

481 

137

467

362.0 
129.4 
35.3 
42.1 

263.4 
115.4 
31.9 
44.1 

236.0 
111.1 
29.4 
48.3 

216.4 
101.7 
23.2 
48.3 

208.8 
94.5 
21.1 
49.1 

211.5 
87.1 
24.1 
51.3 

191.6 
81.6 
21.0 
53.6 

168.9 
76.0 
16.7 
55.4 

153.5
70.4
14.7
56.3

22.4 
70.7 
7.3 
469 
0.2 
307 

10.5 
2.6 

19.5 
63.0 
5.5 
443 
0.2 
386 

18.5 
77.7 
4.6 
350 
0.3 
424 

18.2 
57.2 
3.4 
275 
0.2 
496 

17.8 
55.7 
2.8 
235 
0.3 
579 

16.4 
64.3 
2.9 
189 
0.3 
630 

14.5 
63.1 
2.1 
149 
0.3 
730 

12.6 
58.7 
1.3 
124 
0.3 
840 

11.4
60.7
1.3
103
0.3
943

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

15.0 
10.0 

10.0 
0.5 

11.0'
5.0'

.. 

.. 

30.0 

29.5 

25.9 

20.2

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. XGS denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
f. Actuals.

HONDURAS: Status of Bank Group Operations
Operations Portfolio

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Prc4ect ID 

FY 

Borrower 

Purpose 

Number of Closed Projects: 44

Active ProJects:
HN-PE-57350 1999 Republic of Honduras PROFUTURO 
HN-PE-48651 1999 Gov. of Honduras 
FHIS IV 
HN-PE-64083 1999 Republic of Honduras Hurricane Emergency 
HN-PE-7398 1997 Gov. of Honduras 
Rural Land Management 
HN-PE-34607 1996 Republic of Honduras Pub. Sect. Mod. TAC 
HN-PE-37709 1996 Gov. of Honduras 
FHIS III 
HN-PE-7387 1996 Republic of Honduras Pub. Sect. Mod. SAC 
HN-PE-7396 1995 Gov. of Honduras 
Environm. Development 
HN-PE-7399 1995 Gov. of Honduras 
Basic Education 
HN-PE-7388 1993 Gov. of Honduras 
Transport Sector Rehab. 
HN-PE-7392 1993 Gov. of Honduras 
Nutrition and Health 
Total 

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA): 
Of which has been repaid: 
Total now held by IBRD and IDA: 
Amount Sold: 
Of which repaid: 
Total Undisbursed: 

Active Prolects 
349.82 
0.00 
603.80 
0.00 
0.00 
231.73 

Original Arnount in S Million 
IBRD 
IDA 
Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Difference Between Expected and 
Last PSR
Actual Disbursements 
Supervision Rating
Original 
Forn. Revised Dev. Obj. 
Imp. Prog.

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

8.30 
45.00 
200.00 
34.00 
9.60 
30.00 
115.7 
10.80 
30.00 
85.00 
35.40 
603.80 

Closeroiects 
1,078.41 
521.30 
546.03 
4.46 
4.46 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

8.30 
16.13 
96.41 
21.90 
2.12 
1.42 
27.49 
5.60 
19.24 
23.05 
10.07 
231.73 

0.00 
-26.78 
-55.44 
6.21 
1.58 
0.93 
1.71 
5.54 
16.10 
2.54 
-0.78 
-48.39 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.26 
0.00 
0.00 
7.41 
5.51 
0.00 
6.04 
-0.77 
19.45

HS 
HS 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

HS
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Total
1,428.23
521.30
1,1 49.83
4.46
4.46
231.73

a. intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
Note: Disbursement data is updated at the end of the first week of the month.
Generated on 09/01/99

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

HONDURAS: Statement of IFC's Committed and Disbursed Portfolio

As of October 31, 1999
(In US Dollar Millions)

FY 

Committed 
IFC 

Disbursed
IFC

Approval Company 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic. 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic.

1998 
Camino Real Plaz 
1997/98 Cressida 
1997 
Cressida Intl. 
1995/98 Elcosa 
1988/99 Granjas Marinas 

Total Portfolio: 

10.00 
15.00 
0.00 
7.90 
6.00 

38.90 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.64 
0.00 

2.64 

0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
3.50 
0.00 

0.00 
33.92 
0.00 
19.46 
0.00 

13.50 

53.38 

5.00 
15.00 
0.00 
7.90 
0.00 

27.90 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.63 
0.00 

2.63 

0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
3.50 
0.00 

0.00
33.92
0.00
19.46
0.00

13.50 

53.38

Celtel Honduras 

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan 
Equitv 
Quasi 
Partic
5.00 
0.00 
5.00 
15.00

Total Pending: 

5.00 

0.00 

5.00 

15.00

Generated on 11101199

HONDURAS: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network Area 

Country 
performance 

Major issues 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Annex 89
Page 1 of 1

Reconcillation of
country and Bank
iorf

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management

* Poverty reduction 

. Economic policy 

* Public sector 

* Gender 

Good 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Need comprehensive poverty 
reduction strategy, improve data
base
Maintain stable macroeconomy, 
especially fiscal discipline
Improve efficiency of public 
sector, maintain progress on 
govemance, advance on
decentralization strategy
Need to mainstream across 
public sector institutions and
programs

High 

High

High 

Moderate 

IMF has the lead

High 

High 

Policy dialogue on
decentralization

Moderate Moderate

Human Development

. Education 

Fair 

. Health, nutrition & 
population 

Good 

. Social protection 

Good 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development

, Rural development 

Fair 

. Environment 

. Social development 

Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure

* Financial sector 

* Private sector 

. Energy & mining 

.

Infrastructure 

Poor 

Fair 

Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Good 

Improve quality and coverage, 
especially primary in rural areas,
encourage community
participation, improve efficiency
across the system
Emphasize basic health, 
improve sector efficiency and
articulation at different levels,
deconcentration
Continue to improve targeting 
and strengthen capacity and
participation of local
governments and communities

High 

High

High 

High

High 

High

High 

Integrate with poverty reduction 
strategy, improve service 
coverage, rural credit, and adopt
watershed management
approach
Strengthen institutions, policies Moderate 
and their enforcement
Improve participation of local 
communities

High 

High 

Policy dialogue on
rural credit

High 

Policy dialogue

High

Strengthen prudential 
supervision and regulation
capacity
Streamline regulations, improve 
incentives 
Private sector participation 

Private sector participation and 
longer term strategy

High 

High

High 

Moderate 

High 

Moderate Other partners
have the lead
Other donors have
the lead
Moderate Other donors active

Low 

Annex C
Page 1 of 6

POVERTY AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN HONDURAS

1. 
Honduras ranks among the poorest countries in Latin America with a GNP per capita of $730 in
1998. Estimates of the number of poor households vary due to the use of different methodologies and
sources of data for estimating the poverty line. The two main methods to measure poverty are the income
and the unsatisfied basic needs methodologies. The former estimates poverty in relation to the minimum
income needed to buy a predetermined food basket, whereas the latter considers indicators that measure
household access to selected basic services. However, all sources agree that more than half of all
Honduran households are poor.

How many are the poor?

2. 
Following the income methodology, the National Household Survey (Encuesta de Hogares de
Prop6sitos Mzultiples, EHPM) estimated that in 1993 the extremely poor comprised 45 percent of total
households, and the poor (including the extremely poor) comprised 67 percent. The methodology used by
the Bank suggested that these poverty rates were overestimated due to income reporting deficiencies, and
the abnormally high level of calories used to determine the basic food basket. Thus, the World Bank's
Poverty Assessment for Honduras' estimated a 1993 national poverty rate of 53 percent, of which 32
percent was extreme poverty (Table 1).

3. 
Following the unsatisfied basic needs methodology, in 1996 the EHPM estimated that 78 percent of
the Honduran households were below the poverty line, and 46 percent below the extreme poverty line. This
method classifies a household below the poverty line if it has no access to one or more of the selected basic
needs, whereas it classifies a household below the extreme poverty line if it is below the income-defined
poverty line, and fails to satisfy all basic needs. Similar results were reported for 1996 by USAID using
the same methodology, with estimated poverty rates and extreme poverty rates of 75 percent and 54 percent
respectively.

4. 
Overall, and depending on the source and definition under consideration, between half and three
quarters of Honduran households were poor in the mid-1990s.

Table 1: Poverty Comparisons by Source (% of total households below poverty line)
EHpMa 
WBa 
EHPMD 
USAIDb
Income 
Income 
Basic Needs Basic Needs
32 
46 
.21 
32 
53 
78 

Extremely Poor 
Poor 
Total 

45 
22 
67 

54
21
75

a. For i993;b. For 1996.
Sources: World Bank 1994; EHPM, and Common Country Assessment, Sistema de Nacdones Unidas.

Who are the poor?

5. 
Honduras is mainly a rural economy. Official statistics use a broad definition of rural areas (towns
with less than 2,000 inhabitants or without some basic services such as drinking water or a health center or
primary school). By this definition, 58 percent of the population (56 percent of the households) is rural.
According to the Bank's Poverty Assessment, in 1993 about 51 percent of the rural households were poor

' World Bank (1994). Honduras: Country Economic Memorandum/Poverty Assessment, Report No: 13317-HO

Annex C
Page 2 of 6

and 36 percent extremely poor. In 1992, about 78 percent of the households in the poorest 30 percent of
income distribution were rural. Rural poor households represented 45 percent of all Honduran households,
while urban poor represented about 15 percent of total households. According to the 1996 EHPM, about
60 percent of the poor households and about 70 percent of the extremely poor households were also rural.
Using the unsatisfied basic needs definition, the 1996 EHPM estimated that 83 percent of rural households
were poor and 54 percent extremely poor. Finally, USAID reports indicate that in some rural areas 96
percent of the population were poor and 88 percent were extremely poor (Table 2).

6. 
Thus, while urban poverty is high, the incidence of poverty is more severe in rural areas. The issue
is further aggravated by the fact that the average extremely poor rural household has 6.2 members whereas
the average non-poor urban household has 4.2 members. Hence, the proportion of the population living
below the poverty line is larger than the proportion of households in that situation.

Table 2: Rural Poverty by Source (% of rural households below poverty line)
EHPMa 
WBa 
EHPM0

USAIDbc

Income 

Income 

Basic Needs Basic Needs

Extremely Poor 
56 
36 
Poor 
21 
15 
Total 
77 
51 
a. For 1993; b. For 1996; c. Figures refer to Western rural areas.
Sources: World Bank 1994; EHPM; and Common Country Assessment, Sistema de Naciones Unidas.

54 
29 
83 

88
8
96

7. 
The differences between urban and rural areas are also reflected in some social indicators. Infant
mortality in rural areas is about 42 per thousand live births, whereas the same index in the two biggest
cities (Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula) is 26 per thousand (Table 3). Female illiteracy in rural areas is
close to 30 percent, whereas in the two largest cities, female illiteracy is less than 12 percent. Also, 37
percent of households in rural areas do not have access to safe water (4 percent in urban areas) and 43
percent do not have access to basic sanitation (4.4 in the urban areas).

8. 
There are several related reasons contributing to rural poverty in Honduras: 
the skewed
distribution of land, the lack of access to credit, and low productivity. According to the latest Census
(1993), the largest 2 percent of farms hold 40 percent of the land, and the smallest 37 percent hold only 2
percent of the land. The quality of the land is also significantly lower in the smaller farms, which tend to be
located on hilly lands. Conversely, the largest farms are usually located on the plains and more fertile
areas. This implies that the rural poor are not only poor in terms of income but also in terms of wealth,
with low-quality land, limited access to credit due to lack of collateral, and hence low productivity.

Table 3: Selected Rural/Urban Social Indicators.

Infant 

Female 

Access to Safe Access to Basic

Mortalitya 
42 

Water' 
Sanitation'
Rural 
63 
57
Urban 
96 
95.6
Total 
35 
21 
77.5 
74
a. Per 1000 live births. b. % of femaies. c. % of households. d. Urban data refer to Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.
Sources: EHPM, and Common Country Assessment, Sistema de Naciones Unidas.

Illiteracyb 
28 

26d 

12d 

Recent Trends

9. 
Notwithstanding data problems mentioned above with the EHPM poverty measurements based on
the income methodology, it is the only index covering the period 1991-98, against the most recent Bank
estimates that refer to 1993. Hence, even though poverty rates cannot be reliably calculated for recent
years, the trends are likely to be a good reflection of what has been happening with overall poverty rates.

Annex C
Page 3 of 6

10. 
The period 1991-98 is especially important in the assessment of poverty trends in Honduras
because macroeconomic stabilization and sectoral adjustment policies were implemented to foster economic
growth and increase long-run economic efficiency. On the basis of the EHPM estimates, there was a
steady decline in poverty rates between 1991 and 1993, from 75 percent to 67 percent, and remaining
unchanged in 1994 (Table 4). This poverty decline is more clear in rural areas (80 percent in 1991 versus
71 percent in 1994) than in urban areas (68 percent in 1991 versus 63 percent in 1994). The overall
situation was reverted between 1994 and 1996 when the proportion of poor households increased by 2
percent to reach 69 percent. However, there was also a divergence between urban and rural poverty
levels-whereas 
urban poverty declined further to 61 percent in 1996, rural poverty increased 4 percent to
75 percent in 1996. Finally, over the period 1996-98 overall poverty levels decreased by about 6 percent to
63 percent in 1998 (before Mitch). During this period, both urban and rural poverty rates decreased 4
percent, though rural poverty remained substantially higher.

11. 
After a significant reduction in extreme poverty levels during the 1991-94 period, when extreme
poverty fell from 60 percent to 53 percent in rural areas and from 47 percent to 40 percent in urban areas,
extreme poverty levels evolved in drastically different ways in urban and rural areas during the period
1995-98. The extremely poor households living in rural areas suffered most during this period, with the
extreme poverty rate increasing from 53 percent in 1995 to 55 percent in 1998 (in 1996, however, the
extreme poverty rate reached 66 percent). The extremely poor population in urban areas suffered less in
this period and in 1998 the proportion of urban households below the extreme poverty line (36 percent) was
lower than in 1995 (41 percent).

12. 
Overall, EHPM trends indicate a reduction of poverty levels between 1991 and 1998-about 
11
percent in both rural and urban areas. However, while extreme poverty in urban areas fell between 1991
and 1998 from 47 percent to 36 percent, extreme poverty in rural areas decreased more modestly from 60
percent in 1991 to 55 percent in 1998.

Table 4: Poverty trends (% of households below poverty line)

Poverty Level 
Rural 
Urban 
Total 

1991 
80 (60) 
68 (47) 
75 (54) 

1992 
76 (54) 
62 (39) 
70 (47) 

1993 
77 (56) 
55 (31) 
67 (45) 

1994 
71 (53) 
63 (40) 
67 (47) 

1995 
72 (53) 
63 (41) 
68 (48) 

1996 
75 (66) 
61 (39) 
69 (54) 

1997 
72 (60) 
59 (35) 
66 (49) 

1998a
69 (55)
57 (36)
63 (46)

Memo item:
GDP Growth 
3.3 
5.6 
6.3 
Note: Figures in brackets are extreme poverty estimates.
a. Poverty estimates are pre-Mitch. GDP growth in 1998 is the projected growth rate before Mitch struck.
Source: EHPM, and staff estimates.

-1.3 

4.2 

3.7 

5.1 

5.0

Poverty among Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples

13. 
Honduras' 
indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples comprise about 13 percent of the total
population. 
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples belong to 9 groups: Lenca, Garifuna, Tolupanes,
Miskitos, Pech, English-speaking Afro-Honduran, Chorti, Nahuas and Tawahkas. Notwithstanding 
the
lack of official data (the indicators contained in the EHPM are not disaggregated at a level to make possible
treating 
the indigenous and Afro-Honduran population as a separate group), there are some social
indicators (Honduras: FHIS III Project, Indigenous Peoples Development Plan, March 1998) suggesting a
very high incidence of poverty among indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples.

14. 
About 70 percent of the households classified as extremely poor are rural. According to
Honduras, Libro de. Pobreza, Potencialidad y Focalizaci6n Municipal, SECPLAN, most of these
households below the extreme poverty line are indigenous and Afro-Honduran. 
Infant mortality among

Annex C
Page 4 of 6

indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples reaches alarming proportions. Infant mortality per 100 live births
is about 30 percent among the Garifuna, 40 percent among the Tolupanes, and 60 percent among the
Tawahkas. According to the FHIS, about 60 percent of the indigenous and Afro-Honduran population has
no access to safe water and about 91 percent lacks basic sanitation.

Box 1: The FMIS Nuestras Raices Program

A recent IDA evaluation concluded that FFIS' Nuestras Raices Program, now in its third phase, is having a positive
impact and generating valuable lessons. The Program, started in 1995, allocates projects based on consultations with
indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples organizations. Its main focus is the financing of public works to improve rural
infrastructure using local labor force. The main activity is improving rural access roads, which accounts for about 80
percent of the program budget. A number of important modifications were introduced due to shortcomings identified in
the first two phases. These included strengthening the communal banking component (cajas rurales), improving
technical standards of the works (with KfW support) in response to criticisms that the quality of works was inadequate,
and specifically targeting strengthening of the indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples umbrella organization and
individual ethnic federations.

HDA's evaluation, while noting improvements in the Program, suggests a number of areas to increase effectiveness: (i)
strengthen capacity building, especially by longer supervision of the works and greater coordination with other rural
development programs; (ii) continue efforts to improve the quality of works; (iii) strengthen the communal banking
component, which has had very limited impact, through technical support, training and support for the elaboration of
financially viable subprojects; and (iv) better use and increased reliance on NGOs and private development organizations
active in indirenous and Afro-Tonduran nenles develonment.

15. 

Illiteracy rates reach 90 percent for Miskito males and 100 percent for females, about 92 percent

for Tolupanes, and 72 percent for Lenca. Child malnutrition is substantially higher among indigenous and
Afro-Honduran peoples than at the national level. While the national child malnutrition rate is about 18
percent, the same indicator reaches 68 percent among the Chortis, 62 percent among the Pech and 39
percent among the Tolupanes.

Social Indicators

16. 
Honduras' social indicators are among the weakest in the region, partly reflecting its low per capita
income, but they have been improving steadily over the past couple of decades. Key indicators, including
life expectancy, infant mortality, and the share of the population with access to safe water and sanitation,
are considerably worse than regional (LAC) averages (Table 5). In terms of poverty, the 1999 World
Development Indicators estimate that prior to Mitch, 47 percent of the population lived on less than $1 a
day, and about 75 percent lived on less than $2 a day.

Indicator 

GNP per capita in 1998 (M)1 

Honduras 
730 
47 
66 
65 
63 
27 
28 
1. Preliminary
Source: World Development 
Indicators. All variables, except GNP per capita are averages over 1990-96.

Infant Mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Life expectancy (years) 
Population with access to safe water (percent) 
Population with access to sanitation (percent) 
Overall illiteracy rate 
Female illiteracy rate 

LAC
3,960
31
70
73
63
15
16

17. 
Over the past two decades, Honduras has made considerable efforts in the social sectors, especially
education and health. Prior to Mitch, public spending in the social sectors was equivalent to about 8
percent of GDP, which was high relative to other countries with similar income levels. Public social
expenditures have been channeled to programs designed to expand health care and education facilities. The
share of social expenditures in noninterest public expenditures rose from about 37 percent in 1990 to 41

Annex C
Page 5 of 6

percent in 1997, reflecting mainly the activities of FHIS and PRAF. Also, controlling for income levels,
Honduras' health and education indicators are above average. According to the 1998 UNDP Human
Development Report, while Honduras' income per capita ranked 126 among 174 countries, its health and
education indicators ranked 91 and 118, respectively.

Table 6: Honduras, Selected Health Indicators, 1980-96
1980-89 
Indicator 
49 
Safe water, rural (percent of rural population with access) 
51 
Safe water, urban (percent of urban population with access) 
50 
Safe water (percent of total population with access) 
57 
Immunization, DPT (percent of children under 12 months) 
57 
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months) 
22 
Sanitation, urban (percent of urban population with access) 
32 
Sanitation (percent of population with access) 
101 
Mortality rate, under five (per 1,000 live births) 
300 
Mortality rate, maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
63 
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births) 
61 
Life expectancy at birth, total (years) 
Source: World Development 
Indicators Database.

1990-96
53
81
65
93
91
86
63
61
200
47
66

18. 

As shown in Tables 6 and 7, education and health indicators have improved considerably over the

past two decades. In addition, Honduras has been piloting a promising approach to nutrition (Box 2).

Table 7: Honduras, Selected Educational Indicators, 1980-96
198049 
Indicator 
34 
Illiteracy rate, adult female (percent of females 15+) 
Illiteracy rate, adult male (percent of males 15+) 
Illiteracy rate, adult total (percent of people 15+) 
School enrollment, primary (percent net) 
School enrollment, primary female (percent net) 
School enrollment, primary, male (percent net) 
Repetition rate, primary (percent) 

32 
78 
78 
78 
16 

29 

1990-96
28
26
27
90
91
89
12

Source: World Development Indicators Database.

Poverty and Growth

19. 

The Growth-Poverty Link. As indicated above, the only longitudinal study available, the EPHM,

indicates that poverty rates declined between 1991 and 1994, increased between 1994 and 1996, and again

declined between 1996 and 1998. Average annual growth was about 3.3 percent higher (5.0 percent) in the
1991-93 period than in the 1994-96 period (1.7 percent), and 1.25 percent higher than in the 1997-98

period (3.75), suggesting an a priori 

strong link between poverty and economic growth. Analysis

undertaken for this CAS suggests that: (i) total poverty rates would likely stabilize with annual growth
rates of about 2.1 percent; (ii) a zero growth rate would lead to an increase in the total poverty rate by 1.3
percentage points (about 80,000 people); (iii) every additional percentage point of growth reduces total
poverty by about 0.6 percentage points (about 40,000 people); and (iv) growth rates would explain about
40 percent of the variation in poverty trends. This last element underscores the importance of accelerating
growth to reduce poverty but also that growth is certainly not enough-about 60 percent of the change in
poverty rates is explained by factors other than economic growth.

Annex C
Page 6 of 6

Box 2: A Community-based Nutrition Program in Honduras-A Promising Approach

A new approach. A revised national growth promotion program, which took lessons from international experience and
added some of its own, is showing promising results. The AIN program (Atencidn Integral a la Niflez) adopts a new
strategy, based on the premise that it can have much more impact on child survival by preventing mild and moderate
malnutrition than by concentrating on treating severe malnutrition. Accordingly, it changed health services from focusing
on nutrition status and the severely malnourished to giving highest priority to children growing well, or whose growth
was just beginning to falter, regardless of their nutrition status. The revamped program now operates in the community
as well as the health center, and concentrates only on children less than two years old, so it can give more attention to the
more manageable number who need it most. Research determined that all but about 5-8 percent of the families could do
something to improve the nutrient intake of their children with food and other resources already available to them.

AIN. It functions as a community-based complement to the clinic-based health system. The heart of the program is a
small cadre of well-trained community workers who have monthly contact with families with children under 2. Emphasis
is placed on triggering specific actions, including nutrition advice, home visits, reinforcements and referrals if needed. A
new twist is that, in addition to watching the growth trend on the chart, the mother is told the weight the child should be
in 30 days-the motivated mother is eager to know if she made it. The action prescribed to achieve it is based on what is
needed and what is possible-negotiated with the mother. The community is systematically engaged also, carrying out
its own analysis of why children are having problems and the actions it needs to take as a community to improve them.

Preliminary results. In communities where the program has functioned the longest (9 months) there as been a dramatic
reduction in malnutrition-from 39 to 8 percent in communities with the highest malnutrition, from 25 to 10 percent in
communities with medium levels, and from 9 percent to virtually zero in communities with low levels. More complete
data and analysis are still required, but experienced nutrition progranmmers who have seen AIN, believe it is promising.

The wider debate. This experience also goes to the core of a debate among nutrition practitioners, especially in LAC:
whether it is a good thing to provide food routinely in conununity-based nutrition programs for very young children.
Traditionally, the programmatic reflex to seeing malnourished children is to provide a supplementary feeding program.
Many now believe this should be a last, not first, resort. They object to the considerable time that food distribution takes
from workers and the resources and logistics that swamp and detract from efforts to change the behavior of mothers. The
latter, when well done, can have greater and more lasting impact. In many countries, as in Honduras, fewer than 10
percent of the families involved in such programs cannot add to their children's intake within their existing resources.

4.me Rer A 1 ((() NT~ a. ,4nt 

,reh 

in XTWWin- un No 

4

20. 
The Impact of Mitch. On the basis of the above estimates and projected growth rates for 1999-
01, we can infer a reduction in poverty to about 64 percent in 1999, 66 percent in 2000, and a decrease to
64 percent in 2001. Also, with pre-Mitch growth projections we would have estirnated a steady decline in
poverty reaching about 58 percent by 2001. Mitch, of course changed all of this. If our tentative estimates
were to hold, Mitch would account for an increase of about 6 percentage points in total poverty-i.e.,
about as many as 375,000 additional people would have fallen temporarily below the poverty line as a
result of Mitch.

0

Annex D
Page 1 of 3

THE EFFECTS OF HURRICANE MITCH ON HONDURAS

A. 

Background

1. 
Except for two coastal strips, one extending about 640 km along the Caribbean Sea and the other
64 km on the Pacific Ocean, Honduras is a plateau, consisting of broad, fertile plains broken by deep
valleys, and traversed by mountain ranges in a northwestern to southwestern direction. The mountains,
which are volcanic in origin, rise to maximum elevations of more than 2,800 m. Most of the country's
rivers drain toward the north into the Caribbean Sea. Average annual rainfall ranges from 1,016 mm in
some mountain valleys to 2,540 mm along the northern coast. Like its neighbors in Central America,
Honduras is prone to national disasters, especially hurricanes and earthquakes. Normally, these
hurricanes affect Honduras' Caribbean coast to the north, as was the case with Hurricane Fifi, in
September 1974, which caused extensive damage and loss of life in that part of the country.

2. 
On October 24, Tropical Storm Mitch was upgraded to a hurricane that quickly developed into
one of the strongest and most damaging storms ever to hit Central America. At its height on October 26
and 27, Hurricane Mitch sustained winds of 290 kph and dumped heavy rains over the region. Although
the winds diminished as the hurricane traveled inland over Honduras on October 30, the storm continued
to produce torrential rains, causing catastrophic floods and landslides. After its slow, destructive march
north and west across Honduras and Guatemala, Mitch dissipated over southeastem Mexico but again
gained strength causing flooding in Florida. Hurricane Mitch is considered the worst natural disaster to
have affected Honduras in modem times. Coming after copious winter rains in the previous weeks, which
had swollen rivers and saturated soils, the hurricane's strong winds and relentless rain caused rivers to
overflow and severe landslides. The sheer length of time that it remained centered over Honduras,
combined with its trajectory, resulted in incredibly heavy damage to all parts of the country.

B. 

Hurricane Damage

3. 
Within Central America, Honduras bore the brunt of Hurricane Mitch. As the storm traveled
inland, it dumped one year's worth of rain in a few days. The worst damage was in the Atlantic Coast,
Sula Valley, the Central Region and the South, but no part of Honduras escaped some impact. It is
estimated that about 4.8 million people (three of every four Hondurans) were affected. Unlike previous
natural disasters, Hurricane Mitch wreaked havoc in Honduras' two largest cities, the capital Tegucigalpa,
and San Pedro Sula. About 40 percent of the capital was damaged, half of its 1 million inhabitants were
affected, and the city was cut off from the rest of the country for almost a week. Much of the
Government's own institutional infrastructure was damaged, including destruction of the Ministry of
Education and extensive damage to the Ministry of Finance. San Pedro Sula, the country's industrial and
agricultural heartland, suffered damage to its intemational airport, road and bridge infrastructure, and its
water and sewerage systems. Estimates of the damage and reconstruction costs were prepared by working
teams of donor representatives and the authorities, coordinated by the Technical Support Unit of the
Ministry of the Presidency. IDA staff in Tegucigalpa assisted the effort to produce the first damage
assessment.

* The Human Cost. An estimated 5,660 people died, 12,270 were wounded and over 8,000 persons
were classified as missing, suggesting that the total number of deaths could be substantially higher.
As a direct result of the hurricane, an estimated 441,150 people had to be placed in 1,375 temporary
shelters set up in schools, stadiums, churches and other places.

* Transport. Damage to the road network isolated a number of regions in the country, including the
capital. The hurricane damaged or destroyed an estimated 60 percent of main and secondary paved

Annex D
Page 2 of 3

roads (1,600 km), and 20 percent of unpaved secondary and tertiary roads (2,390). About 100 bridges
(8 in Tegucigalpa) were completely destroyed or suffered extensive damage.

* Water. Water systems in all major urban areas were damaged. In Tegucigalpa, about 23 km of the
water distribution system were damaged. The Government estimates that 47 major water systems and
1,500 of the 4,000 rural systems were damaged. In all, about 4.2 million people (or about 70 percent
of the country's population) lost water supply.

* Energy and Telecommunications. None of the large hydroelectric stations suffered major damage,
but there was considerable damage to substations, and transmission and distribution lines. The
hurricane damaged about 45,000 phone lines.

* Education. The Ministry of Education estimates that 17 percent of the country's 9,548 primary
schools were damaged. In addition, most educational establishments not affected by the hurricane
had to be used as temporary shelters. The Ministry of Education building in Tegucigalpa was
completely destroyed, including all its administrative and academic records.

* Health. The majority of hospitals and health centers suffered some damage. Of Honduras' 27
hospitals, 14 were left with no water. At least 4 of these reported extensive infrastructure damage.
Also, 12 hospitals reported damage to their electricity systems. Damage to rural health posts and
clinics was extensive. Unsanitary conditions and contaminated water placed large parts of the
population at risk of transmnitted diseases such as dengue, cholera and leptospirosis.

* Housing. The Government estimates that the hurricane affected the housing conditions of about
661,760 people (82,720 families). The authorities estimate that about 33,220 new houses will be
needed and about 49,500 will need to be rehabilitated. These estimates are likely to be on the
conservative, since there is little reliable information on conditions in isolated rural areas.

* Agriculture. Most of the basic grains production was lost. This severely impacted the poor, small-
scale farmers who are the main producers of basic grains. Export products also suffered extensive
damage, including bananas, shrimp, pineapples, African palm, melons and other fruits.

e Environment. Some ecologists believe that hurricanes are a natural cycle and are necessary to thin
forests, lower the salinity of coastal waters and scrub underwater reefs, and remove collected debris
and pollution. However, the magnitude of Hurricane Mitch and its impact on some of the same
places damaged by extensive forest fires the previous summer, will likely have a severe impact on
coastal areas and fragile offshore ecosystems. The fires deforested large mountain areas, and then-
absent the trees and undergrowth-torrential rains caused massive erosion. Small streams became
raging torrents that spilled from their banks, carrying with them trees and debris. Thousands of
mature trees spilled from the mouths of rivers into coastal areas on the Caribbean Sea.

4. 
Estimates of Damage and Replacement Costs. The estimates prepared by UNDP and ECLAC
(Table 1) suggest total direct and indirect damage of $3.6 billion and replacement costs of $5 billion
(equivalent to 100 percent of Honduras' 1998 GDP).

C. 

Response to the Hurricane

5. 
After the initial shock over the intensity of Hurricane Mitch, the Government activated the
National Emergency Commission (CONE), and an Information and Damage Assessment Center to
coordinate immediate relief efforts and assess damages. CONE and Government teams worked with the
UN system and emergency response teams from IDA and other donors to determine priorities, channel

Annex D
Page 3 of 3

immediate support and coordinate international assistance. The Government also put in place
mechanisms to provide food and emergency health care, much of this with active help from relief
agencies, other governments and Honduras' own private sector. In terns of transport infrastructure, both
the Northern Corridor between San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa, and the Southern Corridor between
Choluteca and Tegucigalpa were reopened (in some cases using temporary solutions such as Bailey
bridges, or temporary routes around bridges and across the dryer sectors of river beds) within about a
week, reestablishing some road communications between the capital and parts of the country, and
enabling the shipment of food, fuel and emergency materials to get to the capital. Water service was re-
established gradually in the capital and major cities using temporary solutions, such as local wells, as the
Government continued efforts to repair the primary and secondary distribution networks. The
Government also worked with the Panamerican Health Organization to implement a massive vaccination
campaign, rehabilitate basic health services and implement a vector control program.

Table 1: Summary of Damages and Reconstruction Costs ($ million)
Direct 
Indirect 
Damage 
Damage 
2.177.4 
1461.1 
305.4 
719.4 
259.1 
675.3 
25.6 
36.7 
20.7 
7.4 
347.6 
164.2 
314.1 
140.0 
24.2 
7.2 
9.3 
17.0 
1,477.6 
577.1 
1,387.3 
274.2 
15.8 
196.3 
74.5 
106.7 
46.8 
0.4 

TOTAL 
Social Sectors 
Housing 
Health 
Education 
Infrastructure 
Roads, brdges, telecommunications 
Water and sanitation 
Energy 
Productive Sectors 
Agriculture, livestock, fisheries and forestry 
Manufacturing 
Trade, restaurants, hotels 
Environment 

Total Replacement
Damage 
Costs
3,638.5 
4.987.7
1,024.8 
580.5
934.4 
484.0
62.3 
64.5
28.1 
31.2
511.7 
713.2
454.1 
571.4
31.3 
118.6
26.3 
23.2
2,054.8 
3,694.0
1,661.5 
2,990.7
212.1 
381.8
181.2 
326.2
47.2 
n.a.

Source: UNDP/ECLAC, A Preliminary Assessment of Damages Caused by Huricane Mitch, December 10, 1998.

6. 
The international community responded swiftly to the disaster, benefiting from the emergency
response capability of the UN and a number of countries. The primary focus was on rescuing
communities, establishing communications, distributing emergency food and medicines to affected
communities, and organizing shelters for displaced populations. There was also a major task of disposing
of the dead, both human and animals, to prevent the spread of disease. IDA staff on the ground in
Honduras moved quickly to help the Government coordinate with other donors and conduct a preliminary
damage assessment. IDA also reallocated and restructured existing operations, prepared supplemental
credits, and prepared a fast-track Hurricane Emergency Project to support financing of critical imports
and maintain macroeconomic stability. In addition, at the suggestion of a number of donors, the WBG set
up the Central America Emergency Trust Fund (CAETF), which through grant financing has helped
affected countries service their debt to multilateral agencies. CAETF contributions total $115.9 million,
of which $71.8 million have been allocated to Honduras.

OED: Emergency Assistance Recommendations and Overall Evaluation

1. OED: Key Recommendations on Emergency Assistance to Honduras

Key OED Recommendations' 

CAS Response

Annex E
Page 1 of 2

Reward the record of pre-hurricane economic progress with strong 
Bank support. 

Ste up 
.et 
.e e. 
Step up debt relief. 

_._ _ 

. _ _ . .

_ ...

Supply additional reconstruction investment through the successful 
Social Fund (FHIS); FHIS is the desirable channel for reconstruction 
investment. 

InCude prevention and mitigation policies in ongoing investmenits to 
alleviate losses caused by recurrent natural disasters. 

* Bank Group moved quickly to support Honduras during the immediate post-hurricane
period, including: fast-track preparation of Hurricane Emergency Project ($200 million);
approval of supplementary credits for the health and transport sectors; jointly with IFC
support and advice to the private sector, and implementation grant (PHRD) to enhance
capacity of Government to coordinate and manage external reconstruction assistance.
* The CAS proposes an increase in the lending program to support reconstruction
needs as well as to support the Government's reform program, with special emphasis
.__ _. _._B
an 
Jointly with IMF and IDB undertook Debt Sustainability Analysis to determine eligibility
for HIPC.
* At the request of a number of donors, set up the Central America Emergency Trust
Fund to finance multilateral debt service for affected countries; contributions benefiting
Honduras currently total $71.8 million.

on the social sectors and disadvantaged _rou_s

_. 
* 

o Commercial debt buyback operation under preparation.

o FHIS project for $45 million (equivalent) approved in FY99, which has allowed FFIIS to
take the lead in channeling relief and reconstruction support to pool and isolated
communities. A follow-on FHIS operation is proposed for FY00 to support

reconstruction.

- Oingoinng 
transport projects are supporting a prograr to reduce vulnerabilities to
natural disasters in the roads sector, based on detailed road and bridge damage
assessments.
0 Two ongoing projects, Rural Land Management and the Environmental Institutions,
were quickly restructured to support emergency repairs in the Sula Valley and flood
protection with rural municipalities, and protection of the Choluteca River in the capital.
* A proposed Disaster Preparedness and MKtigation Project-or components in other
projects-is under preparation.
* Together with IDB, WBG is supporting the Center for Prevention of Disasters in
Central America; grant funding will be used to support vulnerability and risk
assessments, training for public and private officials, conducting small emergency
response tests, and raising awareness about ways to reduce risks at the local level.
* FHIS is developing prevention and mitigation guidelines in its reconstruction
assistance.
* Study on the Gender Impact of Mich in Honduras and Nicaragua is ongoing.
* Comprehensive Infrastructure Assessment will provide overall framework for
infrastructure rehabilitation.

Source: OED Fast Track: EmergencyAssistance to Honduras. Volume 2, Number6, December 8, 1998.

Annex E
Page 2 of 2

2. OED: Overall Country and Bank Evaluation

Country Performance

Over the past four years Honduras steadily improved its economic performance and the performance of Bank projects. Between 1988 and 1994,
Honduras had an average growth rate of 3 percent. Between 1995 and 1997, the economy expanded at an average rate of 4.2 percent a year-that is, more
than 1 percentage faster than all Latin American economies over the same period, and reached a GDP of US$660 per capita. By 1997 Honduras had
exceeded the IMF Staff-Monitored Program: it had reduced its fiscal deficit, inflation had fallen, and the balance of payments deficit was manageable. In 1998
the new government approved a comprehensive economic reform and stabilization program, including a much-needed tax reform.
However, even before the hurricane, social indicators in Honduras were among the worst in Latin America. Half of the population lived in poverty, and
27 percent of adults were illiterate, almost double the Latin American average. In Tegucigalpa alone, the hurricane destroyed one-third of the housing stock,
leaving 1 million people homeless.

Bank Performance

In 1993, the Bank prepared the first Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), which focused on: (i) poverty reduction and human resources development;
(ii) public sector efficiency; and (iii) environmental protection. The Bank's assistance strategy was relevant in Honduras given the extent of poverty, the
underdeveloped labor force, the oversized public sector, and the fragile natural environment. Between 1993 and 1998, commitments included ten lending
operations totaling US$321 million, including two joint adjustment operations with IDB.
Between 1993 and 1998, Honduras had the fastest improvement in outcomes among regional and worldwide portfolios. The share of satisfactory
projects jumped from 60 to 75 percent between 1993-95 and 1996-98. OED's development effectiveness index (DEI)-a summary of a project's outcome,
sustainability, and institutional impact-reflects this improvement. The DEI grew at a faster rate, but the level of effectiveness in Honduras (a DEI of 6.2
between 1996 and 1998) remained lower than the same index for Bank projects in Central America, Latin America, or the rest of the world. Only one-quarter
of the projects evaluated by OED were considered likely to be sustainable or to have had substantial institutional impact, which is far below the regional and
world averages.

Source: OED Fast Track: Emergency Assistance to Honduras. Volume 2, Number 6, December 8, 1998.

LI

Table 1: HONDURAS: Linkages between IDB and WBG Programs

IDB RELATIONS AND DONOR SUPPORT FOR HONDURAS

IDB Priorities and Lending Program, 1999.01
IDB's assistance program for 1999-01 will focus on support for public spending on social needs, reconstruction of the water and sewerage system, housing,
and the transportation network. Subject to the availability of concessional (FSO) resources, the program would also include support for social sector reforms,
rural development, strengthening the justice system and overhauling the electricity system. The baseline scenario, based on available FSO resources and
agreed with the Government would include 12 projects for a total lending of $305 million over 1999-01. This program will be complemented by technical
cooperation and programs aimed at promoting private sector participation, especially on the part of small and medium-sized businesses, through the
Multilateral Investment Fund, the Inter-American Investment Corporation and IDB's Private Sector Department and Microenterprise Unit. The high scenario
would be predicated on the availability of additional FSO resources and would amount to $404 million over 1999-01

Annex F

Page 1 of 3

Area/Sector 

Education 

IDB 

Vocational Training (ongoing)
Secondary Education (proposed) 

WBG 

Relationship

Division of labor

Complementary
Complementary
Parallel financing

Complementary
Complementary

) Complementary

)

'

)

) Complementary

Complementary
Cofinancing

Basic Education II (ongoing)
Basic Education APL (proposed)
Health Reform Project (ongoing) 
Health APL (proposed) 
FHIS IV (ongoing) 

Health 

Safety Net 

Infrastructure 

Reorganization/Expansion Healthcare (ongoing) 
Healthcare System Reform (proposed) 
FHIS IlI (ongoing) 
PRAF II (ongoing)
Social Spending Protection (proposed) 
Emergency Infrastructure (ongoing) 
Emergency Housing (proposed)
Water and Sanitation Investment (proposed)
Housing Program (proposed)
Development Sula Area (proposed) 
Municipalities: Tegucigalpa, San Pedro Sula (ongoing)
Rehabilitation Electrical System (proposed) 
Rural Infrastructure (proposed) 
) Disaster Preparedness (proposed) 
Rural Development Modernization of Agric. & Livestock Services (ongoing) ) Municipal Dev. & Watershed Manag. (proposed) 
) Land Administration & Land Fund (proposed) 
Coastal Management (proposed) 
Public Sector Modernization Adjust. & TA (ongoing) 

FHIS V (proposed) 
Roads Proect and Supplementary Credit (ongoing) 

) Infrastructure Rehabilitation (proposed) 

) 

Environment 

Public Sector 

Environmental Management Bay Islands (ongoing) 
Public Sector Reform Program (ongoin) 
Modernization of Judicial System (ongoing)
Technical Cooperation to Judicial Branch (proposed)

Area/Sector 
Transparency 

Poverty 

______ 

Disaster 
Preparedness 
Infrastructure 
HIPC/DSA 

IDB Non-Lending Collaboration/Partnerships 
Relationship
Design of strategy and institutional strengthening to improve transparency, accountability and efficient Coordination, integration
lmplementation of reconstruction program (in collaboration with other donors). 
of various activities.
Improve survey capacity to analyze and monitor poverty trends (also with ECLAC). 
MECOVI Project.
_ySupport Governr -pr pare Poverty Reduction S ytr _ 
Joint with IMF.
Support for Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America (also with Japan through Trust Fund). 
Grant financing from the
Bank and IDB.
To be confirmed.
Ongoing HIPC process.

Particpationin Bank Group-led corlprehensive Infrastructure Assessment. 
Carry out and review Debt Sustainability Assessment, review of HIPC Preliminary Document. 

_ 

Table 2: HONDURAS: Donor Indications of Support at the Stockholm CG Meeting, 1998-2003

Page 2 of 3

Donor 

Bilateral 

France 
Germany ___ 

__y_aly 

Japan 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Sweden 
United States 
___ 
Other Bilateral 

__ 

$ml 

Priorities2

___1078.4 

__

33.0 

7. 

_ 

66.5 
62.0 
28.9 
268.5 
99.0 
373.6 
_ _ _ _____ 
74.5 

tcal 

Education, culture, infrastructure- 
Social and_yi 
infrstructure, education, technical and vocational training, forestry, HIS
Community development, water/sanitation, import finance
Basic infrastructure, heafth (iric. water suppy/sanitation,agricuture, hou
N/A
Infrastructure, education, judicial, legislature, security, culture, technical training
Infrastructure, rural water and municipal development
Health, education, pnvate sector development, shelter, environment, forestry, disaster preparedness,
ijudicial, accountability (municipalities), AIDS prevention, titling and feeder roads
Housing, forestry, municipal water, transparency

-_ 

_-

__ 

Multilateral 
EC_ 
__ 

NDF 

WFP 
IDB 
IDA 
Other Multilateral 

1685.0 
___142.9 
20.4 
81.0 
730.0 

702.4 As per CAS

Health, education, economic integraion, democratic srengthening_
N/A 
Food aid
See below -

______ 

____ 

_______.

___ 

__ 

= 

__

= 

_____=__

8.3 

Immunization, reproductive health, housing, disaster management, municipal development, children rghts

2763.4

Total Indications 
Memo Items:
o/w: humanitarian 
85.7
o/w: reprogrammed 
285.9
1. Donor amounts as reported by IDB from Information submitted at the CG Meeting (May 28, 1999). Excludes $346.8 million indicated for regional programs, and US$1,006.2
million where donors did not indicate a country allocation within Central America.
2. To be confirmed with individual donors. Excludes debt relief and write-offs.
Source: IDB Report on Stockholm CG, June 30,1999; and donor inputs.

Table 3: HONDURAS: Major Linkages between WBG and Other Donors

CAS
Priorities SectorslAreas 

Major or Lead Role 

Complementary/Partnerships 

WBG Role

Poverty Monitoring/LSMS 
Poverty Assessment 

IDA/IDB/ECLAC 
IDA

UNDP

Annex F
Page 3 of 3

Poverty Reduction Strategy 

Primary Education 
Secondary Education 
Vocational and Technical Education 

Health Sector Reform 
Health Services Provision 
Social Safety Net: FHIS 

IDA/IMF/IDB 

IDA 
IDB 
IDB/Germany 

IDA 
IDB 
IDA 

Social Safety net: PRAF 
IDB 
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Development IDA 
Rural Roads 
USAID 
Food Security 
FAO 

UNDP

Holland, EC, Germany
Germany 

IDB 
_
USAID, Holland, EC, PAHO, Spain
IDB, Germany, Holland

.
Germany, IDB, EC
Germany 
CARE 

Rural Development and Rural Poverty 

Germany/IDB/IDA 

FAO, Germany, USAID, Holland, Canada, Japan

Overall Infrastructure Development Strategy 
Roads 
Housing 
Urban Water 
Water 

X 0 

.c_ .Rural 

IDA 
USAID 
Sweden 
IDB 
USAID 

IDB
IDB, IDA, Japan, Sweden
IDB, Germany, USAID, Canada, Japan 
Spain, Sweden, USAID, Japan 
IDA, Spain, Italy, Canada, UNDP 

a: 

8 

_ 

__Electrkicty 

Financial Sector Reform &Technical Assistance 
7 Small and microenterprise lending/support 

<__________ Private Sector Development Strategy 

IDB 

IDA/IMF 
I USAID 

FIAS/IFC 

Spain 

IDB, Spain
IDB,CABEI, Holland, IFC 

INCAE, CABEI, IDB

00o 

-c 

o E 

'y, 

d) 

o> 

(L 

Z' 

U) 

No role
No role

No role

No direct role
No role

No role
No role
Indirect role (FHIS)

No role

Indirect role

Indirect role (FHIS)

No role

Macroeconomic Stability 
Debt Sustainability 
State Modemization 

Govemance and Transparency 

Judicial System 

IMF 
IDA/IMF/IDB 
IDA/IDB 

IDB 

Spain/USAID 

IDA
HIPC Participants
USAID, UNDP

IDA, USAID, UNDP, Nordics, Holland, Spain

IDB, UNDP 

Decentralization and Municipal Development 

IDB/USAID/Spain 

UNDP, Sweden, IDA 

Environment 
Forestry 
Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation 

Canada 
Canada/Germany/USAID 
USAID 

Germany, USAID, IDA, UNDP, IDB
IDA, Canada, IDB
IDA, IDB, Japan, USAID, UNDP

Annex G
Page 1 of 7

Background

CAS Dialogue with Civil Society

1. 

In early 1998, when the Honduras Country Team begun discussing preparation of the Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS), the Government agreed that a dialogue with civil society would be desirable
and allow the Bank Team to incorporate a more complete and inclusive vision of Honduras' development
challenges. The Bank had begun to open a dialogue with civil society groups (CSGs), especially those
advocating debt relief for Honduras and its inclusion in the HIPC Initiative. A CPPR Meeting held early in
1998, which marked the first step in the preparation of the CAS included, at the suggestion of the
Government, representatives of the private sector and NGOs who were working on debt relief and the
HIPC process. Although Hurricane Mitch interrupted the CAS preparation process, the Bank Team
maintained an active dialogue with CSGs throughout 1999.

2. As discussed in the CAS document, Mitch introduced a new dynamic in relations between the
Government and groups representing civil society. The Government had already developed a closer
working relationship with some groups in its efforts to mobilize support for Honduras' participation in
HIPC, but the disaster broadened the dialogue as the Government sought to respond to calls by the donor
community to involve civil society in the design of the Reconstruction and Transfornation Program. The
process intensified as the Government and civil society prepared for the Stockholm Consultative Group
Meeting in May 1999, and has continued after Stockholm. The process has not always been smooth, but
there has been a concerted and constructive effort to open up spaces for dialogue and consensus building.

3. As soon as we were able to restart the CAS preparation process, following the Stockholm CG
Meeting, we discussed again with the Government and civil society, represented by INTERFOROS (a
network of civil society and NGO groups), the modalities and timing for a dialogue on the WBG's
assistance strategy for Honduras. Civil society representatives welcomed the Bank's suggestion to carry
out a CAS dialogue, but remained concerned that they would have little scope in practice to influence the
strategy and policies of the WBG in Honduras, especially if they did not have access to early drafts on
which the WBG would base the final CAS. They were concerned that if they would only have access to the
final CAS document, they could not determine the extent to which their inputs had been taken into account.
The Government, in turn, was strongly supportive of the WBG's effort to carry out a constructive and open
dialogue with civil society to prepare the CAS, but wanted to ensure that there would be a wide
representation in the groups participating in the dialogue. It did not seek to exclude any groups, but wanted
to ensure that the Bank heard a diversity of voices.

4. At the request of INTERFOROS, the Government agreed that the WBG could release the CAS
Brainstorming Document to civil society participants, even though the Document had not been discussed in
detail with the Government itself It was made clear that the Document was not the CAS itself, and that it
presented preliminary ideas on the elements that would form part of the WBG's assistance strategy. The
Government also worked with the civil society organizers of the dialogue through FONAC (National
Convergence Forum) to expand the list of participants. Agreement was eventually reached between the
Government and civil society on the timing, participation and format of the CAS Workshop.

The Process

5. The CAS Workshop was held in Tegucigalpa on October 21-22, 1999. The CAS Brainstorming
Document was sent electronically to the organizers of the CAS Workshop one week prior to the event.
Given that over 100 people had been invited, it was agreed that there would be two separate sessions. The

Annex G
Page 2 of 7

two sessions received the same documentation and the same presentations from the Bank Team and the
Minister of Finance, but the dialogue was organized differently in each session.

6. 
The first session (October 21) was attended by 60-70 people representing a variety of stakeholders,
including: labor, rural associations, women groups, private sector, NGO umbrella organizations, locally-
based international NGOs, political groups, academia, government representatives, and the media. The
organizers decided that, following a brief introduction by the Minister of Finance and a detailed
presentation by the Bank Team on the background, context and main elements of the proposed strategy, the
workshop would break out into six Working Groups organized by CAS themes: poverty alleviation and
social protection; rural poverty and vulnerable groups; reactivation and acceleration of economic growth;
economic policies and external debt; state modernization and decentralization; environmental sustainability,
risks and natural disasters. The Working Groups were asked to comment and make recommendations on
their assigned topics, as well as general aspects of the proposed assistance strategy. Each Working Group
prepared a detailed written matrix with comments and recommendations, which were presented and
discussed in the plenary session.

7. 
The second session (October 22) was attended by about 20-30 people also representing a variety of
stakeholders, including: FONAC plus other groups representing NGOs implementing development
projects, the private sector, labor, universities, rural organizations, faith-based NGOs, women groups, and
government representatives. Following presentations by the Minister of Finance and the Bank Team, the
workshop was organized as an open dialogue between participants and the Bank Team.

What We Heard in the CAS Dialogue

8. 
The Bank heard a wide variety of voices and received a rich set of suggestions and
recommendations. In addition to the discussion in the plenaries, we received almost 40 pages in matrix
form of comments and recommendations based on the CAS Brainstorming Document and the Bank Team's
presentation. CSGs welcomed the WBG's efforts to make the CAS process more transparent and
participatory and the Government's willingness to participate and make the consultation process possible.
These were recognized as important steps for the WBG and the Government in developing stronger and
more constructive relations with civil society. While there was support for the Bank's efforts to consult,
and even surprise at the willingness to open our CAS process to civil society, there remained an attitude of
healthy skepticism about the ability of civil society to effectively influence the Bank's strategy for
Honduras.

9. 
Comments and recommendations varied greatly in depth and scope. They included drafting
suggestions, corrections of facts, general and specific recommendations, as well as areas of agreement and
disagreement with the Bank's proposed approaches. Some of the messages we heard were clearly directed
at non-Bank audiences, including the donor community in general, the Government, the other powers of the
state, as well as other stakeholders in Honduran society.

10. Government-civil society relations. CSGs recognized that there was an opening in the dialogue but
felt that the Government needed to do more to empower civil society, arguing that the basic relationship had
not changed fundamentally. It was felt that Government-civil society relations needed to be deepened, and
that the process needed to be widened to include the Legislature and the Judiciary Branches.

11. The economy before Mitch. Some in civil society felt that the Bank overstated the economic
progress prior to Mitch, in two major respects: (i) some questioned official data, arguing especially that
they did not believe inflation data; and (ii) while macro indicators may have been doing well, poverty

Annex G
Page 3 of 7

remained pervasive and stabilization/adjustment policies implemented to improve macroeconomic
conditions had large social costs.

12. Country vision. There was agreement that Honduras needed to forge a consensus on a long-term
country vision. Although there were no concrete suggestions on how to move this process forward, there
was agreement that external actors such as the World Bank can help the process, but the consensus cannot
be forced from the outside or be a top-down approach.

13. Poverty. There was full consensus that poverty is the overwhelming challenge and that it must be a
CAS priority. There was also full agreement on the need for a comprehensive and longer term poverty
reduction strategy arrived at with civil society consultation. It was emphasized that the strategy needed to
be seen not as a document but as a process. It was agreed the strategy needed to define outcome and
progress indicators, how these would be monitored and the way in which civil society would be expected to
participate. It was also agreed that an outcome-oriented poverty reduction strategy with civil society
consultation should be an integral part of the HIPC process, since the aim of debt relief should be to
produce a meaningful reduction in poverty.

14. The measurement of poverty and whether official figures can be trusted was much discussed. There
was agreement that the overall level was not that important and that, instead, there should be agreement
with civil society on the methodology to measure poverty, so as to arrive at a common starting point from
which trends over time will be measured to evaluate progress. There is a need to strengthen the country's
survey and analytical capacity to improve the quality and reliability of poverty and social indicators.

15. Most CSGs stated the Bank's diagnosis of the poverty problem was correct and fairly complete.
While there was general agreement on the components that the Bank suggested should be part of a poverty
reduction strategy, there was less agreement on the specifics and the sectoral approaches proposed.

16. Education. CSGs could understand and support the Bank's proposed focus on the primary level, but
emphasized that there was a need to maintain a comprehensive view of the education system as a whole.
Problems in each education level are carried over into the next. Improving education results has to be
viewed not just as access to education but also in terms of the ability of the system to retain students.
There were strong concerns over the quality of education, the efficiency of the Ministry of Education,
politicization of the system, and problems in the public university system. There was a cautious response
to the Bank's proposed support for the PROHECO (community participation model), which appeared to
reflect the fact that other "special" education models had been tried before and few CSGs were very
knowledgeable on PROHECO. Some CSGs suggested that it was too early to tell whether this was the
right approach and that its results should be carefully evaluated.

17. Health. There was comparably less discussion and depth on the recommendations on the health
sector. Some CSGs were concerned that whatever progress had been achieved was the result of the
availability of considerable external financing for the sector. It was suggested that external financiers
should ensure there was sufficient attention within the health sector to reproductive health, prevention of
STDs/HIV/AIDS, teen pregnancies and violence.

18. Social protection. A number of CSGs expressed the strong view that transfer programs can
perpetuate poverty. There was agreement that the targeting and efficacy of transfer programs such as
PRAF needed to be monitored constantly, and there was a proposal to redirect some of its programs.
Regarding FHIS, views were somewhat mixed. Some CSGs acknowledged that it is an efficient institution
at what it does and that it played a useful role during the emergency. The concerns related more to what
CSGs thought FHIS should be. Most CSGs indicated that the Bank should continue to support FHIS but it

Annex G
Page 4 of 7

should also intensify efforts to prioritize projects at the local level, promote greater involvement of local
communities and strengthen local governments. It was also suggested that there should be grater vigilance
over the quality and sustainability of the works financed by FHIS, including through social audits, and that
the institution should not be politicized.

19. Rural development. This theme generated the strongest and most determined questioning of the
Bank's proposed approach. This clearly reflects the fact that a rural development strategy touches on a
very complex and sensitive set of issues, an area where there is a long history of reform efforts, and where
some groups feel that reforms, even when well-intentioned, failed to meet expectations or floundered in
their implementation due to lack of political will or the opposition of powerful vested interests. The
concerns or criticisms of the Bank's proposed approach can be grouped into two broad areas, bearing in
mind that the various concerns and suggestions from civil society were not always consistent among
themselves: (i) concern and/or opposition to market-assisted land reform, either in principle or specifically
in terms of the proposed Land Fund; and (ii) the need for a more comprehensive approach, with other
elements added to the rural development strategy.

20. 
In terms of land reform and access to land, some CSGs felt that agrarian reform laws should be
applied, especially redistributing land that is not productively employed instead of relying on mechanisms
such as the Land Fund. Other groups supported the Land Fund concept, noting however, that the number
of beneficiaries would be small and that it would be critical to provide complementary support, not just
land. Access to rural credit must be improved, building on the experiences of community credit schemes.
There is a need to review the whole legal framework for the sector, especially the Agrarian Reform Law
and the Law for the Modernization and Development of the Agriculture Sector. There was broader
agreement on the importance of providing poor farmers with access to markets, although there was less
clarity on how to do this or how to prioritize interventions.

2 1. Development of indigenous and Afro-Honduran people. It was explained that the concept had
changed from ethnic groups to indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples (pueblos indigenos y negros). The
development of indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples needed to adopt a comprehensive and intercultural
approach, which recognizes these groups' own cultural processes. It was also suggested that indigenous
and Afro-Honduran peoples development needed to be fully integrated in the poverty reduction strategy,
and not just treated as a separate vulnerable group. Emphasis should be placed on education and the role
of women. Household surveys should identify and collect disaggregated data on indigenous and Afro-
Honduran peoples.

22. Gender. A number of CSGs felt the Bank's effort to address gender issues did not go far enough.
While some of the priorities identified in the CAS were important, such as maternal mortality and access to
land, they fell short of a more comprehensive and cross-cutting approach. In the discussion that followed,
the Bank indicated it found that many of the concerns were difficult for the Bank to operationalize (e.g.,
changing cultural attitudes, increasing self-worth) but that it welcomed concrete proposals for policy
action. There was agreement that CSGs were not proposing isolated women's programs or projects.
Suggestions included revising textbooks and curricula in the education system to remove gender biases,
focus on indigenous and Afro-Honduran women who are especially disadvantaged, greater emphasis in the
health sector on women's reproductive health, and Bank support for the institutional framework that can
support work on gender issues. In addition, one CSG promised to elaborate a more detailed set of
actionable proposals for Bank consideration.

23. Economic growth. CSGs by and large agreed that economic growth was important, and could see
the link with the poverty reduction objectives. They emphasized, however, that growth needs to be more
inclusive, small and micro enterprises need to be seen as a powerful driving force, and that increased equity

Annex G
Page 5 of 7

would strengthen the irnpact of growth on poverty reduction. Economic growth, therefore, must be
accompanied by redistributive policies.

24. 
Infrastructure. CSGs agree that infrastructure rehabilitation and development is essential for
growth, but felt that a long-term infrastructure development strategy should be linked to the need to develop
human capital, support the objective of rural development and also be consulted with local communities
and local governments. There were also concerns that the infrastructure rehabilitation investments needed
to be sustainable and not temporary solutions that will be washed away in the next natural disaster.
Development of the energy sector needed to emphasize hydro power and renewable resources. There were
doubts about the proposed privatization of power distribution, especially since it was not clear to civil
society what the benefits would be.

25. Financial sector. There was agreement on the need to strengthen the financial sector and improve
prudential supervision. CSGs noted that supervisory and regulatory bodies cannot perform their roles
effectively if they are politicized. They also argued that financial sector reforms should be discussed with
civil society.

26. Private sector development. Private sector representatives emphasized the importance of
strengthening and depoliticizing the judicial system, improving property registries, and improving citizen
security, all of which act to discourage foreign and domestic investment. It was also felt that resolving the
problems at the state university level was critical, because without an efficient tertiary system Honduras
could not hope to compete in a globalized environment. The lack of access to term financing and high
domestic interest rates were seen as major obstacles to private sector development. There was also
agreement that programs to benefit small and micro enterprises are urgently needed. Some CSGs stated
that while they supported reforms to improve the business climate and attract foreign investment, they were
concerned that sometimes these reform and legal changes were adopted too quickly, without giving civil
society sufficient time to understand the longer-term implications.

27. State modernization. There was agreement that improving the efficiency of the public sector was
crucial. Efforts to modernize the state, in fact, needed to be speeded up, focusing not just on the Central
Government and needed to include implementation of performance evaluation mechanisms of the public
sector. Improving the efficiency of public sector agencies is important, but there is also a need to improve
the efficiency of public expenditures. The absorptive capacity of the Government can be improved through
greater reliance on CSGs and local governments. In a broader context, CSGs felt that state modernization
efforts needed to include the Legislature and the Judiciary. There was also a need to develop and
implement a system to evaluate public sector performance.

28. Decentralization. This topic generated considerable discussion and proposals. There was
agreement that there is a need to prepare a decentralization strategy, that it must be long term but that it
must also include short-term and time-bound measures. It was agreed that decentralization is not the same
as municipalization, though the terms are often used interchangeably. There was agreement that a strategy
or vision to underpin decentralization was lacking. It was suggested that the Law on Municipalities needed
to be reformed and the current proposal should be amply consulted. It was recognized that the mandated 5
percent of revenues was not being transferred to municipalities, but that whatever resources are transferred
should favor the poorer municipalities. There was a sense that not enough was being done to strengthen
municipalities, and that Municipal Development Councils (Consejos de Desarrollo Municipal, CODEMs)
needed to be strengthened and empowered. A broader view of decentralization would consider community
organization processes, since Mitch clearly showed that where these existed the response to Mitch was
more effective. (This comment on the importance of community organizations also applied to Government-

Annex G
Page 6 of 7

civil society relations.) Also, FLITS had a positive experience when it decentralized to handle the Mitch
emergency, but these lessons should also be applied to other centralized agencies.

29. Governance andtransparency. CSGs agreed that discussions of governance and transparency were
more prominent following Mitch. They felt, however, that this concern needed to go beyond the
reconstruction effort and the transparent use of external resources. There was a lack of political clarity on
how to foster processes to improve governance and transparency. Governance can be improved with
greater involvement and participation of civil society. Impunity and the politicization of the Judiciary need
to be addressed.

30. Environmental sustainability. This theme also prompted a rich and diverse set of views. It was
pointed out that the Bank's diagnosis of the problem needed to be more complete. CSGs felt that the Bank
should point out that, at times, donor-supported projects had contributed to inappropriate natural resource
use (a donor-backed Livestock Fund was mentioned as an example) and that poor farmers have no option
but to encroach on protected lands or cultivate in slopes since they do not have access to better agricultural
land. Illegal logging is a far more serious problem than firewood collection by poor farmers. There was
agreement that a watershed management approach is appropriate, and it was noted that the vast majority of
the rural poor live in and around watersheds. It was suggested that the approach should not neglect micro-
watersheds since these were also important for many communities. One set of comments suggested that the
approach should be wider than watershed management and instead refer to territorial ordering
(ordenamiento territorial) which would involve a national approach to natural resource management and
settlements.

31. 
It was recognized that there had been progress in demarcation of protected areas, but very little in
terms of improving the management of protected areas. The efforts of the Government and NGOs to
protect valuable ecosystems was recognized but it was felt these had to be intensified. There was support
for the development of sustainable tourism in coastal and protected areas, provided a participatory and
consensus-building process is followed.

32. Donors. A number of groups emphasized that donors needed to coordinate better among themselves.
There was also a sense that there were too many individual projects, too fragmented and too small each to
make a lasting difference.

33. The role of the WBG. A number of CSGs wondered why the Bank did not place greater emphasis
on programs instead of projects. The Bank Team explained that this was indeed an objective, and that the
CAS placed emphasis on developing longer-term sectoral programs that the Bank could support through
the recently approved Adaptable Program Loan (APL) instrument. This, however, requires consensus on
longer-term sector development strategies that would justify adopting a program approach. In response a
number of CSGs urged the Bank to support sectoral dialogue and consensus processes, while recognizing
that the effort had to be country-led. There were also suggestions that dialogue and consensus processes
needed to have clear and agreed formats, and specified timings.

How Did the CAS Dialogue Influence the CAS?

34. The dialogue with civil society provided the Bank team with a deeper understanding of Honduras'
development challenges, the complexities involved in forging a national consensus on key priorities and the
evolving role of civil society. In addition, there were a number of important areas where the dialogue led to
adjustment and reformnulation of the initial approach proposed in the CAS brainstorming document. Major
adjustments in the CAS included: (i) reformulating the approach to gender in order to mainstream gender
concerns throughout the CAS and seek ways to strengthen support for gender institutionality; (ii) moving

Annex G
Page 7 of 7

away from an initial approach that tended to treat indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples as a separate
vulnerable group in need of special assistance, seeking instead a fuller integration of their development
needs within the overall poverty reduction strategy and a strengthening of their own institutions and
organizations; (iii) while maintaining a priority on basic education, the CAS now includes a better
articulation between the primary and secondary levels, as well as enhanced donor coordination to support
institutional strengthening across the entire education sector; (iv) adopting a more flexible approach to the
proposed support for health sector reforms, leaving open the choice of lending vehicle to be used but
placing increased emphasis on the dialogue with stakeholders, stronger donor coordination, and consensus
building; and (v) recognizing the complexity of the rural development agenda, the importance of supporting
consensus-building while being aware of the sensitivities involved, and strengthening the CAS links
between poverty reduction, environmental sustainability and sustainable watershed management.

Conclusions and Lessons

* The CAS dialogue was very constructive, carried out with mutual respect and openness. The CSGs
valued the Bank's willingness to open the CAS process, and they worked very hard to provide
thoughtful and helpful recommendations. The majority of the civil society inputs have been
incorporated in the text of the CAS, while others provide a good base for a continuing process of
dialogue and consultation.

- We perceived a deep desire on the part of civil society to participate and be taken into account in the
national decision-making process, both by the state and the donor community. They perceive the latter
as having enormous influence on Honduras' development process.

- While the dialogue brought to light important areas of disagreement or concerns on the part of civil
society, there was also general agreement on the broad development agenda articulated by the Bank.
The challenge is in the details. Much work lies ahead to define and seek consensus on the specifics that
will operationalize the proposed Country Assistance Strategy.

* Related to the point above, civil society welcomed the Bank's willingness to continue a dialogue on key
aspects of the assistance strategy, especially where Bank interventions need to be underpinned by
agreed longer-term sectoral strategies. However, civil society would like more precision from the Bank
on how and when these dialogues are to be carried out. The commnitment to carry out consultative and
consensus-building processes is important, but the way the processes are structured and the
expectations they generate are equally important.

El

MAP SECTION

880 

860 

840

I 

BELIZE

HONDURAS

! 

ROATAN

-16 

I 

16-

Puerto Cortms 

( 

Tel.a 

LA CEIBA 

TRU 

,, 

GUATEMALA

. SAN PEDROg 

J 

J\ 

S 

PUERTO
/-LEMPIRA

YORO 

ffi 

/1 >BARBARA< 

., 

-I.w>:> 

J 

~. 

__ 

/SANTA 

ROSA 
zo 
\, RE COPAN 

r

4 

> 

\ 

8; 

) 

_/~ 

~-C

Gu.t..ala} 

J 

' 

JUTICALP, 

\/ 

XT Puerto C.b-zns
'

P^J 

/7 WRACIAS 

e.eqr 

t@8 

aedros 

l 

p.TE jPEOUE 9 

) 

\CMYGAW

v 

~~~EXPER-AN L PA(

MAIN BITUMINOUS SURFACED ROADS

1A'-

/ Sr 

J 
-

~ 

{ 
/ 

YUSCARAN 
J_ 

\ 

SECONDARY ROADS

EL SALVADOR. -%_ RALOD

-~RAILROADS

To Son Salvado4 

, 

MAIN AIRPORTS

MAIN PORTS

9no 

L^O 

81- 

78V 

X 

_ 

< 

tRIVERS

MEX ! 

i8: 

CHOLEBELIZE 

To Matagalpo 

0 

(5,000 AND GREATER POPULATION)

GUATEMi~AXHONDURAS 

)N 

ICARAGUA 

 

DEPARTMENT CAPITALS

to, 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ NC 

R 

G 

AThe 

he-dories, colors

EL 
SALVADOR 

To Chinadega 

* 

NATIONAL CAPITAL 
DEPARTMENT BOUNDARIES 

de-omioni 

nd any

other in-rnntion shoen
e do not
0th 
Th. World Bnok Groop, 

0 

25 

0 

100 Kilometers 

i0p th 
imply, on the poet of~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~y 

O ~ ~ ~ ~~~ 

I 

I 

I 

I 

~, 

fq 

_ 

lo 

COSTA RICA PANAMA 

10 

-- 

NTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES 

ThporldqSankooulpoly

.ma 

\ 

0 

25 

50 

75 

100 Miles 

505 of 
boundarie 

acx 

te5n 
iosM 0 Gi

a 

o0 
hntn,e 

86 82cceLOM 

84 
84' 

of suh. 

O-
)

'0 

90 

ty 
t6 
82_ 

COlOMBIA 

~~~~~~~~ 

~~~~~~~~~~ 
~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~86' 

90 $6, 

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ __LOMBIA_ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ __ 

00

