Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20426-TA

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZNIA

May 22, 2000

Country Department for Tanzania
Mac roecon omices II, AF TM2
Africa Region

|This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
|official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.l

l

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR: July 1 - June 30

Currency Equivalents

Currency Unit = Tanzania Shilling (T Sh)
US$1 = T Sh 797 (April 2000)

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Adjustable Project Loan
Basic Education Master Plan
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Consultative Group
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
East Africa Community
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Country Risk Guide Index
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Local Government Reform Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Bank of Commerce
National Microfinance Bank
Non-Governmental Organization
National Poverty Eradication Strategy
Office of the Controller and Auditor General
Operations Evaluations Department
Operations Evaluation Groups
Policy Framework Paper
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Reform Credit
Southern African Development Community
Secondary Education Master Plan
Small and Medium Enterprises
Tanzania Assistance Strategy
Tanzania Social Assistance Fund
Tanzania Electric Supply Company Ltd.
Tanzania Investment Center
Tanzania Telecommunications Company Ltd.
United Nations AIDS Program
World Bank Institute

APL 
BEMP 
CAE 
CAS 
CDF 
CG 
COMESA 
EAC 
ESAF 
DAWASA 
FIAS 
HIPC 
ICRG 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
LGRP 
MIGA 
MTEF 
NBC 
NMB 
NGO 
NPES 
OCAG 
OED 
OEG 
PFP 
PRGF 
PRSP 
PSAC 
PER 
PERC 
SADEC 
SEMP 
SMEs 
TAS 
TASAF 
TANESCO 
TIC 
TTLC 
UNAIDS 
WBI 

IDA 
Vice President: 
Callisto E. Madavo 
Country Director: 
James W. Adams 
Task Team Leader: Miria Pigato 

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Cesare Calari
James Emery

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

CONTENTS

Executive Summary ................................................... 

I. Political, Social and Economic Context ....................................................

i

1

A. Political, economic and private sector development issues ............................................... I
B. Poverty, social and governance issues ....................................................
2

II. Macroeconomic Performance and Prospects ................ 

....................................

6

A. Recent economic performance ....................................................
6
B. Macroeconornic prospects, external environment and risks .............................................. 7

III. The Government's Strategy ....................................................

9

A. Overview ...................................................
9
B. Creating higher growth and economic opportunities for the poor ................................... 10
C. Building capabilities ....................................................
11
D. Empowerment and accountability ................................................... 
12

IV. The Bank Group Assistance Strategy ................................................... 

A. Consultations .................................................. 
B. Lessons from past experience .................................. 
C. The strategy ................................... 
D. Description of the lending program .............. 
E. Non lending services .................................. 
F. WBI and MIGA ...................................
G. Portfolio issues ................................... 
H. Benchmark indicators for Government/Bank 
I. Risks .................................. 
J. Concluding remarks .................................. 

.

.

.................... 

.................................. 

13

13
14
17
20
22
24
24
25
25
26

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perfoumance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

CONTENTS (cont'd)

CHARTS

Chart I 
Chart 2 

Tanzania: Social and Governance Indicators
Tanzania: Selected Economic Indicators

TEXT BOXES

Box I 

Box II 
Box III 
Box IV 
Box V 

The Development Vision 2025 (1998) and the National Poverty
Eradication Strategy (1997)
CAS Consultations With Civil Society: Key Findings
OED's and OEG's Findings and Recommendations
Triggers for High Case Scenario
The Need to Scale Up the Fight Against HIV/AIDS

TEXT TABLES

Table I 
Table 2 
Table 3 

Tanzania: Past Results and Macroeconomic Projections for 2000-03
A Framework for Development Partnership
Tanzania CAS- Lending Program FYO1-03 (US$ millions)

ANNEXES

Annex I 
Annex II 
Annex III 
Annex IV 
Annex V 

The Low Case Scenario
Tanzania: The Road to Ownership and Effective Partnership
Portfolio Overview & Performance Improvement Strategy
Client Feedback Survey 1997
Standard Annexes

Map 

Tanzania - IBRD 27941

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

Executive Summary

1. 
Economic reforms in Tanzania began in 1986 and by the early 1990s household surveys
indicated that higher economic growth was reducing poverty. However, in the mid 1990s
Tanzania's reform program fell off track, resulting in high budget deficits, increased inflation and
low economic growth. In parallel, corruption increased significantly. Reflecting this situation,
long-standing donor support for Tanzania came under threat. As summarized in the "Report of
the Group of Independent Advisors on Development Cooperation Issues Between Tanzania and
its Aid Donors" (Thie Helleiner Report) in June 1995: "With the current macroeconomic situation
lagging behind expectations and the continuing malaise in aid relationships, the major progress of
the past nine years is now at significant risk".

2. 
Approximately six months after the report was published, elections were held and a new
Government, led by President Benjamin Mkapa, came to power. In its early pronouncements on
the economic situa4tion, the Government committed itself to a renewed effort at economic reform
and expressed its determination to re-establish more positive relations with its donors and
partners in development. The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), presented in 1997 during
the initial period of the Mkapa Government, focussed on supporting this effort at renewal. Three
related themes were central to that CAS: (i) the critical link between economic growth and
poverty reduction; (ii) the priority of supporting and reinforcing 
the growth oriented
macroeconomic reforms introduced by the new Government; and (iii) the need to respect and
foster Government ownership of both its macroeconomic reforms and investment programs.

3. 
In parallel to the work on this CAS the Government is preparing the Tanzania Assistance
Strategy (TAS) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The TAS provides a
development framework to organize donors assistance around strategic priorities and to increase
the share of aid, currently as low as 40 percent, accounted for by the budget. The PRSP work is
focussing on specific policies and institutional changes for reducing poverty and improving living
standards in the short and medium term. The focus of this CAS is on higher growth, poverty
reduction and institutional reforms to improve governance and service delivery. The CAS shares
the main strategic directions of the TAS - adherence to macro stability, a renewed emphasis on
rural development:, improved governance and increased private sector participation in the
economy. It also supports the Government's desire to enter into new relationships with partners,
based on the phased switching from projects to programs for a more effective and efficient use of
aid resources. The preparation of the CAS has been participatory, involving wide consultations
with civil society and a large number of stakeholders. It also reflects the lessons learned by OEG
and OED in their recent reviews.

4. 
The CAS presents three scenarios. In the base-case scenario (within which the Bank is
currently operating), lending would rise from US$200 million a year (in the last CAS) to US$260
million. This assumes that objectives for the PRSP and the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) would be met, consistent with anticipated schedules. In this scenario,
macroeconomic stability and structural measures 
in the areas of governance, financial

i-

management, tax reforms and improvement of the business environment would be implemented
and social sector programs would be strengthened. The adoption of the low-case scenario
(lending program of US$100 million a year) would result from significant delays in the
implementation of PRSP and PRGF, as well as from slippage in the expected timing for the HIPC
completion point.

5. 
The CAS envisions a move to the high-case scenario by the third year if specific triggers
(mostly on governance and public sector management) are met. This scenario would add US$200
million to the base-case lending scenario, and more importantly, move away from traditional
project financing towards budgetary support through the instrument of a Public Expenditure
Reform Credit (PERC). The PERC would focus on poverty and environmentally sustainable rural
development issues and would be utilized by the Bank to systematically address cross-sectoral
issues of poverty reduction identified in the PRSP.

6. 
Tanzania is vulnerable to external shocks, commodity price changes and droughts. But
the sources of foreign exchange earnings are becoming increasingly diversified, and the current
level of international reserves offer sufficient cushion against external shocks. Domestically,
revenue shortfalls or increased government spending could endanger the adjustment efforts.
Domestic support for the reforms could be undercut if higher growth and poverty reduction are
not achieved. Finally, worsening governance and increased corruption may alienate the support of
key aid partners and reduce investment.

7. 
These risks, however, are manageable. Tanzania is politically stable and ethnic friction is
minimal. The newly created East African Community and similar regional arrangements provide
the basis for greater policy and economic coordination in the area. The HIPC debt relief will
enable the country to free up substantial resources to enable an increase in spending for poverty
focussed programs. For the Bank, the greatest risk is that of overestimating the Government's
implementation capacity. Thus, we will have to pay great attention to project design, to undertake
effective capacity-building initiatives, to be vigilant and disciplined in supervision, and to have a
strong monitoring and evaluation feedback system. This will be vital to track programs, draw
lessons and adjust learning in real time.

8. 

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* Does the Board agree with the strategic priorities for Bank Group support? Given the
success and strength of our dialogue on macroeconomic issues should we now pursue the
broader range of initiatives suggested in this CAS?
Is the proposed level of lending, and large share of program aid, consistent with the
expected progress in budget management and governance? Are the conditions for shifting
towards program support specific enough?
* Are CAS implementation, risks realistic and acceptable?

* 

ii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF 
THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND, THE INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

I. POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

A. Political, econontic and private sector development 

issues

1. 
Democracy is evolving peacefully. Tanzania is one of the few countries in Africa with a
long record of political and civic stability, in which citizens share a strong sense of national
identity. Nearly 15 years into its transition from a socialist to a free market economy, and five
years since the adoption of multiparty elections, the United Republic of Tanzania' is steadily
moving towards a fully democratic society. Besides the party which has ruled since
Independence (the Cliama Cha Mapinduzi, CCM), there are five political parties which have been
active in Parliament and will be contending the next elections, to be held in October 2000. The
process of transformation has been slow - partly because of CCM's control of the political
institutions inherited from the socialist one-party state - but peaceful and extensive. Civic
organizations are developing, the media are becoming stronger and increasingly give voice to
different opinions. However the political situation in Zanzibar has been tense, with accusations of
electoral irregularities in 1995 not having been satisfactory resolved.

2. 
Macroeconomic stability and growth have re-emerged. Since the last CAS the
Government of Tanzania has continued its stabilization program and has introduced deep
institutional and structural reforms. Growth has averaged about four percent during the last four
years. This is a strong result considering the severe weather conditions and reflects strengthened
macroeconomic and structural fundamentals as well as a greater flexibility of the economy in
responding to shocks. A large number of the distortions that existed in the 90s have been dealt
with - markets are fieer and the public sector is smaller. The foreign exchange market and the
trade regime have been liberalized. Though slowly, privatization has proceeded and mnre than
half of the 400 public enterprises have been privatized.

3. 
Since the 1994-95 crisis, the fiscal situation has improved dramatically. But this has
implied large cuts in government expenditure, under-funding of social sectors and deteriorating
public services. Howvever, in the past two years the Government has identified a number of
sectors with a large impact on poverty - education, health, water, rural roads and more recently
agriculture and the judiciary. Funding for these sectors has been protected and monitored under
participatory Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs). The process has been supported by donors
through the creation of a Multilateral Debt Funcf (MDF) which has assisted in servicing debt to
multilateral agencies. The related budgetary savings have been used to protect expenditures
earmarked for these priority sectors.

4. 
Private sector development remains limited. Tanzania has largely shifted from a socialist
to a market econorny but significant obstacles to private sector development remain. The

I Since April 26, 1964, the United Republic of Tanzania consists of former Tanganyka (mainland) and the People's
Republic of Zanzibaf.
2 The MDF, supported by bilateral donors, is aimed at assisting the Government in meeting multilateral debt service
obligations. The relief, tied to the budget, is conditional to the Government's commitment to sustain budgetary
allocations to the priority sectors - education, health, water, rural roads, agriculture and the judicial system.

1

restructuring and privatization of public utilities and large parastatal monopolies is just starting
and the poor quality of public services represent a high cost to the private sector. In 1999, only
13 percent of the road network was in good condition. Electricity is available to only 7 percent of
households and tariffs are high. Frequent power cuts makes it necessary for enterprises to invest
in backup generators. Telephone service remains inadequate, with long waiting times for new
telephone connections, though new private cellular services in urban areas are developing fast.
Transport costs are high, and delays are common in ports and railways.

5. 
The financial sector is now virtually under private sector management, while in 1995
more than 70 percent of the banking system's assets were state owned. In 1997, the National
Bank of Commerce (NBC), the largest bank, was split into the National Microfinance Bank
(NMB) and the NBC. The NMB was put under private management in August 1999, with IFC
assistance and the NBC was privatized in December 1999. A framework for micro-finance has
been established with the aim of increasing access to financial services by the poor. Banking
supervision has improved significantly in recent years and prudential regulations have been based
on internationally accepted guidelines. In spite of recent transformations, the ratio of credit to
GDP is low, 4.7 percent of GDP relative to an average of 14 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Financial penetration (the ratio of deposits to GDP) is also low, 15 percent. The large banks
maintain relatively high lending and low deposit rates to enhance their profitability and are
conservative in their expansion strategies. Non-bank financial institutions are insufficient to
provide significant alternatives and competition to the banking sector. The rural population has
limited access to financial services. Other problems remain, including the inaccuracy of financial
data reporting, and weaknesses in accounting standards. Despite the creation of a regulatory
framework for the securities market and the establishment of the Dar es Salaam Stock. Exchange,
capital markets remain largely under-developed, and constrained by limitation on foreign
participation.

6. 
Improving the environment. Tanzania is recognized globally for its highly bio-diverse
natural heritage. Nearly 40 percent of the land area is covered by wood and forests and. 23 percent
has been established as protected areas. The main issues concerning the environment include: (i)
threats to bio-diversity and loss of wildlife habitats stemming from overgrazing, illegal hunting,
poaching, and overfishing; (ii) deforestation of high forests, the result of unregulated expansion
of the timber industry and the agriculture sector; (iii) environmental pollution, particularly in
urban areas, the result of inadequate waste collection and the lack of an effective regulatory
framework to limit industrial pollution. The government adopted a National Environmental
Policy in November 1997, widely recognized as inadequate for environmental protection and
management. Since then studies and efforts have been carried out to improve the institutional and
legal framework for environmental management. The process has relied on extensive
consultations and involvement of communities. A new and encouraging Forest Policy was
adopted in 1999. The Government is currently formulating a bio-diversity conservation policy
and a national plan to combat desertification.

B. Poverty, social and governance issues

7. 
Poverty is widespread. Despite its potential and rich resource endowment, Tanzania is
one of the poorest countries in the world with a per capita GNP of about US$240 in 1999.
Official estimates suggest that over half of its 31 million population is poor and 36 percent is very
poor. Poverty is essentially a rural phenomenon: almost 61 percent of the rural population is poor

2

Chart I3

Tanzania: Social and Governance Indicators

GCu Prifary Throllment Ratio 
(percent) 

1 

HIV infection rates among blood
donors (percent)

100 
50 

, 

-

j 

10 -

I 

,male

1980 19S5 1990 1995 1997 

1992 

199

30

20 

j1. 

5.9 

| 

female

Life expectancy at birth 
(years) 

(rGovernance Indicators a

~~~~~~~~~~~~~(-gez 

= 0 6, 6 = Ies corrpt bema: mlc of la.v)

55 

50 

45 L 

1 

_ 

12

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

__ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

2 1 -oruto

rule of law

1980 
1997 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

compared to 39 percent of the urban population. Income distribution is uneven. In the 1998 rural
survey the lowest quintile accounted for only 7 percent of mean expenditures. Paucity of
consistent and reliable data make it difficult to assess recent trends in both poverty and inequality.

8. 
Lack of economic growth and of income opportunities for the poor,4 particularly in the
rural areas, are at the root of the poverty problem. In turn, the ability of the poor to benefit from
growth has been impaired by their low human development and lack of access to productive
assets, inputs and credit. The rural poor are concentrated in subsistence agriculture and employed
in crop production and livestock. In urban areas the poor are underemployed in the informal
sector or are unemployed. This analysis reinforces the point that sustaining macroeconomic
reforms and generating higher levels of economic growth remains critical to the policy agenda in
Tanzania. While the solid performance of the past four years is an improvement on the mid-

3 Data on gross enrollment ratio and life expectancy at birth are from 2000 World Development Indicators, World
Bank. Enrollment data fi-om national sources differ and are generally higher. Govemance indicators are from the
International Country Riskc Guide Index.
4 See: Narayan D. (1997), "Voices of the Poor - Poverty and Social Capital in Tanzania", World Bank Working Paper;
REPOA (1998), "Perspectives on rural poverty profiles: results from the rural survey of three regions of mainland
Tanzania"; World Bank(11996), Tanzania: The Challenges of Reforms: Growth, Incomes and Welfare, World Bank,
Washington D.C.

3

1990s, even higher rates of growth will be required to have a significant impact on reducing
poverty levels.

9. 
Social indicators have deteriorated Many indicators of human development, which in
the past were higher than in many low-income countries, have deteriorated. This trend is long-
standing and can be traced back to the early 1980s, when the economic crisis showed that the
sizable investments made by the Nyerere regime in education and health were not sustainable.
Falling real expenditures on social programs throughout the late 1980s led to significant declines
in service delivery which are only now beginning to be effectively addressed. Ensuring 
real
expenditure increases on social sector services on a sustained basis is a key objective of the
present Government. However, it will take time to achieve improvements in social indicators.

10. 
Tanzania's ranking in the Human Development Index declined from 126 in 1992 to 156
in 1997. The infant and under-five mortality rates, 85 and 136 per thousand respectively, are high
and reportedly are much higher for the poor. Communicable diseases (malaria, diarrhea and
AIDS) account for most of the deaths in Tanzania. Among the factors contributing to ill health of
the poor, is the limited access to safe water (48.5 percent and 68 percent in rural and urban areas
respectively). Forty percent of the rural water supply system is malfunctioning or completely
inoperative. As regards sanitation, more than 90 percent of households in urban and. rural areas
use traditional pit latrines. The sewerage infrastructure in Dar es Salaam has not been maintained
over the last decade and is subject to frequent failures.

11. 
The tragedy of HIVIAIDS. Life expectancy in Tanzania has declined to 48 years as a
result of the AIDS epidemic. As of 1997, HIV prevalence among the population aged1 15-49 was
estimated at 9.4 percent. About 50 percent of hospital beds are already occupied by patients with
HIV/AIDS related illnesses. Chart 1 shows HIV infection rates among blood donors5 . They have
increased significantly between 1992 and 1998 and are higher for women. Infection rates are four
times higher among young girls compared to young boys. The Country Economic M:emorandum
indicates that without policy actions, GDP in Tanzania could be 15-20 percent lower by 2015
(with respect to a non AIDS scenario). The number of orphans as a consequence of AIDS could
reach one million by 2015. On the positive side, data from a 1999 survey6 suggest that almost all
Tanzanians have heard of AIDS. Moreover, 56 percent of women and 71 percent of mren (up from
39 percent and 55 percent respectively in 1996) mention condom use as a means of preventing the
spread of HIV.

12. 
The crisis in education. Children's educational attainments are dismal, suggesting a
crisis situation in the education sector. Primary school net enrollment rates are currently less than
50 percent, down from more than 80 percent in the 1980s7 . Admission rates to grade 1 are
reasonably high but survival rates to the end of the cycle (grade 7) are low (54 percent). Children
enroll late, at around 9 years of age. The primary school examination pass rate is 26 percent for
boys and 14 percent for girls. Entry rates to secondary education are only 15 percent. Parental
confidence in the education system is low.

13. 
Progress in the health sector. In health the Government has been more effective in
establishing overall priorities, in working cooperatively with a broad range of health providers (in
the religious and NGO communities 
in particular) and in beginning to produce some
improvement in service delivery. The sector wide program developed by the Government has

5 Data refer to patients' relatives (94 percent) and to institutional donors. Since 1990 all hospitals which provide blood

transfusion services in the country are screening blood for HIV antibodies prior to transfusion.
6 Tanzania (1999): "Reproductive and Child Health Survey", Preliminary Report.
7 These numbers are taken from World Bank databases. National sources indicate higher gross and net enrollment rates.

4

been firmly supported by the donor community. While many problems remain, there is an
emerging and consistent view that the additional resources being provided to the health sector are
being more productively managed and that this should lead, over time, to real improvements in
the health status of the population.

14. 
Gender issues. Women are often poorer than men, own less land and livestock and have
fewer years of schooling. There is roughly gender equality in access to primary schools, though
imbalances exist in c:ompletion rates and access to secondary schools. Gender imbalances are
rooted and sustained by traditional and cultural values. In 1990 the Govemment established the
Ministry of Women Affairs and Children with a view to promote gender equality. A Gender
Budget committee has been created to ensure that sectoral investments respond to the priority
needs of both men and women. The new land legislation has represented an encouraging step
towards securing the r ight of women to own, dispose of and inherit land.

15. 
Labor standards. Tanzania's labor laws and regulations have changed little in the past
two decades. Forced labor is punished, and workers have the right to freely organize themselves
and strike. In 1994 the Government and the ILO signed a Memorandum of Understanding to
prohibit, restrict and regulate child labor progressively, under the International Program on the
Elimination of Child Labor. Provisions in the labor laws include measures on minimum wages,
maximum working arid overtime hours, housing, leave, medical and pension allowances. In the
downsizing that has resulted from civil service reform and privatization, adequate separation
packages have been given to redundant staff. Nevertheless, there is no efficient system to handle
industrial relations and labor disputes can endure for months. While labor laws are often
inadequate to support a modern private sector, the majority of workers in the informal and in the
rural sector enjoy little protection. Children work in agriculture from a young age. In the urban
informal sector children below 15 may represent up to 50 percent of the workforce.8

16. 
Good governance remains an important goal. The fight for good governance is still to be
won in Tanzania. The graph in Chart 1 shows the behavior of two components of the
International Country Risk Guide (ICRG).9 The first measures the strength of the 'rule of law',
the second measures the degree of corruption in business transactions.10 The rule of law index has
improved in the late ].990s. By contrast, the corruption index has worsened during the late 1990s.
Other indices seem to confirm that corruption has been on the rise&1 Serious cases of corruption
were documented in the 1995 Report of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry Against
Corruption-the Warioba Report. As in other developing and transition economies, corruption has
increased where liberalization has occurred in a weak institutional context, offering opportunities
to public officials to exploit their privileged access to information for private gain. But it is also
possible that the process of liberalization has increased the perception of corruption, which is now
reported more frequently.

s See ILO (1999), "Findings Ways to Fight Child Labor in Tanzania", World of Work, February.
9 The ICRG reflects the opinions of banks, multinational companies and other institutional investors.
' Both range from I to 6 with higher scores indicating sounder institutions and less corruption respectively. The "rule
of law" is defined as the degree to which the citizens of a country are willing 'to grant to the established institutions the
authority to make and implement laws and adjudicate disputes'. The corruption index indicates that "high-ranking
govemment officials are likely to demand special payments" and "illegal payments are generally expected throughout
lower levels of government in the form of bribes connected with import and export licenses, exchange controls, tax
assessment, policy protection or loans" (see S. Knack and P. Keefer (1995), "Institutions and Economic Performance:
Cross Country tests using altemative institutional measures", Economics and Politics, 7).
" Transparency International's 1998 and 1999 surveys give Tanzania a score of 1.9, within a range of 0 (highly
corrupt) and 10 (highly clean).

5

17. 
There is, however, progress. President Mkapa has personally been leading efforts to
improve governance and fight corruption. Earlier political inertia and apparent unwilllingness to
prosecute corrupt high level civil servants is receding. Cases of corruption are increasingly being
brought to the courts and institutional reforms are now being accelerated. In May 1999 the
Government presented a new Plan to combat corruption with measures to improve the legal
framework and restore transparency and accountability in public procurement of works, service
and supplies.

II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND PROSPECTS

A. Recent Economic Performance

18. 
Growth has increased. Over the last four years Tanzania has established a record of
successful stabilization and structural adjustment. Real GDP growth has reached 4 percent in
1996-99, driven by improved resource allocation and capacity utilization, and inflation has fallen
from 28 percent in 1995 to 6.3 percent in early 2000, the lowest in 25 years. External reserves
have strengthened to 18 weeks of merchandise imports. Performance under the arrangement
supported by the IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) has been satisfactory. The
success in stabilization reflects a policy of monetary restraint, which has kept real interest rates
positive, and a tight fiscal policy. The adoption of a cash budget system and of sector budget
ceilings has allowed the Government to address the large fiscal imbalances of the mid 90s and to
repay domestic debt.

19. 
Private investment and agriculture have responded slowly to reforms. The share of
private investment has remained at around 10-12 percent of GDP during the 1990s. Reasons
include a poorly functioning legal framework, administrative and regulatory complexities and
poor infrastructure. Average growth in the agricultural sector has barely reached 3 percent since
the early 1990s, just above the population growth rate. Much of the poor performance during
1995-98 can be attributed to adverse climatic conditions and to the overvaluation of the exchange
rate, which has affected exports. But the implementation of reforms has also been partial. Input
prices have increased substantially with price liberalization, due to the removal of sutbsidies and
lack of competition. At the same time output liberalization has been incomplete and many
distortions remain, thus limiting the benefits of the reforms.

20. 
Tanzania is cautiously moving towards regional and global integration. The maximum
tariff rate is 25 percent and the trade weighted average tariff is 14 percent. Tanzania is a member
of the East Africa Community (EAC), The Southern African Development Community (SADEC)
and the Cross-Border Initiative, but it has withdrawn from the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA), in part due to opposition to its aggressive program of tariff
reductions on intra-regional trade. Foreign direct investments have increased substantially, from
$20 million four years ago to the current $183 million per annum. The Government is taking
advantage of the 'Integrated Framework Initiative','2 to prepare for the next WTO round.
Exchange rate stability has been achieved but during 1993-98 currency devaluation has failed to
keep pace with the excess of domestic over world inflation. In 1999 however, the real exchange
rate depreciated steeply, offsetting much of the increase it made in the past three years.

12 The Integrated Framework for the provision of trade-related technical assistance for LDCs was crealed in 1996 by
six multilateral agencies - IMF, ITC, UNCTAD, UNDP, World Bank and WTO. Tanzania prepared its own assessment
of trade-related technical assistance needs in 1997 and was committed financial assistance equaling US$1.4 million. As
provided in the Integrated Framework, the Government held a Consultation on Trade-Related Assistance in Dar es
Salaam on October 1999. The support from donors will facilitate the development of export financing and guarantee
schemes, measures to enhance competitiveness and institution building.

6

Chart 2: Tanzania: Selected Economic Indicators

Growth in Real GDP and Real GDP 
per Capita (percent) 

Inflation and Interest Rates
(percent)

7
6 
5- 

2-
1 
0-0
-1 

Real GDP 

/ 

/ 

Real GDP Per Capita 

1995 

1997 

1999 

.-
2001 

2003 

30

20-

10

Inflation Rate

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Rea1 

Disb wit Rate

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Cunent Account and Fiscal Balances 
(after grants, in percent of GDP) 
2 

Real
Exchange Rate Index
(1992 = 100)

-2

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 

90

*OCrrentAccount *FiscalBalance 

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

140 

I~~~ncrease 
= Appreciation

2000-2003: Projections

B. Macroeconomic prospects, external environment and risks

21. With macroeconomic stabilization substantially complete, the Government of Tanzania
can now focus its attention on creating the conditions for accelerated growth and poverty
reduction. The projections for 2000-2003 presented in Table 1 (our base case scenario) reflect the
ongoing dialogue between the Government, the Bank and the IMF and are consistent with the
scenario prepared in the context of the HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor Countries) Initiative and the
PRGF. A low case scenario is presented in Annex I.

22. 
Annual GDP growth is projected to increase to 6 percent by 2002-03. Monetary policy
will be geared to a decline of the inflation rate to about 4 percent, a rate compatible with that of
Tanzania's main trading partners. Gross official reserves would cover at least 4 months of
imports of goods and non-factor services. The Government will refocus public spending on
poverty reduction priorities. Revenues will increase through a containment of tax evasion,

7

reduction of exemptions, and tax simplification. The cash budget system is expected to be phased
out within the CAS period.

The HIPC Initiative

23. 
In April 2000 the IMF and World Bank agreed to support a comprehensive de'bt reduction
package for Tanzania under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. Total relief will translate into debt
service relief over time of US$3 billion (or US$2.1 billion in NPV terms). This implies a 54.7
percent reduction in the debt of multilateral and bilateral creditors outstanding at end-June 1999.13
Paris Club creditors will provide their share of assistance with a reduction of about 90percent of
eligible debt. The Government intends to target additional resources coming from debt relief to
the sectors that have the largest impact on poverty and human development and to specific
poverty initiatives. The Medium Term Expenditure Framework for 2000/2003 (currently being
finalized), has added to the traditional priority sectors (health, education, water, agriculture and
lands, roads and the judicial) energy and the Office of the Controller and Auditor General. The
additional resources coming from debt relief would allow to meet about 60 percent of
requirements in these sectors. Within each sector, poverty priorities are being specified in the
context of the PRSP.

External environment and risks

24. 
Tanzania is vulnerable to external shocks, commodity price changes and droughts. For
instance tourism revenues may be affected by the spillover effects from conflicts in neighboring
countries. But the sources of foreign exchange earnings are becoming increasingly diversified,
and the current level of international reserves offer sufficient cushion against external shocks.'4 In
addition agricultural output is becoming more diversified. Domestically, revenue shortfalls or
increased expenditures could endanger the adjustment efforts. Moreover, domestic support for the
reforms including a backlash against privatization and foreign investment could be undercut if
higher growth and poverty reduction are not achieved. Finally, worsening governance and
increased corruption may alienate the support of key aid partners and lower investment.

25. 
A number of positive circumstances facilitate the realization of the Government's
economic objectives. Tanzania is politically stable and ethnic friction is minimal. Ihe EAC and
similar regional arrangements provide the basis for greater policy and economic coordination in
the area. The HIPC debt relief will enable the country to free up substantial resources from
servicing multilateral debt and increase spending for poverty focussed programs. The economy's
ability to cushion against exogenous shocks has improved, as shown by the resilience in growth
performance despite the adverse weather over the past three years. Finally, the strcng record in
stabilization has created the conditions for a revamping of private sector growth.

13 At end-June 1999, Tanzania's external public debt amounted to US$6.9 billion in nominal terms (including US$1.6
in arrears) and US$5.1 billion in present value terms (as much of it is on concessional terms), or 43S percent of the
three-year average of exports. IMF assistance (US$152 million) will be delivered over a 10-year period. and will cover
on average 58 percent of debt-service obligations to the Fund. The debt relief provided by IDA (of US$1.2 billion) will
be spread over a period of 20 years, covering 69.1 percent of Tanzania's debt-service obligations to IDA
14 Two scenarios have been simulated for 2001. First, an 18 percent decline in export prices (equivale;at to the largest
price fall that happened during the last 10 years). Other things being equal, the value of the shortfall would be around
US$148 million. Assuming that no additional grant would be available, the level of foreign reserves would go down
from 4.3 to a still safe level of 3.5 months of imports. Second, tourism revenue would go down from 8 percent of GDP

(the 1997 value) to zero. This would represent a shortfall of US$338 million, which, again, could be e2sily paid out of
reserves (reserves would go down from 4.3 to 2.6 months of imports).

8

Table 1. Tanzania: Past Results and Macroeconomic Projections for 2000-03

Real growth of GDP (%) 
Per capita real GDP growth (%) 
CPI (annual av.%) 

(% of GDP)

Gross domestic saving 
Gross domestic fixed investment 

Current Account balance
Before grants 
After grants 

Government Finance:
Domestic Revenue 
Expenditure 
Fiscal balance (before grants) 
Fiscal balance (after grants) 
Memo Items:
Foreign Reserves (months of imports) 

HIPC relief IDA and IMF 1% of GDP) 

HIPC relief IDA and IMF (US$ Mil) 

FY95 

FY96 

Actual 
FY97 

FY98 

FY99 

FY00 

Projections
FY01 
FY02 

FY03

2.6 
-0.4 
28.0 

2.0 
21.9 

4.3 
1.4 
21.0 

3.6 
18.0 

4.0 
1.2 
16.1 

5.4 
15.7 

3.8 
0.9 
12.8 

3.1 
14.9 

4.3 
1.5 
7.8 

2.6 
14.3 

5.0 
2.2 
5.2 

3.1 
17.1 

5.4 
2.6 
4.1 

4.6 
19.2 

6.0 
3.2 
4.0 

5.8 
20.8 

6.1
3.3
4.0

5.8
20.0

-21.1 
-10.5 

-15.9 
-6.1 

-12.0 
-2.2 

-14.4 
-6.1 

-15.3 
-7.0 

-16.0 
-6.9 

-15.4 
-7.2 

-14.3 
-6.6 

-14.0
-6.5

12.5 
18.3 
-5.8 
-2.7 

13.2 
17.6 
-4.4 
-0.8 

13.5 
15.1 
-1.6 
1.0 

12.0 
15.2 
-2.8 
1.0 

12.4 
16.9 
-4.5 
-0.3 

1.4 

1.4 

2.8 

2.9 

4.0 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

12.6 
18.0 
-5.4 
-0.7 

4.2 

0.2 

12.8 
18.1 
-5.3 
-0.5 

4.3 

0.6 

13.0 
18.0 
-5.0 
-0.2 

4.3 

0.5 

13.1
18.1
-5.0
-0.2

4.3

0.6

14.0 

57.7 

65.8 

67.5

A. Overview

III. THE GOVERNMENT'S STRATEGY

26. 
The Government of Tanzania is currently working on the Tanzania Assistance Strategy
(TAS) and the PRSP. The TAS breaks new grounds in the relationship between Tanzania and its
donors. First, it provides a clear framework to organize donors assistance around the priorities
decided by the Government. Second, it provides directions for increasing the percentage of aid
going through the budget (currently estimated to be only around 40 percent). The PRSP, which is
being prepared with the active involvement of civil society (recent consultations were held across
Tanzania) will introcluce short and medium term targets on poverty reduction and human
development, as well as the required budgetary allocations. Both the TAS and the PRSP work are
firmly rooted in the "Development Vision 2025" which specifies the country's long term
development goals and in the National Poverty Eradication Strategy (NPES), which discusses
how far the Vision can be advanced in the period through 2010 (see Box I).

9

Box I: The Dee m Vision 2025(199)andthe

National oer Eradiationf Sitraeg (i1997

Development Vision 2025

The paper envisages that Tanzania in 2025 will beaaiwt 
andeconomic 
, rle
of law, peace, stbility and unity. Tihtie o 
w ha c Y 
seog,selfrlncpti 
and 
sustainable economy with an educated populaton and a cutrlrenaissance. Speic targets for
2025 are: universal primary education n 
the eicatioo 
l 
iteac;access to primary healt
care and qualiy reproductivices 
for all; unive 
access to safe water; gender eui 
nd
empowerment tof twomen; reution o nat adl matinalmortt 
rates Sby0 
thelureso
current levels; oo self sufiec 
and fodscrt; 
and elmnto 
of co'rruptio.

Specific goals for 2010 in the Poverty Erdication Strategy

ve 

eicat 

Povery: 
* 
reduce 
ot 
p 
e 
2025. Educai6n~ civ 
nvra 
rmr 
dcto,adices 
ucinlltrc 
percent; expand secondary education (one secondary school per ward. Water: increas ae 
water to 90 percent of the population witin adistace 
400 me 
ncrease accesstoitary
servicesbiy at least 50 percent 
sevIere 
ition.
among children under-5 fom tr ratetof 6 percent to 2tpecnt orless and moderate malnition
from 44 percent to 22 percent; reduce ternal mortltrate by half 
400 
to 200'per 100,000
live births. 
reduce the rate ofunemployment to lessthan 10 percent.
'mlent: 

it by the ear
o9

to

27. 
The strategic directions of the TAS and the PRSP are in line with commitments to key
international development goals. They encompass three priorities: i) creating higher groswth and
economic opportunities for the poor; ii) building capabilities; iii) increased empowerment and
improved accountability. While not formally a pilot country for the Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF), Tanzania's development strategy is firmly in line with CDF objectives.

B. Creating Higher Growth and Economic Opportunities for the Poor

28. 
The Government's over-riding priority for reducing poverty is to attain a higher long
term sustainable growth rate. Beside maintaining macroeconomic stability, the Government's
strategy rests on three pillars: 1) developing and implementing a new environmentally sustainable
rural strategy; 2) promoting private sector investments and participation; and 3) investing in
infrastructure.

29. 
Developing an environmentally sustainable rural strategy. This has highest priority as
most of the poor are located in rural areas and are engaged in agriculture. The strategy will have
three objectives: i) conserving the depletable natural resources on which the poor depend for their
livelihood; ii) commercializing agriculture and making it more dynamic and productive; and iii)
increasing linkages with urban areas to create income opportunities for youth and uneimployed
migrants.'5 The Government will continue implementing policies aimed at the conservation and
management of the environment and at raising awareness on sustainable use of natural resources.

15 These objectives will be pursued through: reducing trade barriers across regions; rationalizing taxes; privatizing the
remaining parastatal farms; strengthening input and output markets; implementing the new Land Laws; improving
agricultural service provision with a view of getting them closer to small farmers; and developing a framework for
micro-finance and rural financial institutions to address lack of credit.

10

30. 
Increasing private investment and private sector participation. The Government intends
to enhance the role of the private sector in order to accelerate growth, decrease unemployment,
particularly in urban areas, and provide income opportunities for the poor through: (i)
privatization. About 80 percent of the remaining public enterprise sector (in terms of
employment and turnover) will be privatized by 2004, including all major utility and
infrastructure public enterprises (ports, railways, electricity, telecommunications and mining); (ii)
strengthening the regulatory framework in key markets to increase competition and enhance
transparency. Privatization will be accompanied by the development of competitive regulatory
frameworks and new institutional arrangements;'6 (iii) improving the business environment, to
expand private and foreign investments; and (iv) increasing the efficiency of the financial sector
andfinancial services for small businesses. Detailed measures in these areas are in Annex B9.

31. 
Improving crucial infrastructure - energy and roads. In the energy sector, the
Government's objectives are to improve the security of power supply and to increase access to
electricity. The Tanzania Electric Supply Company (TANESCO) would be unbundled and
privatized. A new regulatory framework for the petroleum sector will be approved in 2000
making provisions fror a liberalized market. In the gas sector, the Government will encourage the
development of dornestic gas markets under private ownership. The Government is developing a
long-term transport sector strategy. In the short and medium term the focus will be in improving
maintenance and rehabilitation of existing trunk roads and rural feeder roads. Funding for
recurrent road maintenance costs is to be ensured via a Roads Fund through targeting revenue
from user charges.

C. Building Capabilities

32. 
A central objective of the Government's strategy is building up the assets of the poor
through better health, education, and improved access to public services. In health, the
Government will implement the ongoing Health Sector Reform Program, which started in 1994.
A three year Program of Work and a one year Plan of Action have been prepared to implement
the reform under a sector wide approach (SWAP).17 To address major causes of mortality, the
Government will implement individual action plans for malaria, increase immunization coverage
and contraceptive prevalence. An AIDS plan includes measures to change behavior and raise
public awareness. To this end, the Government will establish a strong national body responsible
for implementing the third Medium Term Plan for Prevention and Control of HIV/AIDS which
has been supportedl by the UNAIDS and other donors.

33. 
Education. Higher growth requires the accumulation of high level technical and
entrepreneurial skills. Over the years, Tanzania's ability to mobilize the skills required by new
businesses and reap the benefits from technological progress worldwide has been weakening. In
the primary education sector, the Government will update the 1997 Basic Education Master
Plan"8 , and develop district based plans for improving school and teaching conditions at the

16 Two multi-sectoral regulatory institutions are being created - the Tanzania Public Utility Regulatory Authorijty
(dealing with electricity, telecom, water, post and natural gas) and the Tanzania Transportation Regulatory Authority
(dealing with maritime and ports, roads, railways and aviation). Each of the sectors will then re-examine and amend the
relevant sectoral legislation to ensure a coherent and competitive legislative framework.
17 Priority areas include: (i) strengthening the delivery of cost-effective primary health services, particularly at the
district level, through decentralization and capacity building; (ii) development of national capacity and systems through
program support and streamlined implementation arrangements; and (iii) improvement in health care financing through
better targeting of government resources and diversifying financing mechanisms.
is The Plan aims to secure an 85 percent gross enrollment rate for primary schooling and 80 percent completion rate; to
reduce the salary/non salary ratio in the primary education sector from 93:7 to 80:20 and the completion of institutional
reforms by 2002.

11

primary level. The Government will articulate and implement theSecondary Education Master
Plan (SEMP), with the objective of improving quality and raising enrolment rates in secondary
education schools. A plan to rationalize a number of underutilized and inefficient tertiary
education institutions will also be implemented.

34. 
Water and sanitation. The Government's objective is to ensure accessible and adequate
water supply and sanitation services to the majority of the population in both rural and urban
areas. This will be achieved through: i) creation of decentralized financially autonomous water
boards; ii) subcontracting of the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority (DAWASA)
management to a private operator and allowing community groups to assume ownership of water
supply schemes; iii) introducing sound pricing; and iv) developing local planning and operational
capacities. Removal of water subsidies in urban areas will free resources for the rehabilitation of
supplies in rural areas. Emphasis in rural areas will be on rehabilitation and upgrading of existing
schemes.

D. Empowerment and Accountability

35. 
Poverty reduction is likely to be achieved faster and to be sustainable if the poor are
given a voice in the design and implementation of poverty alleviation measures. Good
governance 
is also a necessary condition for sustainable private sector development.
Empowerment, accountability and improved governance are key objectives of the Government, to
be realized through (i) improved management of public resources; (ii) decentralization; (iii)
implementation of anti-corruption and financial accountability measures.

36. 
The Government is stepping up efforts to improve the management of public resources
and put the process of institutional reform on solid ground. Important building blocks of the
strategy are: i) the rationalization of the role and functions of the State; ii) the establishment of a
credible and transparent budget process through the extension of the Integrated Financial
Management System (now covering the central Government) to all ministries and regionas and the
implementation of the performance management system; 9iii) restoring ethical conduct and
standards of performance for all public servants; and iv) improving the structure and level of civil
service salaries.

37. 
Tanzania has recently embarked on a prqcess of political decentralization through a
Local Government Reform Program (LGRP), with the aim of improving accountability and the
quality of public services. Implementation of the LGRP2
started in 1999 with around one third of
the districts participating and will be phased in by 2004. With the reform, the city, municipal,
town and district councils will be democratically elected. They will be fully responsible for: (i)
service delivery in education, health, water, roads and agriculture; (ii) social development, and
(iii) maintenance of law and order. Financial support to local governments is provided through
block grants, based on the costs of delivering minimum standards of services that hiave to be
attained by each local authority in the sectors of health, education, water, roads and agriculture.2 '
Local authorities are accountable for their spending, and the central government plays t:he role of
auditor. Local governments are empowered to collect "own revenues" from local taxes and fees.

19 Implementation of the performance management system is carried out through two important tools piloted since
1998 - Performance budgeting and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.
20 The LPRG is coordinated by the Ministry of Regional Administration and Local Government. The LGRP is
supported by seven international assistance agencies (EU, Netherlands, Denmark, U.K., Ireland, Finland, and Norway)
and by budgetary allocations from the government.
2iThe principles for setting of national minimum service delivery standards are: being financially quantifiable,
fundable, achievable, compatible with sector plans, and measurable.

12

38. 
Anti-corruption strategy andfinancial accountability. Success with institutional reforms
holds out prospects for improved governance. However, it requires a fundamental change in the
values and attitudes on the part of those who, in many cases, are benefiting from the status quo.
Corruption in the public sector is still widespread and represents one of the main constraints for
effective utilizatijon of domestic resources. In 1999 the Government developed a National Anti-
Corruption Straj'egy and Action Plan, and sectoral plans are now being prepared. Diagnostic
surveys in a number of ministries and agencies will be undertaken to monitor the implementation
of the Plan. In addition, the Government will: review procurement law and regulations, publicize
all contracts and tender results, and amend the Public Leadership Code of Ethics Act. Second,
the government will strengthen financial accountability. The Office of the Controller and Auditor
General (OCAG), which monitors the proper use of public funds and investigates incidents of
corruption, will be reinforced and adequately funded. Finally, the Government will implement
the Legal Sector Reform Program to strengthen the judicial system, particularly the primary
magistrate courts.

39. 
Combating corruption requires a long and sustained fight. The Government has put in
place a program of institutional reforms and specific measures that is adequate. But ultimately the
outcome will delpend on political commitment, particularly at the top level, and a willingness to
prosecute and convict alleged crimes. In addition, it is critical that citizens believe they can refuse
to pay bribes, denounce corrupt practice, and not be penalized for this.

IV. THE BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

40. 
This CAS has been informed by the strategic priorities defined in the TAS and in the
PRSP, consultations with the Government, the donor community and civil society and the results
from the last Client Feedback Survey (see Annex IV). Lessons from OEG and OED's Reviews
have been largelly incorporated. There are no areas of disagreement between the Bank and the
Government in the development agenda and in the major priority areas.

A. Consultations

41. 
This CAS mirrors and supports the Government's vision of a society free of poverty, and
its development agenda, as discussed in the previous sections.2 2 At a very early stage (June-July
1999) the Bank arranged consultations with a large cross section of Tanzania civil society. Key
priorities such as accelerating growth and improving delivery of public services were largely
shared. People also manifested a strong desire for 'law and order' in a society free of corruption
(see Box II). Three rounds of consultations were undertaken in October 1999, January and April
2000 to discuss with Government and various stakeholders the role of the CAS within the TAS
and the PRSP.

22 The Governmenl's ongoing reform program has been supported by the ESAF program of the IMF, the Structural
Adjustment Credit of IDA, the SAL of the African Development Bank, the fifth rescheduling with the Paris Club and
the Multilateral Debt Fund agreement.

13

Box 11: CAS Consultations With Civil Society: Key Findings

In June 1999, the World Bank held a series of consultative meetings with a large cross-section of Tanzania
civil society23 in the Dar es Salaam, Arusha, Kilimanjaro, Mtwara, Morogoro and Mwanza Regions (at
regional, district, ward and village levels), and in Zanzibar. The objective of these discussions was to learn
about Tanzanians' perceptions of the current economic situation, public services, developmental priorities
and constraints to growth and poverty alleviation, relative to three to five years ago. The key findings of

these consultations are reported below.

Economic situation - Most people believe that the economic situation has deteriorated and reforms have
exacerbated inequalities further marginalizing the rural poor. Perceived private sector constraints include
poor infrastructure, underdeveloped markets, lack of capital and credit and corruption. On the 'other hand,
people believe that the reforms will eventually benefit the economy. Some small-scale farmers feel positive,
about the liberalization measures as they are free to sell their produce to 'private buyers for cash.

Governance - The President is widely respected and trusted and seen to have made a determined tt empt
to listen to people and promote greater transparency and economic arid administrative reforms. People do
not feel that enough has been done to nurture democracy and corruption is seen as a corrosive force whose6`
root causes have not been adequately addressed. Some feel thahe government has failed to enorcme clear

'rules of the game' or otherwise provide the necessary enabling environment.

Public service delivery - In the mainland, there is a general belief that educational standards have
deteriorated and that the introduction of cost-sharmg imposes undue hardships on poor families. In
Zanzibar, on the contrary, the sectors performance is viewed as generally satisfactory. 
ICth
services are seen as satisfactory, although both the mainland and Zanzibar have numernus r-eprtso
shortages of qualified doctors, drugs and facilities in rural areas. Pu 
tension services fr agrC

and livestock, on the other hand, are almost universally viewed as iadequate and neglected.'O '1.`

Culture - One legacy of socialism is that most people cotinue to believe the State has a fnidme 
lo
in promoting development and providing social services. To a certain extent this h 
ledito't- 'e

discouragement of private initiative and personal responsibility.

The Outlook - The overwhelming majority of people think that the country has the potilfor 
a 
future because of its natural resource endowment, locationr, and political and social stabityToeaiehs
potential, however, will take a long tie 
from 15 years to a geniertion.Some peSopethktha 
e pre-
requisites for this emerging bright future are: a change of culture in which people tke responsibiliyfor
their own destiny; and strong leadership from a Govemment with vision and integrty. At thc top of
everybody's wish list is a desire for "law and order" and for transparent and competentpolicy management.
In Zanzibar, private sector representatives suggested the following prorities: strengthening the business

e

community and enhancing marketing capacity/potential.

B. Lessons from past experience

42. 

What worked

* Since the last CAS there have been significant successes on the economic front. Government
ownership of the program has increased significantly. Since 1998 the annual P'ublic
Expenditure Review (PER) and the closely linked Medium Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF) have been carried out in a highly participatory manner - under government

23 Including: small farmers and entrepreneurs in formal and informal sectors, industry and trade representatives, NGO
representatives, journalists, academics, social service providers (teachers, health care workers, etc.), government
officials and elected representatives (from village chairmen to Members of Parliament).

14

leadership. The formulation of the TAS is the latest example of how seriously the
Government is taking charge of its own development strategy.

* There are new productive relationships with donors based on active cooperation. Since 199524
the Government and donors have agreed on improved aid coordination and integration of aid
within Tanzania's development priorities and budget (see Annex II). There is now greater
transparency in aid delivery and accountability for its use. Donors participate in regular
macro and sector-wide meetings under government leadership.

* 

* 

Implementation of Bank projects has improved dramatically. About 90 percent of the Bank
portfolio is now rated satisfactory (see Annex III).

IFC has made important contributions to private sector development through financing. IFC
support for privatization has been critical for key transactions, such as NBC. Other
investments in the financial sector have helped introduce new products and services, and
increase competition. IFC has also supported small and medium enterprises (SMEs) across a
range of sectors, with financing and capacity building.

* Our country dialogue has been strengthened, in the last couple of years, by the Bank-
Government collaborative production of analytical reports. Joint Economic and Sector Work
(ESW) ensures that the analysis and the recommendations are shared and internalized

43. 

What did not work

- As discussed in previous sections, the benefits of growth have not reached the poor and social
indicators anc access to social services have deteriorated. Our macroeconomic dialogue has
not been fully extended to adequately engage the Government and other stakeholders on the
social consequences of adjustment and to provide sufficient support for measures to sustain
social indicators.

-

The Bank has not managed to address the lack of good, reliable infonnation, particularly in
the social sectors, and their importance for constructing a welfare monitoring system.

* The Bank has over-estimated implementation capacity, particularly in sector ministries.
Equally, it has over-estimated the pace of institutional reforms and capacity building.

* Collaboration between Bank and IFC staff has been effective at the project level but has not
extended strategically to address private sector development (PSD) constraints.

OED and OEG reviews

44. 
In 1999 both the OEG and the OED prepared evaluations of the Bank group
operations in Tanzania (see Box III). This CAS fully shares the recommendations made
by OED. The formulation of the CAS program has benefited from the insights of these
analyses. Many of the recommendations 
of the OEG review have also shaped the
preparation of the CAS, which is a joint exercise with IFC. Collaboration between Bank

24 In 1995 a report prepared by an independent group of consultants (the 'Helleiner Report') found that in the absence
of a national framework donors had assumed, over-time, a greater role in defining and designing policies, thus creating
little institutional capacity within Tanzania. Since resources were directly managed and controlled by donors, this gave
rise to the creation of parallel financial systems.

15

and IFC staff will be facilitated by joint work in PSAC I and F'SAC II; and by the
creation of Joint Bank/IFC Global Practice Groups in Telecommunications, Mining, and
Oil and Gas, all important sectors for Bank Group activity in Tanzania.

Box III: OED's and OEG's Findings and Recommendations

OED
The Bank's Operations Evaluation Departnent (OED) prepared a Country Assistance Evaluation-
(CAE) in 1999. It indicated that four decades of Bank assistance to Tanzania have had only limited`l
impact on growth and poverty reduction. However, initial results from the new Bank str;ategy,
initiated in 1996, were considered encouraging. The review suggests the need to intensify efforts on a:
range of issues. Two are summarized below:
* Promoting balanced, long-term growth requires the development and implementation of
strategies directed at a broad number of components - growth, social policy and the budget,`
structural reform and gender issues. For instance, supporting a strategy for private secto
development will help to create a broad constituency for reform, and developing a rural strat
focussing on constraints to agricultural production, will provide significant potential for poverty
reduction. Addressing distortions in social policy and improving the poverty focus of projects in
other sectors is also a key objective that can be helped along by leveraging World :Bankt
assistance. And by being aware of the linkages between different reforms - public enteprise, ;
financial, judicial, regulatory - Bank strategy should guard against the possibly perverse impact
of foreign assistance on domestic capacity building. Finally, with appropriately designed credits-
there are good opportunities for improving the Bank's projects' gender impact.
*Improving aid coordination. In line with the TAS objective, the Bank can help in renioving
inefficiencies of fragmented and parallel aid delivery systems by encouraging other donors to"
assist the Government in its effort to increase selectivity, coherence and harmonizationi of donor
resources.

OEG
In 1999 QEG prepared a Country Impact Review of its activities in Tanzania during I1986-9$. The
Review concluded that although much progress has been made, the country is not yet an atactive
location for pnvate investment. The review describes the principal 
to ivatetors
;tbarriers 
development as, i) slow privatization - between 1993 and 1998 only about halfthe 
parsta
enterprises have been privatized; ii) incomplete financial sector reform - begun in 1991, it has beeng
"disappointingly slow'; iii) strong aid dependence; there is evidence of projects that could have bee
financed privately but that have been displaced by aid; iv) poor infrastructure and human resources -;
even compared to other Sub-Saharan African countries. This penalizes investors with unreliable and
high-cost electricity, high transportation costs, poor communications and a labor force lacking modem
skills; v) social and governmental ambivalence about private sector development. The deep-seated
reluctance to open the economy to private ownership and market forces manifests itself in complex
and unpredictable regulatory regimes related to investment, property, taxes and employment. Irn termsi
of development impact, of the 20 investments evaluated by OEG (representing about 70 percent of
total projects approved since 1986), 60 percent had a satisfactory development outcome. In eight
cases the development impact could have been improved through policy and administrative reforms.
In addition, only 45 percent of the investments evaluated had a satisfactory investment performance.
The review recommends improving the enabling environment; establishing expectations at approval
and monitoring results while identifying constraints; establishing standards for service by providing
training for staff and managers and monitoring compliance; and improving coordination between IFC
and Bank staff.

16

C. The Strategy

45. 
Our mission in Tanzania is to help the Government reduce poverty through the promotion
of higher growth, and interventions that build the assets of the poor, reduce their vulnerability and
promote better governance and accountability. The CAS fully recognizes the leadership of the
Government in defining the development agenda. It supports the Government's desire to enter
into more productive relationships with partners, based on the adoption of sector wide strategic
approaches, on the phased switching from projects to programs and on greater control of
budgetary and procurement functions. This new direction was explicit in recent speeches by
President Mkapa and is fully supported by donors.25

46. 
Besides clialogue on macroeconomic and public expenditure management, the CAS
proposes to focus lending and non-lending interventions in four areas of strategic importance. The
choice has been informed by Government's preferences, a consideration of both the Bank and
IFC comparative advantages, relative to that of other donors, and by the potentially large impact
of these interventions in the economy. They include:

* Private sector and infrastructure development, to support the Government's objective of
making privale sector the engine of growth;
* Sustainable rural development, to improve the livelihood of the majority of the poor who live
in rural areas;
Improved social infrastructure, to improve social indicators and enhance access for the poor
to essential public services; and
* Public sector reform and institution building to increase the effectiveness of public service
delivery and improve governance.

* 

47. 
This program does involve a broadening of our effort from the macroeconomic focus of
the last CAS. This reflects judgment that such a broader effort is now essential to ensure that the
benefits of the reforms are realized by the population, particularly the poor in the rural areas.
However, considerable selectivity will be exercised in the choice of Bank interventions across
these areas. The framework for this decision making will be based on Government preferences
(ensuring that their ownership role is being enhanced through the process), the comparative
advantage of the Bank, the relative areas of strength of the donor community, and, finally, on
those areas where we feel impact on poverty will be greatest. In exercising this selectivity there
are some areas of past activity where the Bank will not be involved. For example, the IDA
program will involve virtually no parastatal investment except where necessary to support the
entry of a private partner, such as in the Dar es Salaam Water Supply Project and in the Songo
Songo Project. This directly reflects the movement to the private sector as the engine of growth
and is a dramatic change from past programs where parastatal involvement was very broad.
Second, we propose no multisectoral investment in district level projects - where we feel other
members of the donor community have a comparative advantage. Third, there will be no IDA
investment in the provision of credit - again reflecting the fact that this should be left to the
private sector.

48. 
In addition to excluding certain areas in the program, selectivity will be exercised in the
activities pursued within these four priorities. First, there is increased Government ownership in
many areas (for example in the preparation of the Public Sector Reform Project). Second, the
Bank should be prepared to relinquish leadership to other donors in areas which they have a

25 See President B.W. Mkapa (1999), "Tanzania's vision regarding partnership based co-operation", speech at the
Workshop on Making Partnerships Work on The Ground, Stockholm.

17

specific interest to support. For example, the Bank did the initial study on corruption but the
UNDP and the European Commission (EC) are now taking the lead in working with Government
on its Action Program in that area. Third, there is increasingly joint execultion of analytic work -
for example in the case of the CEM. The UK and the EC have being leading the analytical work
in the education sector, which is now an essential input into our proposed project work. Finally,
the sector groups that are emerging are typically being led by bilateral conors but the Bank is
playing an active role in supporting them. Overall we are confident that the proposed program
both insures Bank involvement in key issues involving the poverty program but will be executed
in a way that both ensures ownership and maximizes the efficient use of Bank and other partner
resources.
Table 2. A Framework for Development Partnership
Creatin hiher Growth 
Buildi Capabilities Empower ent and accountability

P ar-ty 

Activity 

N1_

cn 

E15 

Z 

0 

-0

> 

> 

~ 

> 

~ 

= 

a)

L ittie Focus mSome 

Focus El 

Significant Focus 

High Focus 

49. 
The proposed lending program comprises (i) quick-disbursing, policy-based lending
operations in support of overall and sector reforms; (ii) high-priority specific investments,
particularly those focussed on critical infrastructure, social services and environmental protection
and (iii) institutional development operations in support of capacity-building and governance
efforts. In addition, assuming that sufficient progress is made on public expenditure management
and governance, the Bank suggests moving toward budget support by the third year of the GAS
cycle with an operation for poverty reduction and environmentally sustainable rural development
through the instrument of a Public Expenditure Reform Credit (PERC). This would be justified
on several grounds: first, the improvement in the macroeconomic environment and budget
management would eliminate the need for Bank support in the form of traditional adjustment
lending; second, the preparation and implementation of 
the PRSP would make possible to
address issues of poverty reduction across sectors in a systematic way. F-inally, the PERC' would
be a better instrument than other forms of lending to address implementation constraints that have
arisen in sector ministries.

18

50. 
The last CAS presented to the Board in June 1997 presented a lending scenario of
US$200 million, predicated on meeting ESAF targets and progress in various areas of the reform
program. A low case scenario (US$90-100 million) as well as a high case scenario (US$300
million or more) vere also included. The current CAS increases the Bank's lending assistance.
Macroeconomic stabilization in Tanzania is largely completed and substantial progress has been
made in reforming the economy. Consistent with the recent 'aid effectiveness' literature, this is
the best time for stepping up financial assistance. In a good policy environment this would result
in faster growth, h2igher private investment and rapid gains in social indicators. We propose the
following scenarics.

51. 
Base case scenario: US$260 million a year over the CAS period. Under this scenario
macroeconomic arid policy conditions for the PRGF would be met consistent with the anticipated
schedules. Equally, PSAC I conditions, which include measures in the areas of governance,
financial management, tax reforms and improvement of the business environment would be met.
In addition, the Government would achieve the commitments under the PRSP for social sector
improvement, implemented through the MTEF.

Table 3. Tanzaniia CAS- Lending Program FY01-03 (US$ millions)

FY01 

FY02 

FY03

Mill. 
Primary Education A.PL 100 
TASAF 
50 
Dar Water Supply 
45 
Rural Water LIL 
5 
Regional Trade 
10 

Songo Songo 
Soil Fertility 
Account./Governance 
Forest Conservat. 
HIV/AIDS 

Total Base case 

High case 

210 

210 

Mill. 
170 
20 
40 
50 
20 

300 

300 

Roads Rehabilitation 
Lake Victoria ll 
PSAC 11 
Local Gov. capacity 
Educat. Ration. 

PERC-Poverty-rural 

developm.-environment

Mill.
80
30
100
40
30

280
200

480

52. 

Low case scerario: US$100 million a year over the CAS period - the low case scenario,

would materialize if the Government is off-track with the PRGF and PRSP programs and if there
is slippage in the expected timing for the HIPC completion point beyond the CAS horizon. The
following high priority social sector projects would be retained under the low case scenario:
Primary Education APL and Rural Water LIL for FYOI; Soil Fertility and Forest Conservation
Projects for FY02; and Lake Victoria II, Local Government Capacity and Education
Rationalization for FY03.

53. 

High case scenario: 

Progress in all areas of the reform program (as specified 

in the

matrix of actions, Annex B9) would make it possible to move, by the end of the CAS period,
towards higher lending. Thus, for the last year of the CAS period, Bank lending would increase
to the high scenario, about US$480 million. The triggers in Box IV would guide the move to the
high case scenario. This would imply not just an addition of US$200 million to the base case
lending scenario; more importantly, it would involve a move from traditional projects to budget
support through a. PERC. The PERC would be the instrument through which the Bank would
address the issues of poverty reduction identified in the PRSP across sectors in a systematic way.

19

Box IV: Triggers for High Case Scenario

Means of verification

* 

Satisfactory implementation of PRGF and PRSP; MTEF
documents approved by Cabinet

* 

Submission of programs and strategies for strengthening
implementation capacity

* 

Submissions of survey results

* 

* 
* 

* 

Submissions of approved anti-corruption plans and
implementation progress reports for each sector

Publication in the official gazette of relevant legislation
Publication in the official gazette of relevant legislation

CAG reports and Treasury Minutes

* Copies of published tender results
Public Expenditure Review Reports

* 

Triggers 
Macro
* Maintain a stable macroeconomic 
environment and poverty focus of public 
expenditure

Sector Performance
* 
Preparation of sector wide programs in 
health, education, water, agriculture and 
environment; significant improvement in the
implementation capacity of these ministries

Governance
* Carry out diagnostic surveys in the ministry 
of Works, Education, Health, Home Affairs,
the Judiciary, Attorney General
* Dissemination of the national and sector 
specific anti-corruption plans; implement 
sector specific action plans against
corruption in the six areas surveyed
* Adoption of the Public Audit Bill 
* Adoption of new procurement law that 
permits greater transparency and integrity
Timely issuing of the office of Controller 
and Auditor General's (CAG) reports and
Treasury Minutes in response to audit
queries
* 
Publish Central Tender Board results 
* Full implementation of the IFMS, including 
all budgetary votes and tax and non tax
revenues, and recording of all expenditure
commitments, payments, and arrears. Roll
out of IFMS to 28 local districts

* 

D. Description of the lending program

54. 
Overall, our program underlies the contribution of various sectors to sustainable
development. For example, the quality of social sector services is of vital concern to the rural
population and progress there will be essential to the well-being of the rural poor. Physical
infrastructure improvements both offer the prospect of opening up areas to the market economy
(through improved roads) and providing services that simply don't reach rural areas at present.
Finally, the quality and efficiency of the public service will be a key determinant of whether
Government services are implemented and provided to many rural areas. Our work across all the
areas below will be vital for reaching sustainable development and making progress towards
poverty reduction.

55. 
Private sector development(PSD) and infrastructure development The OED Country
Assistance Review commented on the lack of an effective PSD strategy in Tanzania; OEG's
evaluation criticized IFC for a lack of focus on an enabling environment for private sector. The
current and planned operations will address PSD comprehensively.

20

* Enabling Environment. The first Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit (PSAC 1), to
address the persistent obstacles to private investment is being presented to the Bank's Board
with this CAS; the second PSAC (PSAC II) is expected to be presented to the Board during
FY03. In addi.tion, a proposed Regional Trade Facilitation Project will address issues of
regional integration.

* Financial SecL or. The Rural and Micro-Financial Services Project and the Second Financial
Institutions Development Project (approved in FY00 will continue to address structural
weaknesses in the financial sector including the design of a legal, regulatory and supervisory
framework for micro-finance. IFC will focus on the establishment of new non-bank financial
institutions arid on strengthening capital markets. It will help NMB's restructuring and
privatization. Other activities include the potential development of a mortgage finance
company, and a discount house in addition to advisory work and technical assistance.

* 

* 

Infrastructure. Inadequate infrastructure remains the most severe constraint to PSD. The
Bank Group will address infrastructure shortcomings, with a focus on sector policy reform
and increased private participation. In the power sector, the Bank Group will assist the
Government in implementing the Power Sector Restructuring Program; and it will encourage
the development of domestic gas markets and generate low cost power through the Songo
Songo Gas Development and Power Generation Project.

In the roads sector, the Bank will contribute to the proposed Roads Rehabilitation Program,
to help eliminate the backlog of rehabilitation works, assuming that progress is made in
improving the institutional framework for financing and managing the road network. The
Dar es Salaam Water Supply and Sanitation Project is aimed at achieving reliable and
affordable water and sanitation services, initially through a private management agreement.
In rural areas, development of projects, through local governments, private sector and
community management will be tested through a Rural Water Supply and Sanitation LIL

* Supporting SMEs, Mining and Tourism. IFC will expand its investments in SMEs, focussing
on pioneering projects. After supporting tourism development with investments in hotels and
tour operators, IFC is shifting its focus to supporting smaller eco-tourism facilities, and in
financing privatization. 
In mining, IFC is seeking to support the construction of new
production facilities as the sector moves from exploration to development and production and
to provide teclnical assistance on sectoral development.

* Privatization. The Privatization & Private Sector Development Project (approved in FY00)
supports the Govemment's privatization and banking restructuring programs, and the
establishment of an institutional framework for regulation of infrastructure and utilities. IFC
will seek opportunities to facilitate privatization transactions across sectors, in addition to
infrastructure.

56. 
Sustainable rural development. The improvement of the rural lives in Tanzania is the
most important challenge facing the Government. The sense that the benefits resulting from
economic reform have not reached the rural poor is acutely perceived in Tanzania and it will be
critical to develop a program addressing these concerns directly. In addition to the ongoing
dialogue on the policy, incentive and regulatory framework of the agricultural sector the Bank is
preparing the Soil Fertility and Agricultural Recapitalization Project, to help develop agricultural
input availability for small holders. Support for communities, particularly in rural areas, will be
provided through the Tanzania Social Assistance Fund. The project will provide self-targeting
and low wage public works to the poorest. Support for the environment would be rendered

21

through two projects. The Forestry Conservation and Management Project, will assist the
government in developing a framework for the sustainable management and conservation of
forest resources and for the involvement of communities and private sector. The Lake Victoria II
operation will assist in completing the rehabilitation of the lake ecosystem. In order to ensure
that the various policy constraints identified in the analytical work on rural development are
addressed through an integrated program, a Poverty/Rural Development Environmental/ PERC is
proposed in the last year of the CAS period under the high case scenario.

57. 
Improved social infrastructure. The Bank supports Government efforts to improve social
indicators, particularly for the poor. A suggested Primary Education APL would address the
critical situation of the primary education system in Tanzania including the budgetary, personnel
and system management issues associated with achieving a more decentralized system of
education. Support for policies to rationalize public expenditures on higher education will be
given through the Education Rationalization Project. In health, the Bank and other donors are
supporting a Health Sector Development Project, which 
is being presented for Board
consideration with this CAS. Finally, a suggested project would support the Government's fight
against AIDS. This would be the first of a series of HIV/AIDS Projects aimed at combating the
epidemic and tackling the consequences of AIDS (see Box V). The size of the epidemic, as well
as the growing number of AIDS orphans will put, in the near future, an unprecedented burden of
care on families and the social welfare system, thus requiring special efforts from the
Government and the donor community.

58. 
Public sector reform and institution building. The recently approved Public Sector
Reform Program is aimed at improving accountability, transparency and resource management
for service delivery. An Accountability/Governance project would strengthen government efforts
to fight corruption and improve governance. A Local Government Capacity Building/ Slums
upgrading project would help building capacity in local councils to provide basic infrastructures
and services. The project would include a component on urban community slums upgrading, i.e.
targeted to infrastructure and service improvements in low income areas.

E. Non Lending Services

59. 
The Bank with Tanzanian collaboration and the International Food Policy Research
Institute is concluding and will be disseminating two major pieces of analytical work - the
Country Economic Memorandum entitled Tanzania at the Turn of the Century: From Reforms to
Sustained Growth and Poverty Reduction and - Agriculture in Tanzania since 1986: Follower or
Leader of Growth? Successful annual reviews of the Public Expenditure have been cornpleted
since 1997, in a fully participatory manner, and will be continued. In the area of macroeconomics
and trade, a proposed report for FYOI on "Tanzania's Integration in Global and Regional
Markets" would analyze potential benefits from regional and global integration. This work,
together with two additional ESWs, a Financial Sector Assessment and a Private Sector Profile
would provide the analytical framework for the PSAC II in FY03. Sector work will be aimed at
preparing sector wide strategies and improving the linkages between sectoral policies and the
overall development strategy, essential steps for moving, by the end of the CAS period, to budget
support.

22

Box V: The Need to Scale Up the Fight Against HIV/AIDS

To date, efforts in Tanzania to fight HIV/AIDS have been slow and inadequate. However, the
Govermment has prepared a strategic plan, the Third Medium-Term Plan on Aids and has put in
place the basic institutional framework to combat this epidemic(a National HIV/AIDS Council
charged with coordinating all the AIDS-related activities, a secretariat and a National HIV/AIDS
Advisory Board). Leadership to tackle the HIV/AIDS problem as a development issue has been
lacking and is now the key constraint. Moreover, there is limited capacity to manage and
coordinate multi-sectoral responses involving both the public and private sector, and to encourage
broader participation in the effort.

The Bank has included a sub-component (US$4.3 million ) in the Health Sector Development
Project to help strengthening the institutional framework and the capacity to coordinate responses
to the epidemic. A National HIV/AIDS Fund will be set up to finance AIDS-related programs.
Disbursement of this component is subject to submission of an implementation strategy and of the
necessary institutional arrangements. The TASAF operation will help communities to tackle
HIV/AIDS (through financing of supplies for non-prescription drugs, ointments ) and by funding
training to commrunity based care givers. The Bank is committed to addressing AIDS issues in its
lending program, particularly in education, water supply, roads and rural development and in the
economic and sector work. Moreover, the Bank is ready to accelerate the preparation of an
HIV/AIDS project (US$20 million, presently envisaged for FY02) as soon as the Govemrnent
finalizes an implementation strategy (nationwide, regional, district) of the interventions planned in
the Mid-Termr Plan III. The strategy should include requirements for financial and technical
assistance, the identification of different agents and tasks; and modalities for choosing priorities in
districts and regions, scaling up successful interventions and contracting out services.

60. 
The Bank recognizes 
the weakness of the information base and of analytical capacity 
in
Tanzania. Consist:ent with the Government's objectives, 
this CAS supports 
the Government's
intention to develop a National Information and Communications Strategy. The strategy would
establish a framework for the use of information and communication 
technologies 
in the country.
Within this context, 
the Government 
is preparing a Household Budget Survey, a Labor Force
Survey (both ongoing), and a Population Census (scheduled for FY02).

61. 
Jointly with other donors, the Bank will increase efforts to build in-country capacity to
collect and analvze 
information, particularly 
in the poverty and social sectors domain; 
to
strengthen 
the iniFormation base and institutional capacity for poverty analysis and to create a
monitoring system:

* The Bank will assist in the preparation and implementation of the PRSP providing assistance
for poverty analysis as requested by the Government. On the basis of the new information
from the Household Budget Survey, a Poverty Assessment Report for FY02 is proposed to
analyze the nature of poverty, incidence and trends and to make recommendations on how to
improve policies for poverty reduction.'

* 

In 1996 the Elank developed a Gender Action Plan (GAP), which was updated 
in 1998.26 A
Gender Report is being finalized and will be made available to the Government before the
end of the fiscal year. In the future the Bank will continue 
to provide assistance 
to the

26 Efforts to mainstream gender concerns in Bank lending are reflected in the Girls Secondary Education Support
(GSES) program, which offers scholarships to low-income girls to attend day or boarding schools for up to four years.
There are also two agricultural projects (NTational Extension Project II, FY97, and Agriculture Research Project II,
FY98) that explicitly reflect gender considerations in their objectives.

23

Government during the preparation of the PRSP to ensure that it is fully inclusive of gender
issues. Gender issues will be mainstreamed in all analytical work and in lending activities.

* Preparing a "rural development strategy' to underpin the Government's intention to pursue a
new strategy for higher rural growth and poverty reduction. Emphasis will be on creating the
necessary linkages among the various sectors that contribute to rural development
(agriculture, rural infrastructure, water, education etc.) and with the urban areas.

* Support of activities for improving governance and accountability and fighting corruption. It
will also provide for a study on fiscal decentralization to assess the policies and mechanisms
of the fiscal transfer system.

F. WBI and MIGA

62. 
WBI. Over the CAS period, the World Bank Institute (WBI) plans to assist in the
implementation of the Tanzanian anti-corruption action program. Planned activities iinclude:
conducting training workshops to strengthen the oversight roles of the Public Accounts and
Finance Committees of 
the Parliament of Tanzania; promotion of media accountability, e.g.,
through strengthening of Media Council; providing support to the Prevention of Corruption
Bureau (PCB) to develop a public outreach strategy and an ethics component in the school
curriculum as well as assisting in developing a booklet on anti-corruption for secondary schools;
supporting the PCB and the Media to start an anti-corruption column in daily newspapers as well
as producing a daily bulletin highlighting the evils of corruption.

63. MIGA. Tanzania has been a member of MIGA since 1992. MIGA's outstanding portfolio
in the country consists of five contracts of guarantee in the infrastructure and telecommunications
sector with a US$4.1 million Gross and Net Exposure. The total amount of Foreign Direct
Investment facilitated to date is US$19.9 million. MIGA is finalizing the issuance of guarantees
for coverage of a mining project with a total investment potential of US$400 million'. With
coverage of this project, MIGA largest exposure in Africa will be in Tanzania. 
In addition,
investors have expressed interest in MIGA's coverage for investments in the infrastructure,
mining, power, and tourist sectors in Tanzania.

G. Portfolio Issues

64. 
Quality and implementation performance of the Bank's portfolio have been imiproving
over the past couple of years as evidenced by the healthy disbursement ratio (at 29.4 - aniualized
at April-end- for FY00 as compared with 15 percent in FY98) and the decline in the percentage of
"at risk" projects (in terms of commitments - the "at risk" ratio has declined from 72 percent in
FY97 to some 11 percent). Only about 10 percent of the portfolio is rated as unsatisfactory.
These positive trends are indicative of the increased progress in addressing the constraints to the
program, and should translate into a greater impact of Bank projects. Sustaining these
improvements through comprehensive annual portfolio reviews is central to this CAS. The
upcoming Country Portfolio Performance Review will seek to identify and define a program of
action for addressing existing and emerging generic problems as well as project-specific issues.
The gains made to date in significantly improved audit compliance (only one project had
outstanding audit reports at the time of writing) are to be safeguarded through close follow-up.
Beyond decentralization of some procurement and disbursement functions and overall portfolio
management to its Tanzania office, the Bank will continue to facilitate client capacity building
and strengthening institutions related to overall good governance.

24

H. Benchmark indicators for Government/Bank

65. 
Country performance. Benchmarks for country performance are included in the matrix
(Annex B9). Many of these benchmarks, which have been determined in a participatory way, are
qualitative (or represent process indicators). Tanzania is now implementing difficult reforms for
private sector development and for improving governance. This will require tackling complex
institutional and legislative constraints, which implies that outcomes need to be measured over a
longer time horizon. The small number of quantitative, measurable indicators is also a reflection
of the inadequate statistical base, particularly for human development, that is available in
Tanzania. Outcome indicators of country performance over the CAS period include:
* Education: 
Increase gross primary enrolment rates by 2.5 percentage points each year;
increase the transition rate to secondary schools from the current 15 percent to 20 percent by
2003;
* Health: Increase percent of children under 2 year receiving measles and DPT from 71 percent
to 75 percent by 2003; increase percent of pregnant women delivering in a health facility -
from 50 percent to 55 percent by 2003;
* HIVIAIDS: Reduce HIV/AIDS prevalence by 25 percent by 2002; enhance community
mobilization on AIDS prevention and support; ensure that all hospitals are equipped to ensure
a safe blood supply for transfusions;
* Decentralization: Implement local fiscal transfers to local councils; transfer control of staff to
local councils;
* Roads: 50 percent increase (over current level) by 2002/03 of km of rural roads maintained
per year;
* Water: Provision of safe and clean water from 48.5 percent population coverage in 2000 to
55 percent by the year 2003 in rural areas; and from 68 percent coverage in 2000 to 75
percent by the year 2003 in urban areas; and
* Justice: Harmonization of the legal and regulatory framework by 2002.

66. 
Benchmarks for Bank performance. Our strategy is to support the Government in
achieving the outcome indicators listed above. In terms of portfolio implementation (see Annex
III), we will be aiming at i) decreasing risk projects from 14 percent to 10 percent of the
portfolio; ii) sustaining a disbursement ratio at around 22 percent and respecting audit compliance
(with 90 percent of on-time audits) and iii) shortening the time between board approval and
effectiveness from the current 6-7 months to 4 months. The achievement of CAS objectives will
be monitored according to two criteria: a) macroeconomic variables which affect growth,
including fiscal performance and inflation targets; monitoring will be conducted during joint
IMF/Bank missions and annual public expenditure reviews; b) progress benchmarks, as detailed
in the CAS matrix. Benchmarks will be monitored during project preparation and supervision
missions, annual consultations and jointly with IMF, IFC and donors. Decision making and
increasingly a larger share of project preparation and supervision is now with the Country
Director and the r esident mission in the field, to ensure a can better response to emerging requests
and issues.

I. Risks

67. 
External risks that might threaten Tanzania's ability to implement its development
agenda have been outlined in previous sections. As already discussed, the most important risks
are domestic. Tanzania has been politically stable and free from ethnic violence and the next
general elections. (October 2000) are expected to take place peacefully. However, the current
political situation in Zanzibar has some potential for instability. Political support and commitment

25

to reform remains fragile beyond Central Government and at the local level, the understanding of
the reform process is limited. The improvement in the governance framework may take longer
than anticipated. 
Implementation of the local government reforms may be delayed because
districts lack capacity to generate appropriate policies and collect revenues and account for
expenditures. The transfer of many responsibilities from central line Ministries to local
Authorities may interfere with prospects for success of sector wide development strategies,
particularly in education and agriculture.

68. 
For the Bank Group, the greatest risk is that of overestimating the Governnent's
implementation capacity. The keys to successfully implementing our strategy and portfolio
include:
attention to project design and robust quality at entry including inter alia consistency with
CAS objectives, clarity and realism of objectives and appropriateness of project approach;
adapting interventions to realities on the ground in Tanzania;
a clear and realistic sequencing of actions and interventions;
conducting good institutional assessments to establish whether there is adequate capacity and
a sound incentive framework for facilitating implementation;
effective capacity building measures aimed at Tanzanian counterparts as well as Bankc staff
and;
. managing the threats to implementation and sustainability through avoiding excessive
optimism about the capacity and readiness to implement; conducting more candid risk
assessments to establish risks of borrower ownership, financial/procurement management as
well as social and institutional risks, and by establishing a strong monitoring and evaluation
feedback system.

J. Concluding Remarks

69. 
The overarching goal of the Tanzania Assistance Strategy, as well as the Bank Group
Country Assistance Strategy is to increase growth for faster poverty reduction and to improve
living conditions of the poor. We believe that the economic and sector work and lending
operations proposed in this CAS, as well as IFC investments and the cooperation with IMIF and
other stakeholders will make a long term difference to Tanzania's development prospects and its
million of poor.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C.
May 22, 2000

26

TANZANIA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

ANNEXES

Annexes:

Annex I 
Annex II 
Annex III 
Annex IV 
Annex V 

T he Low Case Scenario
T'anzania: the Road To Ownership and Effective Partnership
PFortfolio Overview & Performance Improvement Strategy
Client Feedback Survey 1997
Standard Annexes

ANNEX I

The Low Case Scenario

1. 
Under the low case scenario, the Government will maintain its current poliqr regime and
the liberalized institutions already established. The scenario assumes that PRGF targets will not
be met, there will be no further progress in structural reforms and the conditions for the
implementation of the HIPC initiative will not be reached. Climate conditions will reflect those
during 1996-1999. Projections indicate that GDP growth will be around 4 percent and the
inflation rate in the range of 12-11 percent. Over 2000-03 the Government will need additional
foreign financing ifor BOP support in order to maintain macroeconomic stability.

Indicator 

Actual 

Projections 

.

Real Growth of GDP (%) 
Per capita real GDP growth (%) 
Real Growth in Agriculture (%) 
Real Growth in Manufacturing (%) 
Gross domestic investment (% GDP) 
Gross domestic savings (% GDP) 
Consumer Price index (%/6) 

FY96 
4.3 
1.4 
4.6 
3.1 
18.0 
3.6 
21.0 

FY97 
4.0 
1.2 
3.0 
4.6 
15.7 
5.4 
16.1 

FY98 
3.8 
0.9 
2.2 
6.5 
14.9 
3.1 
12.8 

FY99 
4.3 
1.5 
4.2 
5.3 
14.3 
2.6 
7.8 

FY00 
5.0 
2.2 
5.7 
4.4 
17.1 
3.1 
5.8 

FYOI 
3.9 
1.1 
3.9 
4.7 
16.1 
2.9 
12.1 

FY02 
4.2 
1.4 
3.3 
4.9 
15.9 
2.5 
11.5 

Trade

Export (fob) (US $mil) 
Import (cif) (US $mil) 
Current Account Balance (before 
grants % of GDP)
Current Account Balance (after 

grants % GDP)

Government Finance ilall % of GDP)

Domestic Revenue 
Expenditure 
Deficit (before grants) 
Deficit (after grants) 
Net Foreign Financing 

696 
1370 
-15.9 

794 
1388 
-12.0 

613 
1445 
-14.4 

541 
1631 
-15.3 

552 
1748 
-15.4 

521 
1811 
-17.4 

529 
2015 
-20.5 

-6.1 

-2.2 

-6.1 

-7.0 

-7.2 

-8.3 

-9.8 

13.2 
17.6 
-4.4 
-0.8 

13.5 
15.1 
-1.6 
1.0 
0.1 

12.0 
14.8 
-2.8 
1.0 
-0.3 

12.4 
16.9 
-4.5 
-0.3 
-0.3 

12.6 
18.3 
-5.7 
-0.7 
0.8 

10.9 
18.5 
-7.6 
-4.0 
3.2 

'12.1 
19.0 
-6.9 
-3.5 
3.0 

FY03
4.0
1.2
4.2
5.0
16.0
3.0
10.5

658
2186
-19.5

-9.0

12.2
19.5
-7.3
-3.0
2.5

27

ANNEX II

Tanzania: The Road to Ownership and Effective Partnership

1. 
Since 1961 Tanzania has developed cooperation programs with over 50 Governments,
international financial/donor agencies and NGO's. In recent years, external assistance, averaging
US$900 million a year, has contributed to 25-30 percent of the recurrent budget and 80 percent of
the development budget.

2. 
Tanzan[ia/donor relations were strained during the late 1980s and early 1990s due to
deteriorating policy and fiscal performance, failure to collect counterpart funds for donor
supported programs, and rising corruption. These relations were analyzed in 1994 by an
independent group of advisers (The Helleiner Report, 1995). "Agreed Notes" were adopted in
1997 and reviewed in 1999. The review found that issues still remain, including : i) weak
Government capacity, ii) different donors requirements with regard to rules and procedures on
procurement, disbursement, accounting and auditing; iii) parallel budgetary systems and over
dependence on consultants to execute projects. However, Government-donors cooperation has
improved significantly as a result of:
* Changing dronor attitudes towards a new partnership approach, through active participation
in regular sector-wide meetings under Government leadership; and contributions to "basket
funds" in the health, education, roads and local government reform sectors, in support of
mutually agreed common objectives.
Improved aid coordination. Government-donor joint working groups meet regularly under
Governmernt chairmanship.
* Greater transparency in aid delivery on the part of donors and accountability for its use on
the part of the Government. The Ministry of Finance has significantly improved financial
data storage and retrieval system using the latest software and equipment. Treasury budget
management has been strengthened in the past two years.
- Moving the CG meeting to Dar es Salaam has improved ownership.

* 

3. 
The Government has established a confident leadership in the preparation of its
development sl:rategy and in enlarging the participation process. Starting with the Vision 2025
document (initiated in 1995), a significant effort was made to consult with a broad range of
stakeholders.. The Vision document was debated in Parliament and has been widely disseminated
throughout the country. In 1997 the preparation of the National Poverty Eradication Strategy has
involved a substantial consultation process with NGOS and civil society. The Government has led
the preparation of various Policy Framework Papers (PFP), the annual PER and more recently the
TAS. The TAS will promote partnership in designing and executing development programs. The
Local Governrnent Reform, by decentralizing most Government functions to the local/district
levels, is expected to facilitate the involvement of civil society in socio-economic issues with a
direct bearing on their lives.

28

ANNEX III

Portfolio Overview & Performance Improvement Strategy

1. 
Portfolio Flows & Current Status. Improved implementation continues to be central
under the present CAS. As of March 31, 2000, a total of 112 IDA credits and 27 IBRD loans,
amounting to some US$3.5 billion (US$3.2 billion from IDA and US$356 million from IBRD)
had been approved for Tanzania (original principal less cancellations). Of the 27 loans, 8 loans
amounting to US$42.5 million were extended to Tanzania through the East African Community.
Total disbursements amounted to nearly US$3,096 million (some US$2,741 million from IDA
and US$356 million from IBRD). As of March 31, 2000, the active portfolio consisted of 22
projects with total commitments of US$1.2 billion. Four projects have been approved thus far in
FY00 for a total credit amount of about US$120 million. A Health Sector Development Program
in the amount of $22 million and a Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit (PSACI) in the
amount of $190 million are being presented for Board approval in June 2000 along with this
CAS. Four Credits (Roads I, Health and Nutrition Financial Institutions Development and
Forestry Rehabilitation totaling some US$225 million in net credit terms) closed in FY99.

2. 
Portfolio Performance Trends. The Tanzania portfolio performance trends are
summarized below. The number of projects under implementation has remained fairly steady
since FY93 -- at between 21 to 24, however, the average commitments have declined from $75
million per project in FY94 to some $51 million per project in FY00, reflecting a trend towards
smaller, more focused projects. The quality and performance of the portfolio has been improving
over the past couple of years (see Annexes B2 and B8), as evidenced by the healthier
disbursement rati'o and the decline in the percentage of "at risk" projects. These positive trends
are indicative of progress in the implementation of the program, which should translate into a
greater impact of Bank projects.

3. 
The disbursement performance of IDA's investment projects has improved steadily since
FY92 from $47.7 million to $166.9 million in FY96, and has maintained the momentum since:

* The undisbursed balance which was around $800 million in 1996 now stands at
about $480 million.
* Solid gains registered in disbursement, which increased by 21 percent between
FY97 and FY99. In absolute terms FY99 disbursements were over $166 million
while FY97 disbursements totaled $ 137 million.
IDisbursements as a percent of the opening undisbursed balance increased from
over 15 percent to some 20 percent between FY98 and FY99.

* 

4. 
In the first three quarters of FY00, total disbursements have amounted to some US$117.5
million of which over US$95 million is accounted for by investment disbursements. The
(annualized) disbursement ratio at April 30, 2000 stood at 29.4 percent (this is a significant
increase from the 9.0 percent in FY92 and compares very favorably with both Africa Region and
the Bank-wide averages).

5. 
While thie implementation performance of Bank projects in Tanzania has been mixed, and
portfolio quality as measured by "problem projects" has not been entirely satisfactory, this aspect
now appears to be stabilizing. Since FY94 the share of problem projects in the portfolio increased
steadily, largely due to an effort to improve the accuracy and realism in ratings. This
downgrading lecl to an increase in the problem projects in the portfolio from 14.3 percent in FY95
to 22.7 percent in FY96, and balloon further to over 50 percent of the portfolio by FY97. The "at

29

risk" portfolio swelled to some 72 percent. However, as indicated above, conscious piortfolio
strengthening and refining efforts over the past three years have resulted in improvements being
registered in the overall number (and commitment level) of problem projects in the portfolio. As
of March 31, 2000 compared with the end of FY97, the number of problem/potential problem
projects in the portfolio has fallen dramatically with only 3 projects being rated unsatisfactory
either in terms of Development Objectives or Implementation Progress. This compares with 11
projects in this category some two and a half years back. Annex B2 indicates that Talizania's
portfolio performance indicators compare quite favorably with Bank-wide as well as Africa
Region averages:

* Nearly 90 percent of the portfolio (in terms of commitments) is now rated satisfactory --
up from 48 percent in FY97.
* Projects at risk declined from 52 percent to 14 percent of the portfolio between FY97 and
FY00. Commitments at risk declined from 72 percent to 11 percent during the same
period.
* FY00 pro-activity ratio is 100 percent -- specific actions were taken with respect to all
five projects that were rated "U" at the beginning of FY99.
* FY00 realism ratio indicating consistency in ratings between the problem and potential
problem projects is at 100 percent.
* Close attention and persistent focus on financial management is also paying off. The
number of overdue audit reports declined from 35 percent to 16 percent by FY99. At
present only one project has audit reports that are overdue by three months or more.

6. 
Portfolio Improvement Efforts. 
Bank staff have been working closely wi.th their
Government counterparts to iron out certain longstanding issues (e.g., resource constraints,
governance etc.,) that have continued to impinge on the overall performance and impact of the
Tanzania portfolio. The enhanced focus on macro issues, including the improved fiscal and
public expenditure management effort launched by the Government and donors, will leacl to solid
payoffs in this regard over the medium term. The Tanzania Country Team's concerted efforts to
improve the quality of the portfolio have led to significant improvements. To address the generic
portfolio management issues regular meetings of project coordinators have been held
approximately every two months in the period since FY96; important actions were taken at the
individual project level as well, especially for problem or potential problem operations. ranzania
was one of 20 countries selected Bank-wide, for which a comprehensive Portfolio Improvement
Plan (PIP) was prepared for FY97. The PIP which was selected as one of the two Bank-wide
"Best Practices" identified a number of cross-cutting/ generic problems as well as projecl-specific
ones. The main objectives of the PIP, which was shared with the Government, was to achieve
major improvements in the performance of both problem projects and projects at risk, as well as
to further strengthen Government ownership of projects. Good progress has been made since
towards meeting the targets of the PIP including greater portfolio ownership by the Government.
As a result of this significant improvement - reflected in aggregate performance indicators -
Tanzania has graduated from the Bank-wide portfolio "watch list". The continued emphasis on
enhanced portfolio management is expected to sustain these positive results.

7. 
As part of the Bank wide decentralization efforts, the Country Director is now based in
the field. The Country Office has been focussing more on disbursement and procurement pre-
screening, financial management and task management responsibilities. Furthermore, efforts
have been made (quite successfully) to establish a specialized Country Office Tanzanian staff in
areas of financial management, disbursements, and procurement. This has made the regular
exchanges with project coordinators more meaningful.

30

8. 
A CPPR to follow-up on remaining issues and to pre-empt potential pitfalls is planned for
near future. Activities to address the generic portfolio management issues are being steered by
recommendations f,rom the most recent CPPR held in 1998, which focused on areas such as:
availability of counterpart funds; project management, staffing and incentives; and accounting
and audit compliance. A detailed Action Plan was formulated and the Country Office held
regular follow-up rmeetings with project coordinators In order to institutionalize and sustain these
measures, the next CPPR seeks to focus Government's attention on the actions agreed, such that
the findings and recommendations of this exercise are put to good use. The Country Office is
playing a key role in this exercise and will continue to take the lead on close follow-up of
implementation issues.

9. 
IDA's Fuiure Lending Program & Portfolio Improvement Strategy. The principles
guiding the development of a sound lending pipeline for Tanzania continue to include: 
(a)
operations designed to be fully consistent with the objectives of the Tanzania CAS -- which in
turn mirrors the Government's goals of sustaining past progress in poverty reduction through
measures aimed at improved economic growth performance and improved access to basic socio-
economic services; (b) superior quality of projects at entry, ensured through: greater ownership
by the borrower and key stakeholders as well as rigorous preparatory work at the design stage,
including particular attention to project implementation arrangements that would ensure
medium/long-term institutional synergy/strengthening; and capacity building for improved
performance over the life of the operation and enhanced sustainability thereafter; and (c)
supervision on the Bank's part following project effectiveness, and particularly intensive
supervision in the case of emerging implementation issues. Project design is being sharpened
through upstream peer reviews and a focus on the development of clearly defined and
monitorable project impact (including outputs and outcomes) indicators.

10. 
Other efforts at reshaping the portfolio to enhance the quality, sustainability and impact
of Bank operations are underway:

* GOT is taking the lead in developing the Tanzania Assistance Strategy which would
provide the framework within which the development partners are expected to provide
support. The GOT has endorsed the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF)
and this has contributed to furthering Tanzania's adoption of the principles of ownership
and partnership. With increased ownership, it is expected that the portfolio's emphasis
will shift to areas with greater urgency of reform.

* The Country Team is applying lessons of experience and utilizing new instruments. The
recently effective Tax Administration Project (TAP) focuses on providing an overall
framework for donor support, the Health Sector Development Program is an APL which
adopts a sector-wide approach in line with GOT desires. The recently approved Rural
and Micro-finance project is a LIL which used a participatory approach and is a "best-
practice" in the sub-sector. We envisage moving to the provision of broad based budget
support via a rural development and environment Public Expenditure Reform Credit
during the CAS period. All these actions point towards improved quality at entry and are
expected to contribute to improved portfolio implementation.

* The up coming Country Performance Portfolio Review will focus on issues identified by
the project coordinators and Bank staff.

II. 
Remaining challenges to be addressed. While the performance of the Tanzania Portfolio
is now quite robust, there are a few remaining areas which merit closer follow-up:

31

* Pace of implementation: The average age of the portfolio at 4.6 years continues to be
high as compared with both the Bank-wide average age of 3.6 years and the Africa
Region average of 4 years. The number of projects with extended closing date increased
from 2 to 12 between FY97 and FY99. Presently, the portfolio includes nine projects,
which have had closing date extensions of one year or more. Ten projects, or some 45
percent of the portfolio is over 5 years old. As newer projects continue to join the
Tanzania cohort, it raises issues in terms of manageability of the overall portfolio size
and issues emanating from some of the older projects. In this context, it would therefore
be important to consider carefully any project extensions.

* Five projects in infrastructure continue to dominate the portfolio accounting for nearly
60 percent of total commitments and 65 percent of the undisbursed balance at the
beginning of this fiscal year. The Roads program has been the weakest in terms of its
implementation performance - plagued by weak management capacity and procurement
problems. However, the Government of Tanzania recently embarked on a program to
address governance issues in this subsector. For its part, the Bank reviewed its transport
portfolio carefully; the non-performing Roads I has been closed and a balance of about $
30 million cancelled; both the Roads II and Railways projects have been restructured to
focus on ways to improve the quality of roads and rail services including by addressing
issues arising from the el Nino damage to the road and rail network. The privatization of
the Railways parastatal is central to the restructured project. The Roads II project will, in
close coordination with other donors, support the development of a 
long-term
comprehensive (ten year) Road Development Program.

* Dwindling attention to social sectors in the lending portfolio over the past several years
has resulted in the Bank not being able to respond adequately to the emerging challenges
in Tanzania's human development performance, especially in the area of primary
education where enrollment rates have declined. The Government with Bank support is
now engaging other donors on the issue of a cohesive approach to primary education. A
Primary Education APL is envisaged. Work in secondary education rationali2ation is
also planned. The process of dialogue and donor coordination has led to what may be
deemed as good results in basic health care provision. A Health Sector Devel[opment
Program is being presented with this CAS. HIV/AIDS is a critical issue. A program to
assist Government efforts at containing the HIV/AIDS pandemic is envisaged during the
CAS lending cycle.

* Decentralization from the center to the district councils is expected to be a major
challenge in the medium-term, but is affecting the implementation of some of the projects
(such as the ongoing National Agriculture Extension or the planned social sector
interventions). Strengthening of local capacity and sound procedures for funding; district
councils and accountability framework need to be established

32

ANNEX IV

Client Feedback Survey 1997

Summary of Qualitative Interview Results

World Bank Staff
* 
Excellent relationships with the Bank; good interaction at project level.
* 
Staff sheuld spend more time in Tanzania, particularly rural areas, to understand better
country end its needs.
Bank staff should have broader, more frequent contacts beyond government.
Need to be more receptive to local ideas. Bank needs to sell itself, provide more
information on what it does.

* 
* 

Resident Mission
* 
Presence appreciated for facilitation, liaison, project monitoring, accessibility.
* 
Mixed reactions on desirability of Tanzania-based Country Director.
Clients consider as more important increased decision-making authority of Resident
Mission.
More local professional staff would increase understanding between Bank and Tanzania.

* 

* 

Development Objectives
-
Mixed views as to whether there is agreement on development objectives.
-- 
Many respondents not aware of or involved in CAS process.
-
Those involved saw CAS consultations as a positive change, but Government needs to be
better prepared.

Products and Services
* 
Strong views that local capacity building has not been a feature of technical assistance.
* 
Positive effects of adjustment lending, but have lives of poor improved?
* 
Positive impact of investment lending in industry, infrastructure and power sectors.

Procedures
* 
Lending conditionalities necessary, but some feel they are too harsh.
* 
Mixed reactions as to Bank's flexibility with respect to lending conditionalities.
* 
Bank procedures too slow: give more authority to Resident Mission and involve
stakeholders in streamlining.
Procurement guidelines generally helpful.

* 

33

ANNEX V

TANZANIA

CIDUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Standard Annexes

Annexes:

A I Tanzania at a Glance
B2 Tanzania: Selected indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3 Tanzania: Bank Group Program Summary
B4 Tanzania: Summary of Nonlending Services
B5 Tanzania Social Indicators
B6 Tanzania: Key Economic Indicators
B7 Tanzania: Key Exposure Indicators
B8 Tanzania: Status of Bank Group Operations in Tanzania (Operations Portfolio)
Tanzania: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B9 Tanzania: CAS Program Matrix
B 10 Tanzania: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B1

page 1 of 2

Tanzania at a glance

Sub-

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Saharan 
Africa 

Low-
Income 

Tanzanla 

Development dlamond*

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

32 
240 
6.7 

627 
510 
323 

3,536 
520
1,842

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99

Population (Y.) 
Labor force (X) 

2.9 
2.9 

2.9 
2.9 

1.7
1.9 

GNP 
per 

Gross

i 

.

primary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of totalpopulation) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 Wive births) 
Child malnutriton (%o of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Mafe 
Female 

capita 

27 
48 
85 
31 
52 
28 
66 
67 
66 

33 
50 
92 
33 
43 
40 
78 
85 
71 

30
63
68
36 
73
31
107 
112 
102

Access to safe water

-

Tanzania
Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratos

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmentIGDP 
Exports of goods and servicea/GDP 
Gross domeshc savingslGDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

.. 
.
.. 
.. 
.. 

4.8 
17.4 
10.6 
-2.7 
17.5 

7.7 
15 
18.2 
3.1 
2.9 

8.2
14 
21.8
2.6
3.1 

Trade

i

Current account balance/GDF 
Interest paymentslGDP 
Total debtVGDP 
Total debt servicelexports 

.. 
.. 
.. 

-4.7 
1.0 
122.6 
32.5 

-14.4 
0.5 
100.5 
13.4 

-15.1 
0.4 
88.3
11.8

Domesticn 
SavigsA

Investment

14.4 

197949 

1989-99 

1998 

1999 

1999-03 

Indebtedness

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 

.. 
.. 

3.1 
0.6 

3.8 
0.7 

4.3 
3.2 

5.4 
3.0 
5.9

Tanzania
Low-income group

Exports of goods and services 

.. 

9.5 

-10.0 

7.3 

STRUCTURE of the ECONCOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GOP (%i
is

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

.. 

52.4 
14.4 
8.1 
33.1 

45.7 
14.9 
7.2 
39.4 

44.4 
15.3 
7.2 
40.3

10

' 

_

.. 
.. 

s

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

.. 
.. 
.. 

86.4 
16.3 
30.7 

82.4 
8.2 
24.7 

81.9 
10.6 
30.9

-10

-

GDI 

* a GDP

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

3.5 
2.6 
2.1 
2.5 

2.2 
8.5 
6.5 
3.6 

4.2 
7.6 
5.3 
2.4

40
30
20

Private consumption 
General government consurption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and servio3s 
Gross national product 

.. 

2.8 
-6.5 
-0.3 
-1.2 
3.6 

0.9 
-13.3 
4.3 
-16.6 
3.4 

2.5 
0.2 
4.5 
2.4 
5.8

-10 

04 

9s 

se

-20
.30

.. 
.. 

Exports 

Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its Income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex BI
page 2 of 2

Tanzania

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation I%)

Domestic pHces 

40

(% change)
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

129 

25.8 
31.3 

12.8 
17.8 

7.8
137 

20
10

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenuLe 
Overall surplus/deficit 

Q,

64 

95 

De 

97 

oil 

to

1 
12CPI0

' 

4 
-03 

GOP deflator 

.

.

-19 

1.0 

_____________PI

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

(USS millions)
Total exports (fob) 
Commodity1 
Commodity 2 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ci) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goodjs 

.
.. 
.
.
.. 

415 
103 
70 
89 
1,211 
81 
150 
443 

613 

541 
98 
90 
84 
1,631 
89 
134 
629 

1s.o8

111 

1900

91 
68 
1,445 
84 
138 
551 

1,400

12,03 
(

--

t03 SW
eoo

400
200_ 

.

_ 

_| 

LF

Exportpnceindoex(1995=100) 
Import prce irldex (1995=-100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

93 
200 
46 

110 
56 
197 

113 
46 
247

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

t 

99

.
.

a Expots 

*Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

CurrentaccountbalancetoGDP(%J

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

686 
118 
-513 

538 
156 
-1,027 

1132 
217 
-1,045 

1163
244 
-1,291

.

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-9 

-179 

-140 
61 

-39
66 

45

Current account balance 

-521 

-223 

-1,155 

-1,296 

-20

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

464 
57 

223 
0 

1,1B5 
-30 

1410 
-114 

-2s

40

Meno:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC bhcalWSS) 

.. 

.. 

503 
842.5 

776
683.1

119.4 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 1 

I
Compositfon of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstandng and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

4,269 
168 
208 

5,854 
252 
1,016 

8653 
21 
2,451 

7220
18 
2,453

836 18

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

100 
16 
2 

177 
42 
12 

158 
24 
32 

144
11
39

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official crediors 

139 
71 

97 
26 

189 
-15 

459
0 

Private creditors 

2858

Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

-

279

633

World Bank program
Commitments 

143 

73 

150 

.. 
459 

A-IBRD 
B-IDA 
C - IMF 

E-Bibterai
F-Prhate
G - ShoSt-terlm

Disbursements 

72 

115 

183 

D-Othermutilateral 

Prncipal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

4 
68 
15 
54 

28 
87 
26 
61 

36 
147 
20 
127 

30 
430
20
410

Development Economics

Annex B2'

Tanzania: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 

Porfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Imnplementation a 

Average Implementation Period (years) b 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number 4  
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 4" 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 4 d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ million) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1997 

1998 

1999 

21 
4.24 
23.81 
52.22 
52.38 
71.99 
17.85 

21 
4.46 
23.81 
49.07 
28.57 
54.81 
15.02 

18 
4.73 

5.56 

2.92 
11.11 
9.9 
19.82 

2000

22
4.57
13.64
11.1
13.64
11.1
29.4

no 
3.78 
180,000 

yes 
4.5 
214,000 

no 
3.23 
181,000 

yes
3.7
170,000

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Evalby OED) by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

71 
1891.19 
50.7 
43.1 

7
110.75
14.29
14.99

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).

b. Average age of projects in the Banks country potlfolio.

c. Percent of projects; rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).

d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.

e. Ratio of disbursemnents during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only. Annualized as of April 2000.

Tanzania: Bank Group Program Summary 

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Annex B3
page 1 of 2

Fiscal year Project 

USS(fM) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIfML)

2001 

2002 

2003 

Primary Education APL 
DAR WATER SUPPLY 
Regional Trade Fac. Proj. 
TASAF 
Rural Water LIL 

Sub-Total 

Songo Songo 
Account./Governance 
Soil Fert. Recap. 
Forest Conservat. 
HIV/AIDS 

Total 

Roads Rehabilitatien 
Education Ration. 
Lake Victoria 11 
PSAC II 
Local Govt. Capac. 
Total 

Total Base Case (2001-2003) 

H 
M 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
M 
H 

H 
M 
M 
H 
H 

100.0 
45.0 
10.0 
50.0 
5.0 

210.0

170.0 
40.0 
20.0 
50.0 
20.0 

300.0

80.0 
30.0 
30.0 
100.0 
40.0 
280.0

790.0

H
H
H
H
M

H
H
M
M
H

H
H
M
H
H

High-case Lending Program (in addition to the Base-case)

2003 

PERC - Poverty/Ruiral Develop/Environ 

Total High-case (2001-2003) 

200.0 

990

H 

H

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Tanzania: IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

1997 1998 1999 2000

IFC approvals (US$m) 

6.70 

20.30 

2.80 

40.27

Annex B3
page 2 of 2

Sector (%/6)
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
FOOD & AGRO-BUSINESS 
HOTELS & TOURISM 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
TEXTILES 
Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total 

I 

100

16
84

100

101 

100 

100

41 
59
100 

92 
8 

100 

100 

75
25

100 

100 

100 

100

MIGA guarantees (US5m) 

0.430 

0.430 

4.167 

4.167

Tanzania: Summary of Nonlending Services

Annex B4

Conpletion FY 

Cost (USS000) 

Audience' 

Objectiveb

2001

2002

2003

50 
175 
30 
75 
100 
175 
115 
110 

175 
175 
175 
115 
175 
200 

110 
200 
125 

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Govt, Bank 

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 

Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate
Knowledge generation, donor coordination
Knowledge generation, problem solving

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, donor coordination
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, donor coordination
Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate
Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate

Gov't, Bank 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public 

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, donor coordination

Product 

Underway 

Activities for PRSP 
PER 
Financial Sector 
Private Sector Profile 
Tanzania - Integration in Regional & Global Markets 
Poverty Monitoring and Analysis 
Consultative Group 
CPPR 

Planned 

Rural Development Strategy 
Accountability/Transparency 
PER 
Consultative Group 
Fiscal Decentralization 
Poverty Assessment 

Planned 

CPPR 
PER 
Consultative Group 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Tanzania Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

Annex B5

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)
National headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 

Male 
Female 
Access to safe water
(% ofpopulation)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(9l under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(vears)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

15.9 
3.0 
10.1 
6.8 

.. 

.. 

1 

.. 

5.0 
53.0 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

46 
45 
48 

125 
218 

513 
419 

.. 

21.8 
3.2 
17.6 
6.7 

..

.. 

8 
10 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.1 

.. 

56 
55 
56 

52 
85 
47 

66 
67 

.. 

51 
49 
53 

102 
166 

451 
370 

.. 

32.1 
2.9 
30.5 
5.4 

240 
158 
162

38.2

6.8
45.5

1.3 

.. 

48 
48 
49 

52
68
49

69 
74 
31

48 
47 
48 

85 
136 

521 
482 
530

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

627.3 
2.2 
33.3 
5.4 

Low-
income

3,536.4
1.4
30.5
3.1

510 
128 

520
136

1.5 
4.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

58 
53 

50 
49 
52 

92 
151 

432 
383 

1.3
3.2

86
89
82

80
82

63
62
64

68
92

235
208

Tanzania - Key Economic Indicators 

Annex B6
pagel of 2

National accounts (as % of GDP) (Fiscal Year)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Govemment investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

100 
46 
15 
39 

98 
22 
3.2 
19 

23 
42 

2.0 
-0.3 

100 
48 
14 
38 

96 
18 
3.6 
14 

22 
36 

3.6 
2.0 

100 
47 
14 
38 

95 
16 
2.6 
13 

18 
28 

5.4 
4.3 

100 
46 
15 
39 

91 
15 
3.6 
11 

18 
25 

3.1 
2.9 

100 
44 
15 
40 

93 
14 
3 
12 

22 
31 

2.6 
3.1 

100 
43 
16 
41 

94 
17 
4.1 
13 

25 
36 

3.1 
3.3 

100 
43 
16 
41 

95 
19 
4.3 
14 

27 
39 

4.6 
5.0 

100
42
16
42

95
21
4.4
15

28
42

5.8
6.1

4627 

5852 

6920 

7775 

8228 8816 

9732 

10642

160 

160 

190 

210 

240 

270 

280 

300

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
2.6 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.2 

4.3 
4.0 

4.0 
3.0 

3.8 
5.4 

4.3 
3.1 

5 
4.5 

Real annual per capita growtb rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
1.4 
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-0.4 
Total consumption * 
-2.2 
-0.1 
Private consumption 
-0.6 
2.4 

1.2 
-2.1 
0.5 

0.9 
-3.1 
-1.6 

1.5 
-0.2 
0.0 

2.2 
2.4 
2.4 

5.4 
5.2 

2.6 
3.0 
2.9 

6
5.6

3.2
3.5
3.5

Balance of Payments (US$ Mdil ) (Fiscal Year)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Current account balance (before grants) 
Current account balance (after grants) 

1089 
593 
2029 
1510 
-940 
-1047 
-522 

1142 
696 
1986 
1370 
-844 
-942 
-361 

1274 
794 
2040 
1388 
-767 
-842 
-152 

1132 
613 
2177 
1445 
-1045 
-1155 
-486 

1163 1213 
541 
552 
2454 2617 
1631 1748 
-1291 -1404 
-1296 -1400 
-559 
-604 

1377 
652 
2850 
1907 
-1474 
-1463 
-685 

1602
814
3141
2121
-1539
-1523
-737

Net private foreign direct investment 
Change in reservesd 
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 

104 
-46 

134 
-81 

150 
-208 

165 
-30 

183 
-114 

201 
-49 

221 
-18 

244
-73

-20% 

-14% 

-11% 

-13% 

-12% 

-13% 

- 13% 

-12%

Tanzania - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Annex B6
page2 of 2

(Fiscal Year)
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Total revenues 
12.5 
Current expenditures 
15.1 
Capital expenditure (includes net lending) 
3.2 
Balance (before grants) 
-5.8 
Balance (after grants) 
-2.7 

13.2 
14.0 
3.6 
-4.4 
-0.8 

13.5 
12.5 
2.6 
-1.6 
1.0 

12.0 
11.0 
3.8 
-2.8 
1.0 

12.4 12.6 
13.1 13.4 
3.8 
4.6 
-4.5 
-5.4 
-0.3 
-0.7 

12.8 
13.5 
4.5 
-5.3 
-0.5 

13.0
13.5
4.5
-5.0
-0.2

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%/6) 
Private sector credit growth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR92 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Consumer price index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

24.3 
37.7 
0.6 

24.1 
21.9 
19.9 
19.9 18.7 
26.4 
13.3 
10.8 
18.5 
8.4 
-205.3 224.9 244.8 155.4 271.1 

16.0 
9.2 
40.4 

16.4
14.0
180.1

110 
56 
197 
97.7 

28.0 
28.9 

113 
46 
247 
118.3 

116 
120 
124 
108 
108 
38 
31 
25 
106 
107 
310 
388 
486 
101 
101 
125.6 135.5 135.5 120.6 121.8 

21.0 
22.3 

16.1 
20.0 

12.8 
17.8 

7.8 
13.7 

5.2 
9.0 

4.1 
6.6 

110

[10
100
121.8

4.0
5.1

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govermnent.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

* Total Consumption (Govt+ Private) where the share of Government Consumption is about 10%-8% average.
from 1995-2002.

Annex B7

Tanzania: Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and 

7446 

7412 

7177 

8653 

7220 

6800 

6590 

6500

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (TJS$m)a 

95 

149 

239 

192 

439 

459 

471 

482

Total debt service (TDS) 

232 

269 

158 

158 

144 

94.2 

91.1 

8l.0

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(M)

TDO/XGSb 

674.4 

634.6 

546.5 

663.9 

598.7 

599.0 

522.8 

446.2

TDO/GDP 

160.9 

127.3 

104.3 

100.5 

88.3 

85.9 

76.9 

69.6

TDS/XGS 

21.0 

23.0 

12.0 

13.4 

11.9 

18.6 

10.7 

8.5

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRDDS/public DS 

18.9 

12.4 

16.4 

16.4 

7.8 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

Preferred creditor DS/public 

69.9 

55.0 

87.9 

87.9 

97.7 

43.8 

39.7 

28.5

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS 

3.8 

2.8 

1.8 

2.0 

0.9 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

IBRD TDO (TJS$m)d 

87 

56 

34 

21 

18 

11 

7 

5

IDATDO(US$m)d 

2182 

2242 

2306 

2451 

2453 

2864 

2836 

2813

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-

term capital.

b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.

d. Includes present value of guarantees.

e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8

page 1 of 2

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Ori2inal Amount in USS Millions 

Disbursements

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd'

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

37 
44 
76 
20 
200 
34.9 
74.45 
24.5 
170.2 
12.5 
105 
10.1 
31.1 
26.3 
134.1 
21.8 
20.9 
40 
27.5 
45.9 
41.2 

2 

1199.45 

0 
0 
11.26 
0.71 
0 
0 
0 
2.35 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

14.32 

6.87 
7.78 
17.88 
2.56 
25.89 
2.14 
8.93 
4.22 
148.91 
3.39 
54.11 
6.63 
16.46 
18.66 
18.95 
19.88 
12.69 
39.01 
28.7 
0 
38.98 

2 

484.64 

2.41 
4.33 
24.24 
1.3 
11.53 
0.47 
7.26 
5.85 
138.06 
1.73 
5.76 
1.79 
8 
5.72 
13.59 
1.3 
1.99 
2.82 
5.5 
0 
0 

0.45 

244.1 

0
4.02
3.54
0.49
0
0
7.18
0
155.2
0
0
0
0
0
16.07
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

186.5

Tanzania: Status of Bank Group Operations 

(Operations Portfolio) 

Closed 

Projects 

117

Board Date 
Fiscal Year

Active Projects 

Active Projects 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Develooment 

Prnt,ress

~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~ ~~ObietctivesR 

Implementation 

1990 
1991 
1991 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1997 
1997 
1998 
199S 
1999 
2000 
2000 
2000 

2000 

P002184 
P002786 
P002157 
P002817 
P002756 
P002788 
P002780 
P002801 
P002770 
P002812 
P002758 
P046837 
P002753 
P038570 
P002821 
P002804 
P002789 
P047761 
P057187 
P049838 
P060833 

P050441 

PORTS MODERNIZATION 
PETROL REHAB 
RAILWAYSRESTRUCTURI 
FIN.&LEGALMGTPROJ 
POWER VI 
PRIV. PUB. SECT. MGT 
TELECOM 11 
Agriculture Sector Management Project 
ROADS n 
MINERAL SECTORDEV. 
URBANSECTORREHAB 
LAKE VICTORIAENV. 
National Agriculture Extension Project n, (NAEP H) 
RIVER BASIN MGM.SMAL 
StructuralAdjustmentCredit(SACI) 
National Agriculture Research Project II (NARP II) 
Human Resources Development I 
Tax Administration Project (TAP) 
FIDP I 
Privatization & Private Sector Reform Project (PPSR) 
Public Sector Reform Program (PRSRP) 
RURAL& MICRO FIN SERVICE PROJECT 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
s 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
s 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 

S 

Grand Total 

IBRD 

IDA 

TOTAL

Original Principal: 
Cancellations: 
Disbursed: 
Undisbursed: 
Repaid: 
Due: 
Exchange Adjustment: 
Borrowers Obligation: 
Sold 3rd Party: 
Repaid 3rd Party: 
* Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

361,030,400 
5,477,943 
355,552,457 
0 
342,233,982 
13,228,474 
441,526 
13,670,000 
90,000 
90,000 

3,302,156,395 
141,463,032 
2,740,559,746 
484,645,525 
154,616,532 
2,563,804,226 
0 
2,563,804,226 
6,200,000 
6,200,000 

3,663,186,795
146,940,975
3,096,112,203
484,645,525
496,850,514
2,577,032,700
441,526
2,577,474,226
6,290,000
6,290,000

Tanzania: Statement of IFC's 
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 04/30/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

Annex B8

page 2 of 2

FY Approval 
1996/99 
1997 
1998 
1996 
1998 
1997 
1995 
1998 
1996 
1994 
1999 
1994 
1997/99 
1994 
1995 
1993/96 
1996 
1997 
1994 
1996 
1991 
1989 
1993 
1991/97 
1994 
1998 
1994 

Company 
Loan 
AEF A&K Tanzania 
AEF Aquva Ginner 
AEF Blue Bay 
AEF Contiflora 
AEF Drop Zanziba 
AEF Hort. Farms 
AEF MIC Tanzania 
AEF Maji Masafi 
AEF Milcafe 
AEFMoshiLthr 
AEF Musoma Fish 
AEF Nomad Safari 
AEF Pallsons 
AEF Raffia Bags 
AEF Tanbreed 
AEF Tanganyika 
AEF Zainab Grain 
DATEL 
Eurafrican Bank 
IHP 
Mufindi Tea 
TASCO 
TPS (Tanzania) 
TPS Zanzibar 
Tanzania Brewery 
Tanzania Jubilee 
ULC Leasing 

C

a

a

Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
0 
0 
0.3 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0.68 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
1.5 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0.35 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0.32 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.18 
0 
0 
0.19 
0 
0 
0 
0.19 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.03 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.45 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.29 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.13 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.77 
0 
0 
0.51 
0 
0 
1.35 0.48 
0 
0.73 
0 
0 
0 
0.73 
0 
0.6 
0 
0 
1.3 
0.6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.43 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.88 
0 
0 
0.87 1.04 
0 
7 
0.87 1.04 
0.2 
0.2 
0 
0.93 
0.2 
0.1 
6 
0 
0 
0 
6 
0 
0.29 
0 
0 
0 
0.29 
0 
0.95 
0 
0 
1.5 0.76 
0 

0.3 
0.68 
1.5 
0.35 
0.32 
0.5 
0.2 
I 
0.18 
0 
1.5 
0.03 
0.73 
0.29 
0.7 
0.13 
0.77 
2.25 
0 
1.3 
0.43 
0.88 
7 
0.93 
0 
0 
1.13 

C
C
0
C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
()
0
0
0)
0
0)
0
0

Total Portfolio: 

23.1 

10.34 1.24 

0 20.79 10.12 1.14 

IT

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan 

1999 
2000 
1999 
1998 
1998 
2000 
2000 
2000 

AEF Arusha 
AEF Drop II 
AEF Moun Village 
AEF Neptune Flwr 
NBC 
AEFZan Safari 
IOH 
NBC 
Total Pending Commitment: 

Equity 
1.5 
0.2 
0.9 
0.4 
0 
0.7 
2.5 
30 
36.2 

0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
0 
0 
10.07 
30.07 

Quasi Partic
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0

Development 
Objectives/lssues 

Diagnosis 

.

,Z| 
Strategy/Actions 

| 

Adjustment/Benchmark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs' 

Bank Group
Instruments 2

Tanzania CAS: Framework for Country Program

Annex B9

page 1 of 7

Focus on Poverty 
Alleviation & tirowth 

| 

Make poverty 
eradication a central 
focus of development 
strategy, 

Over 50% of population or 
i8 million is poor; 3' oot 
population live in abject 
poverty 
a Poverty is mainly a rural 
phenomenon (61% of rural 
population is poor) 

implementation of a Poverty Reduction 1 * Reduction in poverty incidence, especially in T Official statistics and 1 * All key nulti-lateral and bilateral 1 * Policy dialogue
Creating Higher Growth and Economic Opportunities for the Poor 
I
d.n.r gn.d NC-Os 9. e i.lemtntino 
StrategyrPaper(fRSPj)iodessne argess 
p. uci- 
:e 
I 
PSAC !
* Rural Development
and measures aimed at improving 
.
Increase in GDP per capita growth rate from 
* PRSP completed 
programs (e.g. income generation, 
1.3% (1997-99) to about 3% in 2002-03. 
including database on 
capacity building, community 
Strategy
economic opportunities for the poor, build 
human capital and empower the poor. 
* Maintenance of macroeconomic stability and 
poverty and baseline 
initiatives, infrastructure and social 
* Medium Term
sector interventions) to support 
Expenditure
a Preparation of a rural development 
implementation of full complement of 
poverty line and 
incidence analysis 
Tan;ania's poverty eradication 
Framework (MTEF)I
strategy to articulate a cohesive program 
structwral and social sector reforms 
a Poverty monitoring 
objectives. The larger donors are also 
Public Expenditure
of action for addressing poverty in rural 
areas 
indicators 
actively engaged in policy dialogue 
Review (PER)
*Rural Develop. Strategy 
* Poverty Monitoring

u-au sn- , 0,6S6twf. W 
h 

Activities for PRSP
PERC

.it 

ob.., 
jcs 

* Results of Household Budget Survey by 2001 
* Approved operational poverty monitoring 
indicators and survey methods 
. Pilot labor survey 

* Completion of 
Household Budget 
Survey and labor survey 
a Presentation of 
preliminary analysis on
poverty and of
monitoring system

. UiK/UNDP / EU 
. Other larger bilaterals 

* Policy dialogue
* HIPC
* Activities for PRSP
a Poverty Assessment

. Adoption of MTEF FYO I-03 that adheres to 
prioritization in line wilh the PSRP 
. Adoption of budget 2001/02 in line with 
MTEF priorides and conducting annual 
public expenditure reviews to confirm 
adherence to set priorities 

a Public expenditure 
reviews & MTEF 

a All key donors fully engaged in 
PER/MTEF process 

. Policy dialogue
* FILMUP
* MTEF/PER
a HIPC
* Acdvides for PRSP
* PERC

. Meet Poverty Reduction & Growth Facility 
(PRGF)/PRSP conditions, 
Replace cash management system with 
efficient expenditure management based on 
the budget and spending priorities. 
a. Full implementation of the Integrated 

a PER & MTEF 
.
IFMS records 
* Public Finance Mgment 
& Public Audit Bills 
approved
* Treasury Minutes (in

* IMF Program 
* AfDB/EU: Structural Adjustmsent 
a Key donors engaged in regular 
dialogue 

. Policy dialogue
* TAP
. MTEF/PER
a PSAC I

. Limited and poor quality of 
data on poverty 
a Comparadve poverty data/ 
trends not available 

Improve 
information on 
poverty and 
improve 
statisticscapacity 
for better 
monitoring and 
analysis of 
development and 
poverty data 

Shift budget 
resources towards 
acdivides benefiting 
the poor 

Sound Macro 
Framework & 
Improved Fiscal 
Performance 

Ensure continued 

* Progress in fiscal reform 
needs further broadening, 
especially in expenditure 
management 

a Implement Household Budget Survey & 
labor survey 
n Preliminary analysis of basic household 
data, including poverty lines, poverty and 
sociai indicators (by gender, region and 
socio economic characteristics) 
a Agreement on a monitoring system for 
tracking changes in: i) income poverty, ii)
social indicators and iii) community needs
a Define institutional roles in collection,
analysis and monitoring of poverty
informadon
. MTEF 2001/2 -03104: establishmnent of 
inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral budgetary 
allocations in the recurrent and 
development budget according to poverty 
priorides. 
a Adopt anual budget, incorporating 
poverty priorities in the agriculture,
education, health, rural roads and water
supply sectors
a Maintain anti-inflation stance & reduce 
inflation around 4% 
.
Improve and stabilize fiscal performance 
a Prioritize development expenditues 
among and within sectors and ensue their 
consistency with the MTEF 

All key muld-laterals and bilaterals engaged in policy dialogue and poverty eradication initiatives.

Pinancial Institudons and Legal Management Upgrading Project (FILMUP), 2000
National Agriculture Extension Project (NAEP 11), 1997
Nadonal Agriculture Research Project (NARP 11), 1997
Poverty Reducdon Strategy Paper (PRSP), 2000
Pdivadzadon and Prvate Sector Reform Program (PPSR), 2000
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit, I and 11 (PSAC I and 11), 2000
Public Sector Reform Program (PRSP), 2000
Rual and Microfinance Services Project, 2000
Tax Administradon Project (TAP), 1999

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Adjustment/Benchmark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs 

Financial Management System (IFMS) 

response to audits)

//

Annex B9
page 2 of 7

B ank Group
Instruments'

Development 
Objectives/ssues 

macroeconomic 
stability.

Improve expenditure
mwangement

Improve tax regime: 
Modemize tax 
administration, 
rationalize tax regime 
and contain tax evasion 

Review tax policy to 
reduce trade taxes and 
remove nuisance taxes 
at various levels of 
government 

Address issues of 
heavy external debt 
burden and high 
interest payments on 
domesdc debt. 

Environmentally 
Sustainable Rural 
Development 

Promote sustainable 
rural growth and 
reduce poverty 
incidence in rural areas 

Improved smallholder 
productvity 

* Strengthen Revenue Authority and expand 
tax base 

. Unsustainable external debt 
burden 

. Average 3% agricultural 
growth in 1989-99 below 
potential. 
* Subsistence, rainfed 
farming; low productivity; 
weak (input-market) links. 

. Radonalize import taxes 
* Simplify tariff structure and reduce 
protection 
* Harmonize taxes within the EAC 

* Maintain multilateral debt fund 
a Maintain macroeconomic stability and 
implement structural and social sector 
refonms with a view to reaching the 
completion point under the HIPC 
Initiative 
. Promote private sector investments in the 
ntral sector; greater environmental 
protection; improved linkages with urban 
areas; md strengthening relevant 
institutions. 
* Strengthen fanmer- driven research and 
extension. 
.
Implement land policy to enhance access. 
* Strengthen agricultural exports 

* 

* Establish a Unified Tax appeals mechanism. 
* 
Implement guidelines on the rationalization of 
local taxes and fees 
* Review remaining statutory exemptions (inel. 
NGOs & GOT) to reduce them. 
Introduce unique taxpayer identification 
numbers (TIN) for administration/ 
registration. 
* Abolish withholding tan on goods and 
services & limit other taxes and levies to 
import duty, product-specific excises, the
Energy Fund and the Road Toll; reduce
number of excises to 6
* Reduce tariff barriers & establish customs 
union in line with East African Cooperation 
guidelines 
* Radonalize other customs/export-import 
duties & establish a duty drawback system 

* Reach Completion Point under lIfPC 
Initiative by end FY2001 

. Rationalize levies, fees amd taxes paid by 
farmers/traders; avoid muldple taxation; 
ensure uniform fiscal treatment. 
* Remove trade barriers across regions; 
eliminate temporary export bans; Commodity 
Boards and Strategic Review Scope for Grain 
Reserve. 
. Divest cashew processing factories, state 
farms 
. Publish rules and regulations, based on work 
by Min. of Agric & Cooperatives
Involve export crop industry in research;
apply uniform taxes on crop expons across
districts
* Increase small-holders participatory farters 
groups established and visited/assisted by 
extension agents per cropping season -
* Improved smallholders' access to fertilizer, 
improved seeds, small implements 

* 

* Public Notice of a 
Unified Tax Appeals 
Mechanism being 
operational 
* Published guidelines on 
rationalizing local taxes
and fees
* Strengthen Revenue
Authority and expand tax
base.

. Policies set out in CBI 
policy leter followed 
* Public Notice of a Duty
drawback system being
operational

* Bank of Tanzania (BOT) 
reports on external & 
domestic Public debt 
stock and debt servicing 

. Firm & Farm surveys; 
supervision reports 
* Crop Board Acts 
amended 
* Government orders on 
rationalization of 
taxation 
* Point of sale cashew nut
processing plants, &
remaining state ranches

* 
IMF Program 
* EU/JNDP/USAID/Sweden/Finland/ 
Demnark: Institutional strengthening 
of Tanzania Revenue Authority; 
Ministry of Finance; fiscal reform

* Policy dialogue
* MTEF/PER
* PSAC I
* TAP

.
IMF Program 
* EU/Other larger donors

* As above

* 
IMF Program 
* AfDB/Bilaterals: MDF; HIPC 
support 

.
IMF Program 
* EU/FRG/UK/ Netherlands/ 
Finland/Denmark/ AfDB: sector 
reforfm dialogue 

* Policy Dialogue
. Commercial Debt
Buyback
* Muldlateral Debt Fund
(MDF)
. HIPC
s Policy dialogue
. Rural & Micro-Finance
Services Project
* PSAC I; PSAC 11
* NARP If
* NAEP 11
. HIV/AIDS Project

* Finm & Farm surveys; 
supervision reports 
. Level of budgetary 
expenditures for 
provision of 
decentralized agricultural

_ _ 

_ 

* EU/FRG/UK/ Netherlands/ 
Finland/Demnark/ AfDB: Research 
and Extension 
. UNDP/Den-mark/Finland: agro- 
processing; irrigation 

* Policy dialogue
* NAEP If
. NARP 11
* Lake Victoria 11
. Soil Fertility Project

X__ 

_ 

_ _I

I__ 

* 80% (majority) of farmcrs 
are subsistence farmers with 
average holding size of less 
than I ha. 

* Prioritize smallholder agriculture in 
development strategy 
* Develop/strengthen national and local 
institutions to facilitate farmer (support) 
srgxnirstionr. 

t _ _ _ _ [ _ _ _ _ _ I 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ [ _ _ _ _ 

I__ 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Adjustment/Benchmark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs' 

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Improve rural 
infrastructure 
particularly tunk and 
feedet coads network 

* Inadequate irrigation; poorly 
maintained rural roads 
(trunk and feeder); limited 
access to ruraUurban areas & 
to power 

.

* Build roads to access urbam and rural 
markets. 
Expand use of water for small and 
medium scale irrigation. 
* Electrify rural areas with growth potential. 

* 50% Increase by 2003/04 of kilometers of rural 
roads ( trunk and feeder) maintained per year, 
with a breakdown by level of Government 
and district 

Annex B9
page 3 of 7

Bank Group
Instruments 2

Roads 11
. Roads Rehabilitation
.
Power VI; Songo
Songo

a Policy Dialogue
.
Financial Sector
* FIDP 11
PSAC 1; It
.
IFC support for
.
microfinance

* Lake Victoria 11
* Forest Conservation
* Soil Fertility Project
.
PERC

* Level of Road Fund 
resources directed to 
districts 
* Level of budgetary 
expenditures for 
s 
provision of 

* EU/FRG/IJS/ 
* Finland/Norway/SwitzerlandlUNDP/ 
AfDB: Roads Rehab; mainten. 
* Switzerland/ 
Demark: rural roads
a Switzerland./ UK/FRG: TA; Training

services
a Copy of official gazette 
showing approved 
Microfinance Act 
a NMB operational as 
micro-finance institution 

* Canada/ 
* Norway/Densarld Switzerland: 
Support to micro-finance; rural 
finance; pilot revolving funds; 
capacity building 

a FRG/Norway/ 
a Finland/Denmark/EU/AfDB: Forest 
resources mgmt; wildlife/park areas 
mgmt 
a Norway/Finland/
a Denmark/Sweden/UK/JNDP:
land/soil mgmt; env./ ecosystem
mgmt.
* FinlandU Denmark: fisheries; marine
env. protection

* Publish a biodiversity 
conservation strategy; 
Plan to Combat 
Desertification; 
Enviromnentl Impact 
Assessment Guidelines; 
National Priority 
Environmental 
Management Programme 
fmalized 

e Environmental

Framework legislation
passed by Parliament
a Supervision reports 
a Reports from MOLG and 

Min of Cominunity 
development 

* Policy dialogue on food 
security improvement 
and enhancement (food 
aid food import and 
export) 

aLiberalized 

intemal and 
extemual food 

* Many key Bilaterals (EU/UNDP and 
NGOs involved: Community 

development; gender awareness; 

.
TASAF
a PERC

. Local Govt. Capacity
Bldg.

. Bilaterals and NGOs involved 

.

a Rural Development
Strategy
* NAEP 11 & NARP 11
a PSAC I
Soil Fertility Project
a Local Govt. Capacity
Bldg.

n Examine prudential banking regulations 
and provisions for bank supervision to 
ensure the integration of micro/rural 
finance sector 
* Revise Financial Institutions Act to 
stimulate coordinated growth in 
micro/rural finance
* Conserve natural resources for sustainable 
growth 

.

* 

Issue preliminary regulations for micro/rural- 
finance institutions 
* Recapitalize NMB and transforming it into a 
micro-finance institution 

Prepare a biodiversity conservation strategy 
and action plan 
a Adopt a national action plan to combat 
desertification 
a Present enviromnental framnework legislation 
to Parliament 
* Finalize Environmental Impact Assessment 
Guidelines 
* Adopt environmental standards 
.
* Prepare a National Priority Enviromental 
Management Programme 
a Rationalize donor program from current S 400 
million with 60% outside GOT budget 
Increase capacities of communidies to 
prioritize, implement and manage sustainable 

a 

Improved micro/rural 
financial services 

* Rural and non-rural poor 
have limited access to credit 

Improve Natural 
Resource Management 

Develop Social Safety 

Nets to assist the rural 
poor and vuhlerable 

* Proliferation of 
uncoordinated Donor 
intervenfions 
* Gaps in integrating sector 
policies with envirommental 
policies, 
* Lack of transparent policies 
on wild life and hunding. 
* Deficient property rights and 
disincentives for 
conservation. 
* Deficient urban water and 
sanitation management. 
Inadequate public safety net 
mechanism 

a 

* Empower local communities 
* 
Initiate preparation of District Action 

Plans for Poverty Reduction with 
development iniatives to improve socio- 
stakeholder patticipation 
economic services opporettnities 
* Create safety nets for the most vulnerable, * Conduct zonal workshops for Development of
Districts Action Plans for Poverty Eradication
AIDS victims, orpbsas, widows. 
using pardcipatory methodologies
* Increase percentage of development projects
to combat AIDS

Improve food security 

.

Lack of coherent policy 
frame work relatng to food 
security 

* Legislate national ban on local tayation of 
food shipments across district boundaries 
a Develop a transparent nadonal policy on 
food aid 

* Eliminate Regions prerogative to impose 
export/import bans on food trade 

_ _ _ _ 
_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ __I_ 

_ __I_ 

m arketstrade 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_

Annex B9
page 4 of 7

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

.Bank 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Adjustment/Benchmark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs' 

Increase Private 
Investment and Private 
Sector Participants 

Improve business 
environment and 
enhance contestability 
of markets 

* Cwnbersome processes and 
inadequate regulatory frame 
work for pfivate sector 
paridcipadon 
* Weak institutions that fail to 
support the private sector's 
needs 
.
Low investment rates 
* Lack of capacity in 
Tanzanian fums 
* Ambivalent attitudes 
towards PSD 

* Approve proposed revision of company 
ordinance and submit to parliament 
a Revitalize Tanzania Investment Center 
(TIC) 
* Support development of a Credit 
Information Bureau (CIB) 
* Promote operation of the Comumercial 
Court 
Issue regulations to make the new Land 
Act effective; 
* Arcane labor laws amended 
* Fomulate Transportation Masterplan 

* 

Complete privatization 
of parastatals. 
Encourage privte 
sector participation in 
infnmtricture 

* Slow pace of privatization in 
the past. 
* Considerable fiscal drain 
fiom ineffective parastatals 
* Inefficient state owned 

utilities and infrastructure 
* High costs and inadequate 
service constrain growth 

* Privatize 
* 80No of parastatals (by total employment 
and tunover) 
* -20 strategic / large enterprises 
* 
IS0 smiall medium 

* Adopt comprehensive policy on PE 
retrenchment compensadon 
* Adopt comprehensive policy on PE debt 
treatment and resolve indebtedness of 
panastatals 

c 

* Reduced delays in investment sanctioning and 
simplified procedures for private sector entry 
* company ordinance revised 
foreign participation in the stock market 
allowed 
. Official gazeneC(amendinents of Act 
governing TIC); TIC restructured. 
* CIB established and operational 
* Disseminate the new land law and regulations 
widely 
* 
Implementation plan for the Land Acts. 
* Revised labor laws 
* National policy on transport & Transportation 
Masterplan 
* Nat'l Power sector Strategy approved 

Bring to point of sale/concessioning Tanzania 
Telecom Company Ltd; TRC, TANESCO 
distribution system, DAWASA, Port Services 
* Review and decide on the future role of the 
State Mining Corporation (STAMICO) 

.

Establish an adequate 

and transparent 
National reguatoty 
framework for key 
udlides and 
infrutrtwture 

* Inadequate regulation of key 

a Strengthen the regulatory framework in 

key sectors to increase competition and 
Telecom, Rail, Ports & Shipping, Energy, 
utilities and infrastructue 
(railway, ports, power, 
enhance transparency 
Water 
water, telecommunications) * Strategy for reorganizadon of TANESCO * Regulatory lnstitudon(s) fully staffed 
and Electricity sector by mid-200 1; 
* Passed laws governing the regulatory 
* Inadequate system of 
commercial laws; deficient 
framework for above sectors 

. Creation of Regulatory Institution(s) covering 

legal system for 
demonopolized industries 

* Formation of credit reference company 
* Establish Roads Agency TANROADS 

.___ ___ ____ ___ ___ 
____ ___ ____ ___ ___ ____ ___ _ _ 

* UNDP/US/UiU/ 
* Denmark: Capacity Building; TA 
* UNDP: Trade/ export development 
* Germany: Power Sector 

* 

* Regular implementation 
review & Supervision 
reports 
Issuance of regulations 
for implementadon of 
Land Law 
* A 'New' TIC & CIB 
operational 
* Private sector surveys

* 
IMF Program 
* UNDP/UK: Capacity Building; TA; 
private sector development 

* 

IMF Program 

* AfDB/EU: Capacity Building; TA 

Private sector surveys 
s Supervision reports 
* 
Issuance of required 
docutmentation, e.g., 
MOU; POS; Options 

s 

study; concessioning 
Plans
Issuance of IM to 
investors and Call for 
Bids. 
*Cabinet approval of 
strategy for 
reorganizilon of 
TANESCO and 
Electricity sector 

Copies of official gazene 

showing approved 
Act(s); laws 
Copy of Commissioners 
appointment 
announcement 

* Copies of Sectoral
Regulations 
* Sale of Credit reference 
company's Shares to 

participating Banks.
* Fualy staffed

TANROADS

Group
Instruments 2

Policy dialogue
. PPSR
. Private Sector Profile
Study
* PSAC I; PSAC 11
* Roads Rehab I/
* Songo Songo
. Regional Trade Project

IFC Activities
* Financing and capacity
building for SMEs
. Financing key sectors
of mining and tourism
. Financing of key

privatizations

.

FIAS advisory services

on FDI

. Policy dialogue
a PSAC l; PSAC 11
* PPSR
* FIDP 11
* Dar Water Supply

* Songo Songo

IFC Activities
* Songo Songo
. TTCL privatization
* Financing for private
telecom operators
. Financing for other
utility and transport
privatizations

* Policy dialogue

. PSAC l; PSAC 11
a PPSR
* FILMUP
* Rural & Micro-finance
Services Project

IFC Activities
* Advisory and technical
assistance on regulation

Annex B9
page 5 of 7

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Enihanced performnance 

by tne uinanciai sector 

_ 

e-. 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Political interference in bank 

acuviues, non-commercia- 

lending and bad loans. 
. Weak capacity to enforce 
prudential regulations noid 
supervise finnncial sector 
institutions 
i Weak financial institutions 
* Insufficient development of 
NBFIs 
N Poorly developed capital 
s 
markets 

* 

n 

Improve supervision sod regulation of 
_ 
ssia,csaa src 
* Expanded financial intermediation 
Improve efficiency of financial 
intermediation and stem losses 
i Approve proposal to allow foreign 
pa 
ricipation 
in the stock market with 
appropriate safeguards. 
a Grealer regional integration of capital 
markets 
Build capacity of banks 
s Encourage new NBFIs 

Adj ustmen t/Benc h mark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs 

-.. 

e 

Issued, evised 
p 
t 
r 
d 
revised Banking and 
Financial Institutions Act 
on options for 
FZ, TPe, TIP 
P 

nStudies 

IMF Prograns 
I TTSPI _91r.u-Id .
* Denmark/Sweden/ 
.
Finland: Capacity Building; TA 

*EU/AfDSB/ 

Switzerland: Structural Adjustment 

*Revise 

-nd 

*Revise 

bank licensing requirements, 
...... 
...... 
e 
r 
capacity for both off-site and on-site 
supervision 
the Banking and Financial Institutions 
Act to institute legal franework for regulation 
and supervision of micro-finance institutons 
a Complete revision of prudential bankitng 
regulations 
a 
* Develop and evniuate options for
restcturing 
/divestituare of PBn 
restructuring TPB and privatizing TIB 
m Complete study to strengdten the regulatory 
mechanism for insurance and pension sectors 

Bank Group
Instruments'

Policy Dialogue

FILMUP

* Financial Sector
Assessment
* Rural & Micro-Finance
Services Project
PPSR
* FIDPPS
PSAC I; PSAC 
11

IFC Activities
Privatotion of NMB
A 
* Supprtn for new
NBFIs
a Advisory work on
capital markets
a Term resources to
banks

* Improve health status through greater 
allocation of resources for basic health 
care 
* Broad-based campaign on HIV/AIDS 

Heilth 

Improved Health and 
Population outcomes; 
reduced malnutrition 
and lowered infant, 
child and matemal 
motality rates 
Reduced HIV/AIDS 
infection rates 

.

.

.

.

Inequities in access to health 
services 
1997 infant and child 
mortality rates are 85 and 
136 per Thousand 
respectively 
Severe stunting in 20% of 
children 
In 1997, HIV prevalence in 
15-49 age group was 
estimated at 9.4% 

. Reports from Ministry of 
Health 
* Nationally spear-headed 
campaign on HIV/AIDS- 
National Advisory 
Committee: all regional 
centers; Other National 
Leadership. 
a Visits to 75% of districts 
by 2001 

.
IMF Program 
. AfDB/UNDP/ 
UK/US/Netherlands/Norway: 
HIV/AIDS 
a AfDB/FRG/US/ 
* Norway/Netherlands/Denmark/ 
. Canada/ 
Switzerland/Others: Preventive
Health; nutrition; capacity building;
TA

.
Policy Dialogue
* Decentralization
* PERIMTEF
a PSRP
. HIPC
. Activities for PRSP
* HIV/AIDS Project

Building Capabilities

* 

. Complete national health accounts & develop 
public resource envelope for health within 
MTEF 
* Review/improve efficiency of revenue 
collection for hospitals 
Extend cost-sharing to dispensaries and health 
centers 
* Set targets for intra-sector allocations of 
resources, with priority to basic health 
services and non-salary items 
Increase percentage of children under 2 years
immunized - measles and DPT from 71%
(1996) to 75% (2001)
* Increase % of pregnant women delivering in
health facilities from 50% to 55% by 20003
* 
Implement malaria control plan
* Raise public awareness of HIV/AIDS
epidemic;
* AIDS: reduce HIV/AIDS diseases by 25% by
2002. Ensure that all hospital are equipped to
ensure a safe blood supply for transfusions.

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Adjustment/Benchmark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs' 

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Clean Water 

Improve quality and 
availability of drinking 
water and sanitation 
services 

* Access to safe water is 
around 50%/. and water bome 
diseases are common 

* 

Improved management of water 
distribution system and improved access 
to clean water 
* Strengthen support to urban/mral 
decentralization, private sector 
participation, sound pricing, and 
development of local appraisal, financing, 
implementation and operation capacities. 

* Ensure adequate resources to sector 
* Adopt action plan for education 
management and monitoring system 
Implementation of BEMP and SEMP 

* 

Primary & 
Secondary Education 

Improve access to 
quality and cost- 
effective basic 
education 
Improve secondary 
education, including 
broadened public- 
private partnership 

* Primary school examination 
rates is 26% for boys and 
14%for girls 
* Entry rates in secondary 
schools are about 6% 
* 1997 Illiteracy Rate was 
28.4% 
* 1997 School enrollment, 
primary (% gross): 66% 

Implementatlon of 
Deecentrlization 
Program 

Improved quality of 
ratd arcc:s to pub!: 
services at local levels 

* Major responsibilities and 
accountabilities are being 
devolved to local 
govemments, but their 

financial, governance, 
M-Ifi.1 .. A 
administrative capacities 
to 
deliver infrastructe anBuild 
services are weak 

I 

.

* Local Govemment Refonm Program 
(LGRP) to be implemented in three main 
phases thsrough December 2003 

I~~~~~~ 

.

.

.

In urban areas support to: decentralization for 
provision of WSS service; creation of 
finamcially autonomous Water Boards & their 
consolidation; sub-contracting of operations 
to professional (preferably private) operators; 
promoting sound pricing policy; developing 
local capacities. 
* DAWASA management transferred to private 
sector 
Provision of safe and clean water from 48.5%
population coverage in 2000 to 55% by the
year 2003 in rural areas; and from 68%
coverage in 2000 to 75% by the year 2003 in
urban areas
In nrral areas, develop demand driven
community identification, preparation and
implementation of WSS projects, through
local govemments & private sector.
Community management.
Implement action plan for decentralization of 
education financing and management in 35 
phase I local authorities. 
* Complete primary school mapping in 50 
percent of the districts 
. Complete Secondary Education Master Plan 
(SEMP) and adopt a framework for cost 
sharing among govermment, private sector, 
and local communities 
Increase enrollment rate by 2.5% each year by 
2003/04 
* Improve transition rate to secondary schools 
from 15% to 20% by 2003. 

a 

.

Empowerment & Accountability

n Adopt plan for strengthening capacity in the 
local Govt authorities (LGAs) under the three 
phases 
n Clarifying the framework for delivery of 

. EU/FRG/lreland/Sweden/ 
Denmark/UNICEF: regional water/ 
sanitation projects; capacity building. 

* 

* In urban areas, MOW 
annual reports; 
In Dar es Salaam, bi 
annual reports by 
independent regulator; 
In rural areas, MOW 
annual reports. 
Signed DAWASA
concession agreement

* 

.

* IMF Program 
e UNICEF/EU/ UK/Ireland: Sector 
refom 
* FRG/UK/JUS/ Ireland/Nether- 
lands/Belgiuan/ Norway/Swedern/ 
. Finland/Denmark/
* UNICEF: Support to basic education;
technical and vocational training;
capacity building

* Action plan for 
management and 
monitoring system 
* Mapping Report to 
provide infotmation 
covering: availability and 
condition of schools, 
quality and distribution 
of teachers, quality of 
school management,
enrolbment rate, drop out
rate and key problems in
delivery of education
* Undertake annual joint
government/donor
review to monitor
progress in sector
development, including
basic education
* SEMP Implementation
* LO financial T UK/Finland/ Denmark/ Netherlands: 
performance; anainment 
Local Govt. refom; capacity 
building in inter alia financial 
of national affordable 
minimum standards 
management 

*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Supenision

services on behalf of the Govenmnent 
through * Workshops with district 
reform of the grant system and parallel sector 
authorities and civil 
society to review 
reforms. 
capacity for effective resouce 
progress 
* Supervision reports 
management. 

og ress view__ 

Build 

r 

p 

j 

_ _ __ _ __ 

_ _ __HIP___ 

Annex B9
page 6 of 7

Bank Group
Instruments 2

.
Policy Dialogue
* PER/MTEF
* Dar WSS
* Rural WSS L
* HIPC
* Activities For PRSP
PERC

* Policy Dialogue
* PER/MTEF
. HIPC
* Educ. Ration.
.
Primary Educ APL

.
Policy Dialogue
* Fiscal Decentralization
Study
* PER/MTEF

. TASAF
* PSRP
lIPC
* 
Local Govt Capacity
Bldg

_ _ __ _ __ _

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Adjustment/Benchmark 

Measurement Tools 

Partner Programs' 

Annex B9
page 7 of 7

Bank Group
Instruments

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Improving 
Governance 

Improve accountability 
and teduce corruption 

.Transparency 
intemational 
Tanzania ranks 82 in a of 89 
(89 being most corrupt) 
* Lack of mechanism to 
enforce accountability. 
Lack of civic awareness 

.Official 
adoptioni publication mild 
dissemination of National Action Plan for 
use controt ot corrupnon 
I Implementation of Legal Sector Reform 
Program 

.Dissemmiate 
to all districts the National Anti- 
Corauption Strategy and Action Plan 
a Adopt sector specific ami-corrpiio- pias- ILw 
tax administration, nationai tender system, 
judiciary and public works 
. Cany out diagnostic surveys on Judiciary, 
Ministry of Works, Education, Health, 
RALG, and Home Affairs, A.G.'s, office, 
TRA, and CAG and develop and approve 
operational strategies for these areas 
. Amended Public Leadership and Code of 
Ethics Act 
. Approve/Pass new Procurement Law and 
Regulations 
. Publicize all contracts of significant
implications
. Make public tender results.
e Strengthen the Office of the Controller and
Auditor General
. Full implementation of Integrated Finauicial 
Management System (IFMS) 
* Roll out IFMS to all Ministries, Regions and 
Districts and to at least 50% of disticts by 
2003 
. Performance budget developed and 
introduction of output accountability in 
service delivery for the Ministries of 
Agriculture, Education, Health, Water and the
Civil Service department by FY02-04
. At least 10% reduction in current public 
serice employment nwmbers by 2004. 
Introduce performance management in 
Ministries, Departments and Ageiscies 
(MDA):75 percent of MDAs' to have 
developed strategic plans by 2002. 50% of 
MDAs' to show results by end-2004 
* Establish systems to improve performance, 
personnel management and compensation. 
. Launch at least 37 Executive Agencies by 
2003/04 

.

.

.Workshops with district 
authorities and civil 
-- ci-y 
. Dissemination of Annual 
Report of Pemaneit 
Commission of Enquiry 
Sector-specific anti- 
cortuption plans 
. Sector-specific surveys 
completed
Public Leadership and
Code of Ethics Act
. Regular issue of quality
CAG Reports

.

.

. Record of all expenditure 
comnitments and arrears 
in the IFMS 
Public Finance 
Management Bill and 
Public Audit Bill 
approved 
Survey Results

.

.

.

Public service payroll 
and personnel data 
. Quarterly and annual 
M&E reports 
Predictable resource 
flows to service delivery 
in priority sectors 
(PER/MTEF) 
* 100J of Ministries 
utilizing improved IFS
and Performance
Budgeting
Implementation of public
service management &
employment policy;
public service pay
policy; code of ethics
and conduct
a Public Service
Commission operational 

* 

.EU-/UJi(/Netherlands/Dernmark/ 
Sweden/Finland: anti-corruption 
^ 
strengthening; 
L TNDP/EUW Sweden/Nether-lands: 
Strengthening human rights; refugees 
assistance 
. Denmark/ Sweden/Finland: Support 
to democratic processes; elections;

non 

|.Policy 
Dialogue
| 
Anti-Corruption Report
-
SiTEF
. FILMUP
. Accountability/
Govemance
TAP
Activities for PRSP

.
IMF Program 
a AfDB/EU: structwral adjustment 
facility 
EU/Derunark/ US/Sweden/Finland: 
public financial management refonn 

.

.

Donor Programs noted above 

.
Policy Dialogue
.
PER/MTEF
.
FILMUP
. Accountability/
Governance
* TAP
. Activities for PRSP

.
Policy dialoguc
* MTEF
* Local Govt. Capacity
Bldg.;
.
PSAC I
.
PPRP
. Accountability/
Govemance
PSRP

__ 

_

* Weak local Govemrment 
capacity for delivery of 
public services 

Improve budget 
management to fumly 
root prudent fiscal 
operations, sectoral 
prionii2zation and 
improve public service 
delivery, 

.

a Enhanced Financial Accountability & 
Public Financial Management 
Enforce hard budget constraint on 
parastatals 
Integrate Performance Budgeting and 
Medium Term Expenditure Framework 

.

Establish efficient and 
motivated civil service 
amd improve quality 
and effcctiveness of 
delivery of public 
seriices 

* Consensus for institutional 
reforming and next role of 
the state is still week 
* Civil servants are still poorly 
paid and unmotivated. 

.

Implenmentation of an effective Public 
Service Reform Program 
Reform civil service pay stnictsre 
Introduce output accountability in service 
delivery for the 5 priority sectors 
. Operational plans for perfommance 
management implemented in key 
ministries 

Imnproved 
Governance 

Tanzania CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex BIO

Country 

Major issueb 

Country priority' 

Bank priority' 

Reconciliation

Network area 

performancea 

of country and
Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."

Poor 

Good 
Fair 

Fair 

Poor 

Fair 
Good 

Poor 

Fair 
Fair 

Good 
Fair 
Fair 
Poor 

Increasing Poverty 
Success in Stabilization 
Governance, Decentralization 

Tradition 

High 
High 
High 

High
High
High

Moderate 

Moderate

Low and declining enrollment 
Malaria, AIDS 
Safety nets 

Moderate 
Moderate 

Moderate 

High
High 

Moderate

Poor Performance 
Natural resource degradation 
Slow 

High 
Moderate 
Moderate 

Extensive financial reform 
Low Competitiveness 
Low electrification, mining improved 
Poor quality and maintenance 

High 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 

High
High 
Moderate

Moderate
High
Moderate
High 

Dialogue

Dialogue

Dialogue

b. indicate principai couniry-specific probleriis (e.g., for pove;ty reduction,,"rural pove..y;" foreduca:ion, "fmalc 

sccondry complion;" 

forenvironnnen:, "u.b&a airpo!!u: on",.

c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Lake Victoria

/ 

Jkobo 
gi 

a 

, 

Musom

RWANDA 

K 

M AN2WMARA 

KENYA

BURUNDI 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Arusha 

oho

Kake 

~~~AFRICA

| 

v 

3 

\, 

1 

4 

0M\ 

g 

t 

~~~~~~~~ARUSHA \/ 

4 (; V 0) 4 

<9 

< 

Tang 

-t 0%iS 

t%~~~~~~~~R,ukwe7 

) 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

i eO 

'ar 

< 

(tRVWYA 

SINGIDAINDIN

RIhE

OAanyiM 

AA4EYEA 4 

-

<1 

'(cid:5) 

S 

ff 

/ 

,/XX 

}/ 

~~~~~~~OCEAN

on iis mP o' .notn 
The Worhj~' fiokGrop 

=''\ 

:btus of ony hrrior,I_ 

'oudre =ef uh 

r 

296/ 

TANZANIA 

8f 

MAIN ROADS 
RAILPOADS 

RIVERS 

(3REGION CAPITALS 
iINATiONAL CAPITAL 

-REGION BOUNDARIESr 

-

INTERNATIONAL 
BOUNDAPIESRUMAj 

i~~~~~~~~~~0 

o 

o 

200 

_- 

30- 

WRS.r 

/ 

3w 

e 

OBIQUE 

ROGORO a

N~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Dre

Li 

sM 

ao10

LiIlD 

, 

r 

,

sS 

s

i 

_

>


