d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank Group

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 21187-JM

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

JAMAICA

November 2, 2000

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit: Jamaican Dollar (J$)
US$ 1.0 = J$44.00 (as of October 30, 2000)

FISCAL YEAR

April I to March 31

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Kilogram, Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
Analytical and Advisory Activities 
BOJ 
Bank of Jamaica 
BRDP Bank Restructuring and Debt Management 
Program 
CAN 
Country Assistance Note 
CAS 
Country Assistance Strategy 
CDB 
Caribbean Development Bank 
CFAA Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment 
CIDA Canadian International Development 
Agency 
CPAR Country Procurement Assessment Review 
CPI 
Consumer Price Index 
CPPR Country Portfolio Performance Review 
DFID Department for International Development 
(UK) 
DO 
Development Objective 
EIB 
European Investment Bank 
ESW 
Economic and Sector Work 
EU 
European Union 
FINSAC Financial Sector Adjustment Company 
FTZ 
Free Trade Zone 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environmental Facility 
GTZ 
German Agency for Technical Cooperation 
HRU 
Health Reform Unit 
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
IDB 
Inter-American Development Bank 
IDF 
Institutional Development Fund 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFI 
International Financial Institution 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IP 
Implementation Progress 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization
JANEAP Jamaica National Environmental Action
Plan

JBIC 
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
JICA 
Japan International Cooperation Agency
JSLC 
Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions
JSIF 
Jamaica Social Investment Fund
KFED Kuwait Fund for Economic Development
LAC 
Latin America and the Caribbean
LIL 
Learning and Innovation Loan
MEFP Memorandum of Economic and Financial
Policies
MIF 
Multilateral Investment Fund
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MOH Ministry of Health
MOP Memorandum of the President
MTS Medium Term Strategy
NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement
NCB 
National Commercial Bank
NET 
Government of the Netherlands
NWC National Water Commission
OED 
Operations Evaluation Department
PAHO Pan-American Health Organization
PPG 
Public and Publicly-Guaranteed
REER Real Effective Exchange Rate
ROSE Reform of Secondary Education
SIDA 
Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency
SIL 
Sector Investment Loan
SMP 
Staff-Monitored Program
STATIN Statistical Institute of Jamaica
UBJ 
Union Bank of Jamaica
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
USAID United States Agency for International
Development
USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture

Vice President David de Ferranti
Director 
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Lead Economist Ali Khadr
Task Team 
Sanjay Kathuria (Task Team Leader), Philippe Auffret (Task Team Leader during tde
initial preparation stage), Homa Z. Fotouhi, Errol Graham, Raj Nallari Claudio Visconti
The team acknowledges the contribution of several colleagues in the LAC region, as well as Kalim M. Shah
(IFC) and Pierre Nadji (MIGA).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAMAICA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................... 

I. 

POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONTEXT 

.

.2

A. 
B. 
C. 

Political and Governance Context 
Economic Context ......................
Poverty and Social Issues ....................

.2

II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS 
...
A. The 1996/97 Financial Sector Intervention and its Aftermath ............................................. 
.7
B. Recent Developments: Enhanced Policy Commitment 
..............................................
C. 
Economic Outlook ............................................... 
D. Risks ............................................... 

III. FRAMEWORK FOR POVERTY REDUCTION AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
A. Restoring Economic Growth ........................................................... 
B. 
Protecting the Poor and Ensuring Inclusion .14
C. 
Improving Governance, Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Sector .16
D. Ensuring Sustainable Development .17

IV. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR FYO1-02 
A. Bank Assistance in a Historical Context 
..
B. Bank Assistance in the Context of Overall Support for Jamaica's Development Agenda .
C. 
Proposed World Bank Assistance Program for FY01-02 
.
.22
D. Country Program Monitoring ......................................................... 
E. Bank Exposure, Financial Management and Procurement, and Managing Risks .27

...

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS 

..

i-iv

2
4

7

9
10
11

... i2

12

18
19
20

26

30

BOXES
Box 1 
Box 2 
Box 3 
Box 4 
Box 5 

Measuring, Analyzing, and Explaining Poverty in Jamaica 
.5
Why do High Investment Rates not Lead to Growth? The Investment Puzzle 
OED's Country Assistance Note .19
CAS Consultations- an Evolving Process .20
Pro-active Efforts Turn Around the Portfolio of IBRD Projects .22

.8

TEXT TABLES
Table 1 
Selected Economic Indicators 
Table 2 
Basic Gender Indicators 
.6
Table 3 
Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators under the Authorities' Program .11
Table 4 
Jamaica's Development Partners and their Major Areas of Activity ......................................... 21
Table 5 
Bank Assistance Scenarios, FY0 1-02 .25
Table 6 
Proposed CAS Benchmarks, 1999-2002 .26
Table 7 
External Public and Publicly-Guaranteed Debt and Bank Exposure Indicators .28

.4

CHARTS
Chart 1 
Chart 2 

Historical Economic Indicators 
.3
Four Elements of a Sustainable Poverty Reduction Strategy .13

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

ANNEXES
Annex A 
Annex B I 
Annex B2 
Annex B3 
Annex B4 
Annex B5 
Annex B6 
Annex B7 
Annex B8 
Annex B9 
Annex C 

Annex D 
Annex E 

Jamaica at a Glance
Country Program Matrix
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators - Base Case Scenario
Key Exposure Indicators - Base Case Scenario
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators under an Alternative Medium-Term
Macroeconomic Scenario
Sustainable Public Debt Dynamics
CAS Consultations

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i) 
Developments since the last CAS. The period since the last CAS for Jamaica was discussed at the
Board in March 1993 has been very challenging. Since then; the Jamaican economy has experienced low or
negative growth, particularly following a financial sector crisis that developed around 1996, when several
domestic financial institutions and insurance companies ran into severe liquidity and solvency problems.
The Government undertook wide-ranging intervention, which succeeded in averting a run on and collapse of
the financial system but led to rapid accumulation of high-cost domestic debt. By end-March 2000, gross
public sector liabilities related to the interventions (including those held by public sector entities) amounted
to about 37 percent of GDP. Total public sector debt (excluding intra-public sector debt) stood at
131 percent of GDP. The intervention has imposed severe costs on the economy, such as high interest rates,
crowding out of investment, reduction in competitiveness, and a vitiation of financial sector intermediation,
which in turn have resulted in a lack of growth over the last four years. In terms of Bank assistance to
Jamaica, no new lending proposals were presented to the Board after September 1996, owing mainly to
implementation difficulties in several on-going projects as well as the absence of a shared vision on a
financial sector resolution strategy. As discussed below, these issues have now been resolved.
Encouraging Recent Initiatives. To address these problems, the Government undertook strong
ii) 
corrective steps, foremost being fiscal tightening and initiating the implementation of a strategy to address
remaining financial sector problems and tackle the mounting public debt burden. It also requested a Staff-
Monitored Program (SMP) with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) covering the two Jamaican fiscal
years April 2000 - March 2002, which was finalized in July 2000. The economic situation, while still
demanding close monitoring, has improved in comparison with 2-3 years ago. Moreover, on-track
implementation of the SMP would help to reverse the adverse public debt dynamics and contribute to
restoration of growth.
Considerable Challenges Ahead. Positive recent developments notwithstanding, Jamaica faces
iii) 
considerable challenges ahead. The immediate challenge is to prevent a reversal of the significant declines in
measured poverty witnessed in the 1990s, which occurred despite low or negative growth. While there is
insufficient understanding of the factors explaining the recent declines in poverty, there is little doubt that
these declines are not sustainable unless growth recovers. Thus, the priority task is to lay the foundations for
a restoration of growth. In terms of social dimensions, Jamaica needs to address major concerns relating to
the vulnerability of its youth as well as to crime and violence, which have a negative impact on investment
and tourism, and affect the poor disproportionately.
The Four-Pillar Development Strategy. The Government's development strategy lays out the
iv) 
agenda for tackling both immediate and longer-term challenges. There is broad consensus among the
Government, civil society, and the country's bilateral and multilateral development partners on this
development agenda. Detailed in the Government's Medium-Term Strategy paper, it rests on four pillars: (i)
restoring economic growth; (ii) ensuring that growth is inclusive and that the poor are adequately protected;
(iii) improving governance, efficiency and effectiveness in the public sector; and (iv) ensuring sustainable
development.
The Bank's CAS. Based on the Government's development agenda, and given the context of the
v) 
fiscal and financial sector challenges, an improved macroeconomic dialogue, the promising initiatives over
the last few months, and the improvement in the quality of the Bank's portfolio, the Bank plans to initiate a
fresh assistance program. The proposed program has been drawn up in close collaboration with the
Government, and with the benefit of consultations with civil society and major development partners.
Covering the Bank's fiscal years 2001-2002, its immediate aim is to help prevent a reversal of the recent
(unexplained) gains in poverty reduction and create the foundations for sustained growth. The CAS lays out
a highly focused program, based on three principles: (i) a focus on the Bank's core mandate of poverty
reduction; (ii) a focus on areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage; and (iii) a focus on
complementarity with other development partners, relying largely on their intervention in many critical areas
such as agriculture and rural development, as well as law and order and the justice system, and coordinating
closely to ensure efficient division of labor in common areas of intervention such as the financial sector.

ii
vi) 
The Bank's Base-Case Assistance Program. Assuming that the macroeconomic and financial
sector restructuring program remains on track, and that Bank portfolio implementation remains satisfactory,
the Bank plans an FY01-02 assistance program to Jamaica that includes US$220 million in new lending,
consisting of:

* US$150 million in fast-disbursing support for a bank restructuring and debt management program
(BRDP), comprising two US$75 million operations (the first of which is presented alongside this CAS, with
the second expected in FY02), to support financial sector restructuring and help reduce the public debt
burden, thereby paving the way for restoration of growth and employment opportunities for the poor. A
similar, US$150 million program has been recently approved by the Inter-American Development Bank, as
well as US$25 million by the Caribbean Development Bank.

* US$70 million in support for a social sector program focused on strengthening social safety net
mechanisms (US$35 million) and secondary education (US$35 million), to be delivered in the form of two
investment operations (one each in FY01 and FY02). Strengthening safety net mechanisms will help provide
better and more cost-effective social assistance for the poor, even as improving access to, and the quality of,
secondary education will address the key problem of youth at risk.

* Analytical and advisory activities (AAA), focusing on two broad areas. The first, work on which would
be initiated in the second half of FY01, concerns economic growth, with special attention to the analysis of
the main sources of growth, including the (in)efficiency of investment and estimation of the informal and/or
underground economy, productivity and competitiveness issues, and structural constraints to growth (in
particular, labor market and wage-setting issues). The second area, on which work would be initiated in
FY02, concerns poverty and related social ills, with special attention to an understanding of recent poverty
trends and linkages with growth and, more broadly, to the causes and consequences of poverty and social
exclusion. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a Country Procurement Assessment
Review (CPAR) have recently been completed in draft form and will shortly be discussed with the
authorities in order to inform on-going Bank project support for public sector reform.

vii) 
Apart from the above, the Bank will continue with its regional initiatives, from which Jamaica would
also benefit. These include a prospective US$85-100 million loan/credit package for HIV/AIDS programs in
the Caribbean region; the biennial CGCED conference, which is organized by the Bank in collaboration with
Governments and development partners involved in the Caribbean; and the initiation of project preparation,
funded by the Global Environmental Facility, on a possible environmental protection project. In addition,
within the Bank Group, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA), though faced with only modest prospects of activity in Jamaica in the near term,
stand ready to assess concrete opportunities as they arise.
viii) 
The Low-Case Assistance Program. If the macroeconomic framework (including policy effort) is
judged by the Bank-in close consultation with IMF staff-to be unsatisfactory, or if there is insufficient
progress in the financial sector restructuring program, a low-case lending program would be triggered.
Under this scenario, the second phase of the BRDP would not be processed, and the education reform project
would be delayed, so that new commitments in FYO1-02 would be capped at US$110 million. At the same
time, Bank efforts would be shifted from-lending preparation to an acceleration of AAA, focusing on poverty
monitoring and sources of growth.
ix) 
Managing Risks. Jamaica is a politically open and stable democracy. The incumbent Government
was elected by a large majority in 1989, 1993, and 1997, and has broad political support across the country
and at the local level to undertake far-reaching economic reforms. Unfortunately, the last five years have
been among the most challenging in independent Jamaica, and the risk of adverse developments under which
the macroeconomic context for the proposed Bank assistance program comes under threat (with deteriorating
debt-to-GDP ratios and negative growth) is significant. Some of the key risks and the strategies for
addressing them are highlighted below:

* External Risk Factors include possible adverse commodity price movements, such as decline in the
price of alumina (a major Jamaican export, along with bauxite) and/or further oil price increases, which
would increase the current account deficit. Although these could likely be weathered, a compounding of

iii
shocks cannot be ruled out (and their impact could be aggravated by the net erosion in competitiveness over
the past few years)-for example, an increase in the current account deficit combined with a decline in
foreign direct investment, a significant source of financing. Steps are being taken to increase Jamaica's
resilience to such shocks, for example by ensuring further reserve build-up under the SMP. If, in spite of
this, the macroeconomic situation were to deteriorate significantly, the Bank would need to work with the
authorities and the IMF to strengthen the macroeconomic framework, while ensuring that measures were
being taken to protect the poor. In such a context, the authorities would likely have little option but to seek
enhanced support from the International Financial Institutions (IFIs).

* Risks of Weak Domestic Response. Despite the Government's policies to improve private incentives for
investment, recovery in the domestic economy could be held back by a slower-than-expected decline in
domestic interest rates, a weak private sector supply response, and austerity-driven labor action or social
unrest. Such risks, and their potentially adverse consequences for the poor, would be mitigated by the Bank-
assisted strengthening of the safety net program, and through efforts to gain a better understanding of the
determinants of and structural constraints to growth, as well as of the links between growth and poverty, and
to work the public policy implications into the dialogue with Government. Were unfavorable developments
to materialize, the Bank would work closely with the Government as well as the IMF and other development
partners to track and alleviate repercussions on the poor and vulnerable and to appropriately strengthen the
policy stance.

* Policy Risk Factors include, most importantly, the risk of delays or setbacks in the implementation of
the authorities' program arising, for example, as a result of domestic consensus-building difficulties or
shortcomings in implementation capacity. At least three ways of mitigating such risks would be pursued.
First, while it is difficult to predict policy reversal, the Bank will continue to engage in close dialogue with
both the Government and civil society to reduce the chances of this happening, and encourage public
announcements and debate on government reform intentions. Second, given the lessons of the past, the
planned configuration of Bank lending-based on up-front and irreversible reform measures that are
domestically "owned"-would help mitigate risks. In particular, this approach would be followed in the
proposed Bank support for the bank restructuring and debt management program, which would take the form
of two discrete, phased operations. Third, in the unlikely event that reversal should occur, the Bank would
continue to engage in dialogue and to encourage debate, while deferring or discontinuing new lending as
appropriate.
x) 
Risk mitigation efforts notwithstanding, it is clear that the success of Jamaica's program cannot be
guaranteed. The Bank needs to weigh the reputational risk to which it will be subject if its technical and
financial support for Jamaica is associated with disappointing results against the potential costs to the country
of inadequate support (and the different type of reputational risk associated therewith). This CAS, while
cognizant of both, makes the case for resuming strong support. It recognizes that Jamaica has had a long
period of financial sector difficulties and economic recession. Serious social problems have taken root. To
combat these, the Government has shown resolve in maintaining a very tight and potentially unpopular fiscal
stance, and in defining a program for the resolution of financial sector problems. Under these circumstances,
this CAS seeks to respond to the encouraging reform steps already taken. It also maintains a shorter-than-
usual two-year horizon, intended to enable a broadening and deepening of in-country consultations over the
next 18 months, as well as to continue studying the priority issues identified and analyzing the evolving
situation in order to best respond to Jamaica's needs. Delay may be costly for Jamaica, and there is the real
risk that the socio-economic situation could get worse unless the Bank and other IFIs are able to extend
timely assistance to the country. The Bank will work closely with other bilateral and multilateral agencies in
ensuring that complementarity in activities is maintained and strengthened, and that the development impact
of combined efforts is maximized.
xi) 
Issues Suggested for Board Discussion. The following issues are suggested for discussion by the
Executive Directors.

* Opportunities and Risks. Does the CAS strike an adequate balance between the costs of not supporting
Jamaica and the significant risks involved?

iv
* Lending Focus. Is the balance in lending between the financial sector (US$150 million) and the social
sectors (US$70 million) appropriate?

* Low-Case Lending Scenario. Are the proposed low-case scenario (volume, composition) and associated
triggers appropriate? In particular, does the low-case scenario "penalize" the social sectors for policy-related
shortfalls outside these sectors?

* Analytical and Advisory Activities. Are the proposed non-lending services focusing on the right areas
(e.g., poverty, growth and competitiveness)?

* Perfornance Indicators. Are the country development indicators appropriate, given the two-year focus
of this CAS?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR JAMAICA

1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) has been prepared on the basis of encouraging recent
initiatives by the Jamaican authorities, including the resumption of an intensive policy dialogue with the
Bank and other multilateral agencies. The Government has strengthened its macroeconomic and structural
policy stance, notably through fiscal tightening and by devising a strategy to address remaining financial
sector problems and tackle the mounting public debt burden. It also requested a Staff-Monitored Program
(SMP) with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) covering the two Jamaican fiscal years April 2000 -
March 2002, which was finalized in July 2000. Together with major progress in Bank portfolio
implementation, these developments have paved the way for renewed lending by the Bank. While the
authorities' program faces significant risks, the potential costs to Jamaica of withholding Bank support at this
juncture are very high. Within the Bank Group, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), though faced with only modest prospects of activity in
Jamaica in the near term, stand ready to assess concrete opportunities as they arise.
2. 
The period since the last CAS for Janaica was discussed at the Board on March 25, 1993 (document
R1993-41) has been very challenging. The Jamaican economy experienced low or negative growth for much
of the period, particularly following a financial sector crisis that developed around 1996, when several
domestic financial institutions and insurance companies ran into severe liquidity and solvency problems.
The Government undertook wide-ranging intervention, which succeeded in averting a run on and collapse of
the financial system but led to rapid accumulation of high-cost domestic debt. By end-March 2000, gross
public sector liabilities related to the interventions amounted to about 37 percent of GDP. In terms of Bank
assistance to Jamaica, no new lending proposals were presented to the Board after September 1996, owing
mainly to implementation difficulties in several on-going projects as well as the absence of a shared vision
on a fmancial sector resolution strategy. As discussed below, these issues have now been resolved. In all,
Bank commitments since early 1993 have amounted to US$253 million under 8 operations. MIGA has
issued 14 contracts of guarantee for a total of US$151 million since 1992, while IFC has undertaken three
projects for a total of US$80 million (including a "B" loan).
3. 
This CAS, which covers Bank fiscal years 2001-2002, proposes a Bank assistance program whose
immediate aim is to help prevent a reversal of the recent gains in poverty reduction (which, as explained in
Box 1 below, remain insufficiently understood) and create the foundations for sustained growth. Proposed
Bank assistance has three main components. The first is US$150 million in fast-disbursing lending for a
bank restructuring and debt management program (the first phase of which is presented along with this
CAS), to support financial sector restructuring and help reduce the public debt burden, thereby paving the
way for restoration of growth and employment opportunities for the poor. A similar US$150 million
program has recently been approved by the Inter-American Development Bank, as well as US$25 million by
the Caribbean Development Bank. The second component is US$70 million in support of a social sector
program focused on strengthening social safety net mechanisms and secondary education, to be delivered in
the form of two investment operations (one each in FY01 and FY02). Strengthening safety net mechanisms
will help provide better and more cost-effective social assistance for the extreme poor, even as improving
access to, and the quality of, secondary education will help to tackle the key problem of youth at risk. The
third component is analytical and advisory activities (AAA), focusing on addressing gaps in understanding
relating to poverty, growth and competitiveness. The shorter-than-usual two-year coverage of this CAS is
intended to enable a broadening and deepening of in-country consultations-satisfactorily initiated under this
CAS-over the next 18 months, as well as further study and analysis of the evolving situation and Jamaica's
needs, in order to maximize effectiveness of future Bank assistance.

I. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONTEXT

2

A. Political and Governance Context

4. 
Jamaica has been a stable democracy since independence in 1962. Two-party competition has
become institutionalized, with the People's National Party (PNP) and the opposition Jamaica Labor Party
(JLP) alternating in power roughly once every ten years over the past three decades. The PNP has been in
government since the 1989 elections, from 1992 under the leadership of Prime Minister P. J. Patterson.
Parliamentary elections-which 
returned the PNP to power-were 
last held in December 1997. Under the
Constitution, elections are called by the Government and must be held within three months of the dissolution
of Parliament, which has a life-span of five years.
5. 
On governance more broadly, Jamaica appears to fare comparatively well overall, although problems
persist in key dimensions. Aspects of (perceived) comparative strength-relative 
to other LAC and
developing countries-include well-established formal 
traditions of democratic participation and
accountability. 
Jamaica also scores comparatively well in cross-country surveys of perceptions of
corruption. Political participation is broadly exercised, as exemplified in high, if declining, voter turnout
(around two-thirds) at elections. Jamaican civil society includes a free and active media, and a rich, often
vocal array of civic, professional and labor groups and other non-governmental organizations. Information
about key policy issues typically circulates freely and is widely debated, as evidenced recently in the public
commentary on the Government's Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) for the SMP.
On public sector management issues, while the need for strengthening remains, there is a foundation of
transparency and accountability in public financial management systems, as well as of meritocracy in public
sector recruitment, and progress has been made in improving procurement systems. Nevertheless, even as
most of these dimensions of governance continue to fare relatively well in comparative terms, many are
under strain. Constraints, actual or perceived, on the exercise of voice and participation through traditional
democratic channels have fostered development of alternative channels (such as the "road block"), often
compounding the challenge of building and maintaining social consensus and cohesion on key political,
economic and social issues.
6. 
Perhaps the paramount governance-related challenge facing Jamaica pertains to the crime and
violence and law and order dimensions. While the overall crime rate has been on the decline for at least a
decade, the incidence of reported violent crime, although declining since 1997, remains among the highest in
the hemisphere. Violent crime, which is concentrated in inner-city areas and among young males as victims
and perpetrators, has its roots both in "push" factors (linked to social exclusion) and in "pull" factors
(originally rooted in party-political affiliations and rivalries, and more recently associated with the
proliferation of illegal, including drug-related, opportunities and status associated therewith). Reducing
violent crime and, more generally, better enforcement of law and order is of the utmost priority for Jamaica
in view of the highly disruptive impact that these phenomena have had on key determinants of economic
performance-including human capital development, investor confidence, tourism development, and the
country's image abroad.

B. Economic Context

7. 
With per capita GDP growth being negative for most of the last 25 years, average incomes in
Jamaica have not improved for the last three decades. This has occurred despite very high investment to
GDP ratios of around 30 percent (implying very inefficient investment), aided by active development partner
engagement. This is in sharp contrast to the faster-growing developing countries, where high investment
ratios have been accompanied by consistent improvements in productivity and growth. Higher GDP growth
in Jamaica is unlikely to occur without substantial improvements in productivity.

8. 
The initial reform period (1980-86): 
Halting reform, accumulation of external debt 
(see Chart 1 and Table 1). Jamaica's economic
reform efforts date back to the election in 1980 
of a Government that supported free markets and 
private-sector-led growth, backed by a record 
level of disbursements from 
international 

financial institutions (IFIs), including three 

World Bank Structural Adjustment Loans during 
1981-85. By 1986, progress had been made in 
correcting an overvalued exchange rate and to

some extent in reducing the size of the public 

sector. However, bountiful availability of
external financing encouraged a delay in many 
areas of reform and created a pile-up of external
debt. Growth was sporadic during this period.

9. 
More broad-based reforms, reflected in 
improved growth (1986-94). Reforms made 
more progress during 1986-94, notably in the 
areas of trade and exchange liberalization (the 
capital account has been open since 1991); 
privatization; 
reduction of public 
sector 
employment; removal of price controls and 
subsidies; reform of the tax system; and 
liberalization of the financial system involving 

the privatization of banks. These reforms were 

reflected in at least some aspects of economic
performance. There was a sharp improvement
in Jamaica's 
fiscal situation 
(the central 
government moved to fiscal surplus in 1990, 
compared with large deficits in the 1980s, and 
the public debt to GDP ratio moved sharply 
downwards), 
its 
external 
position 
(net 
international reserves turned positive after 1993, 

and debt started to come down), and inflation, 

12 

8 

I 

n 

4I 

o l D 1nf 

X 

l*.6

l

1 
I 

/ 

DU 

H*

-

III 

l 

IGDPOeftaxis)_CPI

External CAB and Indebtedness

160 

140 

120 

100 

80 

60 

40 

20 

2 

I 

1o90 

;982 ;196, 

;988 ;990 ;992 1994 1996 1998

F -

PG(leflxis) +Ext.CAB

Central Gov't Overali Balance and Total Debt

7 

2 

-3 

8 

-8 

n 

/ 

t 

3

C

Chart 1. Historcal Economic Indicators

Output and Inflation

so

6

20

0

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12

200

1o0
160

140

120

100

80

r- 

-18 

.

.

.

982 
1M 

.

.

.60

-13u 

1996 1998

1984 1986 

19 990 19921 

OveallBalance(leftaxis) 

which declined from very high levels in the 
early 1990s. Also, seen in the context of
independent Jamaica's history, the 3.4 percent 
average annual growth registered over the period 
1986-94 was very good; however, it trended
down in the 1990s and turned negative in
1996/97.
10. 
Incipient problems looming, especially in the financial sector (1995). These reforms, however, were
incomplete. Emerging problems included structural increases in wages unrelated to productivity, and, more
importantly, financial sector liberalization unaccompanied by a sufficiently robust prudential and supervisory
infrastructure. This liberalization led to a proliferation of inter-linked financial institutions, most of which
had weak management and which, moreover, sought to benefit from regulatory arbitrage. There was a credit
boom over the period 1990-95, even as much of the real sector was reacting passively to, and thus being
adversely affected by, the trade liberalization. Inevitably, asset quality in financial institutions deteriorated.
Starting in 1995, some of these institutions experienced severe liquidity problems, which prompted support
from the Central Bank. Eventually, this mushroomed into a full-blown crisis (see Section II.A).

-4-PublicDebt

4

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators ()

198086 

1986-94 

1995/96 1996/97 

1997/98 

1998/99 

1999/00

Output (real growth, %)
GDP(mp) percapita 

-2.0 

2.5 

-0.3 

-2.0 

-2.7 

-1.4 

-0.9

GDPatmarketprices 

-0.5 

3.4 

0.7 

-1.4 

-2.1 

-0.5 

0.0

Saving-Investment (% of GDP)

Gross Domestic 

investment 

20.7 

27.2 

31.8 

32.3 

32.4 

29.0 

29.6

External saving (=-CAB) 
Gross national saving 
Central Government (% of GDP)

9.9 
10.3 

3.9 
21.0 

2.4 
30.0 

1.5 
30.7 

5.6 
27.7 

3.0 
26.0 

4.5
25.1

Total revenues 

28.1 

31.8 

30.4 

28.3 

27.0 

28.3 

31.2

Tax revenues 
Total expenditures 

26.5 
38.7 

27.7 
30.2 

26.1 
28.8 

24.8 
34.8 

25.2 
35.1 

26.6 
35.6 

28.1
35.5

Current expenditure 

30.5 

24.6 

24.1 

29.5 

30.8 

32.7 

32.6

Overall Balance 

-10.6 

1.6 

1.5 

-6.5 

-8.1 

-7.3 

-4.3

Other

Inflation Rate (average CPI, %) 
Merchandise Exports (real growth, %) 
ExportsofGoodsandServices(nominal,%) 

17.8 
-12.9 
2.1 

26.3 
5.1 
9.9 

21.7 
13.7 
24.8 

21.5 
-6.9 
-2.0 

9.1 
-1.6 
1.0 

8.1 
-4.3 
-1.3 

6.3
-4.2
0.2

REER (%, increase = appreciation) 

4.0 

-1.1 

7.6 

25.9 

7.1 

1.5 

-3.8

External Public Debt (% GDP) 

90.7 

106.7 

68.6 

50.8 

48.5 

46.8 

46.0

Total reserves excl. gold6) 

0.9 

1.3 

2.1 

2.7 

2.1 

2.1 

2.4

Total reserves/M2 (%) 

10.1 

17.3 

37.9 

35.4 

28.1 

32.4 

34.6

Source: BanJk ofJamaica, IFS, IMF StaffReports, and Bank staffestimates
(i) Most indicators shown in Jamaican fiscal year, which runs from April I to March 31.

(iv) In months of imports of goods and services.

11. 

The financial sector crisis and its containment (1996-present). Economic growth was the big
casualty of financial sector distress (see Table 1). GDP registered zero or negative growth for the fourth
successive year in 1999/00. (In 2000/01, GDP growth may be modestly positive.) Also, as a result of
interventions to provide full protection to depositors and life insurance policy holders, public debt
accumulated rapidly, as reflected in the increasing debt-to-GDP ratio (see Chart 1). In the aftermath of crisis
containment, the authorities have progressively tightened fiscal policy. The central government's primary
surplus rose to an impressive 10 percent of GDP in 1999/00, and is slated to rise further in 2000/01. In
parallel, a strategy is in place for the resolution of the fnancial sector troubles (see Section II). Inflation has
also been reduced through tight monetary policy. However, this policy combination has had its costs,
including high interest rates and the consequences thereof, such as reduced incentives for private sector
investment, and declining competitiveness.! More importantly, the large interest payments arising from
growing public debt have crowded out public investment as well as other potentially growth-enhancing
expenditures.

C. Poverty and Social Issues

12. 
Despite Jamaica's poor track record of economic growth, many of the country's social indicators are
good and recent trends indicate declining poverty. Life expectancy at birth, which has been rising gradually,
is 69 and 72 years for males and females, respectively. Access to safe water and sanitary facilities has been
increasing. At the national level, over 80 percent of the population have access to safe water while
99 percent have access to sanitary facilities. The infant mortality rate, at 24.5 per thousand live births in

I While interest rates remain high, they have by and large been on a declining trend since December 1999. The benchmark six-
month Treasury bill interest rate stood at 17.1 percent at end-September 2000. The real effective exchange rate has on balance
appreciated by over 30 percent since 1995/96.

i -

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

~~~~~~~~~~4~4 

1

0 

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~k 

I ~~~~~~~~~~ 

Q.~~~~~~~~~~j A~~~0 

f?).~~~~~~~~~~~~>400 i 

*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4

e 

s

44

.

.

.

.

14~~~~~~~~~4.-

6
1993 (the latest available official data on mortality), is well below the average for middle income countries.
Jamaica has also made considerable strides in addressing gender issues, although unemployment continues to
affect women disproportionately. Females have higher enrollment rates than males in secondary and tertiary
education, gender gaps in wages have decreased significantly, and female labor force participation, at
64 percent in 1997 (see Table 2), is among the highest in the region. On these and many other social
indicators, Jamaica compares favorably with similar-income countries in the Latin America and Caribbean
region. In addition, the Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions (JSLC), which has been monitoring living
standards annually since 1988, points to a generally declining trend in the incidence of poverty (see Box 1).
In 1999, the poverty headcount was an estimated 16.9 percent of the population (some 437,700 people),
down from 28.4 percent in 1990 and 26.1 percent in 1996.
13. 
However, the forces which have worked to lower poverty during a period of sustained recession are
insufficiently understood (see Box 1) and are in need of further, systematic analysis. Although the reduction
in poverty in Jamaica has been associated with low or negative (measured) income growth, this trend runs
counter to the bulk of cross-country evidence, and it can safely be said that unless growth resumes, the gains
are likely to be temporary. Moreover, the incidence of poverty in Jamaica is already lower than in many
comparator countries. For these reasons, the key short-term challenge for Jamaica is to prevent reversal of
the recent declines in the incidence and severity ofpoverty.

as exemplified by the impact of higher school dropout rates and
involvement in violence amnong boys on their educational
attainment and lifetime earning capabilities.
Table 2. Basic Gender Indicators

14. 
There are also broader concerns 
relating 
to 
income and non-income 
dimensions of poverty and inequality. In 
Jamaica, the poor have disproportionately 
low access 
to quality educational
opportunities, and are more exposed to
violence. Perhaps more significantly, 
Education'
their age distribution-almost half of the 
Illiteracy (%) 
poor are under 18 and a further 10 
Children out of School-Primary (% of age group) 
percent are over 65-limits 
coping 
Children out of School-Secondary (% of age group) 
strategies, making the need for effective Health
and well-targeted 
social 
programs all 
the more critical (see Women with HIV/AIDS (as a % of total population 
Section III.B). The concentration of 
with HIV/AIDS)3
poverty among the young also increases 
Life Expectancy (years) 
the severity of social problems related to 
Labor Market Outcomes
youth-at-risk. More broadly, inequalities 
Labor Force Participation(%) 
in living standards and opportunities 
Unemployment Rates (%) 
continue to be a major development 
Earnings Inequality 
challenge. Enrollment in early childhood, 
Hours of household production/market production 
upper secondary, and tertiary education is 
Violence6
strongly correlated with economic status; 
Homicide rate/million 
in addition, the quality of teaching is 
substantially lower in inner city and rural 
areas, where lower-income segments of Women in ariament 
the population tend to be concentrated. Women at a ministerial level ()4 

assistance Maternal Mortality per 100,0002 

Youth Unemployment Rate (%/) 

Decision Making

(%)4 

19.0 
5.0 
32.0 

-

-

69.0 

82.0 
10.0 
100.0 
9.9 

24.6 

10.0
4.0
28.0

115.0

31.0

72.0

42.7

64.0
23.1
90.0
21.5

297(a)

-

116

6.0

e 

n

Also, despite being better off than most

comparator countries, Jamnaica does have 

Janiaca doe have 

compartor 
contries 

some gender concerns-females 
and 
female-headed 
households 
are 
disproportionately exposed to poverty 
and unemployment. Jamaica also has a 
"reverse gender problem" in the making,

victims and perpetrators are men.

(a) This is the rate for both males and females, however most homicide
Sources: ' Genderstats, World Bank web page, 2 lN, Women's World
1995, 3 UNIFEM, 2000,4 LACGENDER database, 5Economic and Social
Survey of Jamaica, 6 Global Report on Crime and Justice, Graeme
Newman, Editor.

7

15. One of the most pressing challenges in the social agenda in Jamaica-and one that has substantial
spillovers onto other social problems-concerns youth-at-risk. At least six interrelated factors underlie the
challenge of youth-at-risk: (i) poverty; (ii) low quality of education and high rates of absence from school;
(iii) lack of employment opportunities; (iv) poor reproductive health and high rates of teenage pregnancy;
(v) unstable home environments, poor parenting, and lack of guidance; and (vi) involvement in or exposure
to illicit and violent activities, including domestic violence. Significant efforts have been made by
Government, NGOs, and development partners to implement a wide range of youth-at-risk programs.
Nevertheless, many risk factors continue to prevail, threatening the potential of young people to grow into
responsible and productive adults. Every year, more than 14,000 babies are born to teenagers, and teenage
fertility rates continue to increase. Many youth, particularly those from poor and low-income households,
are neither in school nor employed. In addition, youth increasingly face special health or developmental
needs; for example, almost a quarter of all reported HIV/AIDS cases are in the 20-29 age group.

II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS

A. The 1996/97 Financial Sector Intervention and its Aftermath

16. 
The Financial Crisis. The incipient financial sector problems outlined in paragraphs 10 and 11
were accompanied by a reversal of fiscal consolidation efforts and an increase in money supply growth,
under pressure from excessive wage settlements and efforts to eliminate central bank losses. 
Inflation
accelerated in the second half of 1995, even as GDP growth turned negative. In response, the Government
made inflation reduction a primary objective of its economic program while holding the nominal exchange
rate stable, which required the implementation of a tight monetary policy. While inflation fell sharply,
interest rates rose substantially, and the real effective exchange rate appreciated. This exacerbated
recessionary tendencies, created more non-performing loans, including those for real estate, and led to
erosion of confidence and some shift to financial institutions which enjoyed greater confidence, particularly
foreign-owned ones. (Nevertheless, the management of these problems was rendered easier by domestic
depositors' not switching to overseas deposits, and the fact that there was no balance of payments crisis.)
17. With a systemic threat looming, the Government decided to intervene in domestic financial
institutions, de facto insuring all depositors for their total exposure in order to stave off a financial collapse
and prevent a run against the domestic currency.2
In January 1997, it created the Financial Sector

Adjustment Company (FINSAC) to restore liquidity to and restructure the distressed financial institutions.3

FINSAC is a government-owned limited liability company which operates as an extra-budgetary institution.

Initially financed by Government, FINSAC subsequently began issuing its own (government-guaranteed)

securities. 
Its modus operandi was to capitalize intervened entities by purchasing shares, making
subordinated loans and purchasing bad loans and related assets (including significant real estate assets) using
FINSAC notes that allowed for interest to be capitalized.
18. 
Evolution of treatment of intervened institutions. The Intervention phase of FINSAC's operations
was largely completed by end-March 1998, with FINSAC acquiring control in five of nine commercial
banks, three building societies, five merchant banks, and five insurance companies. FINSAC has since
advanced significantly in its Rehabilitation and Investment phase, and has merged the operations of all
FlNSAC-controlled banking institutions into two banks-Union Bank of Jamaica (UBJ) and National
Commercial Bank (NCB). Rehabilitation of the insurance sector has also been undertaken, involving the
severing of links between insurance companies and related banks. Currently, all the institutions are being
prepared for divestment of the public sector ownership acquired as a result of intervention.

2 As has been the case in many banldng crises in other countries, the Government did not consider it feasible to impose significant
burden-sharing, particularly on depositors, arguing that protecting depositors was crucial for maintaining social stability.
For more details regarding the financial sector, see Memorandum of the President for the Bank Restructuring and Debt
Management Program (document R2000-198), the first phase of which is being presented to the Board together with the CAS.

3 

19. 
Costs of the Intervention. While FINSAC has played a noteworthy role in keeping the financial
sector afloat, the costs of intervention turned out to be much greater than initially anticipated by the
Government. Total gross cumulative support to intervened financial institutions amounted to 37 percent of
GDP by end-March 2000. High interest rates and a declining GDP have led to severely adverse debt
dynamics, in spite of some decline in external debt. Total public debt (net of intra-public sector debt)
increased from 102 percent of GDP at end-March 1996 to 131 percent at end-March 2000.
20. 
The crisis has had strong repercussions on GDP, which failed to expand for the fourth consecutive
year in 1999/00. Private sector uncertainty as to when the Government would explicitly recognize the costs
of intervention in the financial sector (recently resolved, as detailed below) has, along with high interest
rates, reduced incentives for private investment. In addition, allowing for data inaccuracies, it appears that
the efficiency of private investment has seen a further decline from already low levels, given the negative
GDP growth rates since 1996/97 (see Box 2). Public sector investment has also declined significantly,
crowded out by increasing recurrent expenditures on wages and interest payments on a swelling domestic
debt. Capital expenditure on externally-funded projects declined sharply from 3.7 percent of GDP in
1995/96 to 1.8 percent of GDP in 1999/00, and is budgeted to fall further to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2000/01.

lBox 2: Whydogh Invebshent; Rae Vnot led to Grotii? The Inetet 
Jamaica's gross domesticitr 
asm 
urthe 
Nil 
A 
t 
av 
the last five years. Yet,g 
th b 
rlowieo 
neat
Measurement errors, mg 
if 
d 
to unders atement of G 
GD 
oDrio.
Allocation iufficien 
iail 
because real exchange e 

theg 
d an overtat 
tio 
ives 

othe ng 
fthe 
ivt 
et 

rin 
on bad 

finv 

t 

th, 
aia 

iie 

ppitces 

?uzle
over 30 percent of GDP in

economy, leading

sector crisis, and
that resources do not

Adverse seleftion, dt 

hireal 

int 

ra 

ading tc 

got ofus 

instead fvoring risky
and 

As in the case of the p 
pu2zl,i her isttle 
dsding 
of t 
factors. Yet, rtoing 
tst 
priorit f 
amc 
understand the invetngrthpzlea,oreesowf 

relieaty 
aly 
growhand c 

power of these different
needed to better

t 

.

21. 
Jamaica's competitiveness has deteriorated substantially since the financial crisis began. Between
1995 and 1999, the real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by almost 30 percent, even taking
account of a 5 percent depreciation in 1999. This has arisen from the high interest rates (which create
incentives to acquire and hold Jamaican assets) that have resulted from tight monetary policy and large
government borrowing requirements. Nevertheless, the Government has been reluctant to allow a significant
real depreciation of the exchange rate, on the grounds that this would generate unpredictable wage-price
dynamics and could rekindle inflation. While the authorities maintain that the real effective exchange rate
should not be allowed to appreciate further, they have indicated that efforts to improve competitiveness will
focus on labor market and other structural reforms.
22. 
The intermediary role of the financial sector has also been considerably impaired as a result of the
financial sector crisis-and 
this may help to explain the decline in the efficiency of investment. First, non-
intervened banks, including subsidiaries of foreign banks, find it more attractive to invest in high-yield
government paper than to extend loans in an uncertain macroeconomic environment. Second, the intervened
banks, whose functioning is closely guided by FINSAC and the Bank of Jamaica, lack the capacity, mandate
and liquidity to act as intermediaries and to extend credit to the economy. The Government's strategy to date
has consisted of providing the intervened banks with minimal liquidity injections made through FINSAC to
keep them afloat and pay a small portion of interest on F1NSAC notes, while capitalizing the remaining
interest obligations.
23. 
Trends in the Real Economy. The shrinking of the economy since 1996/97 is reflected in the
performance of the key economic sectors. The manufacturing sector has been in decline since 1995,
reflecting a contraction in most sub-sectors, including the once vibrant apparel industry. The contraction in

9

the apparel sub-sector reflected, inter alia, eroding competitiveness. The mining sector has grown at a
modest rate of 3 percent per year since 1996, largely reflecting capacity constraints. With the tapering off of
the growth in hotel room construction as well as the adverse impact of high interest rates on residential
investment, the construction sector has registered consecutive declines every year since 1996. The generally
weak performance of the agricultural sector since 1996 reflects, among other things, the impact of the failed
privatization of the sugar industry, the loss of competitiveness in other export crops including bananas, as
well as adverse weather conditions. In the services sector, although tourism continued to post modest growth
and telecommunications has been buoyed by significant capital investment from Cable and Wireless, the
contractions in financial services and real estate held back overall performance.

B. Recent Developments: Enhanced Policy Commitment

24. 
The realities of the financial sector distress and its repercussions forced the Government to take
strong steps, foremost being corrective fiscal measures, even as FINSAC continued its efforts to restore the
health of the financial sector. Successive steps ensured that the central government primary surplus as a
percentage of GDP increased from 2 percent in 1997/98 to 6 percent in 1998/99 and 10 percent in 1999/00.
The budget for 2000/01 (April 2000-March 2001) promised even more restraint, bringing the primary
surplus up to an anticipated 12.6 percent of GDP. The Government then requested the IMF to undertake a
two-year Staff Monitored Program (SMP), which was approved in July 2000, taking effect retroactively from
April 1, 2000. Implementation of this program would reverse the adverse public debt dynamics.
25. 
Simultaneously, the Minister of Finance and Planning, in his 2000/01 budget speech, announced a
plan for resolving the issue of outstanding FINSAC liabilities (as committed to subsequently under the
SMP). The details of the resolution plan are now being implemented with assistance from the IDB, the CDB
and the Bank. The proposed program seeks to address not only the key fiscal issue-by using all proceeds of
sales of FINSAC-owned assets as well as of loans from the IFIs to retire debt, canceling most intra-public
sector debt, and explicitly assuming, as of end-March 2001, all remaining FINSAC liabilities as cash-
interest-paying government liabilities-but also the restructuring and divestment of intervened institutions
and a strengthening of the prudential and supervisory environment in order to reduce the risk of recurrence of
financial crisis. Regulation of banking activity to prevent illicit activity is also being strengthened.4 The final
resolution of FINSAC, including the disposal of FINSAC assets and liquidation of FINSAC debt, should
help ease the adverse economic conditions and rebuild confidence.
26. 
The economy also looks in better shape than it did 2-3 years ago (see Annex B6). Inflation is down
to single digits; foreign reserves grew in 1999/00 by about US$100 million to 2.4 months of import cover at
year-end; the current account deficit, despite widening to 4.5 percent of GDP, was largely financed by
foreign direct investment; external debt service was under 20 percent of exports of goods and services; and
short-term foreign liabilities were below 83 percent of reserves at end-1999/00. Nevertheless, important
concerns remain. GDP growth was around zero in 1999/00 (albeit up from negative rates in previous years),
and the much-anticipated turnaround in the real sector has yet to be confirmed. Interest rates, though on a
declining path, continue to be high. The public debt-to-GDP ratio has continued to mount (but ought to be
reversed if the authorities' program keeps on track). Restoring growth is clearly the key economic challenge
for the Government.

4 Regulations against money laundering are discussed in the Memorandum of the President on the BRDP. Briefly, money
laundering is a criminal offense as per the Money Laundering Act of 1996. The central bank also issued guidance notes on money
laundering in July 2000, which include procedures for reporting of suspicious transactions (whose reporting has now become
mandatory). Jamaica is a member of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force, a regional initiative to achieve compliance with the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations, and is not in the FATF list of non-cooperative countries in the international
anti-money laundering campaign. Also, the Government intends shortly to set up a Financial Crimes Division under the Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions to tackle financial crimes, including money laundering.

C. Economic Outlook

10

27. 
The major economic challenges facing the Government in its effort to restart growth are: (a) the
adverse debt dynamics due to a heavy debt burden in the face of high interest rates; (b) a fragile financial
sector with limited intermediation due partly to inadequate liquidity; (c) continuing structural weaknesses in
the public sector as well as in the labor market; and (d) a distortion in the incentives for trade arising from a
currency that has on balance appreciated significantly, following years of tight monetary policy.

28. 
Outlook under authorities'program. To address the above challenges, the Government's program
carries a commitment under the SMP to making even stronger fiscal adjustments in 2000/01 and 2001/02
than in the previous two years, with the aim of reducing the public sector borrowing requirement and
bringing about a sustained reduction in interest rates. Financial sector issues are being squarely addressed,
with commitments made under the SMP and developed further under the program supported by the IDB, the
CDB and the Bank. The tight fiscal stance will complement planned monetary measures, including a
lowering of the cash reserve requirements from 15 percent currently to 12 percent by March 2001 and
9 percent by March 2002, in order to make more credit available for the private sector. Structural reforms,
especially in the public sector, will be accelerated, and efforts to improve the quality of expenditure under the
Public Sector Modernization Program (see Section III.C), supported by the Bank, will be continued. These
combined measures are expected to have a positive impact on the debt dynamics. Growth is expected to
resume, based on improved financial sector intermediation, declining interest rates, and higher private sector
confidence, thereby encouraging higher and more efficient investment by the private sector. Sectorally, this
growth is expected to be driven by output increases in bauxite, transport and communications, electricity and
water services, and financial services.

29. 
The program thus targets steady restoration of growth in GDP, starting with 1.5 percent in 2000/01
(compared with zero growth in 1999/00) and rising to 3.5 percent in 2004/05, as well as a steady decline in
interest rates (180 day T-bill rate) from 17.9 percent at the end of 1999/005 to 14 percent and 12.9 percent,
respectively, at end-2000/01 and end-2001/02. Under this growth and interest rate profile, projected
outcomes include a firm decline in the hitherto rising debt-to-GDP ratio, an increase in reserves, and a
marginal increase in external debt. The expected outcomes are summarized in Table 3 6
30. 
An alternative scenario, also discussed with the authorities under the SMP, gives an indication of
what the outlook could be like under less favorable developments.7
It is possible, for example, that interest
rates may not decline at the pace or to the extent projected in Table 3. In addition, recovery in output could
be slower, due for example to the impact of continued drought on the agricultural sector. Accordingly,
interest rates assumed in this scenario are 15.9 percent and 15 percent, respectively, at the end of 2000/01
and 2001/02. Growth over the five-year period beginning 2000/01 would increase from 0.5 percent to
2.5 percent, versus the 1.5 percent and 3.5 percent targeted under the authorities' program. Other details of
this alternative scenario can be found in Annex C and in the SMP document.8 As can be expected, the
alternative scenario sees a longer and more difficult period of adjustment, with the public debt-to-GDP ratio
declining more slowly. Extra care would be needed under such a scenario to ensure that the needs of the
poor, such as essential social services and protection through social safety nets, are met.

5 At the time of preparation of the SMP, an earlier auction rate in March 2000 of 19.7 percent was quoted, and used as a basis for
the projections.

6 At the time of preparation of the SMP, it was assumed that the intra-public-sector debt would be fully written off or offset.
More recently, it has been agreed that a part (J$ 13.2 billion) of the central bank's holding of FINSAC paper would be converted into
government securities paying cash interest.

7 Note that the difference between the two scenarios arises not from a fundamental difference in policy stances, but rather from
differences in assumptions about exogenous conditions and private sector responses in the economy (e.g. on portfolio allocation and
investment decisions).

8 

See the authorities' Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), 2000/01-2001/02 (Annex to IMF SMP,

EBS/00/1 52), summarized in Table 10 of that document.

Table 3: Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators under the Authorities' Program

11

Key Indicators

(in % unless otherwise indicated) 
Output
Growth of Real GDP 
Growth of Real per capita GDP 
Prices
Inflation rate (CPI end of period) 
Interest rates (180-day T-bills) 

Average exchange rate (LCU/US$) 

Public Finance (% of GDP)
Total public debt (net of intra-public- 
sector debt)
Public sector primarybalance 
Central government balance 
External
Current account/GDP 
Gross official reserves (US$ million) 
Debt Service/Exports 

Estimate 

-------------- 

Projection -------------

1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05

0.0 
-0.9 

8.4 
17.9 

40.1 

1.5 
0.6 

7.0 
14.0 

-

2.5 
1.7 

6.5 
12.9 

-

2.8 
2.0 

6.0 
12.4 

-

3.2 
2.4 

5.0 
11.1 

-

131.2 

122.9 

114.1 

107.3 

100.6 

12.5 
-4.3 

4.5 
801.3 
17.9 

14.1 
-1.0 

13.2 
1.3 

-4.8 
1077.6 
15.7 

-5.3 
1221.0 
16.4 

12.0 
1.3 

-5.3 
988.9 
26.1 

3.5
2.7

4.0
10.0

-

93.7

11.1
2.0

11.6 
1.6 

-4.6 
1017.2 
13.8 

-4.1
1064.6
12.5

D. Risks

31. While the authorities' program is careful and comprehensive in formulation, it faces very
unfavorable initial conditions. Specifically, public sector debt was 131 percent of GDP at end-March 2000
(including external debt of 46 percent of GDP, excluding intra-public sector debt). Under the agreed
financial sector resolution strategy, beginning April 2001, interest on the stock of these liabilities would be
serviced by the Treasury in cash, in contrast to the current policy of capitalizing interest on these liabilities.
The combined cash interest payments on all liabilities (projected at 14 percent in 2001/02) puts a major
burden on public finances and calls for additional fiscal tightening. Stabilization and improvement in the
debt dynamics can be expected under a reasonable range of growth and interest rate profiles, but-at 
least
under conditions likely to prevail in the immediate future-at 
the cost of maintaining a very tight fiscal
stance with very little flexibility (see Annex D). Because the very limited room for maneuver, the
macroeconomic outlook carries significant risks. Three broad categories of risks can be visualized, relating
in turn to the external environment, sluggish response in the domestic economy, and policy-related events
(see Section IV.E for a discussion of risk mitigation).
32. 
External Environment. Possible external shocks include adverse commodity price movements.
Other things equal, these would increase the current account deficit (projected, under the authorities'
program, at an average of 5 percent of GDP over 2000/01-2003/04) and financing needs. If the price of
alumina, which together with bauxite is expected to contribute about half of merchandise export earnings in
2000/01, were to remain flat (the program assumes an increase of 7 percent), the current account would
deteriorate by about US$50 million, or 0.7 percent of GDP. Similarly, if energy price increases (petroleum
and energy products account for about 15 percent of merchandise imports) were to average 50 (75) percent
above their level last year (as compared with the 12 percent increase assumed), at projected volumes the
additional import bill would amount to US$127 million (US$196 million). While adverse shocks could
likely be weathered, a compounding of such shocks cannot be ruled out, and the impact of these could be
aggravated by the erosion in competitiveness and self-imposed constraints on allowing equilibrating
exchange rate movements. For example, if higher current account deficits were to occur simultaneously with
shortfalls in foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows (the authorities' program assumes very significant
financing by FDI), beyond a point such higher financing requirements could not be sustained through
additional external borrowing or reserve drawdown. In addition, the impact of rising oil prices on the prices
of electricity and water, as well as the pass-through effect of such increases, could trigger inflationary
impulses and create pressure for wage increases.

12

33. Weak Domestic Response. Factors which could slow recovery in the domestic economy include a
slower-than-expected decline in domestic interest rates, a weak private sector supply response, and austerity-
driven labor action or social unrest. In particular, the potential supply response (including the extent to
which the recent erosion of competitiveness might curb the supply response for exports) remains difficult to
predict. In addition, while Jamaica has been fortunate in evading natural disasters, such as hurricanes, in
recent years, such events can cause major disruption in economic activity and entail large reconstruction
costs.

34. 
Policy Risks. Finally, risks of delays and/or slippage in the implementation of the macroeconomic
and structural reform program cannot be ruled out. Such delays could, for example, arise as a result of
domestic consensus-building difficulties on reforms or shortcomings in implementation capacity. While the
authorities' commitment is strong and implementation of the program is on track thus far, it is clear that
setbacks of this type would undermine the fragile prospects for recovery.

IH. FRAMEWORK FOR POVERTY REDUCTION AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

35. 
At the dawn of the new millennium, the formulation and development of Jamaica's economic and
social policies and programs will be guided by the vision for an efficient, globally competitive and growing
economy, creating jobs for a vibrant, healthy and educated population, caring for its environment in a just,
secure and equitable society.9 . The Government recognizes that achieving this vision involves, in the short
and medium term, the restoration of economic growth to create employment and improve living standards.
In addition, given the goal that "... achievement of broader social and environmental goals must be attained
simultaneously with economic growth", continued emphasis will be placed on human and social
development, support for labor-intensive growth and rural development and, given the economic dependence
on natural resources, an improved framework for environmental management. In particular, the poor and
vulnerable must be adequately protected, which requires a special focus on children, who comprise
49 percent of the poor in Jamaica. The Government seeks to pursue these objectives within a context of
good governance, including openness, transparency, accountability and a participatory democracy.
36. 
Four Elements of a Sustainable Poverty Reduction Strategy. There is broad consensus among
the Government, civil society, and the country's bilateral and multilateral development partners on the
development agenda for the future. This agenda, which is detailed in the Government's Medium-Term
Strategy, rests on four pillars, as can be seen in Chart 2.

A. Restoring Economic Growth

37. 
Although growth alone is not sufficient to reduce poverty, and even though the growth-poverty
linkage is insufficiently understood, the Government and other stakeholders recognize that restoring and
maintaining growth is a prerequisite not only for long-term poverty reduction but also to prevent a reversal of
the recent gains in poverty reduction (see Section I.C).
38. 
Rehabilitating the financial seetor. By allocating resources efficiently, well-functioning financial
systems play a key role in the process of economic growth. The financial crisis has significantly impaired
the Jamaican financial sector's ability to play that role (see Section II). Moreover, the financial sector itself
accounts for a significant fraction of Jamaica's real GDP, so a decline in value added originating in the
financial sector has a major impact on overall growth. Cognizant of this, the authorities are implementing a
comprehensive restructuring plan for the financial sector, in partnership with the IFIs (see Section II.B), in
order to encourage greater competition, foster development of strong and well-capitalized financial
institutions, and reduce the vulnerability of the system to future crises. This, together with a tightened fiscal

9 Government of Jamaica, "Jamaica: Medium-Term Strategy (MTS), 2000-2002", June 2000. Prior to the MTS, a National
Industrial Policy was prepared in 1996 to provide a systematic approach to long-term growth and sustainable development.

13

stance and a resultant decline in interest rates, is expected to improve financial intermediation and enable the
private sector to draw on a higher share of the considerable domestic savings in order to fuel higher growth.
39. Consolidating fiscal policy. The Government is acutely aware of the problems created by the
adverse fiscal situation that was brought on by the financial sector intervention and excessive wage
settlements. In response, it has embarked on even greater fiscal tightening than in previous years and stepped
up efforts to improve the effectiveness of public expenditure (see Section III.C). Elements of the fiscal
strategy include maintaining large primary surpluses; reducing the debt stock by using the proceeds of
planned divestments of public enterprises and intervened financial institutions; lowering interest rates based
on a reduced public sector borrowing requirement; maintaining a presence in international markets to
diversify funding sources and maintain an adequate level of foreign reserves; and improving securities
management. On the revenue side, since the tax ratio, at around 31 percent of GDP in 1999/00, is already
high, new measures focus on strengthening tax administration. Should macroeconomic developments be less
favorable than anticipated, the Government has indicated that it is prepared to consider additional revenue
and expenditure measures.

40. 
Strengthening the framework for private investment. With
geographical proximity to North America, an English-speaking 
workforce and major tourist attractions, Jamaica has significant 
potential to enjoy private-sector-driven, export-led growth. However, 
this growth potential has not been realized, owing largely to structural,
regulatory, and macroeconomic constraints which have reduced the 

efficiency of and the incentives for private investment (see Box 2).10 

41. Much of the Government's economic program is devoted to 

strengthening private incentives by, inter alia, improving financial 
sector intermediation and creating a framework for a decline in interest 
rates (paras. 38-39), reducing labor market rigidities (paras. 50-51), 

and helping to provide a better-trained work force (paras. 46-47). To 

combat the high level of crime and violence, which deters both 
domestic and foreign investment, the Ministry of National Security 

and Justice has adopted an integrated approach to develop public order 
programs in which other ministries have critical roles to play. The 

police force is focusing on community policing and enhancing 
intelligence-gathering. In the legal system, the focus is on improving 
access to justice and strengthening alternative dispute resolution 

mechanisms. The Govermment is also attempting to deal with the 

shortcomings in infrastructure services, especially water shortages, 
inadequate sewerage facilities, and a deficient road network, that have 

impacted production and tourism adversely. It is also making efforts 

to strengthen the urban public transport system (as evidenced by recent 
improvements in the Kingston Metropolitan Area transport system)
that has long restricted mobility and employment opportunities among 
the poor, increasing their sense of isolation. Over the next fifteen 

years, additional investment requirements in the infrastructure sectors 
are estimated to be more than US$600 million in power and 

US$1 billion in the water sector. 

l' The external trade regime does not pose major issues for Jamaica at present. The 
average import tariff is 20 percent, with a lower 5 percent rate for capital goods.
While the preferential market access is likely to be eroded in the case of bananas and
sugar, it has improved greatly in the apparels industry. The key issues for

international access relate to Jamaica's own competitiveness.

Chart 2: Four Elements of
a Sustainable Poverty
Reduction Strategy

Restoring Economic Growth

1. Rehabilitating the financial sector
2. Consolidating fiscal policy
3. Strengthening the framework for

investment

private 
Protecting the Poor and
Ensuring Inclusion

1. Enhancing the efficiency and

effectiveness 
of social safety nets

2.1mprovingeducationalaccessand

3. Improving health services
4. Stimulating labor-intensive growth

Improving Governance,
Efficiency and EffecCiveness
in the Public Sector

I. Divesting from commercial

activities

2. Improving management and
informiation systems
3. Reforming public maagement and

incentives

Ensuring Sustainable
Development

1. Generating synergy in the
2. Stimulatng seucotnaionmablrelationship
development
3. Linking tourism and sustainable

development

3. Improving disaster preparedness

14

Realizing that the public sector does not have the resources or the capacity to undertake such investments,
Government is keen to invite further private participation in infrastructure (see paras. 53-54). Finally, at the
sector level, the Government is paying particular attention to the information technology industry which,
while presently contributing less than 1 percent of GDP, has the potential to grow and become an important
part of Jamaica's economy
42. 
The Government expects these measures to enhance private sector confidence and induce higher and
more efficient investment weighted towards re-tooling and re-engineering (for improving competitiveness
and productivity). Over the medium term, it expects output increases from sectors such as bauxite,
information technology, transport and communications, electricity and water services, and financial services.

B. Protecting the Poor and Ensuring Inclusion

43. 
Enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of social safety nets. Recent analyses, supported inter
alia by the Bank, have pointed to several deficiencies in the existing array of social safety net programs in
Jamaica."1 While many of these programs provide much-needed assistance to the poor and vulnerable,
identified shortcomings include: errors of inclusion or exclusion, combined with low average benefits
received by the needy; high administrative overheads; fragmentation of programs, coupled with lack of
consolidated eligibility criteria; and inadequate tailoring of programs to age-specific poverty or vulnerability
factors.

44. 
To address these shortcomings, the Government is in the process of preparing a comprehensive
action plan for the reform of social safety nets, the framework for which has recently been presented to the
Human Resource Council of the Cabinet. It has identified the following as target groups of the reform:
children in poverty; youth at risk; the elderly poor; the disabled; poor single-parent households; large poor
(rural) families; the long-term unemployed; and victims of social or natural disaster. Special priority is to be
given to children and youth (see Section I.C).
45. 
In line with the broader reform objectives, several initiatives are under active consideration by the
Government. Among other measures, the major income transfer programs (such as the Food Stamp, Social
and Economic Assistance, and the Poor Relief programs) are proposed to be consolidated into a unified
income transfer program. Total spending on the consolidated program is proposed to increase substantially
(based on re-allocation from other programs) to ensure a meaningful level of benefits, alongside the
introduction of a cost-efficient, transparent and easily accessible delivery mechanism. Access to the program
will be linked to such criteria as school attendance, where appropriate, in order to reinforce behavioral
change and break the intergenerational cycle of poverty. It is also proposed that other programs will be
eliminated or modified using criteria such as administrative costs, level of benefit and coverage, delivery
mechanism, and degree of targeting to the poor. A universal targeting mechanism, including a case
management approach, is expected to be established, and capacity to monitor and evaluate the impact of
programs strengthened. Specific measures are also planned to improve the targeting of school feeding and
drug provision programs, and to increase cost recovery from those able to pay. Owing to the high priority
that the Government is placing on poor children and youth, an early childhood development program-
possibly based on the model of the "roving care-givers"-is expected to be scaled up, and possibilities for
implementing a new youth employment scheme explored. It is expected that the implementation of these and
other specific reform measures will be supported, inter alia, by Bank and IDB projects under preparation.

11 Social safety net programs are defined broadly to include programs that provide income support and access to basic services to
the poor and needy and/or those needing assistance after economic downturns, natural disasters, or household-specific idiosyncratic
events that lower income. Existing social assistance programs, on which public spending amounted to some 1.2 percent of GDP in
1998, include income support programs, school-based assistance programs, community-based programs, labor market interventions,
drug provision programs, indigent housing programs, feeding programs, small-scale investment programs, as well as support for
relevant NGO programs.

15

46. 
Improving educational access and outcomes. Jamaica stands out, particularly in comparison with
other similar-income-level countries, in having almost universalized 9 years of education. However, the
enrolment rate declines in upper secondary education, and is closely associated with income levels. Major
efforts are thus needed to increase the number of school places beyond grade nine, and to improve learning
outcomes at all levels. The key beneficiaries of qualitative improvement and quantitative expansion of
education will be poor children, who are at the margin of both achievement and access, and are most at risk
of being drawn into unemployment, violence, and delinquency. The Government's Green Paper 2000:
Education-the Way Upward recognizes that building human and social capital through education and
training represents the best hope for economic growth and social peace.

47. 
To address the challenges, the Government integrated early childhood care, development and
education for children from birth to six years. Investment in this sub-sector is supported by the CDB and
there is proposed support from CIDA. At the primary level, where there is near-universal enrolment, the
emphasis is on improving quality, including retention and remediation at grade four, in partnership with the
IDB. At the secondary level, the Government has implemented a broad-ranging Reform of Secondary
Education (ROSE) program since 1993. After successfully focusing on improvement in junior secondary
education (Grades 7 to 9) in the 1990s with the support of the Bank, the thrust in this decade is to expand
enrollment and improve quality in senior secondary education. The target is to ensure that by 2002, every
child in Jamaica entering the secondary level will have access to at least five years of secondary education.
Key areas of proposed emphasis include: (i) a focus on learning outcomes, with complementary policy and
inputs to support its realization; (ii) strengthening teacher skills and improving efficiency and incentives in
the use of teachers' services; and (iii) reforming education finance, notably through equalization of public
allocations to different school types and improving cost sharing and reducing financial assistance program
leakage at both the secondary and tertiary level.
48. 
Improving health services. While Jamaica's health gains over the last 25 years have been
impressive, a changing demographic and epidemiological profile poses major challenges to maintaining the
health status of the population. The aging of Jamaica's population and other factors have shifted the causes
of morbidity and mortality toward chronic and degenerative conditions which, if not addressed through
preventive and educational efforts, are likely to result increasingly in expensive hospital admissions. Also,
Jamaica, like other Caribbean countries, has a high HIV/AIDS prevalence rate among adults (0.99 percent
compared with 0.57 percent in Latin America).

49. 
In order to address sectoral challenges in a comprehensive manner, in 1995 the Ministry of Health
(MOH) created a Health Reform Unit (HRU) within the MOH. Directions for health reform have emerged
from recommendations of HRU studies, conducted with technical assistance from the IDB and other
development partners. The reform program under implementation encompasses substantial changes in the
financing and organization of the sector in an effort to improve sustainability, efficiency, equity, and quality
of service delivery. A national health insurance system is under development to allow for increased
sustainability of health care financing in the face of fiscal constraints, and greater equity and access to care
for the less fortunate. Measures have been implemented to separate policy-making and operational functions
through the decentralization of service delivery (with the creation of regional health authorities). This allows
for increased accountability and better management (including significantly larger, though still modest, cost
recovery), and increases the sector's ability to respond to emerging problems. Complementary measures to
strengthen human resource management and health service delivery are contributing to improved quality of
services. The reform measures also take into account the Government's desire for enhanced partnership with
the private sector, reflecting the latter's growing and dominant role in ambulatory, diagnostic and
pharmaceutical services.
50. 
Stimulating labor-intensive growth. Although it is true that poverty is predominantly a
phenomenon of the working poor, labor market and wage rigidities in Jamaica have nevertheless exacerbated
the unemployment problems that accompany a low growth economy. Characteristics of the labor market
which are of concern include high unemployment among women and youth; a growing share of the informal
sector in total employment (implying lower worker protection); a wage-setting mechanism in the formal
sector that is not well-suited to deal with large fluctuations in inflation, and creates nominal wage rigidity in

16

the short run; and harsh and freuent 
labor conflicts, even though the establishment of a Pre-Conciliation
Unit in the Ministry of Labour has helped reduce the number of work stoppages after 1997. The "no
victimization" rule (under which employers take back all striking employees after the strike is over) is one
reason why workers resort frequently to strikes. Moreover, dispute resolution lacks effectiveness owing to
the long delay in settlement, even though tribunal awards are considered fair.
51. 
As recommended by its Committee on Labor Market Reforms in 1996, the Government has made
several attempts to implement a social pact during the last three years. However, while some progress has
been made at the individual sector level, including in the banana and bauxite industries, this has not gained
wider acceptance. Outstanding issues on the Government's agenda include the need to modernize the
collective bargaining process, introduce preventive conciliation, and reduce the time lag in tribunal awards.
The Government realizes that any delay in addressing these issues will mean that even when growth
recovers, employment growth, especially in the formal sector, is likely to lag, and employers' incentives to
use less labor-intensive technology than warranted by Jamaica's underlying factor endowments are likely to
persist.

C. Improving Governance, Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Sector

52. While significantly lower than in the 1980s, overall public employment in Jamaica, at some
30 employees per thousand people, continues to be substantial. Organizational and incentive deficiencies,
such as proliferation of agencies, inefficient business practices, and a lack of focus on results and
accountability have often translated into low quality of services delivered. Jamaica's response to these
challenges has been proactive, both in disengaging the state from non-core, commercial activities, and
especially in seeking more efficient and effective fulfillment of core public sector mandates through better
financial management, information and incentive systems and, more recently, through broader New Public
Management initiatives.
53. 
Divesting from commercial activities. Over the last decade, Jamaica has made considerable
progress in divesting public utilities, though some 150 enterprises remain in the public sector, including
many engaged in commercial activities such as petro-chemicals, marketing boards, industry-specific banks,
tourism, and social and economic infrastructure such as ports, electricity, water and housing. Jamaica's
experience with privatizing state activities has yielded mixed results, including reacquisition of privatized
activities (sugar and transport), continuation of financial support after privatization (air transport), and post-
privatization establishment of a high-cost monopoly (telecommunications), and this has led to some
ambivalence towards further privatization and private participation.
54. 
However, the Government remains committed to private sector partnerships as an important means
of improving services and reducing the fiscal burden, and is moving ahead with private participation in the
power utility, the Jamaica Public Service Company (slated for divestment by March 2001), the water utility,
and the two international airports. Options are also under consideration in roads and railways. Inviting well-
established and competent private management and financing in these sectors would require action on a
broad range of issues, including transparent and competitive procedures for award of contracts and a stable
and transparent regulatory framework that promotes investor confidence and protects consumer interests. To
this end, the Office of Utility Regulation (OUR) was established in 1997 with jurisdiction over electricity,
telecommunications, water and sanitation, and transport. Though initially mandated to regulate only new
utilities, an amendment is now in Parliament to allow it to regulate existing enterprises as well. Also, in
order to reap the full benefits of privatization, the Government is introducing competitive structures-in
telecommunications, for example, the initial privatization with a 25-year exclusivity agreement is now being
renegotiated to reduce the exclusivity period to 1-3 years and invite competition in the sector. Despite these
initiatives, there remains a perception within the Government that it is becoming increasingly difficult to
interest private investors in the remaining state holdings.
55. 
Improving management and information systems. Government initiatives since 1991 have
included introduction of corporate planning in all ministries and agencies, installation of Financial
Management Information System (FMIS), and strengthening of human resource management. A customer

17

service improvement program was also launched in 25 agencies. Those initiatives have improved
govermnent planning capacity and control over budget execution, and created greater client service
awareness. Under the on-going Public Sector Modernization Project (see below), these reforms are being
consolidated and deepened, including, inter alia, further strengthening of the link between corporate
planning and program budgeting, and developing of second-generation versions of the financial management
information and human resource management systems.

56. 
Under a comprehensive reform of tax departments initiated in 1994, tax departments have been re-
organized along functional lines. The enforcement capacity of the tax administration has been enhanced
through legal changes and provision of equipment and training. Integrated, full-service Revenue Centers
have been established to make tax compliance more convenient for taxpayers and staff have been trained in
customer service. An Integrated Computerized Tax Administration System (ICTAS) has been developed to
modernize information technology in tax administration. The ICTAS is currently undergoing testing, with
rollout expected shortly. The project has contributed, among other factors, to the increase in the tax to GDP
ratio in the last three years, and the ICTAS rollout is expected to further enhance revenue collection.
Reforming public management and incentives. Ambitious efforts to introduce New Public
57. 
Management (NPM) in Jamaica's public sector, patterned on reforms in the UK and New Zealand, were
initiated in 1997, with support from the Bank under a Public Sector Modernization Project (PSMP).
Broadly, the initiative aims to restrict ministries to policy-making, monitoring, and evaluation, while
transferring service delivery responsibilities to subordinate operational entities with appropriate degrees of
autonomy (in financial, human resource, and operational matters) and accountability (bolstered by a formal
contractual framework). Implementation has advanced in two pilot ministries (Transport and Works, and
Land and Environment) and 17 entities (departments, statutory bodies, or public companies) slated for
conversion into 10 executive agencies. 
Initial results from four executive agencies that have been in
operation since April 1999 are promising, indicating inter alia heightened focus on performance targets,
increased revenue generation and reduced financial dependence on the central budget, and greater focus on
customer convenience and demand.

58. 
The Government has also been responding to the increasing demand from civil society for more
transparent and participatory decision-making. For example, civil society members are often invited to
participate in Cabinet Committee meetings. 
In addition, the National Planning Council chaired by the
Finance Minister has representation from a broad cross-section of civil society, including representatives of
trade unions, NGOs, the private sector, and academia.
59. 
Despite the impressive overall progress to date, implementation of a significant portion of the public
sector reform agenda-including completion of the pilot NPM reforms and their extension-still 
lies ahead.
However, realizing that the gains to Jamaica of a more transparent, efficient and effective public sector,
particularly in the present environment of severe resource constraints, are potentially very significant,
commitment to the reforms has been demonstrated at the senior-most level of Government.

D. Ensuring Sustainable Development

60. 
Generating synergy in the environment-economy 
relationship. Recognizing the Jamaican
economy's dependence on natural resources, the Government is committed to advancing the creation of a
framework for the sustainable use of the natural resource base. The dominant economic activities-coastal
tourism, bauxite mining, and agriculture-are 
supported by natural assets, but they also contribute to
environmental degradation. The inter-connected nature of the island's ecosystems also means that economic
activities without the necessary environmental safeguards can have far-reaching external effects on multiple
ecosystems. Policies to promote economic growth can also pose significant environmental challenges.

61. 
In general, fiscal policies have a direct effect on the environment and so can be used effectively to
promote protection of the natural resource base while generating revenue to offset the cost of protection. The
Government has expressed its commitment to promote environmental economic policies based on the
market-based "polluter pays" principle. On the whole, removal of subsidies to producers and consumers has
a positive impact on the environment. The challenge for the Government is to ensure adequate budgetary

18

allocations for environmental protection in the present climate of fiscal constraints and to encourage efficient
and effective use of such allocations.
62. 
Stimulating sustainable agricultural growth. Given that almost three-fourths of the poor live in
rural areas, the battle against poverty cannot be won without a sustainable agricultural/rural development
strategy. Key challenges facing the agricultural sector are its vulnerability to drought conditions, and high
costs/low productivity. Government policy focuses on implementation of its National Master Irrigation Plan,
generation and dissemination of improved technology (towards which the Government proposes a joint
agriculture research program with the private sector), improving credit availability, and supporting the
development of agro-industry. In terms of external trade issues, while Jamaica is likely to suffer some loss
in access owing to erosion of EU preferential arrangements for bananas and sugar, its main challenges
continue to be domestic, relating to lack of competitiveness in many sectors which have, for example, meant
that Jamaica's EU import quotas for bananas and sugar have not been fulfilled.
63. 
Linking tourism and sustainable development. The Government has acknowledged the leading
contribution of tourism to national development (it presently contributes about 7.7 percent to GDP and
employs 7.6 percent of the labor force) and expressed its commitment to a sustainable tourism development
strategy. The sustainability of tourism depends on the following: careful management of the natural resources
on which the sector currently relies (sea, sun, and sand); diversification of the product, including greater
promotion of ecological and cultural attractions-resources 
that are the most fragile; and wider stakeholder
participation, including the poor, in the benefits of the sector, which the Government intends to promote.

64. 
The environmental threats posed by tourism are well documented, including poor disposal of liquid
and solid waste, overcrowding in coastal zones and destruction of environmentally sensitive areas. Natural
resources on which tourism depends are also threatened by activities such as poor upland watershed
management and industrial pollution. Identifying these will help in determining appropriate policies for
protecting tourism-related natural assets, and in assessing polluters' incentives to pay for prevention of
damage. The Government is considering a variety of instruments to raise revenue for financing
environmental protection, including debt-for-heritage swaps, debt-for-nature swaps, an environmental tax,
tax incentives, and incentives for investment in environmentally sustainable technology in the tourist
industry.
65. 
Improving disaster preparedness. Jamaica is susceptible to several types of natural hazards due to
its physiography and its location within an earthquake zone and hurricane belt. The natural hazards include
tropical low pressure systems, flooding, earthquakes, and landslides. Man-made hazards such as chemical
spills have been relatively localized and infrequent. The 1999-2002 Jamaica National Environmental Action
Plan (JANEAP) cited disaster management issues related to land use, climate change and sea level rise. Poor
land use practices such as cultivation and development on unsuitable slopes have led to soil erosion, which
has exacerbated the impact of natural phenomena such as hurricanes and flooding. As a small island
developing state with only a narrow coastal strip fringing a mountainous interior, Jamaica is especially
vulnerable to the threat of sea level rise associated with the present trends of rapid global warming. The
coastal zone on which the island is heavily dependent for settlement, tourism and fisheries, is at risk from
increased coastal erosion, and inundation during storm surges.

66. 
The Government has identified in the JANEAP a number of disaster mitigation strategies. These
include: hazard mitigation; land and hazard mapping; earthquake hazard assessment; sea level rise
preparedness; possible continuation of vulnerability assessments, planning and capacity building activities as
undertaken through the Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Global Climate Change (CPACC) project; and
an oil spill contingency plan.

IV. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR FY01-02

67. 
The development agenda outlined in Section III provides an organizing framework to advance the
short to medium-term objectives articulated by the Government. Based on this agenda, and given the context
of the fiscal and financial sector difficulties, the improved dialogue, and the promising initiatives over the

19

last few months (see Sections I and II), the Bank proposes to initiate a fresh assistance program. This
program, which incorporates lessons learned from past Bank assistance to Jamaica, has been drawn up in
close collaboration with the Government, and with the benefit of consultations with civil society and major
development partners. The key elements of the Bank's FY01 -02 assistance program that have emerged from
this process are: support for a bank restructuring and debt management program, consisting of two inter-
linked, fast-disbursing operations; support for a social sector program to assist with the reform of social
safety nets and secondary education; and analytical work on poverty as well as growth and competitiveness.
The program would support the immediate objective of preventing a reversal of recent gains in poverty
reduction, and helping to lay the foundations for sustainable growth in the future.

A. Bank Assistance in a Historical Context

68. 
The last (March 1993) CAS focused on: (i) consolidating macroeconomic stabilization;
(ii) increasing public sector efficiency by refocusing public expenditures and strengthening staff and pay in
key ministries; (iii) encouraging export-oriented private production through provision of supporting
infrastructure and appropriate regulatory reform; and (iv) improving the delivery of social services by
stepping up implementation of externally funded projects. The CAS was cautiously optimistic, noting
substantial progress in the creation of a policy framework for growth, but pointing out the lack of adequate
private investment. During 1993-96, progress was achieved in these areas under an IMF Extended Fund
Facility and a Bank private sector development loan as well as education, energy and public sector reform
projects. Portfolio implementation was aided by the establishment of a Bank country office in Kingston in
late 1993.

69. With the advent of financial sector troubles in mid-1996 and owing in part to the lack of a shared
vision on the overall policy framework to tackle financial distress, the level of Bank activity in Jamaica
declined. No new operations were approved by the Bank after September 1996. Overall, the average annual
level of new commitments between FY93 (beginning with the CAS) and FY97 amounted to US$51 million
against an expectation of about US$100 million.
70. 
A Country Assistance Note (CAN), prepared by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) in
December 1998, pointed out that the outcome of the Bank's assistance program to Jamaica has on the whole
been unsatisfactory, and below the average outcome for Bank projects (see Box 3). The CAN suggested that

Box 3: OED's Country Assistance Note
The Country Assistance Note (CAN) provided a long-term pespective on the experience of the Bank's assistance to
Jamaica. The CAN noted that since 1965, the Bank had lent US1.3 billion for 62 projects to Jamaica. Of these, fifty-
one projects had been rated by OEt), and ranked low in terms of all three indicators-outcome, sustainability and
institutional development impact-compared to averages for both the LAC region and the Bank as a whole. Less than
half of adjustment lending (which made up nearly 40 percent of the total), and about half of investment lending, were
given satisitctory outcome ratings. Loans for technical assistance and administrative refom also performed poorly.
The CAN noted that adjustmnent programs did not ensure adequate fiscal adjustment ad 
istead relied on extemal
borrowing, entailing a sharp incease in Jamaica's external public debt and debt service payments, and in the Bank's
exposure. Investment lending for water supply and sanitation, education, power, and mining sectors was generally
considered satisfictory in design, while lending for population, health, and urban development was found to be
unsatisfctory. Ambitious design of projects that was not consistent with local implementation capacity, and insufficient
attention to risks in the funding and management of projects were identified as the leading causes for the low success
rate. Shortages of counterpart funds also hampered project implementation. Economic and sector work in the l 990s
responded to a growing preference for short and focused pieces (see Annex B4 for a swumary of recent work).

the outcome could be improved if a few key lessons were taken on board. These lessons-adopted 
in this
CAS-also 
emerged from implementation of the 1993 CAS and, more recently, from the portfolio
management and project completion reports:

20

* Given the history of adjustment in Jamaica, the CAS should be based on more intensive participation
involving the Jamaican authorities as well as civil society, to ensure country "ownership" of Bank-
supported operations (see Box 4).
* Measures designed to support macroeconomic stability and financial sector restructuring must be a
critical element of any future lending strategy, given the critical role of macro-financial sector reforms in
fostering resumption of growth. Labor market reforms, including the wage-setting mechanism in the civil
service, is also considered crucial to break the vicious cycle of inflation followed by large wage
increases, and approaches to such reforms must form part of the dialogue between Jamaica and the Bank.
* Future lending programs should make special efforts to strengthen institutions and human resources and,
in the meantime, project design in all sectors should be scaled to existing capacity.

Box 4: CAS CosltatinsaEvvggProcess

iaguwthetiti 
Center, lceine 

e CAN pointed out that in r 
ibased 
on more
intensive participation by theJainathiteanciisoit.Nwihtnngtelkofahrd 
vision on
some key aspects of macro-fincl 
picora 
periot 
imthe 
B 
remained
good, in particular at the se 
lv 
natihon, 
te 
a 
uicf 
University
of the West Indies campus nare 
hou,has
helped disseminate infomatio and served in the past as a meeting place to discuss economic issues wth social and
environmental NGOs.
In the specific task of preparing tis CA, a broa range of views in Jamaica was souht 
Governmenspific 
inpt frtheepaihis 
CASi 
hntsbie 
(2000-02). tled 
dions 
on the daft Swrheld 
Planning, the PlanninJ
undertaken with conce e 
tameigcardb 
key elements of thepropos eCAS 
smeetlb 
the same time. Finally consultatonswe held wth a 
sessions in Montego Byand 
hr 
notieo 
discussed. 0,verall, partici 

00 
eaaey
encies atabout
at two
and
was no

nlt 
etme 
andmultpta} 
in 
t S 
i 

n te part oth
r S 

t 
o cil 
rpsdBn 

ofnance and

ertr 
at 

i mieber 

e 

Miit 

sitnesrtg 

h 

aie 

ii ~e 

i so 

2000 

ot,al 

rsne 

h 

y

reservation about theproed 

al an 
One of the objectives of this CAS is to promot 
of a regla process rather t 
consultation, for whichpaipantsattSepte 
ada.

consensus on the overall de 

p 

a one-ofevent sict 

nil 

sort 
t 
oaeranmindepth 

tis CAS.
diloguewicvsci 

in 

sie 

on 

E4hASpre 

on. C 

xpid 

srog spprtld 

making it part
i 

-deph

al 

p deepen

B. Bank Assistance in the Context of Overall Support for Jamaica's Development Agenda

71. 
Development partners' activities. Apart from the United Nations system, there are some thirteen
development partners currently supporting Jamaica's development agenda. Table 4 indicates the areas where
various bilateral and multilateral agencies are active in Jamaica. The Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB), the European Union (EU), the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID), the UK Department for International Development
(DFID) and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) have large and comprehensive assistance programs in
the country.
72. World Bank activities. The Bank's recent lending and non-lending activities are summarized in
Annexes B4 and B8. Since early 1993, the Bank has approved eight projects, including one fast-disbursing
loan for private sector development. The six currently active projects focus on making the public sector
more effective (two loans), improving access to and quality of education (two loans), enhancing exports and
private investment (one), and supporting a social investment fund (one). No projects have been approved
since 1996. The quality of the portfolio, which was poor through much of the 1990s, was turned around in
FY00 (see Box 5). In addition to lending, recent Bank analytical and advisory activities (AAA) has focused
on the social sectors, leaving much of the macroeconomic work to the IMF (with whom the Bank coordinates
closely). Public expenditure analysis includes a Public Expenditure Review (1996), followed by a review of

21

secondary education (1999) and, more recently, a Social Sector Expenditure Review (2000). Other ongoing
social sector studies include an assessment of social assistance programs, and an analysis of youth at risk.
Crime issues were analyzed in the Urban Poverty and Violence study (1997).

Table 4: Jamaica's Development Partners and their Major Areas of Activity

.2 

Specific Interventions 
Financial Sector Reform 
Power Sector Reform 
Telecommunications Reforms 
Water and Sanitation Reform 
National Highways 
Privatization of Ports 
Competition Laws and Competitiveness 
Microenterprises, SMEs 
Trade Liberalization 
Agricultural Sector reform 
Energy 
Standards 

Basic Education 
Prima Education 
Secondary and Tertiary Education 
Skills Training 
Health Sector Reform 
Health Services Provision 
AIDS Prevention and Treatment 
Land Management 
Justice System 
-Social Safety Nets and their Reform 
Emergency Reconstruction 

Development Partners
IDB, IMF, CDB, IBRD
IDB, IFC, NIGA
EU, CIDA, USAID
EU, CDB, JBIC, IDB
EU, IDB, KFED, JBIC
IDB, EU
CIDA, EU, USAID, IBRD
CIDA, USAID, EU, UNDP, IDB
IDB
EU, CDB, IDB
GERMANY
CIDA, IDB/MIF

UNICEF, CIDA, CDB, DFID
IDB, USAID, DFID
DFID, NET, IDB, EU, IBRD
GERMANY, JICA, UNDP, IDB, EU
IDB, EU, PAHO, DFID
EU, USAID, GERMANY, NET, JICA
USAID, GERMANY, NET, CIDA, UNDP, IDB, IBRD
1DB
CIDA, IDB, DFID
IDB, CDB, EU, DFID, IBRD
CDB

Integrated Financial Management 

IDB, IBRD

o 2 c -
c 

Of which:
Budget Management and Budget Support 
Tax Administration 
53 > Public Sector Modemization 
2 E , et Civil Society/Electoral Reform 
E2>'> > o 
Participation 
Decentralization Strategy 
-Urban Strategy 

0 

vQ 

Environmental Policy Reform 
Watershed Management 

Rural Roads 
Agricultural Support and Production 

Sewerage - Water 

EU, IBRD
IBRD
EU, DFID, UNDP, CIDA, IBRD
EU, CIDA, UNDP
DFID
IDB, CIDA, UNDP, UNICEF
DFID, USAID

CIDA, USAID, GEF, IDB, UNDP
EU, CIDA, UNDP, IDB, USAID

EU

CDB, IDB, EU, JICA

JBIC, CHINA, IDB, GERMANY, EU, USAID

73. 
Selectivity will be sharpened. While the Bank's assistance program in the past has not been very
wide-ranging, selectivity will be sharpened under the present CAS, guided by the following principles:
* Focus on the core mandate of poverty reduction, through support for safety net mechanisms and the
planned reforms of secondary education to help improve the future of Jamaica's youth, as well as by
helping to foster renewed growth to safeguard recent poverty gains.
* Focus on areas of comparative advantage, such as the financial sector, the education sector, and social
safety nets, where the Bank possesses cross-country experience and/or accumulated knowledge and
involvement in Jamaica.
* Focus on complenentarity and coordination with bilateral and multilateral agencies. For example,
Bank staff will continue relying in large measure on IMF staff macroeconomic monitoring and
assessments, focusing principally on the social and structural policy agenda. Where there are common
areas of intervention, such as with the IDB, CDB and IMF in the financial sector, close coordination will

22

continue so as to ensure complementary specialization of focus. And in areas that are critical to
Jamaica's development agenda but where other partners are already active (such as agriculture/rural
development and the justice system where, among others, IDB, CDB, EU, DFID and CIDA have on-
going or planned assistance initiatives), the Bank will rely largely on the partners.

Box 5: Pro-active Efforts Tintr Around the Porflio of IBR 
Through much of the 1990;, several projes in the Bank's portfolio expeienced 
lficuties. 
FY99, there were on average two probl projects in the orio. Disbursements F 
n 
undisbursed amount at the begnning of the fiscal year. In 1999, facd with 

imletatn 

macoeconomic constraints, the GoBeameni with the assistanceof Bnk sftff 

j

Between FY93 and
fell to 14 and I8 percent of the
problems as well as severe

the portfolio, proceeding with

closure of projects such as pow whihadseebusementags, 
problem projects. Owing to theseeff, 
e 
56 percent in FY00 (although t 
s temp 
disbusement on the energy Se 
der 
at any time in recent years, and hb 
US$250 million, to six prjects wh U 

pr 

m 

st 

s 

y dlining since FY, 

is now 

t 

t a n-o 
pror to its cl 

in n commitmet in 00

lup 
adtaingpro-ctivemasto 
t 

up of the potio, 

improve the performanc of
dibursement ratio reaching a high o
n 
is due to a substanial
t, 
e 
lio 
is now much smaller than
onofine projecs wit net comitments o

At the s 

ith impl 

selt 

n 

torsf Bank Portfolio t 

rfrmae 

Y93-FYOI

Fiscal year 
Projets(#) 
Net Commitment Amount (Sm) 
ProjectsatRisk( ) 
ActualProblemProjects(#) 
Potential Problem Projectse 
ComnitmtentatRisk($m) 
Realism Index (%)1 
ProactivityIndex(%9 
Disbursement Ratio3
Average Projec Age (years) 

1993 
12 
345 
3 
1 
2 
60 
33.3 
NA 

22.0 

3.9 

1994 
13 
369 
4 
3 
1 
86 
75.0 
NA 
16.5 
3.8 

199 
10 
332 
4 
3 
1 
150 
75.0 
NA 

13.4 

40 

1996 
8 
238 
3 

2 

1 
97 
66.7 

NA 
21.6 

1997 
9 
250 

1 

149 
2 0 
100 

25.7 

198 
7 
217 
3 
2 

121 

667 
0 
14.2 

3.6 

199 
7 
217 

3 

2 

117 
66.7 
50 

18.0 

4.6 

2000 
6 
157 

0 
I 
28 
0 

100 
55.7 

5.2 

20014
6
157
0

0
0
0
100

100

-

5.5

!3.8 29 

Source. World Bank Business Warehouse
1I Realism Index: Measures the ratW of acu probler projects to total actua and potential problem projects.
2/ ProaiVIt indx: Measures the proportion of project 
ted as actual problem projec tweve moths earhich 
su 
. or pllyor 
fycande 
Inorderto avelOpercetpactivity,ationrmubetakenon 
ap 
3/ Disbursement Ratio: Measures IBRD d 
i 
m initlscal year (JlyJun 
30)to ihe 
i 
year.
4/As ofOctober 20, 2000

e 

.

have been upgraded, restructre

at thin 

of 

e fiscal

C. Proposed World Bank Assistance Program for FYO1-02

74. 
As noted earlier, this is the Bank's first CAS since 1993. It is being processed in the wake of several
positive developments in Jamaica and improvement in the quality of the macroeconomic and structural
policy dialogue between the authorities and the IFIs. The CAS proposes a highly focused program for
Jamaica, based on the foregoing selectivity principles and Jamaica's development needs.
75. 
Base-case Scenario. On the assumption that implementation of the macroeconomic and financial
sector restructuring program is on track, and that Bank portfolio implementation remains satisfactory, the
Bank would undertake a lending program of US$220 million over FYOI-02, of which US$150 million would
be fast-disbursing assistance in support of financial sector rehabilitation and the remainder (US$70 million)

in support of the social sectors. The program as a whole will consist of the following:

(i) 
Bank Restructuring and Debt Management Program As a first step, creating the preconditions for
growth and thereby preventing reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction calls for maintaining and
consolidating macroeconomic stability and pursuing financial sector restructuring. The proposal to provide
US$150 million in support of a bank restructuring and debt management program will complement support

23
from the IDB (US$150 million) and the CDB (US$25 million), with appropriate specialization and division
of labor among the three institutions as well as close coordination with the IMF. Given the need for
flexibility in response, Bank support would take the form of two successive operations (US$75 million in
each of FY01 and FY02, respectively, 9-12 months apart), nested within the overall progranmmatic financial
sector reform framework. The focus of the program will be on: (a) the resolution of public sector (FINSAC)
liabilities accumulated in the wake of intervention; (b) restructuring and divestment of affected financial
institutions; and (c) regulatory/supervisory strengthening to reduce the chances of recurrence of crisis.
(ii) 
Social Program. Jamaica's youth represent one of the most vulnerable groups in society. Tackling
this youth-at-risk problem demands a multi-dimensional response at different levels. Key elements
underlying youth vulnerability include weaknesses in early childhood development, low quality of and/or
access to primary and secondary education, and shortcomings in social protection mechanisms that can
benefit youth. In FY01-02, the Bank proposes to provide support for a social program focused on
strengthening safety nets (US$35 million) and reforming secondary education (US$35 million). On safety
nets, the proposed Social Safety Net Reform Project (FY01) will likely focus on supporting a consolidation
of and increase in allocation for major income transfer programs, development of targeting and monitoring
mechanisms and associated institutional strengthening and capacity building, and a strengthening of early
childhood development initiatives. Close coordination is being maintained with the IDB, CDB, EU, CIDA,
DFID, UNICEF and UNDP to ensure that complementary programs receive funding and technical assistance.
A second Reform of Secondary Education (ROSE II) project, planned for FY02, is intended to focus on
upper secondary education while consolidating gains already achieved under the ROSE project. It will
support enhancement of quality and efficiency and increased access, by strengthening teacher skills and
incentives, setting standards, and reforming education finance. Several other development partners are active
in basic and primary education, as well as in secondary and tertiary education (see Table 4).

(iii) 

Targeted Analytical and Advisory Activities. Aside from analytical work that is undertaken as part

of project preparation, stand-alone analytical and advisory activities (AAA) would be undertaken to deepen
the understanding of critical aspects of the Jamaican economy, and provide the foundations for the policy
dialogue and the future lending program. The ongoing youth-at-risk review as well as the regional gender
review would increase understanding of these critical areas as well as present policy options to the
authorities. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a Country Procurement
Assessment Review (CPAR) have been prepared in draft form and will shortly be discussed with the
authorities in order to inform on-going Bank project support for public sector reform (see Section IV.E).
New AAA is expected to focus on two broad areas:
* The first concerns economic growth, with special attention to the analysis of the main sources of
growth, including the investment puzzle and estimating the size and growth of the underground
economy (see Box 2), productivity and competitiveness issues, structural constraints to growth
(including, in particular, labor market and wage-setting issues), and the public policy responses needed
to foster income and employment growth. This work is likely to take the form of a Social and Structural
Review, and would be initiated in the second half of FY01.
* The second area, likely to be initiated in FY02, concerns poverty and related social ills, with special
attention to an understanding of recent poverty trends and linkages with growth (see Box 1), and, more
broadly, to the causes and consequences of poverty and social exclusion, and appropriate public policy
responses.
While maintaining the overall thrust summarized in Table 5, the timing or relative emphasis of new AAA
could be adjusted in line with evolving Government priorities. In developing this work program, the Bank
will actively seek to collaborate with other development partners and Jamaican institutions.
(v) 
Regional Initiatives. In addition to its Jamaica-specific program, the Bank will continue to organize
regional policy platforms in which Jamaica is an active participant, such as the Regional HIV/AIDS
Conference of September 2000 and the biennial Caribbean Group for Cooperation in Economic Development
(CGCED). Following the September H[V/AIDS Conference, Bank Management announced its intention to
request Board approval for US$85-100 million in loans and credits for HIV/AIDS programs in the Caribbean
region. Jamaica, among other countries in the Region, is expected to benefit from this initiative. The project

24

will help implement preventive measures to limit the epidemic and build capacity to fight against it. It would
build upon existing programs in the Caribbean and support the Caribbean Regional Strategic Plan of Action
for WV/AIDS put forth by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). As organizer and chair of the CGCED,
the Bank works closely with Governments and development partners in the Caribbean to ensure that issues of
importance to the Region's development are regularly reviewed and discussed. Such issues have included
trade liberalization, public sector modernization, private sector development, financial sector development,
labor market impediments, opportunities and constraints in tourism development, environmental protection,
erosion of EU preferential trade arrangements in banana and sugar, and implications of NAFTA for
Caribbean exports. The June 2000 CGCED meeting in Washington, DC focused on a 20-year development
vision and agenda for the Caribbean, with a detailed focus on preventing HIV-AIDS, enhancing governance,
diversifying risk and mitigating natural disasters. The private sector and civil society are also represented in
the CGCED discussions. Finally, the Bank is also exploring with several Caribbean countries the possibility
of a more integrated regional approach to natural resource management in connection with the tourism
industry. This approach would involve identifying priority areas for environmental protection (with
community involvement) including rich biodiversity areas with potential for eco-tourism. In Jamaica, the
Bank has initiated discussions with the Government on the preparation of such a project (Cockpit Country
Conservation Project) with funding from the Global Environmental Facility.
76. 
Bank Portfolio Evolution under the Base-case Lending Program. Assuming that projects under
implementation close as scheduled and that two new operations are delivered in each of FY01 and FY02,
base-case deliveries would lead to three projects under implementation at the start of FY02.12 At the start of
FY03, there would be 2-3 projects in the active portfolio.13 The base case lending program, if fully
implemented, will increase the Bank's exposure to Jamaica but still keep it within manageable limits (see
Section IV.E below).
77. 
Low-Case Assistance Scenario. The base-case assistance scenario is, in the Bank's judgement, the
most likely scenario to materialize. However, contingency plans need to be in place should the framework
for base-case lending not be realized. The low-case scenario is based on less-than-satisfactory progress in
specific respects, for which two triggers have been identified. The first is a situation where the
macroeconomic framework (including policy effort) is judged by the Bank to be unsatisfactory. In making
such a judgement, the Bank would be guided primarily by IMF views on the implementation of the SMP.
Indicators to be tracked by the Bank to monitor macroeconomic developments include the primary balance
and overall balance of the central government, as well as the public sector debt-to-GDP ratio, although any
judgement on the adequacy of the macroeconomic framework would clearly need to be a holistic one that is
arrived at in close consultation with IMF staff. The second is a situation where key actions under the bank
restructuring and debt management program (BRDP) are not taken, or where progress is insufficient to
complete the Govermnent's financial restructuring program.
78. 
The low-case lending program is based on either of these two triggers materializing, but Bank
project implementation continuing to remain satisfactory. However, even if the low case occurs, it would be
triggered only after Board presentation of the first phase of support for the bank restructuring and debt
management program, commitments and disbursements from which would already have amounted to US$75
million. In light of this, the low-case lending program for FY0 I-02 would be defined as the first phase of the
BRDP (US$75 million) along with the social safety net reform project (US$35 million). Under the low-case
lending program, the second phase of the BRDP would not be processed, and the reform of secondary
education would be delayed, in order to cap new commitments over FY01-02 at about US$110 million. In

12 The Reform of Secondary Education (ROSE 1) and the Tax Administration Reform (TAXARP) projects will close on December
31, 2000. The Jamaica Social Investment Fund and the Private Investment and Export Development projects will close on March 31,
2001 and June 30, 2001, respectively. The first phase of support for the BRDP would likewise close on June 30, 2001.

13 The two remaining projects in the currently active portfolio, the Jamaica Student Loan and Public Sector Modernization
projects, will close on June 30, 2002. The exact number of projects in the active portfolio at the start of FY03 would depend on the
closing date of the second phase of support for the BRDP.

25

the unlikely event of significant deterioration in the implementation of Bank projects or in the quality of the
social sector dialogue with the Government, the Bank would need to reconsider even this low-case lending
scenario.
79. 
The low-case scenario would materialize in the event that the macroeconomic or financial sector
program is off-track (see Table 5). Should this happen, AAA is likely to be stepped up (as compared with
the base-case AAA), to understand better what went wrong (i.e., why the low case occurred), with the
immediate focus likely to be on poverty monitoring and sources of growth. In effect, Bank effort would be
shifted from lending preparation to AAA.

Table 5: Bank Assistance Scenarios, FYO1-02

Lending Strategy 

Lending 

Triggers 

Base Case 

Low Case

Lending for financial sector and social sectors 
(social safety nets and secondary education) 
programs, and preparing for follow-up 
operations.

Focus lending on support for social safety net
reform, and prepare for secondary education
reform operation.

US$220 million (including US$150 million fast- No lending in FY02 (commitment capped at
disbursing). 
US$110 million).

1. Macroeconomic framework: consistent with 
the authorities' program outlined in the SMP. 

2. Financial sector program: on-track 
implementation. 

1. Macroeconomic framework: unsatisfactory
macroeconomic framework, including policy
effort (implementation of the SMP off-track).

2. Financial sector program: lack of progress in
key areas such as resolution of NCB and Life of
Jamaica or in strengthening the regulatory
regime for the financial sector.

3. Portfolio management: satisfactory. 

3. Portfolio management: satisfactory.

Analytical and Advisory Activities will cover social and structural 
Activities under the base case, especially in
Activities 
policies (growth, competitiveness, labor 
relation to poverty and growth and
markets), in-depth analysis of poverty, youth at 
competitiveness, will be accelerated and
risk, procurement and financial management, and broadened in scope.
review of country portfolio performance.

Other Prospective 
Activities 

Support for Regional HIV/AIDS prevention and As under the Base Case.
mitigation program; GEF-funded support for
environmental management and conservation.

80. 
Apart from IBRD, the World Bank Group's two other constituents have also played a role in
Jamaica. While this role has been limited owing to lack of sustained market growth, increased private sector
interest in the country (which stands a good chance of materializing if the authorities' economic program
proceeds on track) could see a substantial increase in IFC and MIGA activity, as outlined below.
81. 
International Finance Corporation (IFC). Given the difficult macroeconomic conditions and
constraints on private investment during the past several years, IFC's activity in Jamaica has been limited.
An IFC investment in an independent power producer (US$22 million in debt and US$2 million in equity)
was approved in FY95, of which US$16.8 million remains outstanding. This was complemented by
additional support for the project in FY97, financed by a participating bank in the form of a US$45 million
"B" loan. Another IFC investment of US$8 million, approved in FY93, was pre-paid in FY00 when the
company was sold. In addition, IFC has had discussions with several financial institutions regarding credit
lines and other transactions. Unfortunately, owing to the difficulties in the financial sector, no transactions
have materialized. IFC continues to look for opportunities in Jamaica and is currently reviewing a possible
investment in the telecommunications sector. In addition, Jamaica is one of the twelve Caribbean countries

26

participating in a joint IFC-The Bank of Nova Scotia US$50 million facility to provide financing to small
and medium-sized export-oriented enterprises undertaking greenfield, expansion and restructuring projects.
82. Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). Jamaica became a member of MIGA in
1988. Since 1992, MIGA has issued 14 contracts of guarantee, mostly in Jamaica's power sector, for a total
issued amount of US$151 million. MIGA's outstanding portfolio consists of 12 contracts of guarantee with
US$97.3 million in gross exposure, of which US$92 million constitutes net exposure. The current exposure
is well below the guarantee limit for Jamaica, which is of the order of US$620 million, and could be even
higher, since MIGA could raise substantial additional capacity in the private market through its Cooperative
Underwriting Program (CUP) and facultative reinsurance. MIGA's objectives in the medium term are to
diversify its portfolio while supporting private sector development along the CAS objectives, in particular the
rehabilitation of the banking sector.

D. Country Program Monitoring

83. 
By far the largest influence on Jamaica's development progress will be the Government's own
policies and actions, rather than the precise volume and composition of Bank support. Nevertheless, a priori
expectations are that if the CAS base-case lending scenario is implemented within the context of a sound
macroeconomic framework and on-track implementation of structural and institutional reforms (Sections II
and III), Jamaica would witness gradual progress towards growth, employment generation, and consolidating
gains in poverty reduction. On the other hand, were the low-case Bank lending scenario to be triggered, the
underlying policy environment within which this occurred would be less conducive to achieving the
development goals. There could be short-run deviations from these linkages, but it is highly unlikely, for
example, that sustained growth and poverty reduction would be possible without the right enabling
environment.
84. 
Progress in relation to CAS objectives, assuming that the base-case lending scenario is implemented,
will be measured through Country Development Indicators (see Table 6) and Bank Program Performance
Indicators over the next two years. An assessment of progress, especially the analysis of the link between
Bank support and country performance indicators, will also feed into the preparation of the next CAS.
Table 6: Proposed CAS Benchmarks, 1999-2002

Key Poverty Indicators
Poverty Headcount Ratio (% estimates, JSLC) 
Poverty Gap 

Leading Proeress Indicators

1999 

2000 

2002

16.9 
4.4 

16.0 
4.0 

16.0
4.0

Indicators associated withfinancial sector resolution and restoration of growth

Increase in growth rate of per capita GDP from negative rates in recent years to 0.7 percent in 2000/01 and 1.7
percent in 2001/02.
Decline in total debt (net of intra-public debt) to GDP ratio from 131 percent of GDP in April 2000 to 123
percent of GDP by April 2001 and 114 percent of GDP by April 2002.

Social Indicators associated with poverty reduction

Increase in the percentage of grade nine secondary school graduates having a place in grade ten from under 80
percent in 1999 to near 100 percent by 2002.

Country Development Indicators

* Key indicators ofpoverty alleviation. Given the already low headcount ratio, fiurther declines in poverty
are expected to be slow, especially given that growth recovery is likely to be gradual. The immediate

27

development challenge (see Section I.C) will be to prevent reversal of the recent gains in poverty
reduction. Accordingly, the benchmarks for this CAS will be a 2002 poverty ratio of about 16 percent,
and a poverty gap index of around 4 percent. Given that even the 2001 poverty data will not be available
until about September 2002, the preparation of the next CAS for the period July 2002 and beyond will
have to rely on monitoring some of the factors normally associated with poverty reduction (at least in the
medium to long term), such as growth of per capita income. Qualitative aspects such as progress in the
definition and implementation of reform measures in safety nets, which affect measured poverty, will
also be tracked. The Bank will monitor these indicators together with the Government.

* 

Indicators associated with the financial sector and restoration of growth. Progress toward the resolution
of the remaining financial sector problems and the restoration of growth will be closely monitored.
Indicators will be measures of macroeconomic improvement, such as the growth rate of per capita GDP
and decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio (net of intra-public sector debt). Additional indicators more directly
related to progress in financial sector restructuring are incorporated in the accompanying bank
restructuring and debt management program. These indicators will be monitored by the Bank in
cooperation with the IMF, who will undertake monitoring on a regular basis until end-March 2002 in the
context of the SMP.
* Non-income dimensions ofpoverty. One indicator to be tracked is enrollment in secondary education, as
per government goals. Every child that successfully completes grade nine is expected to have a place in
grade ten (currently, this ratio is under 80 percent). This will also be a monitoring indicator under the
secondary education project. Increases in such enrolment are likely to improve income distribution over
the medium term. 14

Bank Program Performance Indicators

- Portfolio management. Close attention will be paid to Realism and Pro-activity indices as well as the
Quality Assurance Group's (QAG) "at risk" flags, which draw special attention to project-specific
financial management and procurement problems, including availability of counterparts funds, use of
special accounts, slow disbursements, and timeliness and quality of audit reports. In the event that a
project should become a "potential problem" (i.e., possess three or more QAG flags), Bank staff will
increase supervision intensity to mitigate implementation risks. Disbursement rates will be carefully
monitored, and steps taken to ensure continued improvements. More generally, Bank self-evaluation
will be strengthened through quarterly reviews of portfolio performance with the support of the Jamaica
country office. The CFAA and CPAR exercises will facilitate project implementation.
* Project effectiveness. Key success indicators for each of the projects in the portfolio during the next two
years will be monitored and linked in a broader way to the country development agenda, following the
approach of programmatic support which this CAS proposes to adopt.

E. Bank Exposure, Financial Management and Procurement, and Managing Risks

85. World Bank Exposure to Jamaica. Bank exposure to Jamaica has declined significantly in recent
years as a result of reduced-and, over the past four years, absence of-new 
lending. As of end-March
2000, Jamaica's debt outstanding and disbursed (DOD) to the Bank was US$383 million,15 or 12.1 percent of
Jamaica's total public and publicly-guaranteed (PPG) external debt of US$3.2 billion (about 46 percent of
GDP). A furhier US$54 million was undisbursed under six on-going Bank projects. Over the past ten years,
net flows to Jamaica from the Bank have averaged a negative US$30 million annually, and net transfers a
negative US$73 million annually.

14 Other indicators such as infant mortality are not being tracked since there is no recent data on this. In early childhood (3-5
years), the enrolment is already almost 95 percent, and near 100 percent in primary education.

15 US$353 million at end-September 2000.

28

86. 
Against the backdrop of the macroeconomic outlook under the authorities' program (see Table 3),
the proposed base case Bank lending program for Jamaica in FY01 -02 (US$220 million) would entail only a
moderate increase in Bank exposure, given that principal repayments due on existing Bank loans average
almost US$50 million annually over the next five years. Even under relatively optimistic disbursement
assumptions (see footnote 18), the proposed lending program would see Jamaica's debt outstanding and
disbursed to the Bank increase to US$422 million (12.4 percent of the projected external public and publicly-
guaranteed (PPG) debt stock) at end-March 2001, rising further to US$476 million (13.1 percent of the
projected external PPG debt stock) by end-March 2002 and stabilizing thereafter (see Table 7).
87. 
In terms of the flow exposure indicators which the Bank typically tracks, over the next five years:
(i) debt service to the Bank as a ratio of exports of goods and services is projected to remain within the
2-3 percent range and even fall below 2 percent after 2001/02; and (ii) debt service to the Bank as a ratio of
total PPG external debt service is projected to remain within the 13-14 percent range.16 However, debt
service to preferred creditors as a ratio of total PPG external debt service payments due would remain high,
in the 36-38 percent range,17 over the medium term.
88. 
In terms of overall external indebtedness, Jamaica's debt to GDP ratio places it around the median
for IBRD borrowers. However, Jamaica's total (internal plus external) debt to GDP is among the highest of
all IBRD borrowers, which limits its capacity to absorb additional shocks or pressures. Nevertheless, IBRD
exposure should remain manageable, even as Jamaica faces a high overall debt burden. Constitutionally,
debt servicing receives precedence over all expenditures on the budget, which means that creditors would get
paid even if other expenditures such as planned investments have to be curtailed.

Table 7: External Public and Publicly-Guaranteed Debt and Bank Exposure Indicators"
Base-case Bank lending scenario (Jamaican Fiscal Year)

Estimate 

------ 

----------- 

Projection -------------------

1999/2000 2000/01 

2001/02 

2002/03 

2003/04 

2004/05

Overall Indebtedness
PPG DOD/XGNFS 
PPG DOD/GDP 
PPG DS/XGNFS 

IBRD exposure
IBRD DS/PPG DS 
Preferred creditor DS/PPG DS 
IBRD DS/XGNFS 
IBRD DOD (US$ million) 

94.0 
46.0 
17.9 

12.5 
32.1 
2.2 
383 

94.4 
47.2 
15.7 

13.7 
38.0 
2.1 
422 

95.3 
47.6 
16.4 

12.9 
37.5 
2.1 
476 

85.0 
42.9 
26.1 

7.6 
22.3 
2.0 
476 

80.2 
40.9 
13.9 

13.4 
37.9 
1.9 
472 

75.2
38.5
12.5

13.4
36.0
1.7
470

89. 
Financial Management and Procurement. Draft Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA) and Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) exercises have recently been completed and

16 With the exception of Jamaican fiscal year 2002/03, when the ratio would dip to around 8 percent due to a concentration of
repayments on sovereign bonds.

17 Again, with the exception of a dip (to about 22 percent) in Jamaican fiscal year 2002/03.

18 The key assumptions underlying the exposure projections include: (i) new Bank commitments of US$110 million (of which
US$75 million fast-disbursing) per year in (Bank) FYO1-02, followed by US$75 million in new (investment) commitments in
FY03-05; (ii) fast-disbursing commitments to be disbursed in the same FY; (iii) 30 percent disbursement ratios for new investment_
commitments beginning in the FY following the commitment; (iv) interest and charges on new IBRD commitments at 8.7 percent;
and (v) projections of aggregate debt flows and stocks based on the authorities' baseline medium-term scenario outlined in Table 3.

29

will shortly be discussed with the Government. The CFAA analyzes the state of public sector budgeting,
accounting, financial reporting and auditing. It concludes that the overall structure of government fimancial
management is sound, especially in comparison with other Caribbean countries, and that accountability
procedures and practices are on balance sufficiently reliable for fast-disbursing lending from the bank to be
adequately administered. However, in spite of recent progress (partly through the implementation of Bank-
financed reform programs), some weaknesses remain. The CFAA makes several recommendations to
improve public sector financial management, some of which were based on prior diagnostic work carried out
by international firms. On procurement issues, the Government has made progress, as reflected in impending
finalization of its procurement policy manual and handbook of procurement procedures. However, a large
number of issues remain, seemingly more challenging than those on financial management. To address
these, the draft CPAR has made recommendations that can be implemented in the short term (including, for
example, using competitive bidding instead of direct invitations to approved contractors, and establishment
of a system for administrative appeal against the decisions of the National Contracts Commission) as well as
in the medium term. Many of the weaknesses that have been identified in both financial management and
procurement issues are being addressed in the on-going Public Sector Modernization Project (PSMP), and
efforts will be made to involve DFID and other agencies in addressing the remaining issues. In addition, the
Government is examining ways to implement the recommendations of a Strategic Review for strengthening
its accountability framework.
90. Managing Risks. Jamaica is a politically open and stable democracy. The incumbent Government
was elected by a large majority in 1989, 1993 and 1997 and has broad support across the country and at the
local level. It has the political support needed to undertake far-reaching economic reforms. Unfortunately,
the last five years have been among the most challenging in independent Jamaica, and the risk of adverse
developments under which the macroeconomic context for the proposed Bank assistance program would
come under threat (with deteriorating debt-to-GDP ratios and negative growth) is significant. Key risks have
been highlighted in Section II.D. Such risks would be addressed along the lines described below:
External Risk Factors. Steps are being taken to increase Jamaica's resilience to such shocks, for
example by ensuring further reserve build-up under the SMP. If, in spite of this, the macroeconomic
situation were to deteriorate significantly, the Bank would need to work with the authorities and the IMF
to strengthen the macroeconomic framework, while ensuring that measures were being taken to protect
the poor. In such a context, the authorities would likely have little option but to seek enhanced support
from the IFIs.

 Risks of Weak Domestic Response. Despite the steps taken by the Government to improve private
sector investment incentives, there are risks that the recovery will be slower than expected. Such risks,
and their potentially adverse consequences for the poor, would be mitigated by the Bank-assisted
strengthening of the safety net program, and through efforts to gain a better understanding of the
determinants of and structural constraints to growth, as well as of the links between growth and poverty,
and to work the public policy implications into the dialogue with Government. Were unfavorable
developments to materialize, the Bank would work closely with the Government as well as the IMF and
other development partners to track and alleviate repercussions on the poor and vulnerable and to
appropriately strengthen the policy stance.
* Policy Risk Factors. At least three ways of mitigating risks of delays or setbacks in the implementation
of the authorities' program would be pursued. First, while it is difficult to predict policy reversal, the
Bank will continue to engage in close dialogue with both the Government and civil society to reduce the
chances of this happening, and encourage public announcements and debate on government reform
intentions. Second, given the lessons of the past, the planned configuration of Bank lending-based on
up-front and irreversible reform measures that are domestically "owned"-would help mitigate risks. In
particular, this approach would be followed in the proposed Bank support for the bank restructuring and
debt management program, which would take the form of two discrete, phased operations. Third, in the
unlikely event that reversal should occur, the Bank would continue to engage in dialogue and to,-
encourage debate, while deferring or discontinuing new lending as appropriate.

30

91. 
Risk mitigation efforts notwithstanding, it is clear that the success of Jamaica's program cannot be
guaranteed. The Bank needs to weigh the reputational risk to which it will be subject if its technical and
financial support for Jamaica is associated with disappointing results against the potential costs to the country
of inadequate support (and the different type of reputational risk associated therewith). This CAS, while
cognizant of both, makes the case for resuming strong support. It recognizes that Jamaica has had a long
period of financial sector difficulties and economic recession. Serious social problems have taken root. To
combat these, the Government has shown resolve in maintaining a very tight and potentially unpopular fiscal
stance, and in defining a program for the resolution of financial sector problems. Under these circumstances,
this CAS seeks to respond to the encouraging reform steps already taken. It also maintains a shorter-than-
usual two-year horizon, intended to enable a broadening and deepening of in-country consultations over the
next 18 months, as well as to continue studying and analyzing the evolving situation in order to best respond
to Jamaica's needs. Delay may be costly for Jamaica, and there is the real risk that the socio-economic
situation could get worse unless the Bank and other IFIs are able to extend timely assistance to the country.
The Bank will work closely with other bilateral and multilateral agencies in ensuring that complementarity in
activities is maintained and strengthened, and that the development impact of combined efforts is maximized.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

92. 
Past shortcomings in macro-financial policies and structural reforms have been costly and have
placed Jamaica in a vulnerable position. The Bank proposes a pragmatic and focused assistance program that
would re-engage the lending relationship between the Government and the Bank, and help the Government
restore economic growth by consolidating hard-earned macroeconomic stability, pursuing efforts to
restructure the financial sector, and strengthening mechanisms to protect the poor. Financial support is
focused financial sector resolution and on social protection and education. The lending program is selective
and prudent, and provides timely and much-needed assistance to Jamaica without compromising its debt
position or implementation capacity. Proposed non-lending services seek to improve the country's
understanding of poverty, growth, and competitiveness-related issues. The program also provides for a
broad-based in-country consultation process that would help the Government strengthen the national
consensus on development priorities. At the same time, the Bank is aware of the significant risks to which its
proposed assistance program is subject, and stands ready to re-assess it, should macroeconomic, structural,
and portfolio management conditions so warrant.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Sven Sandstrom

November 2, 2000

Jamaica at a glance 

Annex A

Latin Lower-
America middle.
Jamaica & Carib. 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond*

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 

2.6 
2,330 
6.6 

509 
3,840 

2,094 
1t200
2,513

Life expectancy

GNP per capita (Atas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, USS billions) 

1,955 

Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (%) 
Laborforce (9%) 
Most recent estirate (latest year available, 1993-99) 

1.0 
15 

t.6 
2.5 

1.1
1.2 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 

16,9
s0 
71 
25 
10 
83 
14 
100 
100 
99 

Urban population (9 of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Inat mortality (per 1,000 ive births) 
Child malnutrition (X of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 
KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 
2A 
19.2 
49.8 
18.4 
13.3 
-5.8 
4.4 
71.7 
23.8 
-. 

75 
70 
31 
8 
75 
12 
113 

43
69
33
15 
86
16
114 
114 
116 

Access to safe water

Jamaica
---Lower-middle-income group
:

.- 

.. 

1989 
4.1 
28.5 
47.2 
19.0 
16.4 
-7.2 
4.2 
111.1 
29.6 

1998 
7.1 
29.0 
47.2 
21.9 
26.0 
-3.0 
2.4 
58.6 
15.0 
53.5
106.5

1999
7.2
29.6 
46.7 
20.6
25.1
-4.5 
2.7 
58.8 
17.1

Economic ratlos*

GDP (USS billions) 

Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross dornesti savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balancetGDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Totalextemaldebt/GDP 
Total exWnal debt servicelexports 
Present value of external debt/GDP 
Present value of external debt/exports 

T

rade

Domestc
Domestic 
Savngs

Investment

.

.. 

.. 

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

199 

1999 1999-03

(average annual pro wth)

GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1.2 
-0.6 
4.0 

0.6 
0.8 
0.1 

-0.5 
0.1 
7.9 

0.0 
-1.8 
-1.1 

2.5 
1.7 
4.0

-Jamaica
-- Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(96 of GDP at m.p.)

Agriculture 
Industry 

7.2 
40.3 
16.4 
52.5 

6.9 
42.7 
159.6 
50.4 

7.1 
29.8 

6.9 
27.7
126 4 
49.6 

5 

Manufacturing 

13.9 

0 

Services 

51.6 

-5 

95 

9

.10

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

62.3 
19.3 
50.6 

67.0 
14.1 
56.7 

60.4 
18.6 
55.2 

62.3 
17.4 
56.0

-15

-GDI 

O GDP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

0.3 
0.8 
1.7 
1.S 
3.5 
5.2 
-1.1 
7.7 
0.7 

3.0 
-0.2 
-1.8 
0.9 
-0.4 
-1.3 
4.6 
0.0 
1.5 

0.2 
-1.4 
-3.9 
0.1 
-7.7 
11.0 
-11.0 
-4.8 
0.9 

1.7 
-0.1 
-09 
-0.1 
3.2
-6.8 
2.1 
1.4 
-1.0

40

30 -

20

10

.10 
-20

94

-

Exports 

_Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
ImplicitGDPdeflator 

r0

28.7 
16.6 

23.8 
12.6 

8.1 
6.8 

6.3 
7.9 

eo

40

Government finance 
( of GDP, includes current giants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 

20
0 

.

31.8 
5.6 

28.0 
-4.7 

30.3 
-2.4 
-4.3

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99

-G 

DP deflator 

e- CPI

Overall surplus/deficit 

1.2 

-7.3 

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

(US$ millions)

Total exports (fob) 
Alumina 

1,000 
475 

1,551 
588 
83 
43 
2,561 
280 
293 
516 

1,535 
672 
48 
44 
2,719 
328 
429 
472 

3,500

3,000

Bauxite 

Il 

2,s00

Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

69 
1,874 
160 
274 
565 

2,
1, sSi
1,000
soo
o

93 

94 

9s 

96 

97 

98 

99

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 

101 
85 

96 
112 

98
116 

* Exports 

* Imports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

118 

85 

85

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exportsofgoodsandservices 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

1,165 
1,198 
-32 

1,941 
2,291 
-350 

3,353 
3,925 
-572 

3,366 
4,037 
-671 

o
-1 - *_ 
.2

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-187 
80 

-271 
323 

-283 
638 

-353 
698 

3.
4

Current account balance 

-139 

-298 

-217 

-326 

-s

;Financing items (net) 

-20 

136 

203 

448 

4- 

.

Changes in net reserves 

159 

161 

14 

-122 

-7

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millons) 
Conversion rate (DEC, hcaU/USS) 

.. 

.. 

700 
36.9 

801
40.1

1.8 

5.7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composton of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

1,705 
127 
0 

4,560 
650 
0 

4,026 
410 
0 

4,039
355 
0 

A 355
c 86

G: 638 

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

302 
15 
0 

643 
109 
0 

537 
99 
0 

614
106
0 

D 

580

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 

13 
110 
-39 

122 
75 
-11 

92
-144 
217 

-8 
-73

F 1,054

Foreign direct investment 

-26 

57 

369 

.

Portfolio equity 
i 

0 

0 

0 

t 

1,326

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

60 
19 
5 

75 
52 
54 

0 
31 
72 

0 
25 
78 

A - IBRD 

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

B -IDA 

D - Other muftisteral 

c - IMF 

Net flows 

15 

-2 

-41 

-53

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

11 
4 

55 
-57 

28 
-68 

28
-81

Development Economics 

1112t00

ANNEX Bi: Country Program Matrix, FYO1-02

,''' 

t 

, 

i 

'. 

, 

, 

_ 

___________

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
Over-arching Objective 
* Annual monitoring to improve 
* All partners 
* GoJ: Poverty tracking updates 
FY02: Support for poverty
Poverty level is estimated at 16.9 
targeting of the poor. Maintain 
(JSLC) in Sept. 2001 and Sept. 
analysis
* 
percent for 1999 by the Government, 
strong macroeconomic 
2002
but recent gains in poverty reduction 
frainework to improve the 
* GoJ and Bank: Safeguard against
are reversible unless growtth occurs 
environment for private sector- 
poverty reversal. Poverty
led growth through a 
headcount target of 16 percent in
2002 (16.9 percent in 1999)
comprehensive resolution of the 
financial sector, and improve 
* GoJ and Bank: Total public 
sector debt to be reduced to 114 
social protection 
attainmnent
intervention 
percent of GDP by April 2002 

* 

* 

FYO1-02: Two fast-disbursing
loans in support of a bank
restructuring and debt
management program (BRDP)

Short term Objective 
* Goverfnment intervention in 
financial sector led to mounting debt 
of 131 percent of GDP (excluding 
intra-public sector debt) by April
2000

* 

IMF - Staff Monitored 
indattan Programn (SMP) 
IDB & CDB - Financial 
sector loans 

* 

Rehabilitating the Financial Sector
* Government intervened in several 
domestic financial institutions to 
protect depositors and stave off a 
financial collapse and to prevent a 
run on the local currency 

1. Restoring Economic Growth

IMF - SMP 
IDB and CDB - Financial 
sector loans 
* CDB - Technical 
Assistance Grant 

* Comprehensive resolution of 
* 
public sector liabilities associated * 
with the intervention. 
Restructure the financial sector 
through divestment of the 
financial institutions, disposal of 
non-performing loans, and 
strengthening of prudential 
regulations and supervisory 
capacity 

* 

* 

FY01: BRDP (first phase)
FY02: BRDP (second phase)

* GoJ and Bank: Macroeconomic 
and financial sector program on 
track, including the sale of Union
Bank of Jamaica and significant
reduction of FINSAC liabilities
* GoJ: Government to explicitly
assume outstanding FINSAC
liabilities in April 2001 and
convert them into marketable
securities
* NCB and LOJ to be prepared for
resolution
* GoJ and Bank: establish Financial
Services Commission for
integrated supervision of financial
institutions by March 31, 2001

ANNEX Bi: Country Program Matrix, FY01-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reluction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Sbort term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
Consolidating Fiscal Policy
The growing interest bill on public * Maintain large primary surpluses * RMF - SMP 
sector debt (incl. FINSAC liabilities) 
in FY01 and FY02 so as to 
* EU 
was the main reason for public 
reverse the adverse debt 
sector deficits (9.1 percent of GDP 
dynamics 
in 1999/2000, inclusive of interest 
* Reduce the debt stock by using 
due on FINSAC liabilities but not 
the proceeds of planned 
paid) 
divestments of public enterprises 
and intervened financial 
institutions 
* 
Strengthen tax administration 
* Reform public enterprises 

* GoJ: Reduce overall public sector * Recently completed Social
deficit to 4.9 percent of GDP by 
Sector Expenditure Review
April 2001 and 0.6 percent of GDP * 
Evaluation of Tax
by April 2002 
Administration project
* GoJ: Continued expenditure 
* Ongoing Public Sector
restraint in the next two budgets 
Modernization project
* National Water Commission
(NWC): Implement the
performance targets approved by
the Office of Utility Regulation
(OUR) set for end-2000/01

Strengthening the Framework for
Private Investment
* Need to rationalize the public sector. * 
The infrastructure investment 
demands are large and the 
Government does not have the 
resources 
Private sector-led activities impeded 
by structural, regulatory and 
macroeconomic factors. 
* Erosion of competitiveness in recent 
years owing to exchange rate 
appreciation 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Improve incentives for private 
* 
[DB - Power sector reform * GoJ: Sell Jamaica Public Service * Ongoing Public Sector
sector by improving financial 
* Germany - Energy project 
Company (JPSCo) by March 31, 
Modernization project
intermediation and creating a 
* EU, DFID, UNDP, CIDA -
2001 
Potential as well as some
framework for a decline in 
Public Sector 
* GoJ: Private operation of the water 
ongoing IFC and MIGA
interest rates, reducing labor 
* EU, IDB - Ports 
company under new legislation 
operations
market rigidities and combating 
privatization 
* GoJ: Private sector participation in * Ongoing Private Investment
crime 
* CIDA, DFID, IDB -
a free zone management, airport 
and Export Development
Strengthen regulatory 
Justice system 
terminals, water utility. 
project
frameworks in critical sectors to * EU,CIDA,USAID -
* GoJ: Maintain competitive 
FY01: Social and Structural
leverage private sector 
Telecom reform 
exchange rate and reduce existing 
Review including growth and
participation 
EU, CDB, JBIC, IDB -
restrictions such as surrender 
competitiveness issues
Stimulate private production by 
Water reform 
requirements
land titling and improving access * 
JBIC, EU, IDB, KFED -
to credit for small businesses 
Highway
* Do not allow exchange rate to 
* CIDA, EU, USAID, IDB,
appreciate, and focus on 
UNDP - Micro-
providing an enabling 
enterprises
environment 
IDB, EU, CDB -
Agricultural sector reform
* 
IDB - Trade liberalization
* USAID, EU, CIDA -

* 

* 

Competition laws

ANNEX B1: Country Program Matrix, FYO1-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
2. Protecting the Poor and Ensuring Inclusion

Enhancing the Efficiency of Safety
Nets
in place which * Comprehensive reform of social * 
a At least 45 programns 
provide much needed assistance to 
safety nets focusing on the needs 
the poor and vulnerable; however, 
of poor children, youth at risk, the 
there are several shortcomings, 
disabled, single-parent 
including coverage, errors, low 
households large rural families, 
average benefits, high administrative 
the long-term unemployed, and 
overheads, fragmentation of 
victims of natural disasters. 
programs, lack of eligibility criteria * Unify and increase spending on 
and inadequate tailoring of programs 
income transfer programs, and 
to the needs of the poor and 
introduce a cost-efficient, 
transparent and accessible 
vulnerable 
delivery mechanism 

IDB, CDB, EU, DFID -
Social safety net and their 
reform 

* 

* GoJ and Bank: Social safety net * Ongoing Social Investment
expenditures in 2000/01 and 
Fund
* Planned evaluation of SIF
2001/02 be maintained in real 
terms 
* FY01: Assessment of social
* GoJ: Eliminate ineffective 
programs
FY0 1: Social safety net reform
programs 
* GoJ: Introduce early childhood 
project
development programs and 
* FY01: Youth-at-risk report
establish standardized targeting * FY0 1: Social and Structural
for safety nets 
Review
* GoJ: Develop universal targeting * FY02: Poverty study
mechanisms
* GoJ: Improve targeting of school
feeding programs by directing
benefits to poor students,
increasing coverage, and
improving the nutritional content

of meals

* GoJ: Develop a strategy for
pension reform

ANNEX B1: Country Program Matrix, FY01-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
Improving Educational Attainment
* Near-universal 9 years of education. * 
However, enrollment rate declines in 
secondary education and this 
together with low attainment at all 
levels is associated with 
delinquency, violence, youth 
unemployment and poverty 

Increase number of school places * UNICEF, CIDA, CDB, 
in upper secondary school. 
DFID - Basic education 
Improve learning outcomes at all * 
IDB, USAID, DFID -
levels 
Primary education 
* Ensure key beneficiaries of 
* DFID, NET, IDB, EU, 
education expansion are poor 
IBRD - Secondary and 
children 
tertiary education 
Strengthen teacher skills and 
improve incentives in the use of 
teachers' services 
* Reform education finance 

* 

* 

* Ongoing Reform of Secondary
Education (ROSE) project
* Recently completed policy
report on secondary education
* Ongoing Student Loan project
* 
FY02: ROSE 11

* GoJ: Abolish automatic 
promotion from primary through 
secondary schooling 
* GoJ: Develop and introduce a 
common core curriculum for 
secondary education 
* GoJ: Provide textbooks, teacher
training for disadvantaged
schools
* GoJ and Bank: Implement
education finance reforms by
equalization of allocations to
different school types, improving
cost sharing at the secondary
level, and reducing leakage of
financial assistance
* GoJ and Bank: Increase
percentage of grade 9 students
having a place in grade 10 to near
100 percent

Improving Health Services
* Despite recent reforms and public 
* Change in the financing and 
IDB, PAHO, DFID, EU -
spending of close to 4 percent of 
organization of sector to improve 
Health sector reform 
GDP per year, the aging of Jamaica's 
efficiency, equality and quantity * EU, USAID, Germany, 
population and other factors have 
* Develop and introduce a national 
JICA, NET - Health 
shifted the causes of morbidity and 
health insurance system 
services provision 
mortality toward chronic and 
* Enhance partnerships with private * NET, Gennany, USAID, 
degenerative conditions 
sector 
CIDA, PAHO, UNDP, IDB 
Janaica has a high HIV/AIDS 
Prevention and treatment 
- HIV/AIDS prevention and 
prevalence rate among adults 
treatment

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* GoJ: Introduce national health 
insurance system in the medium 
term 
* GoJ: Separate policy-making and 
operational functions through
decentralization of service
delivery with the creation of
regional health authorities

FO l: Bank's Regional
Conference on HIV/AIDS
FY01: Regional project on
HIV/AIDS

ANNEX B1: Country Program Matrix, FYO1-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the wav for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an enviroiment for growth

Stimulating Labor-intensive Growth

Rigidities in labor market and wage * Modernize collective bargaining * GERMANY, UNDP, EU, 
setting mechanisms are exacerbating 
process, expand social pact to 
IDB, JICA - Skills Training 
unemployment problems, in 
cover all sectors, introduce 
Program 
particular among women and youth 
preventive conciliation to avoid * CIDA - Facilitating labor 
strikes and reduce time lag in 
market reforms 
tribunal awards 

* 

FY01: Labor Market Analysis
as part of Social and Structural
Review, building on work done
so far

* GoJ: Reviews of vocational, 
skills and community-based 
training programs in terms of 
effectiveness (apprentices job 
placement), administrative costs
and degree of targeting to the
poor
* GoJ: Move to social partnerships
in specific sectors, including
sugar and tourism
* GoJ: Implement the amended
Trade Union Act during 2000-02

3. Improving Governance, Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Sector

Divesting from Commercial Activities
* Despite progress on divesting public * Continue to introduce private 
entities over the past decade, the 
management and financing 
experience has been mixed. 
Strengthen regulatory 
Government re-acquired activities in 
frameworks in all utilities 
sugar, urban transport, and financial 
institutions

* 

* 

IDB, EU 

* GoJ: Privatization of power and * Ongoing Private Investment
water utilities and the two 
and Export Development
international airports 
project
* GoJ: Move towards privatization
of roads and railways

Improving Management and
Information Systems
* Need to further improve the 
financial and human resources 
management systems 

* Customer service improvement * 
programs in 25 agencies 
* Computerization of tax and 
customs administration 

IDB - Integrated Financial * GoJ: Complete testing of 
Management 
Integrated computer Tax 
* EU - Budget Management 
Administration System and 
and Support 
introduce the new system to
increase tax revenues
* GoJ: Bring small businesses and
informal sector under tax net and
increase their compliance with
existing regulations

* Ongoing Tax Administration
and Public Sector
Modernization projects

ANNEX BI: Country Program Matrix, FY01-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
Reforming Public Management and
Incentives
* The public sector has seen a 
proliferation of agencies, and suffers 
from inefficient business practices 
and a lack of focus on results and 
accountability, which have often 
translated into low quality of 
delivered services 
* Despite progress, financial 
management and procurement 
practices need strengthening 

* Continue with efforts to introduce * 
New Public Management 
patterned on reforms in the UK * 
and New Zealand 
Strengthen project preparation 
and implementation capacity 

EU, DFID, UNDP, CIDA -
Public Sector Reform 
IDB, UNDP, CIDA, 
UNICEF - Decentralization 
EU, CIDA, UNDP - civil 
society/electoral reform 

* 

* 

* 

* GoJ and Bank: Complete the 
* Ongoing Public Sector
conversion of 17 entities into ten 
Modernization project
executive agencies and strategic * FY0 1: Country Portfolio
reform of key ministries 
Performance Review
* GoJ: Restrict ministries to core 
FY0 1: Country Financial
functions of policy formulation 
Accountability Assessment
and evaluation. Transfer 
FY0 1: Country Procurement
implementation to relevant 
Assessment Review
agencies
* GoJ: Implement
recommendations of Strategic
Review
* GoJ and Bank: Finalize
procurement manual and
handbook of procurement
procedures in 2000-01

* 

Generating Synergy in the
Environment-Economy Relationship

4. Ensuring Sustainable Development

* Tourism, bauxite mining and 
agriculture are dominant activities. 
But they also contribute to 
environmental degradation. 
Increased air and water pollution has 
adverse impact on poor 
* 

* 

* Create a framework for the 
sustainable use of natural 
resources 
Promote policies based on 
"polluters pay" principle 
Enhance partnerships with civil
society

* CIDA, USAID, UNDP, 
GEF, IDB - Environmental 
Policy Management 
* EU, CIDA, UNDP, IDB -
Watershed Management 

* GoJ: Strengthen the institutional * 
capacity for environmental 
management, in particular in 
waste, coastal zone and
watershed management

Initiating preparation of a
regional project on biodiversity
protection funded by the GEF

ANNEX B1: Country Program Matrix, FY01-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
Stimulating Agricultural Growth

* About 75 percent of poor live in 
rural areas. Rural poor are small 
farmers, fishermen, unskilled wage * 
laborers. High costs and low 
productivity a key issue 

* 

Invest in quantity and quality of * CDB, EU, IDB, JICA -
assets owned by rural poor 
Agricultural support and 
Improve agricultural productivity 
production 
in particular in sugar and bananas 
as prefercntial access is croded 

* GoJ: Improve rural education and
health services
* GoJ: Implement National
Irrigation Plan
* GoJ: Facilitate credit access and
support agro-industry
* GoJ: Accelerate land titling and
leases

Linking Tourism and Sustainable
Development

* 

Sustainability of tourism depends on * Facilitate management of the 
improved management and 
natural resources and 
participation 
diversification of tourism product 
and wider stakeholder 
participation

* GoJ: Enforce "polluter pay" laws
and tax incentives
* GoJ: Raise revenue for financing
environmental protection

Improving Disaster Preparedness

* 

Jamaica is vulnerable to 
* Continue to update the National * CDB, IDB 
earthquakes, hurricanes and flooding 
Environmental Action Plan 
due to rising sea-level 
including the disaster mitigation 
strategies 

* GoJ: Prepare, with external 
assistance, strategies for hazard 
mitigation, land mapping, 
earthquake hazard assessment
and oil spill contingency plan

* Ongoing Caribbean Planning
for Adaptation to Global
Climate Change project

* 

* Need for an integrated approach to 
Identify regional approaches 
natural resource management in 
* Enhance human development 
connection with the tourism industry * 
Improve governance to deal with 
* Caribbean region has identified 
crime and violence 
education, HIV/AIDS, governance, * Safeguard enviromnent to ensure 
tourism-environment issues as 
tourism sustainability 
priorities for next 3 years 
Prevent H1V/AIDS 

* 

5. Regional Agenda

* GEF 
* EU, 1DB, CDB, UNDP, UK, 
DFID, CIDA. PAHO 

* Bank: Explore with several 
Caribbean countries the 
enviromnental priorities relating 
to bio-diversity and eco-tourism 
* Bank: Organize CGCED 
meetings and take the lead in the 
preparation of studies and 
projects with active participation * 
of civil society and extemal 
agencies

* 

FY01: Ongoing regional
studies on catastrophic
reinsurance and risk
management
* Ongoing Small States
initiative, Vision 2020 study
and other regional reports
FY01: Regional project on
HIV/AIDS

Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of 10/12/2000

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under hnplementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Numbera, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amounta, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousands) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousands/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

7 
3.6 
28.6 
40.8 
42.9 
55.5 
14.2 

yes 
422 
60.3 

7 
4.6 
28.6 
40.8 
42.9 
53.8 
18 

no 
474.3 
67.8 

6 
5.2 
0 
0 
16.7 
18.1 
55.7 

yes 
544.8 
90.8 

6
5.5
0
0
0
0
9.2

n/a
n/a
n/a

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
45 
933.9 
47.7 
48.5 

5
150.3
40
43.3

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Programa'

Fiscalyear 

Project 

US$ 
(million) 

Strategic 
Implementation
Rewards 
(H/IML) bl Risks (HIMIL)

b

2001 

2002 

Bank Restructuring and Debt Management 
Social Safety Net Reform 

Subtotal FY01 
Bank Restructuring and Debt Management II 
Reform of Secondary Education (ROSE) II 
Subtotal FY02 
Total 

75.0 
35.0 
110.0
75.0 
35.0 
110.0
220.0

H 
H 

H 
H 

H
M

H
M

IFC & MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001 c

IFC approvals (US$m) 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

1998 

1999 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

2000 

0.00 

0.00

2001

-

a. This table presents the proposed program for Bank fiscal years 2001 and 2002. Note that this does not include: (i) proposed support for
a regional HIV/AIDS program which is expected to benefit Jamaica; and (ii) GEF-funded environmental management initiatives.
b. For each project, high (H), moderate (M), or low (L) indicates the expected strategic rewards and implementation risks.
c. FY200 Ito date.

Annex B4
Summary of Non-Lending Services

Product 

Recent completions

Public Expenditure Review 
Achieving Macro-Stability and Removing Constraints 
to Growth (CEM)
Urban Poverty and Violence 
Secondary Education: Improving Quality and Extending 
Access
Country Portfolio Perfomance Review 
Social Sector Expenditure Review 
Labor Market Analysis 
Macroeconomic Policy and Poverty in Jarnaica: An 
Evaluation of Options
Assessment of JSIF Interventions in Inner Cities 

Underway
Assessment of Social Assistance Programs 
Youth At Risk 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment Review 
Caribbean Gender Review 
Country Portfolio Perfomance Review 

Planned

Country Portfolio Perfomance Review 
Growth and Competitiveness Study (possibly Social and 
Structural Review)
Poverty Study 

Completion 

Audience a 

Objective b

FY96 
FY96 

FY97 
FY00 

FY00 
FY00 
FY00 
FY00 

FY00 

FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY0I 
FY01 
FY01 

FY02 
FY02 

FY03 

G/B/D 
G/B/D 

KG/SS
KG/PS

G/B/D/P 
G/B/D 

KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS

G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B 

G/B 

G/B 
G/B/D/P 
G/B 
G/B 
G/B/D/P 
G/B/D 

PS
KG/ PS
KG/PS
KG/PS

KG/PS

KG/PS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS/SS
PS

G/B/D 
G/B/D/P 

PS
KG/PS/SS

G/B/D/P 

KG/PS/SS

a. Government (G), Donor (D), Bank (B), Public dissemination (P).
b. Knowledge generation (KG), Problem-solving (PS), Strategy-setting (SS).

Annex B5
Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group2
Lower-
middle-
income

iV .ufLatin 

' .(cid:1) 

America 
& Carib. 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year(millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population(% ofpopulation) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY

2.0 
1.7 
41.2 
4.5 

2.3 
1.6 
47.8 
3.5 

2.6 
1.0 
50.2 
2.8 

509.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.7 

2,093.7
1.1
42.9
2.1

f/o ofpopulation)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

.. 

.. 

16.9
10.6
22.0

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas methodology) 
Consumer price index(1995=100) 
Food price index (i995=100) 
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

1,390 
2 
1 

900 
10 
9 

2,330 
146 
132

3,840 
147 

1,200
145

Gini index 
Lowest quintile (lo of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile(9o of income or consumption) 

.. 

.. 

0.4
7.0
43.9

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (%l of GDP) 
Education(% of GDP) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

3.7 
7.4 

3.3 
3.6 
7.4

3.0
4.8

Social security and welfare(%/ of GDP) 31 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 

.. 

.. 

0.5 

99 

98 

98 

95 

98

Male 
Female 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

99 
96 

96 
94 

98
97

Access to improved water source

(%o of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 

.. 
.. 
.. 

83 
98 
69 

75 
84 
45 

86
90
84

Immunization rate
(f/ under 12 months)

DPT 
Measles (12 - 24 months) 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

84 
82 
4 

93 
82 
8 

92
93
15

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 
Male 
Female 

68 
67 
70 

71 
69 
72 

71 
69 
72 

70 
67 
73 

69
67
72

Mortality

Infant(per thousand live births) 

35 

27 

25 

31 

33

Under 5 (per thousand live births) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

38 

39

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000population) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

216 
116 

194
134

Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

1ll

Births attended by skilled health staff (f%) 

.. 

.. 

98 

78 

69

1/ Figures received from the Planning Institute of Jamaica
2/ Figures from the World Bank live database system

3/ Some elements counted here under health and education expenditures could also be regarded as falling under this category. Such an

adjustment would more than double $he share of social security and welfare.

Annex B6
Key Economic Indicators - Base Case Scenario

---------- 

Actual ---------- 

Estimate 

--------- 

Projected ---------

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product (factor cost) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

100 
9.1 
38.8 
52.1 

100 
8.4 
36.8 
54.8 

100 
8.0 
35.4 
56.6 

100 
8.0 
33.7 
58.4 

100 
8.2 
32.8 
58.9 

100 
8.3 
33.0 
58.7 

100 
8.3 
32.4 
59.2 

100 
8.5 
32.3 
59.2 

100
8.6
32.1
59.4

Total Constunptiona 
Gross domestic investment 
Govermment investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

79.6 
31.8 
5.4 
26.4 

80.5 
32.3 
5.9 
26.4 

81.8 
32.4 
5.6 
26.8 

79.0 
29.0 
2.9 
26.1 

79.7 
29.6 
3.0 
26.6 

79.8 
30.0 
3.2 
26.8 

77.8 
30.5 
2.7 
27.7 

76.8 
31.0 
4.0 
26.9 

74.3
32.4
4.4
28.1

56.1 
67.4 

48.7 
61.5 

43.5 
57.7 

47.2 
55.2 

46.7 
56.0 

49.0 
58.8 

49.0 
57.3 

49.8 
57.5 

50.6
57.3

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

25.0 
30.0 

24.3 
30.7 

22.7 
27.7 

21.9 
26.0 

20.6 
25.1 

20.2 
25.2 

22.2 
25.1 

23.2 
25.6 

25.7
27.9

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GDP percapita (US$ at current prices) 

5,239 

5,864 

6,653 

7,109 

7,210 

7,376 

7,761 

8,161 

8,574

2,077 

2,310 

2,605 

2,760 

2,775 

2,815 

2,938 

3,066 

3,198

Real annual growth rates (%/o, calculated from 1986 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
0.7 

-1.4 

-2.1 

-0.5 

0.0 

1.5 

2.5 

2.8 

3.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (c/6, calculated from 1986 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-0.3 
-2.0 
Total consumption 
3.9 
-0.9 
Private consumption 
3.3 
-3.9 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFSP 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Current account balance as % of GDP 
Net private foreign direct investmnent 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapital(net,incl.errors&ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

-2.7 
-1.1 
-3.8 

-1.4 
-4.7 
-8.5 

-0.9 
0.0 
2.3 

0.6 
0.5 
1.5 

1.7 
0.7 
2.1 

2.0 
1.3 
1.7 

2.5
-0.7
-0.9

3,435 
1,802 
3,807 
2,703 
-372 
584 
-123 
-2.3 
88 
-137 
-79 
-57 
219 
-47 

3,369 
1,689 
3,888 
2,710 
-519 
658 
-93 
-1.6 
104 
20 
-175 
195 
121 
-152 

3,399 
1,703 
4,080 
2,850 
-681 
611 
-386 
-5.8 
169 
149 
-249 
398 
14 
53 

3,353 
1,551 
3,925 
2,661 
-572 
638 
-217 
-3.0 
309 
106 
-144 
251 
-213 
14 

3,366 
1,535 
4,037 
2,719 
-671 
698 
-326 
-4.5 
249 
-81 
23 
-104 
281 
-122 

3,615 
1,658 
4,337 
2,958 
-722 
780 
-352 
-4.8 
365 
262 
38 
224 
15 
-290 

3,804 
1,733 
4,450 
3,004 
-645 
738 
-415 
-5.4 
319 
232 
11 
221 
25 
-161 

4,060 
1,869 
4,696 
3,177 
-635 
748 
-434 
-5.3 
350 
-156 
-30 
-127 
25 
215 

4,339
2,014
4,916
3,324
-577
757
-392
-4.6
367
44
-24
68
25
-44

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR86 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
ManufactLres 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-7.1 

-8.8 

-10.2 

-8.0 

-9.3 

-9.8 

-8.3 

-7.8 

-6.7

13.7 
13.7 
0.9 
23.6 

-6.9 
-5.3 
-13.3 
0.4 

-2.3 
2.0 
-14.9 
4.5 

-7.2 
-10.6 
-4.2 
-1.4 

-3.8 
0.1 
4.7 
-2.9 

3.9 
5.7 
6.4 
4.9 

3.3 
3.1 
6.2 
2.8 

5.2 
4.6 
5.8 
4.4 

5.2
4.7
S.2
2.2

(Continued)

Annex B6
Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

---------- 

Actual --- 
Estimate -
Projected ---------
1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues (incl. grants) 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

31.4 
24.1 
7.3 
6.1 
-2.0 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%/o)

Price indices( YR86 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms oftrade index 
Real exchange rate indexf 

Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

28.6 
24.4 
197.7 

169.0 
141.4 
119.5 
1.08 

21.7 
25.2 

28.6 
29.5 
-0.9 
6.2 
-2.2 

31.9 
31.8 
23.4 

27.7 
30.8 
-3.1 
5.5 
1.2 

28.0 
32.7 
-4.7 
2.9 
1.2 

30.3 
32.6 
-2.4 
2.9 
-1.8 

32.7 
31.2 
1.5 
3.2 
2.7 

30.0 
2.5 
-84.0 

30.4 
11.9 
-68.3 

32.1 
16.4 
-80.0 

32.2 
8.8 
-75.9 

170.1 
141.9 
119.9 
1.35 

21.5 
17.7 

175.7 
131.2 
133.9 
1.45 

9.1 
10.5 

172.5 
119.5 
144.3 
1.48 

8.1 
6.8 

177.5 
130.7 
135.8 
1.42 

6.3 
7.9 

184.5 
157.9 
116.9 
1.42 

7.7 
6.8 

30.5 
26.8 
3.7 
2.7 
2.9 

32.3 
10.0 
77.4 

186.7 
156.6 
119.3 
1.42 

6.8 
6.6 

30.2 
25.2 
5.0 
4.0 
-2.0 

32.3 
9.0 
19.9 

29.8
24.2
5.6
4.4
0.4

32.3
8.1
40.7

191.4 
158.6 
120.7 
1.42 

196.0
162.0
121.0
1.42

6.3 
5.8 

5.5
4.9

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources; negative denotes increase.
e. Budgetary central government.
f. An increase in the index denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Key Exposure Indicators - Base Case Scenario

Indicator 

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

---------- 

Actual ---------- 

Estimate 

--------- 

Projected ---------

Total debt outstanding 
(TDO) (US$m)'
of which:

4,262 

3,981 

3,913 

4,026 

4,039 

4,480 

4,721 

4,575 

4,632

PublicandPubliclyGuaranteed(PPG) 
Short Term and Private Non-Guarantee( 

3,640 
622 

3,285 
695 

3,039 
874 

3,216 
810 

3,165 
875 

3,411 
1,069 

3,625 
1,096 

3,451 
1,124 

3,478
1,153

Net disbursements (US$m) 

-122 

-149 

93 

1 

-70 

245 

215 

-173 

29

Total debt service (TDS; US$m)' 

673 

674 

641 

537 

652 

666 

720 

1,157 

703

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

TDO/XGNFS b 
TDO/GDP ' 
PPG DOD/GDP b,o 
TDS/XGNFS 
PPGDS/XGNFS 
Concessional/lDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%) 
IBRDDS/XGNFS 
IBRD DOD (USSm) d 

Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA DOD (US$m) 

IFC Commitments (US$m)e
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity f 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

124.1 
91.7 
78.3 
19.6 
18.5 
31.5 

20.8 
50.8 
3.8 
595 

0.5 
0 

22.0 
2.0 

118.1 
63.8 
52.6 
20.0 
18.8 
31.3 

19.1 
44.3 
3.6 
515 

0.5 
0 

115.1 
59.8 
46.5 
18.9 
17.4 
27.7 

17.9 
42.0 
3.1 
431 

0.4 
0 

120.1 
58.6 
46.8 
16.0 
14.4 
26.3 

20.6 
40.2 
3.0 
410 

0.4 
0 

120.0 
58.8 
46.0 
19.4 
17.9 
24.3 

12.5 
32.1 
2.2 
383 

0.3 
0 

123.9 
62.0 
47.2 
18.4 
15.7 
22.7 

124.1 
62.0 
47.6 
18.9 
16.4 
20.1 

13.7 
38.0 
2.1 
422 

0.3 
0 

12.9 
37.5 
2.1 
476 

0.3 
0 

112.7 
56.9 
42.9 
28.5 
26.1 
17.1 

7.6 
22.3 
2.0 
476 

0.3 
0 

106.7
54.4
40.9
16.2
13.9
16.3

13.4
37.9
1.9
472

0.3
0

0.0 
0.0 

45.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

42.2 

38.4 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

... 

...

Note: All debt and debt service data relate to external debt only
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGNFS" denotes exports of goods and non-factor services.
"TDO" comprises PPG, Private Non-Guaranteed, and Short Term debt.
"DOD" denotes Debt Outstanding and Disbursed
c. External debt converted at end-period exchange rate.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. World Bank fiscal year.
f. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of 10/12/2000

Closed Projects 56

Active Proiects 

Project ID 

Project Name 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Develonment 
Objectives 

Imolementation 
Proeress

P007485 

P007490 
P007479 
P039029 
P038700 
P007489 

PRIVATE INESTMENT AND EXPORT 
DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC SECTOR MODERNIZATION 
REFORM OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 
SOCIALINVESTMENTFUND 
JAMAICA STUDENT LOAN 
TAXADMINISTRATIONREFORM 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Dibrs 

mDements'

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GE 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

1994 

1997 
1993 
1997 
1997 
1994 

Total 

35 

28.4 
32 
20 
28.5 
13.2 

157.1 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

9.3 

22.8 
5.1 
1.4 
6.1 
1.1 

45.7 

9 

17.1 
4.9 
-0.1 
4.2 
1.1 

36.2 

0

6.9
0
1.4
0
1.1

9.4

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Loans/Credits Summary in USD As of September 20, 2000
Original Principal 
1,326,000,000 
Cancellations 
90,019,937 

Disbursed 

Undisbursed 
Repaid 
Due 
Exchange Adjustment 
Borrower's Obligation 

Sold 3rd Party 

Repaid 3rd Party 
Due 3rd Party 

1,190,264,129 

45,715,934 
823,919,334 
364,767,931 
-11,886,058 
352,881,871 

1,576,864 

1,576,864 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

1,326,000,000
90,019,937

1,190,264,129

45,715,934
823,919,334
364,767,931
-11,886,058
352,881,871

1,576,864

1,576,864
0

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 08/31/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

FY Approval 

Company 

1995 

Jamaica Energy Partners Old Harbour Diesel Project 

Total Portfblio: 

Loan 

16.82 

16.82 

Held 

Disbursed

Equity 

Quasi Partic Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic

0 

0 

0 

0 

37.84 

16.82 

37.84 

16.82 

0 

0 

0 

0 

37.84

37.84

Annex B9
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Major issue 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation of country
and Bank priorities

Network area 

Country 
Performance 

Poverty Reduction and
Economic Management
* 
Poverty reduction 

Fair 

* 

Economic policy 

Fair 

* 

Public sector 

Fair 

* Gender 

Good 

Persistence of low growth and high 
unemployment threatens to reverse
(unexplained) poverty improvements of
recent years.

Fiscal consolidation is critical to reverse 
adverse debt dynamics. Need to improve
competitiveness, notably through structural
reforms in the labor market.
Despite reforms, shortcomings in the 
efficiency and accountability of the public
sector persist. Need to strengthen policy
formulation capacity and quality of public
service delivery.
High unemployment among women and 
vulnerability of female-headed households.
Marginalization of males.

High 

High

High 

High

High 

High

Moderate Moderate

High 

High

High 

Moderate Strong involvement by IDB,
USAID and other
development partners.
Jamaica to benefit from
planned Bank support for
regional program on
HIV/AIDS.

Human development
* 
Education 

* Health, nutrition and 
population 

Fair 

Good 

Quality shortcomings at all levels and 
access issues at the secondary level.
Generally low educational outcomes.
Key issues concem reproductive health of 
adolescents and youth, AIDS and other 
sexually transmitted diseases. 

* 

Social protection 

Fair 

Environmentally and
Socially Sustainable
Development
* 
Rural development 

Poor 

* 

Environment 

Fair 

* 

Social development 

Fair 

Finance, Private Sector
and Infrastructure
* 
Financial sector 

Poor 

* 

* 

Private sector 

Fair 

Energy and mining 

Good 

* 

Infrastructure 

Fair 

Numerous programs with limitcd bencfits, 
duplication and high administrative costs,
and coordination shortcomings.

High 

High

Shortcomings in rural infrastructure and 
management of watersheds. Limited 
support services for agriculture. Need for a 
well-articulated rural development strategy. 
Need for better disposal of liquid and solid 
waste. Risk uf degradation of watersheds
and coastal and marine resources.
Need to combat crime and violence, enforce 
law and order, and address youth-at-risk 
and community voice and participation 
issues. 

High 

Moderate Strong involvement by the
EU, USAID and CDB, and
proposed involvement by
the IDB.

Moderate Moderate

High 

Moderate Ongoing dialogue and AAA
on youth-at-risk. Other
development partners
supporting youth programs
and initiatives to combat
crime and strengthen voice
and participation.

Liquidity and solvency problems in 
significant parts of the domestic financial
sector concentrated in 1996/97, continuing
weak intermediation and need to strengthen
regulatory and supervisory framework.
High cost of capital. Weaknesses in 
regulatory framework persist.
Need to accelerate privatization in energy 
sector. Further investment needed to
expand capacity in mining sector.
Constrained public investments and 
allocations for maintenance. Regulatory 
framework for private participation needs 
strengthening.

High 

High

Moderate Moderate

Moderate Moderate

High 

Moderate 

EU, IDB, Japan and other 
development partners active
in this area.

-

Annex C
Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators
under an Alternative Medium-term Macroeconomic Scenario

Key Indicators 

Estimate 

------ 

1999/00 

2000/01 

--------- 

2001/02 

Projection ---------------

2002/03 

2003/04 

2004/05

Output
Growth of Real GDP (%) 
Growth of Real per capita GDP (%) 

Prices

Inflation rate (CPI) (end of period) 
Interest rates (180-day T-bills) 
Average exchange rate (LCU/US$) 
Public Finance (% of GDP)
Totalpublicdebt 
Publicsectorprimarybalance 
Central government balance 
External
Current accountlGDP 
Gross official reserves 
Debt Service/Exports (%) 

0 
-0.9 

8.4 
17.9 
42.1 

131.2 
12.5 
-4.3 

-4.5 
801.3 
17.9 

0.5 
-0.3 

7 
15.9 

-

125 
13.9 
-1.8 

-4.6 
1067.5 
15.8 

1 
0.2 

6.5 
15 

-

119.4 
13.1 
-0.1 

-5 
1179 
16.5 

1.5 
0.7 

6 
14.5 

-

114.3 
11.9 
-0.4 

-5 
899.7 
26.4 

2 
1.2 

5 
13.4 

-

109 
11.5 
-0.6 

-4.5 
876.4 
14.2 

2.5
1.7

4
12.3

-

103.9
11.1
-0.4

-4.4
862.2
12.9

Annex D
Sustainable Public Debt Dynamics

The Jamaican authorities' program, in particular the plan to address the stock of outstanding
FINSAC liabilities, is expected to begin to reverse the rapid growth in public debt observed
during the past few years. However, the prospects for sustaining a reduction in the stock of
(internal and external) public debt (as a ratio of GDP) over the long term hinge sensitively on the
evolution of interest rates, inflation, GDP growth, and the extent of continued fiscal effort (as
measured by the primary surplus-to-GDP ratio). This point may be illustrated using a simple
definitional relationship to summarize the mechanics of public debt dynamics-that this (end of)
period's debt stock equals last year's, plus interest due on last year's stock, less this year's
primary surplus.' Such a relationship, widely used in the economics literature to discuss the
concept of the sustainable public sector deficit, can be used to identify the level of fiscal effort
(primary surplus) required in order to keep the public debt stock (as a ratio of GDP) stable over
time for different parameter values (growth, interest rates, inflation, and the inherited debt
stock).2 Table D. 1 provides an illustration for a range of parameter values.

Table D.1: Primary Surplus/Deficit (+/-: % of GDP)
Reauired to Stabilize Public Debt Stock

g, f, i in % 
d in % of GDP 
d=100 
i=10 
i=12 
i=14 
i=16 
1=10 
i=12 
i=14 

d=130 

i7=16 

-O 

f=6 
3.8 
5.7 
7.5 
9.4 
4.9 

7.4 

9.8 
12.3 

f1=8 
1.9 
3.7 
5.6 
7.4 
2.4 
4.8 
7.2 

9.6 

f-18 
-0.1 
1.7 
3.5 
5.3 
-0.2 

2.2 

4.5 

6.9 

2

166 

1.7 
3.6 
5.4 
7.3 
2.3 

4.7 

7.1 

9.5 

f-8 
-2.1 
-0.3 
1.5 
3.3 
-2.7 

-0.4 

1.9 
4.3 

f6
-0.2
1.6
3.4
5.2
-0.3

2.1

4.4

6.8

Thus, for example, if the inherited debt stock stands at 130 percent of GDP, the effective
(nominal) interest rate on the debt is 14 percent, growth is zero, and inflation is running at 6
percent, the primary surplus required to hold the debt-to-GDP ratio stable is 9.8 percent of GDP.
A primary surplus that is any lower would result in an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio (the
lower the primary surplus, the larger the increase), while a higher primary surplus would of
course entail a decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio. For a lower (higher) interest rate, higher (lower)
growth,. and/or higher (lower) inflation, the primary surplus needed to stabilize a given debt-to-
GDP ratio is lower.

This equation can be rearranged to relate this year's debt-to-GDP ratio to last year's debt-to-GDP ratio and this
year's interest rate, inflation rate, GDP growth rate, and primary surplus. Specifically

dt = {(l+it)/[(l+fO)(l+gt)]}d,- - St

where d denotes the debt-to-GDP ratio, i the (nominal) interest rate, f the inflation rate, g the real growth rate of GDP,
and s the primary surplus as a ratio of GDP.

2 Arithmetically, this is obtained by setting d = d, = d and solving for s as a function of i, f, g, and d.

It should be noted that the consistency of these assumptions with a given fiscal stance is not necessarily assured.

However, for the illustrative purposes at hand this is not a source of concern. Note also the implicit assumption of no

3 

divestment of public assets.

Annex E
CAS Consultations

A. Background

Specific input for the preparation of this CAS was obtained through successive, detailed discussions and
reviews with the Ministry of Finance and Planning, the Planning Institute of Jamaica, and the Bank of
Jamaica. CAS discussions were also held with the Cabinet Secretary and Permanent Secretaries
representing all ministries. In addition, in agreement with the Government, the country team held
consultation meetings with a broad spectrum of civil society stakeholders, including private sector
representatives, community leaders, academics, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and
employer organizations. Consultations were also held with bilateral and other multilateral agencies active
in Jamaica.

The CAS consultation process was informed by very useful consultations initiated earlier on the reform of
the social safety net mechanisms. The meetings took place as follows (apart from those with immediate
Govemment counterparts):
* Montego Bay, Civil Society, September 27, 2000 (18 participants)
* Kingston, Development Partners, September 28, 2000 (18 participants)
* Kingston, Cabinet Secretary and Permanent Secretaries, September 28, 2000 (13 participants)
* Kingston, Civil Society, September 29, 2000 (15 participants)

B. Meeting Design and Obiectives

The main objective of the CAS consultations was to initiate a continuing and regular consultative process
between the Bank and Jamaican stakeholders on the country's development agenda, and to understand
how the Bank could best support it. Each meeting lasted about three hours and was moderated by a
professional facilitator. The first part of the meeting consisted of a brief presentation by the country team,
which covered Jamaica's development objectives and challenges (as seen by the Bank's country team) as
a context for the current CAS; an explanation of what a CAS is and the proposed strategy for Jamaica,
including the proposed areas of financial and technical support; and the rationale for selection of these
areas. This was followed by questions and answers on the CAS, the Bank's role, and other more general
issues and/or concerns on Jamaica's development agenda. The second part of the meeting was intended
to solicit participant views on three questions: (a) the causes of persistent poverty in Jamaica; (b) the
opportunities for reducing poverty and enhancing sustainable development; and (c) the key obstacles to be
overcome. In all but the last meeting (due to time constraints), there was an additional question on the
existence of a comprehensive national development strategy informed by consultations with civil society.

C. Summary of Particivants' Comments in response to the Country Team's Presentation of the
Development Ai!enda and proposed Bank Assistance

Poverty, social issues, and growth
* Growth necessary but not sufficient for poverty reduction. Need for targeted programs to assist the
poor and importance of giving the poor themselves a key role in shaping such programs.
* Lack of support systems to maximize use of education and lack of opportunities for students finishing
secondary education. Need for increased focus on human resource development, notably by
enhancing access to technical and tertiary education. Continued weaknesses in education attainment
at all levels, despite continuing progress in enrollment. Education the crucial link in breaking the
vicious cycle of youth-at-risk, crime and violence, and other social problems.
* Expansion of the informal economy a possible explanation of the recent decline in poverty despite
many years of zero or negative officially recorded growth. May explain puzzling trends in, for

example, electricity and cement consumption. Possible links with illegal, including drug-related,
activity.

Governance-related issues
* Large size of the public sector coupled with heavy bureaucracy and shortcomings in service delivery.
Need for systematic evaluation of public sector reform efforts. Need to strengthen implementation
capacity.
* Need to strengthen the rule of law, including the consistency of application and enforcement of law.
* Need to strengthen corporate governance.
* Emphasis on the need to institutionalize mechanisms to increase voice and participation, particularly
at the community level.

Constraints or costs of doing business for private sector
* Lack of incentives for private sector development (tax regime constraints, unfavorable investment
environment, high costs of and poor access to funds).
* High import taxes (e.g. same tax levels for medical equipment as for furniture) hindering
development of the various professional disciplines.
Inability of manufacturing industry to compete because of outdated equipment, inadequate technical
training and high costs of materials.

* 

Environment and rural development
* Difficulties faced in agriculture, owing to skewed land ownership patterns and lack of resources to
cultivate the land. Impact on the persistence of poverty, given the high concentration of poor people
in rural areas.
* Need for increased focus on environmental (e.g., marine) protection, given the central role of natural
resource assets in economic activities critical to Jamaica (e.g., tourism).

D. Participants' Comments in response to questions on the National Development Strategv, Causes
of Poverty, O=3rtunities for Growth, and Obstacles to Development

Views on the existence of a comprehensive national development strategv informed by a consultative
nrocess with civil society
- Civil Society (Montego Bay): the prevailing perception was that there was a need for wider and more
intensive consultations on such a strategy in order to improve awareness and ownership by civil
society of a national development strategy.
* Development partners (Kingston): the existence of several consultation fora was acknowledged, but
participants saw a need for deepening and especially broadening both the consultation agenda and the
scope of individuals consulted.
* Permanent Secretaries (Kingston): while the existence of several consultation fora was cited,
participants expressed the view that expectations needed to be managed, and that civil society and the
private sector would need to follow through more systematically with support for reform measures
around which consensus had been built. It was also suggested that broadening and strengthening the
consultation process would be beneficial, and that there was interest in the Bank facilitating this.

Views on the causes of poverty, opportunities for growth, and obstacles to development

>0 

o 

r O 

i g 

S >o 
0 Lb 

ffi 

@; 

s .g o 

O) i 

Shortcomings in early childhood development, high occurrence of teenage pregnancies, frequent
incidence of female-headed households, marginalization of males, absence of leadership (role
models), low respect for law and order, low national pride, heavy dependence on Government to
solve problems, governance and the political culture, inadequate investment, short-term economic
management driven by perpetual crises over the last three decades, fiscal and monetary policies
which constrain entrepreneurship and opportunities for a growing population, shortfalls in access to
and quality of education and training, inadequate curricula in parts of the education system, lack of
'life skills', limited development of human resources and capture of intellectual property, limited
availability of jobs, low wages and low productivity, skewed income and asset ownership
distribution, migration of well-educated people, urbanization, high costs of materials (e.g., energy),
failure to develop new industries, underdevelopment of natural resources

Education and training, information technology, improving police-community relations and
reducing crime and violence, community development, small business development, labor market
reform, modernization of the public sector, foreign investment, reduction in interest rates, rural
development (unutilized lands), forestry (cedar, mahogany), craft and furniture, better use of
natural resources (tourism), building convention and conference centers, health care tourism,
Jamaica as retirement island, international sports development facilities, globalization (regional
integration for greater economies of scale), comparative advantage in language, location, and links
with major trading partners

8 <, S 

m n e 

D > 

Legal barriers to doing business, poor family planning, factionalized civil society, parallel system
of government in inner cities, crime and violence, lack of confidence by the average individual,
lack of accountability, heavy bureaucracy, poor infrastructure, high cost of production, high interest
rates, lack of credit availability, low private sector involvement in the provision of social services,
insufficient technical knowledge

E. Conclusions and Lessons

The meetings were characterized by high energy and participation and the comments were constructive
and positive. Significantly, participants generally considered the country team's characterization of
Jamaica's development agenda to be the right one. They also did not express concerns regarding the
financial and technical support priorities proposed in the CAS, though several asked about the potential
for (increased) Bank involvement in other areas, such as rural development, tertiary education, and
enviromnental management. Overall, there seemed to be much appreciation for the consultation process.
Both Government and civil society expressed strong support for continuing this process and promoting a
broader and more in-depth dialogue with civil society in Jamaica, in order to help increase ownership and
deepen consensus on the overall development agenda.

ERD 20848

10

X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ji

~~~~~Jj 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~FBRAYloss

ii 

