Document of
The World Bank

For Official Use Only

Report No. 20355-UR

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE

WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

May 5, 2000

Country Management Unit Argentina, Chile and Uruguay
PREM Network
Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistane Strategy for Uruguay was discussed by the Executive 
IDirectors in June 1997 (Report N. 16642-UR, dated June 5, 1997). 

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Uruguayan Peso (Ur$)
Ur$ 11.90 = US$1

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR
July 1 -June 30

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
AIDS 
ANEP 
APL 
CAS 
CEPAL 
CPAR 
CPI 
GDP 
GEF 
GNP 
IDB 
IDF 
IMF 
IFC 
INE 
MERCOSUR 
MIGA 
NBI 
NGO 
OECD 

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Acquired Inmmune Deficiency Syndrome
National Administration of Public Education
Adaptable Program Loan
Country Assistance Strategy
Economic Commission for Latin America
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Consumer Price Index
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Product
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Monetary Fund
International Finance Corporation
National Statistics Institute
Southern Cone Conimon Market
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

Indice de Necesidades Bdsicas (Index of Basic Needs)

Non-governmental Organization
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS (continued)

OED 
OPP 
PPP 
SME 
UN 

Operations Evaluation Department
Office of Planning and Budget
Purchasing Power Parity
Small and Medium Size Enterprises
United Nations

WB Managers and Staff Responsible for this CAS
Vice President 
Mr. David de Ferranti
Country Director 
Ms. Myrna Alexander
Sector Director 
Mr. Guillerrno Perry
Task Manager 
Mr. David Rosenblatt

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. 
2. 

INTRODUCTION .....................................................................
1
SOCIO-ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND POLITICAL CONTEXT .......2

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE .....................................................................
.....................................................................
POLITICAL CONTEXT ....................................................................
SOCIAL PERFORMANCE .....................................................................
5
ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE CONTEXT ......................................... 14

2
4

S5

CONTEXT FOR INFRASTRUCUTURE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES DEVELOPMENT ............. 16

CONTEXT FOR PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT .................................................... 17

MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT ......... 19
DOWNSIDE RISKS .................................................................... 
20

3. 

THE URUGUAYAN GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ............ 20

MEDIUM TERM VISION AND PRIORITIES ................................................................. 21

4. 

THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY .......................................... 23

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT ..................................................... 26

KEY STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS FOR THE CAS: FYO1-05 .......................................... 27
1. POCKETS OF POVERTY AND SOCIALEXCLUSION ................................................. 28

2. ENVIRONMENTAL/ECONOMIC/SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT NEXUS ................ 29
3. ROLE OF THE STATE, PUBLIC ENTERPRISE REFORM AND GOVERNANCE ............ 29
PROPOSED PROGRAM AND MONITORING OF DEVELOPMENT PROGRESS ................. 31

BANK PERFORMANCE AND SELF-EVALUATION ....................................................... 33

RISKS .................................................................... 

34

Annexes

Annex A2 Uruguay at a Glance

Annex B2 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3 Bank Group Program Summary
Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA)
Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services
Annex B5 Social Indicators
Annex B6 Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7 Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8 Status of Bank Group Operations
Annex B8 (IFC)
Annex B9 CAS Program Matrix: FY2001-FY2005
Annex B 10 CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Map No. 19541

This document has a restricted distrbution and may be used by recpients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwis be disclosed without
World Bank authorizadon.

-

ill -

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Uruguay has made considerable progress in achieving macroeconomic stability during
the 1990s. Per capita GDP growth averaged 2.9 percent, and inflation was reduced to
the low single digits by the end of the decade. This performance was supported by a
variety of important economic reforms that resulted in signif icant productivity gains.
Macroeconomic stability and relatively moderate external indebtedness have allowed
Uruguay to receive "investment grade " status for its sovereign debt.

This progress came at the end of the 20th century in which Uruguay experienced long
alternating cycles ofprosperity and stagnation. In the first half of this century, economic
growth -- based largely on livestock exports -- enabled Uruguay to be a pioneer in the
provision of broad-based social benefits. The major elements of the system were put in
place in the first half of this century. After the exhaustion of the import-substitution
strategy, in the 1950s, the country entered into a long period of stagnation characterized
by growing intervention by the state in an effort to maintain standards of living and
social benefits.

With the reestablishment of democratic institutions in 1985, the countryfaced the
challenge of economic reform, freeing the economy from the historical burdens of an
oversized state bureaucracy, unfunded entitlements, and a weak and protected private
sector. At the same time, there was the need to preserve, andfurther deepen, the social
gains that placed Uruguay in a favorable position compared to most regional
counterparts.

Uruguay's consensus-based approach to policy reform has generated substantial but
gradual progress in the reform agenda during the 1990s. The government reformed the
social security system, downsized the public sector, lowered trade barriers and ended
several state monopolies. Broad-scale privatization of key sectors - the banking sector
and public utilities - has been rejected by society, and in some instances, continuing
inefficiencies in the public utilities may place the country at a disadvantage relative to its
larger Mercosur partners.

The World Bank's support in this gradual process of reform has been focused throughout
the 1990s on several key areas, adapting to the policy and institutional stance of the
government. The Bank has supported the deregulation of the transport sector,
competition in generation of electricity, and improvements to the transparency and
regulation of the financial sector, as well as creation of the private pension system.
These efforts are now being extended to the water and sanitation sector building on
earlier support. In terms of investment, financing has been directed to modernizing the
transport system, particularly to meet Mercosur standards and the needs of the emerging

-

iv 

-

commercialforestry industry; diversifying crops, and upgrading technology and
environmental considerations in the agriculture and irrigation sectors; and importantly
in expanding the capacity and quality of the primary and pre-school system. This latter
program has been especially successful in expanding enrollment ofyoung children and
focusing on equity issues in pre-school. In the area of health, our support has been
relatively modest, aimed at introducing modern management in public hospitals on a
pilot basis and equipping the Ministry of Health for its policy-making, regulatory and
quality assurance functions through technical assistance. On the side of advisory
services and analytical work, the Bank has worked with the government on strategies to
adapt Uruguay's development trajectory to its position in Mercosur and to its reality as a
small, agriculturally based, and open economy and to address social concerns. The
experience of New Zealand has been particularly relevant to this dialogue. By and large,
the Bank's support in Uruguay has been successful albeit slow to implement. All
fourteen projects evaluated by OED have achieved their development objectives.

Nevertheless, the Bank does not have the lead role in external assistance for Uruguay. In
investment lending, the Inter-American Development Bank (which lent $1.1 billion over
the lastfive-year budget period) remains the main source of externalfinance. However,
the Government of Uruguay continues to seekfinancial and technical assistance from the
Bank in selected areas where it perceives that the Bank can bring to bear a knowledge-
based comparative advantage. In addition, the government has used effectively the
support of the International Monetary Fund, both in guiding progress in addressing
fiscal imbalances and in providing short-termfinancial resources during difficult periods
(e.g., end-1998). The government is in the process offinalizing a new 22-month stand-by
arrangement for approximately $200 million, which the Government treats as
precautionary.

Given Uruguay's relatively high level of social and economic development, the time has
come to consider a gradual reduction in support, reflecting the evolving nature of
Uruguay's development challenges and the Bank's role. Uruguay has an income per
capita of $6,180 (Atlas methodology), the sixth highest among active IBRD borrowers,
and about 20 percent above the Bank's indicative thresholdfor initiating graduation. In
PPP estimates, its income per capita rises to $9,480. Uruguay's social development
indicators, in general, are among the highest in Latin America -- particularly in terms of'
poverty and income distribution. Still, there are areas in which more attention is needed'
as employment opportunities shift to higher skills, pockets ofpoverty continue to exist
and marginal zones where basic services are not yet up to standard, leading to an
increased sense of exclusion among the poor segments of the population.

The Bank's proposed Country Assistance Strategy for FY 01-05, covering the entire
period of the new administration, would include the following:

* Base case lending of $150-200 million for FYOI-05 would include selected investment
lending in areas where there is an important social or environmental dimension, and
the Bank's international knowledge would be crucial to project success. The Poverty
Assessment included a detailed analysis of vulnerable groups, identifying pockets of
povertyfor targetingfuture interventions;

- v 

-

* 

Investment lending would be identified and designed based upon up-front analytical
work, and would be triggered by satisfactory project performance under ongoing
operations,

* High-case lending of up to $ 250 million would include adjustment lendingfor
financial sector or other critical reform areas. Triggers would include the needfor
additionalfinance, perhaps due to external shocks, and the degree of government
commitment to the reform effort.

* Monitoring of indicators for eventual consideration of graduation. These indicators
would include access to financial markets (e.g. sovereign credit ratings),
macroeconomic performance, and improvement in selected poverty/social indicators.

* Advisory and analytic services will be used to guide the selectivity of the lending
pipeline, and to maintain an open policy dialogue with the government. It would also
serve as background preparation in the eventuality that a high-case lending scenario
is triggered

This lending program implies a reduction of about 50 percent (in terms of average
lending peryear) compared to the 1997 CAS. The justification for adjusting the nature
and extent of the Bank's support rests on three factors: (1) Uruguay's superior social
indicators, albeit certain groups need more attention, (2) Uruguay's relatively modest
vulnerability to external shocks and access to international markets via investment grade
(one of only 3 countries in the region with investment grade), and (3) the continued scope
for IDB lending for investments (planned average annual commitments of approximately
1 percent of GDP).

This lower level of engagement by the Bank in Uruguay entails country-specific risks.
Uruguay is a small open economy with major trading partners that have sufferedfrom
fairly severe macroeconomic shocks in recent years. It is also a country where the
gradual, participatory approach to economic reform implies that there is the risk of
falling behindfaster reformers in the region, resulting in a loss in competitiveness. The
economy has experienced serious ups and downs over the past decades, and while
Uruguay has been able to come through the latest round of economic shocks, this may
not ahVays be the case. Continied attention needs to be paid to achieving sustained
economic growth and increasing the participation in that growth.

The following questions are suggested as possible issues for Board Discussion:

* 

* Is the proposed pace and timing of the reduction in Bank assistance to Uruguay
appropriate to the country's current social and economic status?
Is the proposed assistance program appropriately targeted to Uruguay's development
challenges?
Is the proposed monitoringframework appropriate?

* 

I

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

1. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Uruguay was considered by the
Board in June 1997. It was prepared during the middle of the last administration, as it
gradually moved ahead in a number of important reform efforts, and as it consolidated
progress in achieving macroeconomic balance. Over the past decade, the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) has been Uruguay's main external financier. The last CAS
proposed selective investment lending in key sectors to enhance benefits of Mercosur
integration, to increase private sector participation and to rationalize public expenditures
(infrastructure, education, and health). In the high case scenario, it also opened the
possibility of an adjustment operation to support financial sector development.

2. 
Through 1998, the last government could claim substantial gains in achieving its
economic and social objectives. At the end of that year, however, the regional economic
slowdown led to a sharp recession in 1999. These events, combined with a preoccupation
with the 1999 elections, resulted in a deterioration in fiscal balance, a rise in
unemployment, and a slowdown in much of the reform agenda. The new administration
that took office in March of this year has expressed its desire to re-invigorate and
accelerate the legacy of gradual, but steady, reforms.

3. 
Despite last year's recession, Uruguay enjoys a generally high level of economic
and social development, relative to many other Bank borrowers. The proposed CAS for
FYO1-05 would further refine the selectivity of the recent CAS, adjusting the Bank's
program to Uruguay's evolving circumstances, and to the transition to the next
government in early 2005. It also proposes a set of criteria for evaluating progress of the
program and the Bank's role. The proposed program of assistance would focus on a
limited number of areas, with critical social and environmental dimensions, promoting
sustainable development and increasing the capacity of the poor to participate in that
process. This would be in areas where the Bank's international knowledge, in particular,
can be leveraged.

- 2 -

2. 

SOCIO-ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND
POLITICAL CONTEXT

Historical Perspective.

4. 
Uruguay's future depends equally upon correcting past mistakes and building
upon past achievements. The current economic and social landscape of Uruguay can be
traced back to the dramatic rise and decline of the country's fortunes during the twentieth
century. By the 1880s, Uruguay became distinguished for its prosperity, based mainly on
livestock exports. In the 1920s, it was a pioneer in the provision of social benefits, with
universal access to education, health, and retirement benefits. However, economic
performance started to deteriorate after the 1930s, as the agriculture sector was taxed to
support the development of an inefficient manufacturing sector. By 1950, livestock
remained by far the most important export activity, but industry had displaced agriculture
as Uruguay's largest productive sector.

5. 
In the mid 1950s, the country entered a period of prolonged stagnation.
Commodity prices stagnated. On the domestic front, the limited growth potential of
Uruguay's own protected industrial sector quickly became exhausted. Uruguayans,
nonetheless, zealously guarded their social achievements and turned to the state for
maintaining standards of living and benefits. The state responded by increasing public
sector employment and by becoming ever more involved in arbitrating and redistributing
rents within society. Macroeconomic stability deteriorated, use of the inflation tax
became pervasive, investment declined and emigration of the young to neighboring
countries was substantial. Sustained poor economic performance contributed to a
military takeover in 1973 that lasted 12 years.

6. 
The military initiated reforms that enhanced the role of market forces, and
between 1973 and 1981, average GDP growth reached 3.7 percent. In the early 1980s, an
exchange rate based stabilization prograrn was not supported by fiscal and monetary
restraint, resulting in an overvalued currency, capital flight and problems with the
domestic banking system. In 1982, when the outbreak of the debt crisis led to a virtual
cessation of capital inflows, a severely indebted Uruguay went into a deep recession.

7. 
The new civilian government in 1985 confronted these challenges. In addition,
two previously dormant issues were assuming new prominence: (i) financing of the
social security system; and (ii) the size of public employment. An adjustment program,
with Bank and IMF support, helped restore economic activity over the short term, but its
effectiveness in addressing longer-term structural issues was limited. Initial
achievements in improving the finances of the social security system suffered a severe
setback in 1989, when a Constitutional reform increased social security obligations.
Improvements in public sector management were limited to a few public enterprises, and
public sector employment grew. By 1989, growth was again stagnant, the public sector
deficit exceeded 7 percent of GDP, and the annual inflation rate approached 100 percent.

8. 
In 1990, the subsequent administration concentrated on restoring stability. It
advanced in financial sector reforms and trade liberalization (including entry into

- 3 -

Mercosur), as well as modernizing and reducing the size of the state. Accomplishments
on the latter proved modest, but prudent fiscal management and a favorable external
environment helped to improve most macroeconomic variables. The Bank-IMF-led debt
service reduction program in 1991 contributed similarly. Annual GDP growth, which
had averaged less than 1 percent between 1988 and 1990, increased to 4.4 percent from
1990 to 1994, bolstered by strong demand from Argentina and Brazil.

Figure 1: Uruguay in the 1 990s-Growth with Stabilization

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

0

-a-Annual Inflation 

-*Real 

GDP (1983=100)

9. 
Progress with inflation in the early 1990s was more modest. Reductions in the
fiscal deficit helped inflation decline slowly from 129 percent in 1990 to 53 percent by
the end of 1993, but deeper reductions in inflation proved difficult. This was due to
traditional wage indexation, plus difficulties in sterilizing high levels of capital inflows.
Essentially a crawling peg exchange rate regime has been in place throughout the
nineties. Tfhe rate is allowed to fluctuate within a very narrow band that devalues at a
pre-announced rate. Although inflation could have been fuirther contained by lowering
the rate of depreciation, the Government -
in agreement with the IMF - opted to forego
this option out of fear that this could have led to fturther appreciation of the real exchange
rate with adverse consequences for the export sector.

10. More significantly, in the early 1 990s, the administration failed in its attempts to
accelerate structural reforms. Its program to begin to privatize public enterprises was
rejected by voters who overturned this initiative through a plebiscite in 1992, and
attempts to initiate reformn of the central government were reversed by the legislature. By
the end of 1994, just as the regional financial crisis was about to hit, the fiscal accounts
began to deteriorate seriously.

11. When the next administration took over in 1995, its first priority was to reduce the
fis'cal deficit that had reached 2.8 percent of GDP in 1994, despite that year's strong
economic growth (7.1 percent). The deepening recession of 1995 made the government's

- 4 -

objective all the more challenging. Despite a decline in GDP of 1.3 percent, the
government managed to reduce the fiscal deficit to 1.6 percent of GDP, via limited
nominal wage increases in an inflationary environment, investment cuts and increases in
public utility tariffs. The government initiated a downsizing program for the public
sector that initially increased the deficit, due to separation costs, but which also set the
stage for further fiscal strengthening in the late 1990s. During the recession, inflation
decelerated only moderately, from 44 percent in 1994 to 35 percent in 1995.

12. 
Following the recession, the period 1996-1998 was characterized by strong
growth, sharp improvement in price stability and consolidation of improved fiscal
performance. Economic growth averaged 5.1 percent over this period, inflation fell to
8.6 percent by end- 1998, and the fiscal deficit (including costs associated with social
security and other reforms) declined to 0.8 percent of GDP. Following the 1995
recession, however, unemployment remained in the double digits (10-12 percent) over
the 1996-98 period and contributed to less progress in improving social indicators.

Recent Economic Developments

1 3 
Uruguay suffered a difficult recession in 1999. The recession in Argentina,
devaluation in Brazil, and fall in international commodity prices all contributed to the
country's economic difficulties. In addition, in the second half of 1999, the onset of a
drought hampered agricultural and livestock production. This situation was complicated
further by rising international petroleum prices, given that Uruguay is not an oil producer.
The economy is estimated to have declined by about 3.4 percent in 1999, the fiscal deficit
deteriorated to 3.8 percent of GDP, and unemployment reached nearly 12 percent at one
point during the year. (It ended the year at 11.4 percent.) Inflation was further reduced
to 4.2 percent by the end of the year.

14. 
The exchange rate, in recent years, has been used to gradually guide the path to
lower inflation, and this process has been supported by IMF programs. Last year, despite
lower inflationary pressures, the government stuck to its 7.5 percent annual nominal
devaluation rate - allowing for some real adjustment with respect to its Mercosur
neighbors. Prudent monetary policy was used to support the exchange rate system. A
stepwise devaluation would be extremely risky in the context of Uruguay's highly
dollarized banking system (about 85 percent of deposits are in dollars or indexed to the
dollar).

15. With a consistent macro framework in place, financial sector variables performed
well, despite the recession and uncertainties surrounding the presidential elections. There
was some pressure on the exchange rate, and limited reserve losses during the period
leading up to the elections. International reserve losses, however, were within IMF
program targets. The exchange rate reached the most depreciated point of the narrow 3
percent band only for a brief period. By the end of the year, international reserves
returned to the level of end-1998, the exchange rate returned to the lower portion of the
band, the banking system weathered the recession well. Throughout the year, spreads on
sovereign debt remained in the 200-300 basis point range.

- 5 -

16. 
In March 2000, the new government began with a general economic situation
similar in many ways to the starting point of the last administration in 1995. Last year's
drought and a less than average tourism season could delay the resumption of growth
until the second or third quarter of the year. Working in the govermnent's favor will be
the positive impact of structural measures taken by the last administration: privatization
of the national airline, civil service restructuring, social security reform, the concession of
the national gas company, port concessions, road maintenance concessions, and
improvements in financial sector regulation with Bank support. In addition, high
inflation no longer complicates macroeconomic management.

Political Context

17. 
Since the return to democracy, Uruguay's political processes have been
dominated by a careful, consensus-building approach. This approach, to some extent, is
enshrined in the Constitution which establishes that 25 percent of the voters can call for a
referendum to overturn a particular national law, l and 10 percent of the voters can call
for a vote on Constitutional reforms. The consensus-building approach is also a natural
consequence of the political equilibrium that exists among three major political
movements: (1) the National Party (traditionally rooted in the rural, agricultural sector);
(2) the Colorado Party (traditionally based on the urban, Montevideo area); and (3) the
more recent emergence of the leftist coalition known as the Broad Front (Frente Amplio).

18. Uruguay's consensus style of government policy making is expected to continue
during the next five years. Gaining from the traditional parties, the Frente has become
increasingly more successful in presidential elections in recent years. In 1994, they
received 31 percent, and in the first round vote last fall, the Frente received a plurality of
votes, totaling 39 percent of the votes. The second place Colorado candidate formed a
coalition with the National party that had been supporting the Colorados in the last
administration, as well. This coalition won in the final run-off election but the new
government faces a Frente plurality in Congress.

Social Performance

19. With 3.3 million people, Uruguay has a highly urbanized and aging population
(91 percent urban and 13 percent over age 65). Its per-capita income of $6,180 (Atlas
methodology) ranks 6h highest among active IBRD borrowers - about 20 percent above
the indicative threshold for initiating graduation. In PPP terms, Uruguay's income per
capita rises to $9,480 (latest World Development Report). According to the 1999 UN
Human Development Index, Uruguay is ranked 40th in the world and is in the "high
hunan development" category. (For comparative purposes, this places Uruguay 10/11
slots behind Korea and Barbados, 5 ahead of Costa Rica, and 10 ahead of Mexico.)

20. 
Income Distribution. Not only does Uruguay have a high income per capita, the
distribution of income is one of the most equitable in Latin America. This is attributable

1 Excluded are laws that create taxes or those cases in which the bills of law must be exclusively presented

to Congress by the Executive Power (Article 79 of the Constitution).

- 6 -

to a variety of factors, including relatively high and broad-based educational
achievement, a generous social security system which protects the elderly, and a number
of social programs targeted to the poor. There has been some deterioration in equity over
the 1990s, as the Gini coefficient grew from 0.41 in 1991 to 0.43 in 1998.

Table 1: Comparison of the Distribution of Income (Gini coefficient),
Selected LAC Countries

Country 
Argentina 
Bolivia 

Gini Coefficient
.49
51

Brazil 

Chile 

Colombia 

Mexico 

__.58

11M~~~~~~~~~4

.61

.56

.52

.47

Venezuela 

.50

Source: World Bank, Regional Study, Poverty and Policy
in Latin America and the Caribbean, Argentina Poverty Assessment and
Uruguay Poverty Assessment (FY00)

21. 

Poverty Rate. Despite a high

income level and relatively equitable 

distribution of income, poverty has yet 

to be eradicated. The national 
headcount measure of poverty is 22

percent in urban areas. This rate had 

improved to 18 percent in 1994, 
following the strong GDP growth of 
the early 1 990s but deteriorated after 
the recession of 1995. There was a 
small difference in poverty rates 

between Montevideo and the urban 

interior (1 to 4 percentage points) with 

the largest gap occurring in 1993, 

when the poverty rate fell to below 20
percent in Montevideo.

Figure 2: Income Growth and The Poverty Rate

1991-1998

140.0

100.0
80.0

60.0
40.0

20.0

0o0

1991 

1992 

1993 1994 1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

GDPpercapita(1991=100)
.eMrt1ndex(1 
91=100)

=---HeadcountPo 

22. 
In the FY00 Poverty Assessment, several poverty lines were tested. The intention
was to identify a standard measure to compare levels of poverty across subgroups of the
population rather than to identify a single unequivocal number as there are a number of
methodological issues regarding the measurement of poverty in Uruguay that the
government intends to address. The number should not be used for comparison to other
countries, since income poverty lines and methodology vary substantially across
countries. With this caveat, the sensitivity analysis shows that poverty trends followed a
similar pattern, regardless of which line was used. All of the poverty lines tested are

-7 -

based on a food basket developed by the National Statistics Institute (INE) of Uruguay.2 .
For 1998, the food basket or 'indigence line' was estimated at 760 pesos per month
(US$72, or US$2.40 per day) in Montevideo, and 537 pesos (US$51 per month, or
US$1.70 per day) for the rest of the country. The poverty line was estimated at 2,455
pesos per month (US$233, or US$7.77 per day) for Montevideo, and 1,505 pesos per
month (US$143, or US$4.70 per day) for the urban interior. This line is based on per
capita household income. These poverty rates use household income per adult equivalent
to determine whether a household is above or below the poverty line.

23. 
Sensitivity analysis was applied to the poverty line, both increasing and
decreasing it to determine if the value of the poverty line affects the results regarding
poverty trends. Poverty trends (Figure 2) remain the same; however, poverty line
movements caused higher than proportional variations in the estimated poverty rate. For
example, a reduction in the poverty line of 5 percent caused a reduction in the headcount
ratio of around 8-10 percent. This may be explained by the fact that the actual poverty
line is situated near a modal value in the income distribution. The implication is that
lowering the line might result in a lower reported poverty rate, but there would be a
significantly large group on the verge of poverty.

24. 
Poverty and Unemployment.
Employment problems - either
through lack ofjobs or low pay - are

* 

closely associated with poverty. It is 

not surprising, 
then, that 
not surprising, then, that;
unemployment rates followed a
patter similar to poverty rates 
during the 1990s. In the early 1990s,
unemployment averaged about 8 to 9
percent. Over the last few years,
however, unemployment shifted up
to the 10 to 12 percent range. This is 
due to a variety of factors: corporate
and public sector restructuring, and 
rigidities in wages that prevented 
labor mrarket adjustments following 

Fig. 3: Unemployment and Average Real Wages

(unemployment 
rate (%/), real wages Dec-95=iO)

12

9

7

l

1990 1991 199 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999

- unemployment(%) 

public-realwages -* 

priate-realwages

the 1995 recession. Average private 

sector real wages stagnated
following the 1995 recession.

25. 
There are also indications that underemployment, instability of employment and
informality have gone up in Uruguay in the late nineties. Much of this is likely related to
the changes in use of technology globally, shifts in business practices (contracting out,

2 Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, Uruguay and CEPAL, 1996, Aspectos Metodologicos Sobre Medicion
de la Linea de Pobreza, el Caso Uruguayo, Montevideo, Uruguay.

- 8 -

part-time work, etc.), and importantly the relatively low level of investment in Uruguay
leading to relatively slow expansion of the productive base.

26. 
It is important to note that some of these changes in the labor market-e.g., the
shift to contract employment and informality--are seen among those belonging to the
richest households, and not just the poorest and that this is an increasingly common
phenomenon in Latin America, as presented in recent ILO country studies. It is not
concentrated among the youngest or the oldest workers, as a high proportion of those in
the typical working age (20 to 60 years old) also have less stable employment.

27. Demographic Characteristics of the Poor in Uruguay. The profile of the poor in
Uruguay is quite similar to other countries in the region. Poverty is heavily concentrated
among the young. Approximately 40 percent of the poor are less than 15 years of age,
while less than 5 percent are older than 64. This is in part due to the generous pension
system in the country. Poor households, on average, have four times as many children
under 15 as non-poor households. Between 1994 and 1998, poverty rates grew
considerably among children under 15, particularly in Montevideo, and in the 0-5 age
group. For the latter group, the rates rose from 39 to 49 percent. The high percentage of
young people among the poor is particularly worrying. Without significant investments
in education for this group, there will be a progressive deterioration in the human capital
of the population and overall increase in poverty levels given its intergenerational nature.

28. 
Poverty is also high among female headed households with children. This group,
as discussed below, is among the vulnerable groups as it is particularly difficult for them
to access labor markets. For those women who do work, their incomes are generally low,
making it difficult for them to support their families. For females living alone, poverty
levels are actually quite low (5 percent). This is largely due to the general demographic
structure of poverty where the elderly are generally not among the poor. Many of these
females living alone are among the elderly receiving pensions.

29. Vulnerability and Social Exclusion. The above concerns are part of a broader
concept of social exclusion which has spatial and social dimensions. In some cases,
excluded groups may include those who have migrated from rural and smaller urban
centers to search for new opportunities, but have left behind their social networks. Those
who are able to find employment have largely entered the informal sector or are in more
unstable employment situations. These workers do not have access to the same social
benefits or safety nets for themselves and their families as formal sector workers, and are
therefore more vulnerable to shocks. In addition, with 40 percent of Uruguay's children
now born into poor families, there are significant implications for future social and
economic programs resulting from a shift in the structure of the population needing
attention.

30. 
In Uruguay, social exclusion is relatively new, and is particularly visible given
that the country has traditionally been characterized as a homogenous society, with the
most equal distribution of income in Latin America. Generous welfare policies over the
past decades have ensured that most Uruguayans receive access to basic health, education
and other services. Historically, neighborhoods were quite heterogeneous, with

- 9 -

households of varying welfare levels living side by side and sharing the same public
space. This integration provided a social cohesion between individuals of different
cultural and socio-economic backgrounds.

31. 
But circumstances have changed. In order to better understand this phenomenon
and those affected, a study was carried out in selected poor urban neighborhoods, as part
of the FYOO Poverty Assessment. The study involved consultations with major
stakeholders, collection of secondary data, and identification of local partners. It used
participatory rapid appraisal and methods such as focus groups, interviews with key
informants, and direct observation.

32. 
Identification of the neighborhoods and of the excluded groups was carried out
using both quantitative indicators of poverty and basic needs, and qualitative data. The
quantitative indicators included a set of human and social capital variables including
average educational attainment of household members (over age 20), socio-economic
composition of the household (job type classification), percentage of teenagers that
neither work nor study in the community, percentage of single teenage mothers, and drop
out and repetition rates for children in the household. These indicators are a subset of
those used in a recent CEPAL study. Neighborhoods in Montevideo and the metropolitan
zone were then ranked into high and low risk areas. Of the neighborhoods in
Montevideo, thirteen or 30 percent, were ranked as high risk.

33. 
This information was combined with data on unsatisfied basic needs (mainly
infrastructure), rates of labor instability, and incomes. This process narrowed the
identification to ten neighborhoods considered most critical (including two from the
metropolitan zone). Six were then selected for the fieldwork, in part due to the presence
of NGOs to facilitate the coordination of the rapid participatory assessment.

34; 
Characteristics of Marginal Neighborhoods. The results of this part of the
Poverty Assessment show that there are two principal types of marginal areas in
Uruguay. These include irregular settlements largely settled in recent years, and
cantegriles, or shanty towns, which have been in existence for a long time and are home
to the chronic poor. Both types of marginal areas can be characterized as follows:

* Zones with unsatisfied basic needs, such as water and sanitation and quality housing;
. Low levels of education and high percentages of school dropout and repetition;
* High unemployment and labor instability
* Gender discrimination
. Territorial isolation and area stigma
* Problems of insecurity and violence

35. 
Irregular settlements. The number of irregular settlements has increased, and they
are now estimated to be home to approximately 50,000 people in Montevideo
(representing about 3.5 percent of the population of Montevideo). These settlements are
characterized by irregular land ownership, and low standard sanitary and environmental
conditions. Because the neighborhoods have evolved in a relatively short span of time,

- 10-

they do not have sufficient infrastructure such as sewage and roads; the poor road
conditions are particularly problematic for public transportation and garbage collection.

36. A survey carried out in 1994 in the irregular settlements showed that about half of
the residents moved due to economic difficulties, and forty percent moved from
cantegriles. The majority (86 percent of cantegril population) were less than 41 years
old, and they had a high number of children under 10 (33.5 percent) in relation to the
total population (18.5 percent), (INE, Census). Of the settlements, there are three
categories. First, there are those that have been around for five years or more with
somewhat more established housing and services such as electricity and water. The
second group has been inhabited for 1-2 years, houses are mostly of wood, and most have
lights and water in the house. The third type of settlement is the most recently occupied
ones (within the last several months).

37. 
Cantegril. The conditions in the cantegriles are generally worse than the irregular
settlements. Housing is rudimentary, as most homes are very small and are made of
scrap materials such as wood, nylon or carton. The cantegriles are quite visible, forming
a belt around the city. They are predominately inhabited by heads of household who are
known as hurgadores - people who collect and sort garbage by horse and cart around the
city in search of recyclable materials and food.

38. Vulnerable Groups. From the above quantitative and qualitative data, six groups
emerged as particularly vulnerable among the poor as they face risks beyond that of low
income levels. Other factors that can affect household and individual vulnerability are:
acgess to housing and other physical assets, human capital, income diversification, links
to networks and formal safety nets. As a total share of the population, these vulnerable
groups are small-with the exception of children--indicating that with relatively few
resources, it would not be difficult to target appropriate assistance to these groups.

Table 2: Identification of Vulnerable Groups

Vulnerable Group 

Female household heads with low income, low educational 
attaimment, between 30-50 years old
Inactive Male Youth, 15-24 years (not studying, not working and 
not looking for a job)
UJnemployed male adults, 40-50 years old 
Women 50 years or older, especially widows, no children. 
Teenage mothers (15-19 years); 
Children in poverty, street children (0-15 years) 
n.a. Not available because the sample is too small
n.a. Data are not available
Source: Poverty Assessment (FY 00).

Poverty 

rate 
(1998) 

61.5 

44.1 

39.2 
9.9 
n.a. 
40.8 

Group's

share of
total
population

(1998)
3.3

2.0

1.0
5.5
n.a.
10.3

- 11 -

39. 
Educational Achievement. Not only does Uruguay benefit from relatively high
years of schooling, educational outcomes in Uruguay are good by regional standards.
These outcomes clearly are important in explaining Uruguay's encouraging performance
on other social indicators. Illiteracy has been nearly eradicated (3 percent of the
population over 15 years of age), and average educational attainment is higher than most
regional counterparts. Part of this favorable outcome is due to a progressive pattern of
spending, as described below. There are still challenges facing in Uruguay in raising the
quality of education to the levels of OECD countries. Uruguay's educational
achievements are even more impressive when one takes into consideration the relatively
low share of GDP that has been dedicated to education (public spending equal to 3
percent of GDP).

40. Access to educational services is high, by regional standards. The urban data
show that, overall, the proportion of school attendance between ages 6-15 is 93 percent.
Because the poor mainly attend public schools and tend to have more children, and the
non-poor are generally enrolled in private schools, spending in the education sector is
quite progressive with the exception of tertiary education (see Table 3). In 1995, the
annual per capita spending for all the education programs of the Administraci6n Nacional
de Educaci6n Puiblica (ANEP) was US$586 (January 1995, constant US$). The
equivalent level of spending for the poorest 20 percent of the population was US$997.
This was four times the average spent by the richest quintile.

Table 3. Social Expenditure Distribution across Population Quintiles
Uruguay, 1998

% transfers to each population quintile 
Budget Pseudo-
Poorest 
Richest US$ 
Gini

3rd 

2 nd 

4 th 

Social Sector 

1. Education 
2. Health 
3. Feeding and nutrition 
4. Pensions 
5. Other cash transfers 
6. Housing 

36.8 
24.1 
72.5 
2.5 

20.0 

24.0 

21.6 
20.3 
16.9 
7.0 

22.2 

21.0 

16.7 
20.0 
7.0 
14.7 

19.9 

25.6 

16.5 

19.0 

13.4 
18.0 
2.4 
23.7 

23.3 

18.9 

20.8 

16.8 

Million

11.5 
595.3 
17.5 
815.4 
1.2 
21.0 
52.1 2,331.3 

14.5 

10.4 

159.1 

86.3 

-0.24
-0.06
-0.63
0.46

-0.04

-0.12

36.3 4,025.1 

0.21

14.5 1,693.8 

-0.13

7. Total (1-6) 

13.6 

12.9 

8. Total excluding Pensions 
28.8 
20.9 
Source: Uruguay: Social Expenditure Review (FY00).

41. 
Education to Break the Cycle of Poverty. As could be expected, education levels
among poor heads of household are lower than the non-poor. The strong link between
investments in education and poverty reduction has been well established internationally.
The average number of years of schooling for heads of household in Montevideo was 8.8
for men and 8.4 for women. In decile one, the average was 6.1 years for men and 5.4
years for women. Among the wealthiest households in decile 10, the average number of

- 12 -

years of schooling for household heads was almost double, 11.9 years for men, and 10
years for women. These patterns were similar in the urban interior though, on the whole,
the average number of years of schooling was somewhat lower at 6.9 years for male
heads, and 6.2 for female heads. Gender differences are not substantial for either urban
group.

42. 
Despite the progressive spending pattern, there are quality issues in the public
sector which particularly affect the poor. Repetition rates are very high in secondary
education and in the first years of primary school. The high repetition is mostly
concentrated in schools located in poor areas, in part reflecting the low quality of
education in these schools. There are also problems in the sector related to keeping up
with the labor demands generated by the increased integration with the global economy.
In particular, the system has not efficiently matched the education received by students in
secondary and technical schools and the demands of the modem sectors of the economy.
In the technical-vocational cycle where most students come from low-income
households, the three years required for a degree are difficult to sustain making desertion
a common problem.

Fig. 4: School Attendance for Poor and
Non-poor Children

100

80

> 

43. 
The proportion of students 
who drop out of school is also 
substantially higher among the poor, 
particularly in Montevideo. While 13 
percent of children from poor 
households drop out, for the non-poor, X 11 20
that proportion falls to 1.3 percent. It 
0_-_, 
is likely that poor children enter the 
labor market which perpetuates a 
dangerous cycle of poverty. 

._ 60 _

40 

_._.__

12 13 14 15 16 17

4 -- poor 

Age

non-poor 

l

44. A national evaluation of learning was carried out in 1996 in Spanish and
Mathematics. Information was also collected on the children's socio-economic
background using a family survey. Achievement by school type was ranked in a clear
ordering of the five subsystems. The best schools included the urban private schools in
Montevideo and the interior, followed by public schools in Montevideo and the interior.
Achievement scores were lowest in the rural schools. Socio-cultural factors that
explained some of the variation in achievement included mother's education, ownership
of household equipment, household density, school repetition, and attendance of a pre-
school. On these indicators, the rural households had the least favorable scores.
Nevertheless, early results of the on-going pre-school and primary school quality
program, supported by the Bank, demonstrate that there are ways to close this gap.

45. Health. The health profile of Uruguay is consistent with its relatively good
performance on social indicators in general, but there are areas in which performance
could be better. In addition, there are variations across geographic areas (departments)
and income groups. Infant mortality rates are at 16 per 1000 live births, as compared to
19 in Argentina and 12 in Chile and can be 50 percent higher in the poorer areas of the
country. Immunization coverage in infants is in the high 80s and 90s of the population

- 13 -

less than one year old. What is particularly noteworthy is that Uruguay has completed an
epidemiological transition: many communicable diseases found in neighboring countries,
such as malaria, dengue, yellow fever and acute cases of chagas, do not exist in Uruguay
and no case of poliomyelitis, neonatal tetanus, rabies and diphtheria has been reported in
more than 15 years. The regional cholera epidemic in 1991 did not spread to the country.
But, in more recent years, the hanta virus has been reported and reported AIDS cases
have gradually increased with data from 1996 showing an infection rate of 0.2 percent of
the population. Other emerging diseases tend to be associated with life style-obesity
(the population consumes high levels of fat), diabetes, and importantly cancer,
cardiovascular diseases and hypertension and rising rates of alcoholism. Correctly,
health policies in the country focus more on non-communicable diseases, prevention and
control.

46. 
These achievements, however, have been accompanied by high expenditure
levels. Public and private spending in health is approximately 8.3 percent of GDP
(1992), compared with an average of 6.2 percent for the rest of Latin America, and puts
Uruguay closer to OECD spending levels. Of the total, about 30 percent is in the hands
of public facilities and the rest by private providers. These total expenditures should be
sufficient to finance a generous package of health services for the entire population.
Health expenditures have also been on the rise due to factors affecting the demand for
health such as demographic changes which have resulted in an aging population,
changing lifestyles associated with urbanization, rising living standards, and increased
demand for highly complex procedures. Health expenditures also increased due to
inefficiencies in the health care system. Hospital beds and skills, for example, are not
well distributed throughout the country; public hospitals have little autonomy; and the
average stay in public hospitals is over 16 days.

47. Access to health care is high, with 95 percent of the total population covered in
some way, and two-thirds of the population with health care insurance. Almost half of
the population is covered by not-for-profit mutual-based insurance schemes (mutuales)
which provide services to different groups, dependent on formal sector employment or
other affiliation, through a pre-payment system. The insured are all covered by a
catastrophic fund. Insurance rates tend to be high, and can reach 20 percent of household
income. Moreover, this system is fragmented and inadequately regulated, which in turn
produce distortions in the risk exposure of providers, and result in lower coverage for
segments of the population, particularly the poor. For the poor, about 8 percent of
individuals have no health coverage as compared to only 1.5 percent of the wealthiest 60
percent of the population. At present one of the serious issues facing the health system is
how best to regulate the private insurers, especially those mutuales encountering financial
difficulties.

48. While there are problems of inefficiency in the health care system-with the
private insurers/providers spending considerably more per person or per procedure--
spending is, on the whole, relatively well-targeted to those in the middle and lower
income groups. Individual out-of-pocket expenditures on health in Montevideo are
almost 10 times higher for the rich than the poor in absolute terms, though as a percent of
total household income, they are about the same. The higher per capita spending in

- 14-

households in the top income groups is due partially to the higher number of elderly in
those households. In the interior, average spending is substantially lower, though the
difference between spending for the poorest and the wealthiest deciles is even greater,
with the wealthy spending 20 times more. Lower public spending in the interior is
mainly associated with the relatively low level of service outside of Montevideo.

49. 
Social Protection Programs. Social protection is provided to the population
through an extensive pension system, an unemployment insurance scheme, and a number
of social welfare programs targeted to the poor. Examples of the latter are feeding
programs, family assistance, cash transfers, youth training, and a social-fund type project
(Fortalecimiento del Area Social, financed by the IDB). There appears to have been little
evaluation nor recent modification of these programs, with the exception of the social
security scheme that has recently undergone major reform from a Pay-as-You-Go to a
multi-pillar system, of which one pillar is comprised of private "capitalization" funds.

50. 
The available data show that the feeding programs appear to be relatively well-
targeted (Table 3), though coverage is quite low. Only 10 percent of the poor in
Montevideo and 20 percent in the urban interior receive food assistance. Coverage for
these programs for the poor is even lower. In light of these results, combined with the
perception of increased separation - geographically, demographically, socially and
economically-among diverse groups in Uruguay, it would be worthwhile to undertake a
more in-depth analysis on program impact, administrative costs, delivery mechanisms,
and targeting efficiency. In particular, the overall program mix may need to be adjusted
to take into account changes in Uruguay and the needs of the most critical vulnerable
groups as highlighted earlier.

51. Rural Poverty. It is noteworthy that the above analysis of poverty and social
exclusion does not include rural populations. Data on these populations are scarce but
the general hypothesis is that Uruguay's poor rural population, albeit very small in totals,
tends to be even more excluded from higher wage occupations and income generation
opportunities than their urban counterparts. The statistics available on rural schools,
health facilities, and water and sanitation services would bear out this proposition in
terms of basic public services. Also, poverty rates are higher in regions that have a
higher share of rural population (although this does not necessarily imply that those rural
populations are poor, since household survey data would be required to confirm this
hypothesis). It is also noteworthy that Uruguay's significant Afro-American
population-about 5 percent of the total population--is concentrated in the major urban
areas, and tends to be overly represented among the poor.

Environmental and Natural Resource Context

52. Uruguay is blessed with a rich natural endowment. The natural soil quality and
favorable climate facilitated the country's early accumulation of wealth during the late
nineteenth, and early twentieth, centuries. In addition to traditional livestock and
agricultural sectors, important foreign exchange earnings from tourism depend on the
natural beauty of the coastline. In brief, Uruguay is a country where the link between
environmental-natural resource conservation and the economy are direct and obvious.

- 15 -

53. With these issues in mind, the country has been relatively successful in avoiding
serious environmental degradation; however, as outlined below, there are a number of
local and global environmental issues on the policy agenda. Uruguay's pollution
problems range from contaminated river basins and coastal areas to unsanitary
management of solid waste. The lack of capacity to prevent and mitigate impacts from
oil spills has also been recognized as a potentially severe risk for coastal ecosystems. On
the global environmental agenda, Uruguay has responded actively with a number of
projects and activities.

54. 
The marine and coastal biota along the Uruguayan coastline are increasingly
impacted by human activities. Marine biodiversity may be threatened by future oil spills
and other forms of hydrocarbon pollution, ship generated wastes, as well as wastes from
coastal municipalities and the main port. Pollution, due to petroleum loading zones and
heavy traffic of fishing and cargo boats, generate hydrocarbon residuals. Concentrations
of hydrocarbons are spread along the coastline and have the potential to affect marine
populations. An example of the risks faced is the oil spill in February 1997 that
contaminated over 20 miles of Uruguayan coastline. It would be necessary to work
towards preventing such an occurrence. Management of coastal wetlands has become an
increasingly important issue.

55. 
The management of fisheries in the region is jointly carried out by Argentina and
Uruguay on the basis of long-term sustainability and agreed quotas. However, fish stocks
have been declining as a result of over-fishing by various parties, including foreign
licensees and illegal fishing. Both countries established exclusive fishing zones with a
radius of approximately 200 nautical miles, jointly managed under a bilateral agreement.
In addition, some areas have been designated as off-limit, as they have been designated
for juveniles of various species, but because of poor enforcement capacity and illegal
fishing, these areas have not been respected.

56. 
The country is well advanced in achieving the targets in mitigating substances that
contribute to ozone depletion, as called for by the Montreal Protocol. By 1999 it reduced
about 50 percent of 1992 baseline consumption when a freeze was required. These
remarkable results were achieved with only $3 million of grant assistance, of which $1
million has been provided by the Bank and $2 million by other agencies. The next
challenge for Uruguay will to cut the remaining 50 percent of the baseline from 2005 to
2010, except for essential uses.

57. As a signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
Uruguay has identified areas of opportunity to implement low-cost greenhouse gas
mitigation measures. These include abatement of carbon dioxide emissions through
energy conservation and of methane emissions from solid waste landfills.

58. 
Inadequate natural resource management could jeopardize the otherwise
promising performance of the livestock and agricultural sectors during the last decade.
Poor water resource management is still widespread, leading to inefficient water use and
increased pressure on water resources. The result is that these sectors have become
exposed to recurrent dry spells. In addition, there are water quality problems in some

- 16 -

sub-sectors. Livestock production, which has been dominated by extensive, low profit
production systems, represented until recently little or no threat to natural resources
management. However, exposure to prolonged periods of economic hardship and
frequent weather-related difficulties are resulting in an over exploitation, and consequent
deterioration, of the natural resource base.

Contextfor Infrastructure and Public Utilities Development

59. 
There are a number of key issues to address in infrastructure maintenance and
development. One of the critical areas - as highlighted in the earlier section on social
exclusion-is the lack of basic infrastructure in the relatively new marginal urban and
peri-urban areas which now exist in Uruguay. Rural infrastructure is also likely to be
deficient. This demonstrates that those responsible for these services-the 
local
municipalities on the one hand, and the major public utilities on the other--have lagged
behind in making the needed investments. This is particularly critical in the area of water
and sewerage, and urban roads and garbage collection.

60. Addressing this issue goes hand in hand with the other central theme facing
infrastructure in Uruguay-that is, is improving the commercial orientation of public
enterprises. By and large, performance of these enterprises has not been weak,
comparatively speaking (for example, in terms of coverage of services and financial
returns, as seen in Argentina prior to its privatization program). In addition, it has been
improving over the past decade as part of Uruguay's gradual process of reform. A more
radical approach that would entail outright privatization was rejected by the Uruguayan
population in a popular referendum over the sale of the telecommunications company in
1992. There have been financial improvements: the current surpluses of public
enterprises (before interest expenditures) have been in the range of $ 400-500 million per
year since 1995. However, this financial performance may mask inefficiencies, obscured
by the lack of competition, and relatively high tariff levels.

61. 
The emerging concern, therefore, is not so much the financial drain of the
enterprises but their contribution to Uruguay's overall competitiveness and accessibility
of services for the poor. This is especially true as both Argentina and Brazil, following a
more aggressive approach to public enterprise reform, are seeing impressive productivity
gains from the new private companies. The public utilities - telecommunications,
electricity and water - are still largely government-owned monopolies even though there
has been some progress in the latter two sub-sectors to move towards more commercially
oriented management of these enterprises. The eventual elimination of monopoly status
is the goal - given political constraints to outright privatization.

62. Moreover, while the past governments' gradualist approach has produced results,
progress has varied. For example, the national railway agency's inward-looking,
bureaucratic approach has resulted in a deterioration in the quality of fixed infrastructure
and poor quality service. It has historically also run up very large losses. On the other
hand, the ports sub-sector has displayed strong productivity improvements since the
government began to allow a more substantial participation of the private sector in the
investment operations of the port authority; in this case, the dollar port charge per

- 17 -

container in Uruguay is lower than Argentina, Brazil and Chile. Efforts to commercialize
the state postal services also seem to be generating benefits, and the national airline has
been sold. The financial performance of the electricity company-UTE-has 
been quite
positive since 1995 with average tariffs at 11 cents per kWh slightly above the estimated
long-run marginal cost and large consumers paying in the order of 5 cents per kWh. Still,
these rates are considerably higher than those paid in Argentina and Brazil. It should be
noted, however, that large companies can now purchase electricity from neighboring
countries.

63. 
In the case of Uruguay, road transport is particularly important, as it is the
dominant mode of transport for both freight and passenger traffic. The road network in
Uruguay is quite extensive, representing one of the highest density of roads in the region,
and it is rated as well developed by the Bank's standard transport index. It provides all
weather access to almost all locations in the country. Still, since much of the system was
built a long time ago, quality has deteriorated due to reduced resources for maintenance,
and, more importantly, inefficient use of these resources. Importantly, demand is
increasing at a rate 2-3 times the historic average. The govermnent is addressing this
problem by progressively concessioning new construction and contracting out to private
companies for road maintenance. In fact, they are nearing the target of bringing 50
percent of the road network under this forn of private maintenance contracts with Bank
support. At the same time, the gradual retrenchment of workers has allowed total staffing
to decrease in the national highway authority.

Context for Private Sector Development

64. 
The gradual opening of the economy and reduced role of the public sector has
opened up new opportunities for the private sector to lead the economic growth process.
Historically, Uruguay has experienced relatively low levels of investment, and even
during the 1990s, gross private investment only averaged about 14 percent of GDP.
Private savings, too, have been low, at about 11 percent of GDP. These levels reflect an
aging population, the rather lack of dynamism in the private sector, the reliance on
historic investments in the agriculture sector, relatively high wage costs, as compared to
Brazil (albeit lower than Argentina's) and the relatively low investment requirements in
the service sector. That sector has been the fastest growing, with services now accounting
for 64 percent of GDP, comparable to Argentina and OECD countries.

65. 
The financial sector is one of Uruguay's better developed sectors. One of the
attractive features of Uruguay for foreign investors continues to be the establishment of
private banking operations targeted at high net worth individuals, primarily from
neighboring countries. This is due to the relatively low risk perception of a stable sector
that has liberalized in a steady fashion. Banks offering private banking sectors have
traditionally been European and North American, but there is a growing number of banks
from neighboring countries entering into this sector. In addition, international banks have
begun entering the retail market with new instruments. For example, the World Bank
Group, through MIGA, has supported a European bank in developing residential
mortgage capabilities in the domestic market, with the view of extending maturity and
reducing debt servicing costs to consumers. However, interest in expanding into the

- 18-

retail banking sector is limited by the perception of a small and potentially low-
profitability national market. Moreover, small and medium sized domestic enterprises
have limited access to credit and even larger companies face constraints posed by limited
financial sector development (see Box 1 on the Bank's Financial Sector Review, FYOO).

66. 
Finally, as a small economy, the corporate sector tends to be closely knit and
lacks initiative and risk taking. Parts of it have been slow to modernize and IFC's
experience has not been positive on corporate governance issues, among other things. To
be' successful, companies generally need to look beyond Uruguay's borders, even at a
fairly early stage in a company's development. Direct access to larger markets, via
Mercosur, has had a positive impact, in general, on the business environment. Continued
progress in consolidating free trade within Mercosur, as well as the lowering trade
barriers in non-Mercosur destinations will be key factors for future private sector
development. Another area in which the Bank has worked in the past is full application
of internationally accepted accounting and auditing norms and standards. This is an area
in which Uruguay has lagged, although legislation is pending in Congress.

_otbtdobot~%fD 

_n 198 _ntedgeo 

moeizto m_sue as_ 

wa 408c hi 

bt,t ths=esrs 

rga,soe 

ihrta 

istonihosBai 

n 

retn.B 

otat 

rga

=:oedeeoe 

.aia makt whc ha aaetpiaitiono 

esta %o D,:cmaedt 

- 19-

Medium-Term Economic Prospects and the External Environment

67. Uruguay's prospects will depend upon its ability to continue in the modernization
of the public sector, deregulation of the private sector, and the private sector's own
efforts to adapt to a rapidly changing global business environment. Prospects also
depend greatly on the openness of global markets to agricultural commodities and the
country's terms of trade. The government's and society's efforts over the last fifteen
years have been rewarded with higher economic growth rates and greater economic
stability. An indicator of the improved performance in terms of economic efficiency is
that total factor productivity grew by 1.8 percent per year over the 1985-1998 period --
after years of decline in total factor productivity.

68. 
Continued success will depend upon progress in economic reforms, and the
process could be facilitated, or handicapped, by external factors. Key reform measures
would include the de-monopolization of electricity, water and telephone sectors, removal
of preferred treatment for state-owned enterprises in the banking sector, and progress in
liberalizing labor markets in particular sectors. Key external factors will be growth in
Argentina and Brazil and trends in international commodity prices. In addition, weather
may play a role in the shorter term, as droughts or other natural events could impact
certain sectors.

69. Assuming moderate growth in neighboring countries and gradual progress in
reform areas, we foresee the following scenario. The recession of 1999 and sluggish
growth of 2000 would be followed by two strong growth years, before settling on a long-
run growth rate of 3.5 percent. The fiscal deficit would be cut in half in 2000, following
the proposed program with the Fund. Further fiscal consolidation would result in a fiscal
deficit well below one percent of GDP in later years.

Table 4: Medium-term Scenario

1999 

-3.4% 

3.8% 

2.9% 

2000 

2.0% 

1.8% 

2.5% 

2001 

4.0% 

1.2% 

2.0% 

2002 

4.0% 

0.8% 

1.8% 

2003

3.5%

0.5%

1.7%

2,602 

2,587 

2,637 

2,730 

2,830

4.2% 

11.4% 

5.8% 

11.0% 

4.0% 

10.5% 

2.5% 

10.0% 

2.5%

9.8%

GDP growth 

Fiscal Deficit 
(% of GDP)
External Current 
Account Deficit

(% of GDP)

Gross International 
Reserves
($ millions)
Inflation (e.o.p.) 

Unemployment 

3See E. Bucacos, "Fuentes del Creciniento Economico en Uruguay: 1960-98," Revista de Economia, Vol.
VI, No. 2, Central Bank of Uruguay.

- 20 -

Downside Risks

70. 
The most obvious external downside risk would be a recession (or even more
severe economic crisis) in either Argentina or Brazil. Some Uruguayan exports -- like
commodities, livestock and wool - can eventually be diverted to other markets. There
are other sectors, however, that are directly dependent on these neighbors - tourism and
perishable dairy products, for example. The impact of such a shock would be a recession,
with a corresponding increase in poverty and a decline in living standards. The threat of
another global financial crisis, emanating from another region of the world, would have a
less severe impact on Uruguay, given its relatively favorable external debt position and
investment grade credit rating.

71. Another potential threat is a change in Argentina that encourages Argentine
residents to withdraw their deposits in Uruguayan banks. A substantial share of bank
deposits are held by foreigners, mostly Argentine citizens seeking a tax haven or other
forms of secrecy. A sudden withdrawal of these resources would have a severe impact on
the banking system. Many banks do hold liquid foreign assets against these liabilities. It
has been estimated that all liquid foreign assets in the economy (official reserves and
private holdings) cover 86 percent of all short-term external debt (including all non-
resident bank deposits).

72. A more gradual risk would be the deterioration in competitiveness that could
result from stalled reforms and/or from an even greater deterioration (or lack of recovery)
in commodity prices and Uruguay's terms of trade. Neighboring countries have either
privatized -- or are rapidly moving ahead with privatization -- of telecommunications,
electricity and water sectors. If Uruguay's state-owned monopolies do not keep pace
with cost reductions in neighboring countries' utility sectors, the country's productive
sector could lose competitiveness relative to its neighbors. Similarly, if the external
markets for Uruguay's main products remain highly protected, and if commodity prices
continue to stay at their low levels, the result could be sustained slow, or negative, growth
with strains on the social safety net and deteriorating social indicators.

3. 

THE URUGUAYAN GOVERNMENT'S
DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

73. 
Emerging from a serious recession, the government plans to address pressing
issues immediately: reverse expenditure increases that occurred last year in order to
return to the path of deficit reduction; provide relief to sectors suffering from the ongoing
drought; and participate actively with Mercosur negotiations to reduce frictions that arose
among the partners following Brazil's devaluation last year. Part of the relief to the
agriculture sector may come in the form of increased transfers to municipal governments,
so that the rural property tax could be reduced without compromising municipal budgets.

74. During this adjustment period, the government has reached agreement on a new
22-month Stand-By Arrangement with the IMF (letter of intent as of mid-April),
providing a framework for improving the immediate fiscal problem and guiding a gradual
path out of the recent recession. Under the auspices of this program, the government has

- 21 -

committed to cutting the fiscal deficit in half - to about 1.8 percent of GDP. On the
expenditure side, the adjustment plan takes a balanced approach. Nominal public sector
wages will grow by only 1.5 percent, in the context of inflation in the 4-6 percent range,
and a broad range of other primary expenditures will suffer moderate adjustments. On
the revenue side, economic growth of 2 to 2.5 percent will ease the process. The
economic recovery in Argentina and Brazil is expected to result in an improvement in
exports and a narrowing of the current account deficit from 2.8 percent in 1999 to the 2-
2.5 percent range in 2000. The Stand By arrangement is for $ 200 million (SDR 150
million) which the government is treating as precautionary.

Medium Term Vision and Priorities

75. 
The new administration is committed to macroeconomic stability as a necessary
pre-condition for future growth. The President has stated that the experience of the last
half-century has shown that Uruguay "only grows without inflation, without fiscal deficit
and with exchange rate stability." He is proposing a thorough re-evaluation of
government programs to see where expenditures are ineffective or unnecessary.

76. 
The government is committed to improving competitiveness, not through
devaluation, but by attacking excess local costs at the source. This process will involve
deregulation of particular sectors and ending both public and private sector monopolies,
so as to lower the "costo uruguayo." This is one of the key elements of the new
government's strategy.

77. 
Part of the government's plan for a more efficient Uruguay is to improve public
sector efficiency. Better governance and transparency would be a driving force to
improve the quality of public services and to reduce chronic delays in the present
administrative processes. In particular, the new administration is committed to "total
transparency" in government procurement and in the granting of concessions. The
government plans to propose a new procurement law that corrects problems in the
existing system. In addition, it plans to improve the dissemination, via internet, of
government expenditures so that citizens can have direct access to this information.
Finally, the government plans to require that government employees receive training in
auditing and monitoring of govermment expenditures.

78. 
Education will be a priority of the new administration, with a particular emphasis
on improving computer literacy among the population. Despite immediate concerns with
the fiscal deficit, the government recognizes the need to dedicate more resources to this
sector in the future. The Minister of Education has set 4.5 percent of GDP as the target
figure for total education expenditures, including private sector expenditures (currently
the level is about 3.9 percent).

79. 
In health, the government plans to continue the gradual process of reform by
phasing out non-priority services and making institutional improvements. It is reassessing
the costs of health protocols and plans to advance with decentralized management of
public hospitals, improve primary care, promote good preventive health habits and
improve training of health care workers.

- 22 -

80. Water resource management and the energy sector are priorities of the new
administration, as well. (In fact, they are both related due to the importance of
hydroelectric power in Uruguay.) Water resources have become of particular concern
during the last drought and its impact on the agricultural and livestock sectors.
Efficiency in irrigation systems is key and the new Minister of Industry has put at the top
of his list of priorities the definition of a national energy strategy. Water resource issues
also include the quality of coastal waters, a key factor for further development of one of
Uruguay's most dynamic sectors - tourism.

81. 
The new administration wants to move ahead with further consolidation of
Mercosur, and the further opening of non-Mercosur markets to Uruguayan agricultural
goods. Uruguay perhaps has a greater stake in Mercosur, relative to the two large
country partners - given Uruguay's small size, geographic position and larger share of
trade in GDP. Uruguay can also play a facilitating role with Argentina and Brazil. In
addition, the new President has stated that the ultimate objective of the Latin American
countries should be the creation of a hemispheric free trade zone from "Alaska to
Ushuaia." Uruguay, like it partners in the Cairn group, calls for greater equity and access
in the world's market for agricultural commodities.

82. 
The government has expressed its desire to attack deeply problems of social
exclusion and the coordination of this policy has been assigned to the Budget and
Planning Office. This office is looking forward to further analysis of the issues and the
impact of on-going programs, as initiated under the Bank's Poverty Assessment, as a
contribution to the redesign and/or refocusing of expenditures during the next budget
cycle. For example, the new Minister of Labor has targeted worker re-training programs
as a priority, and the President has suggested that the state may need to address the issues
of land titling for the rural poor, as an emerging issue. Clearly, basic social services-
particularly education and water and sanitation--are areas that need to be addressed.

83. 
Clarifying the role of local (departamento) governments will be another important
challenge. Departments have taken on the following traditional urban functions: solid
waste disposal, sanitary regulations for local businesses, participation in the construction
and maintenance of local streets, street drainage, urban property use, and local traffic.
The Departmnent of Montevideo has taken on the responsibility of sewerage services.
Without clear delineation of functions or objectives, the departments have responded
spontaneously to perceived needs. In health, some have established multi-purpose clinics
(policlinicas), some have established ambulance services, and some have assisted in the
construction and maintenance of federal hospitals. In education, departments have
assisted in the construction and maintenance of schools. In terms of general social safety
net functions, they sometimes establish eateries for the poor, they provide direct cash
transfers to needy families on occasion, and they assist in providing emergency relief
services. In addition, the departments often contribute to infrastructure projects. Finally,
a few departments (but not many nowadays) engage in commercial activities, providing
slaughterhouse services and running hotels.4 The last Constitutional reform (1994)

4See World Bank, Uruguay: Local Government Finance, December 7 hi, 1999.

- 23 -

established the creation of a Sectoral Commission that would decide on a fixed share of
the national budget that would be allocated as new transfers to the local level. This share
will have to be determined as part of the five-year budget plan to be submitted to
Congress.

4. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

84. 
In recent years, the Bank's assistance to Uruguay has been very selective with
limited lending that supported the government in particular reform activities, or
complemented the much broader investment program that is financed by our partners at
the IDB. In particular, the Bank has looked for ways in which our international
knowledge and experience can contribute to the government's development agenda -
whether it be specialized knowledge of international standards in financial system
regulation, or the efficient management and organization of water utilities as an example.

85. 
In the upcoming years, Bank assistance will become even more selective as the
Bank gradually scales down its programs and monitors the country's progress in realizing
its development objectives. The proposed program of assistance would focus on a
limited number of areas, involving critical social and environmental dimensions, the
promotion of sustainable development and increased attention to vulnerable groups.
Emphasis will be given to areas where the Bank's international knowledge and policy
contribution can be leveraged.

86. 
Progress towards 1997 CAS objectives. The last CAS for Uruguay was
considered by the Board in June 1997. It was prepared in the middle of the last
administration, during a period when the economy was growing strongly, led by trade
within the Mercosur zone. The CAS proposed base case lending of US$ 180-225 million
for FY98-00 that would include investment lending in key sectors for enhancing benefits
of Mercosur integration, increasing private sector participation and rationalizing public
expenditures (transport, energy, water, education, and health). In the high case scenario
(US$250 million), adjustment lending was to be considered, with a focus on capital
market development and the deepening of social security reform.

87. 
Progress towards meeting these objectives has been positive. Investment loans
used enterprise reform/concessioning components to advance the public sector reform
agenda. Physical investments helped establish the infrastructure basis for improved
export performance in the context of Mercosur. A pair of single-tranche adjustment loans
supported key incremental steps in structural reforms (social security system and
financial sector), and they were designed flexibly to match the Government's priorities
and political constraints. In the social sectors, reforms advanced further in education than
in health; however, in the latter, a productive policy dialogue was established. The
historical delays in disbursement of investment loans were ameliorated through close
supervision efforts and by establishing clear intermediate targets with Government
executing agencies. The Country Assistance Evaluation, prepared by OED (see Box 2),
will be circulated separately; however, it generally agrees with this assessment. More
details, by sector, are provided below.

-24 -

o8. The ongoing Irrigation and Natural Resource Management Project has been
successfol in improving crop diversification and exports to Mercosur destinations -

although the loan itself suffered from disbursement d'elays. This project was a follow-up

to the successful Second Agricultural Development Project. The latter supported

investmnents and policy reforms that conitributed to tremendous gains in production,

exports and crop diversification. From 1988 to 1998, forestry areas planted were more
than twice the amount expected at the time of project preparation. Productivity

improvements resulted a revival of the dairy sub-sector, with milk production almost

doubling over the period.

89. 
Transport development for the forestry and other sectors, supported by Bank
loans, will lay the foundation for improved trade relations with Mercosur. The Second

Transport Project is rehabilitating roads and bridges to meet Mercosur standards. It is
also increasing private sector participation and rationalizing public expenditures by
establishing performance-based contracts with private companies for road rehabilitation
and maintenance. The Forestry Products Transport project is similarly addressing the
needs of both rail and road capacities to handle the expected heavy traffic from
Uruguay's nascent commercial forestry industry. On that front, the progress on the road

side has been better than that of the railway.

90. A recent financial sector adjustment loan was approved afts 
te wernment
successfully completed a variety of actions to improve competition in the banking sector,
restructure public banks, strengthen banking regulation and supervision, improve
transparency of the financial sector, and modemize the financial sector legal framework.

- 25 -

This loan was a single-tranche operation, and the new government will need to continue
with further actions in this sector in order to assure the future competitiveness and
efficiency of the sector. An agenda for future action has been set out in the
accompanying financial sector review.

91. 
In terms of rationalizing public expenditures, one of the major achievements of
the last administration was the reform of the social security system. The reform
established a multi-pillar system in which workers could choose to a share of their payroll
contributions to newly established private pension funds. (New entrants to the labor
markets and workers under age 40 with incomes above a certain level were obliged to
enter the new system.) The reform also lowered the average benefits to future pensioners
by changing the formula for calculating the benefit - thus significantly reducing the
future government liability associated with the pension system. The Bank supported
these efforts with the single tranche Contractual Savings Adjustment Loan.

92. 
In education, the First Basic Education project has been highly successful in
providing improved materials for basic education, expanding pre-school education
coverage (especially in poor areas) and improving basic education administration and
monitoring. This is a critical part of the country's effort to eradicate poverty and address
the concerns of increased social exclusion. The follow-up Second Basic Education
project is helping to finance the expanded coverage of pre-school education to children 4
and 5 years of age, and it will establish full-day schooling, targeting schools in poor
neighborhoods. Improvement in student accomplishments has been substantial and the
innovations under these operations are being shared with several states in Brazil and
provide lessons which are to be applied in Central America.

93. 
In the health sector, there has been less progress in addressing some of the major
issues facing the sector, notably regulation of the insurance schemes/providers and
managing health care costs. There has been slow progress on the decentralization of
hospital management but the Bank-financed Health project has initiated work in
reforming the sector even though that project had to made less ambitious. The project
has initiated a pilot program in creating administrative autonomy for hospitals,
institutional development for monitoring public health problems, and analytical work
leading to the development of a longer term strategy for separating finance and provision
functions within the national health system. The results of the hospital pilots are very
promising in terms of efficiency and quality improvements.

94. 
Finally, in the public utility sectors, the Bank been helping the government
gradually improve transport, water and electricity enterprises through a strategy of
corporatization -- eventually moving towards removing monopoly power. The ongoing
Forest Products Transport Project addresses restructuring of the national railroad agency
albeit with limited success. The Power Transmission and Distribution Project (despite
delays in implementation) used a twinning arrangement with a foreign utility to
reorganize and modernize management practices in the power company. The proposed
Water Sector APL (accompanying this CAS), in its first phase, will provide technical
assistance and investments, laying the groundwork for additional concessions of water
services, and improve environmental management of the national water agency. Later

- 26 -

phases of the APL will launch additional concessions. This program will be particularly
critical in extending service to poor neighborhoods and improving the quality of service.

Portfolio Performance and Management

95. As stated in the last CAS, Uruguay has traditionally been a steady, if slow,
executor of Bank projects. This general assessment continues to apply. Disbursement
lags continue to be a problem among the seven active investment projects across most
projects and sectors (see Annex B8, the eighth project is an adjustment loan). Despite
these delays, efforts to accelerate project performance have usually been successful in
establishing intermediate goals and deadlines that result in eventual satisfactory project
performance. There are two highly satisfactory projects in the active portfolio, both for
development objectives and implementation: the First Basic Education Quality
Improvement Project and the Financial Sector Adjustment Loan.

96. At the time of the last portfolio and programming review with the government last
fall, there were no problem projects or projects at risk in the portfolio. Over the past five
fiscal years, all 14 projects evaluated by OED had successfully achieved their
development objectives. Two projects which may need to be restructured are the Power
Transmission project and the Forestry Products Transport project. Both of these will be
closely reviewed with the new government in the coming months.

97. One of the areas of continuous delay and contention in project implementation has
been procurement. This is also a generic area of delay for the public administration as a
whole. A Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), issued in July 1999,
highlights the strengths and weaknesses of public procurement and makes
recommendations to improve it. The government concurred with the report's main
findings and requested the Bank to assist with implementation. The CPAR recommended:
(a) revamping the legal and administrative procurement framework, including the
creation of a public procurement law; (b) establishment of a body responsible for
developing procurement policy, regulation and documentation, assisting line agencies
and monitoring procurement; and (c) developing a procurement management career
stream and a long term human resources strategy.

98. Decentralization of the Country Management Unit. Decentralization of the
country office to neighboring Buenos Aires has facilitated a number of aspects of the
Bank's work. In particular, supervision of the health sector loan (with supervision
conducted from the field office) has been enhanced. The policy dialogue, with
government officials only a one hour flight away, has benefited from more frequent
contacts with senior staff. In addition, the Bank's NGO coordinator in Buenos Aires has
been able to maintain closer contacts to Uruguayan NGOs-at a very low cost--than
would have been the case if these activities had been managed from Washington.

99. 
Participatory Processes. Uruguayan political traditions are firmly based on
consensus-building. With a population of 3.3 million and competitive political parties,
the policy debate is highly participatory. There are also Constitutional processes that

- 27 -

give minority views the power to voice their opinion and overturn legislation -- if their
views manage to convince the general electorate.

100. The Country Department respects this tradition and has supported it in a variety of
ways. One example is the participation of businessmen, journalists, academics, union
leaders, and opposition politicians in a study tour of New Zealand's reforms. The Bank
also helped sponsor an open forum last year on directions for Uruguay in the twentieth
century, in partnership with a local association of businessmen and involving speakers
from Germany, New Zealand and Ireland. Our work on decentralization brought together
local and national government officials to study the cases of neighboring Argentina and
Brazil as background for their own ongoing debate on the subject. The Bank also
sponsored an open discussion of the issues in higher education, involving authorities, the
teaching profession, academics, and other interested parties. The FY00 Poverty
Assessment used a participatory approach in diagnosing the issue of social exclusion' with
NGOs participating in designing the analytical approach and in conducting the analysis.
An initial meeting was recently held with the civil society Consultative Forum of
Mercosur. This group is comprised of representatives from labor unions, business
associations, professional associations, cooperatives and other general-action NGOs.
General strategic directions were discussed and a commitment was made to continue
contacts.

101. The IFC and MIGA. The IFC has a portfolio of four projects in Uruguay. Two
are in the agricultural sector, one in a financial intermediary, and a participation in the
Punta del Este regional airport (the IFC's only airport investment globally). IFC's
primary focus continues to be resolving ongoing problem projects, as some operations
have been disappointing. Where new investments are possible, priority will be given to
the financial sector and the social sectors. In the financial sector, IFC would seek to
reach smaller enterprises through investments in local financial intermediaries. In the
social sectors, IFC is looking at an opportunity to support a private university.
Opportunities for IFC to support any of these sectors will depend on the progress in
reforms and an expanded role of the private sector in the country.

102. MIGA has two guarantee operations in the financial sector for risks associated
with any potential expropriation or controls on the transfer of funds. The total value of
the guaranties is $40.7 million - $23.4 million net of re-insured portions. MIGA is
discussing projects with banks of neighboring Mercosur countries to enter the private
banking sector in Uruguay. In addition, MIGA is looking to support projects in other
sectors that are of interest to foreign investors (such as agribusiness and tourism).

Key Strategic Directions for the CAS: FYOI-05

103. The proposed program will continue to reinforce Uruguay's economic and social
development, with increased concentration on activities that affect sustainability, address
pockets of poverty, and protect for economic vulnerability. The consultative process
involved in the study of social exclusion helped identify key geographic areas and social
groups that need assistance. The Country Assistance Evaluation, and discussions with

- 28 -

Government, have encouraged the Bank to continue supporting the expansion of access
to education, private sector development and financial sector reform.

104. As noted in Table 2, the largest vulnerable group identified is children in poverty.
These children are also associated with poor female headed-households that face difficult
circumstances in balancing survival employment and child-rearing responsibilities. In
terms of breaking the cycle of poverty in poor neighborhoods, the most critical factor is
to start children early and keep them in school with better quality schooling. Thus,
management proposes to expand the Bank's successful program of support for the
education sector. Management also proposes, via our work in sustainable development
and water and sanitation, increasingly to incorporate disadvantaged groups and rural
populations. Continuing the partnership that the Bank has established with the
government on poverty and targeting of social expenditures will be critical as well.

105. 
In terms of broader, macroeconomic vulnerability, the continued competitiveness
of the financial sector and the major public services still in the public domain deserve
high priority. In addition, the maintenance of prudent macroeconomic policies is an
absolutely necessary pre-condition for reducing vulnerability, as is the strengthening of
financial sector supervision and regulation. Thus, along with the IMF, the Bank expects
to maintain an active policy dialogue, including an update of recently completed work on
the financial sector.

1. Pockets of Poverty and Social Exclusion

106. The Poverty Assessment documented the substantial accomplishments of
Uruguay in addressing the problem of poverty and the Bank has long supported the
government's strategy to focus on the quality and the reach of education services as the
way to reduce poverty and to improve the distribution of income in Uruguay. At the
same time, economic and social conditions are quickly evolving and, recently, there has
been an expansion in urban pockets of poverty. Some rural groups may been left out of
the economic gains of recent years, as well. Social segmentation is beginning to occur in
a way that goes against the country's egalitarian traditions. The government's social
programs thus need to evolve in a commensurate way to address these emerging
concerns.

107. A number of factors - including the critical role of macroeconomic growth and
stability - need to be considered for improving the lives of the people living in poverty.
In rural areas, it may be the case that simple access to water is a critical factor for
improving income-generating capacity. In urban areas, access to basic urban services -
water and sewerage -- may be critical for keeping families healthy and productive.
Keeping children in school, and providing day-long learning and daycare options, may be
the most important elements for eliminating the cycle of poverty. In response, the re-
allocation of existing public resources will play a critical role.

108. 
In this context, the Bank will plan for an operation to continue the successful
work that has been started at the pre-school and primary school level. Since the IDB
works extensively on secondary education, there is an opportunity for us to work together

- 29 -

and devise an integrated strategy with the new authorities. It is likely that the Bank's
assistance will involve a combination of policy advice and dissemination of best
practices, combined with investment in key areas that focus on quality and equity in the
educational system. More generally, in the area of social development, the Bank would
seek to support activities that would be a catalytic complement to existing programs
addressing pockets of poverty. This could be realized by AAA on the issues of targeting
and program design, possibly leading to a poverty/targeted operation with a community
development (rural and/or urban) focus. This would complement the IDB's activities in
the area of slum upgrading and the Bank's own efforts on improving water and sanitation
services for poor neighborhoods. The Bank would also be open to the possibility of a
follow up to our health project to complement the IDB's role in that sector.

2. Environmental/Economic/Sustainable Development Nexus

109. To a large extent, environmental sustainability is another dimension of economic
vulnerability. Uruguay's economy is based largely on its natural resource base. Exports
are highly dependent on the quality of land for agricultural and livestock production.
Water resource management is a cross-cutting theme, as it also relates to the agriculture
and livestock sectors, but also in tenns of coastal pollution that can affect fisheries and
the dynamic tourism sector.

110. As for irrigation and natural resource issues related to agriculture, the Bank is
active with a current project and the Bank plans to evaluate the progress and scope for
additional activities. The new administration has emphasized the importance of this area
in our strategic dialogue. The Bank also plans to prepare a Maritime Management
Project, with a GEF complement, that would include activities to improve environmental
safety of the main port, monitor ships, develop oil spill contingency plans, and improve
information on fish stocks for developing sustainable fishing regulations. This operation
would create synergy with a comparable program with Argentina and thus be the
beginning of a continental capacity. Another GEF operation-a mid-size grant-would
pilot a method of recovery of methane gas from waste landfills. The Bank further
anticipates that the restructuring of the ongoing Power Transmission and Distribution
project will create opportunities for pursuing new activities in energy conservation, in
which case a GEF grant would be proposed.

3. Role of the State, Public Enterprise Reform and Governance

111. Private sector development in Uruguay will depend upon the transformation of
the role and performance of the public sector, as suggested in the Country Assistance
Evaluation. The last administration made progress in these areas, and the new
administration is committed to accelerating the process by opening these sectors to
competition and commercializing the operation of public utilities. This would have to
take into account the needs of the poor at the outset-a lesson the Bank has learned from
Argentina. The ground has been laid for this under several ongoing operations, and the
government has requested that the Bank provide technical assistance for designing
concessions and other forms of private participation in infrastructure, as well as devising
new regulatory mechanisms. This Technical Assistance operation would be with the

-30 -

Office of Planning and Budget (OPP) as the key oversight agency for public enterprises.
Specifically for the water and sanitation company, the Bank would continue support via
the water sector APL ('00) in subsequent phases, if APL triggers are met.

112. 
In the financial sector, regulatory functions have improved, and the Bank
supported these efforts via AAA and an adjustment loan. Continuation of this process
will be high on the agenda. Periodic technical assistance and advisory work will be
pursued - in consultation/cooperation with the IMF - to assist the government in
advancing further. Additional financial support, under a high case scenario, would be
justified.

113. 
In the area of governance, the government has been implementing a State Reform
Program, with IDB assistance, focusing on civil service reform and financial
management, but not procurement. Based on the recent CPAR, the government has
requested that the Bank continue to work in this particular area via an IDF grant. OPP
has identified as areas that require the most urgent attention: (i) the development of
procurement information systems and its integration with financial management, as well
as (ii) creating awareness among high level officials of the importance of procurement as
a management tool and the establishment of a professional procurement career stream.

114. Key Partners. The IDB is, and is likely to continue to be, the key source of
external development finance for Uruguay. The IDB expects to lend $1.1 billion over the
next five-year budget period - a level similar to the last five-year period. Major
infmastructure investments may be part of the program. The IDB will also maintain an
active program in health and education and in social services (for example, slum
upgrading, violence and security). One area for potential collaboration and leaming
could be in the area of social investment funds and community development. In general,
the IDB shares similar concerns for macroeconomic stability, improving the coverage of
social services in the poorest neighborhoods, strengthening of the financial system to
improve access to credit and reforming state-owned enterprises.

115. The upcoming IDB program (yet to be finalized) will likely include projects for
science and technology, public sector reform of the legislative and judicial branches and
training of health sector workers - early on in the upcoming five-year period. Further
down the road, other areas under consideration include a multi-sector loan that would
have a focus on strengthening the financial system and improving SME access to credit,
support for expansion of the rice and cattle sub-sectors, support for road and other
transport upgrading, further reforms of the state electricity company along with electrical
infrastructure investments, some programs for professional worker training, support for
health sector reforms, improvements in public housing programs, and perhaps a loan for
institutional strengthening of solid waste disposal in the greater Montevideo area.

116. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). As described above, the IMF is providing a
precautionary stand-by arrangement of approximately $200 million that would go
through the end of CY2001. In CY2000, a cut in the fiscal deficit is programmed: from
3.8 percent of GDP to 1.8 percent. The government has a comrnmitment not to increase
taxes, and economic growth is expected to be only about 2 - 2.5 percent, so most of the

-31 -

fiscal adjustment will fall on real expenditure cuts. Inflation of between 4-6 percent,
would allow for part of that real decline. This fiscal adjustment is necessary for
maintaining Uruguay's fiscal sustainability and creditworthiness. The adjustment,
however, will make it more difficult for investment loans from the Bank or IDB to
disburse this year, and perhaps in the upcoming year or two. Fiscal adjustment is the
current priority. For the year 2000, the reform focus in the Fund program is on
information: audit of public banks, regular publication (quarterly) of the financial
performance of public banks, and more frequent (quarterly) publication of public sector
accounts. On the exchange rate, the new authorities are planning to maintain the
devaluation rate of 7.5 percent per year. In terms of collaboration, the Bank and the Fund
work closely together on the general economic concerns, and most intensively in the area
of financial sector reform and on competitiveness of the public enterprises.

117. Selectivity. There are a number of areas of public sector reform in which the IDB
is taking the lead and Bank involvement probably will not be required: for example,
reform of the legislative branch, judicial branch and central government civil service. In
the past, the Bank has worked with the IDB in transport, and management does not
foresee future Bank assistance for this sector, given the priorities identified via
consultation and the Country Assistance Evaluation.

Proposed Program and Monitoring of Development Progress

118. Given Uruguay's relatively high level of social and economic development, there
is ample justification to reorient the Bank's role to these evolving circumstances with an
increased focus on vulnerable groups. Uruguay has an income per capita of $6,180
(Atlas methodology), the sixth highest among active IBRD borrowers, and about 20
percent above the Bank's indicative threshold for initiating a phase-out program for
graduation. In PPP estimates, its income per capita rises to $9,480. Uruguay's social
development indicators, in general, are among the highest in Latin America particularly
in terms of poverty and income distribution

119. This proposed program, under the base case, consists of lending from $ 150
million to $200 million for FYO 1-05, with about 1-2 operations per year, and implies a
reduction of 50 percent compared to the 1997 CAS (in terms of average annual
commitments).5 The main factors taken into consideration in proposing this smaller
prograrn are: (1) Uruguay's superior social indicators albeit with remaining pockets of
poverty; (2) Uruguay's relatively modest external vulnerability and investment grade
(one of only 3 countries in the region with investment grade); and (3) the high existing
and planned lending levels of the IDB (planned average annual commitments of
approximately 1 percent of GDP). The FY01-05 CAS period was chosen to coincide
with the Uruguayan electoral cycle. Management would consider periodic Board
presentations to update the Board on developments, if country conditions deteriorate, or if
high case lending is proposed.

5The 1997 CAS included base case lending of $180-225 over three years ($60-$75 million per year).

- 32 -

Table 5: Monitoring the Development Process

(1) Economic and Financial Variables 
Initial Values 
(a) GDP growth 
-3.4 percent (1999) 
(b) Current Account Deficit 
2.8 percent of GDP 
(c) External Debt Exports of Goods and Services 215 
(d) Credit Ratings 
BBB- for S&P/DCR; 
Baa3 for Moody's 

Target Values
Average 3 percent
< 2 percent of GDP
< 200 percent
Improve two grades.
2/

(II) Social Indicators
(a) Unemployment Rate 
(b) Poverty Rate 

11.4 percent 
< 10 percent
22 percent (Poverty Assessment'00) <=18 percent
or 6 percent (CEPAL) 3/ 
<= 6 percent
(c) Gini Coefficient 
0.43 
0.43
(d) Secondary Education Completion Rate /1 
40 percent 
50 percent
(e) hifant Mortality Rate 
16 per 1,000 
<= 16 per 1,000
1/ Defined as the percentage of the population over 19 years of age that has completed all six years of

secondary school and/or technical school, teachers training or university.
2/ For comparison purposes, Portugal has AA rating, Barbados A-, Chile A- and Korea (post crisis) BBB-.
3/ The CEPAL poverty line has a higher proportion of food in its consumption basket, as compared to the
Poverty Assessment's poverty line. The latter is based on average consumption patterns in Uruguay, while
the former is not. The CEPAL estimate is mentioned here, however, since it is published on a regular basis.

120. A selection of measurable indicators will be used to determine Uruguay's
progress in realizing its development goals. Significant deterioration in several of these
variables would trigger an evaluation of the proposed strategy, possibly leading to high-
case lending if special efforts were warranted. The variables include standard economic
and financial indicators and social indicators. The table above lists the monitoring
indicators, and the initial values. These indicators monitor two critical areas: (1) the
country's need for the Bank's financing (for example, access to private credit markets,
and macroeconomic stability); and (2) the country's need for broader development
assistance. AAA will also be used to evaluate Uruguay's evolving competitiveness, trade
performance in the context of Mercosur, and progress in poverty alleviation (Annex B4).
This combination of AAA, and monitoring of the indicators of Table 5, will provide the
basis for an informed discussion of the extent of future Bank involvement in Uruguay for
the next CAS.

121. Program Triggers. Triggers for high case lending are presented in Table 6. The
Bank would consider a higher case for lending if there were a significant break-through
on the policy front, most notably in the financial sector and privatization (or closure, as
the case may be) of the two intervened commercial banks or some other comparable
area.6 This high case would bring the total program to the order of $ 250 million over the

6 Under possible high-case scenarios (not developed in this CAS), a significant external shock (e.g.,
collapse in commodity prices) or a domestic shock (e.g., bank run not due to domestic policies, or a
natural disaster), might imply that Uruguay faces a serious financing constraint, despite its investment
grade. Under these circumstances, the Bank could play a catalytic role with higher lending to secure
economic reforms, if the government is committed to an appropriate macroeconomic framework.
Social protection would be a key focus of support to alleviate the social impact of the economic
shock. Burden-sharing with other international fnancial institutions would come into play. Such
developments would be reported to the Board in a CAS Progress Report.

- 33 -

period. In any case, a pre-condition would be agreement with the government on the
direction of structural reforms and measures that should be taken. In contrast, slippage in
reforms already achieved to date, or significant deterioration in portfolio quality, would
lead to lower lending levels. In the low case, lending would continue for poverty
alleviation purposes, providing financial support only for core social programs. For
example, in the case of policy slippages, it would be difficult to proceed with reform-
oriented infrastructure projects, but we could continue with a community-based social
program (Annex B3). We could also continue with AAA during the low case, in
anticipation of a potentially improved situation.

Table 6: Program Triggers

Triggers Leading to High Case 
Base case triggers, plus: 

Base Case 
Macroeconomic framework 

acceptable to the Bank

Superior Policy Performance: 

- Privatize publicly held banks 

- Additional opportunity to

accelerate realization of selected
development goals

Triggers Leading to Low Case
Significant policy slippages:

- fiscal deficit (as a % of GDP)

deteriorates for two
consecutive years.

- unsatisfactory progress in

financial sector reforms

Satisfactory Portfolio 
Performance 

Unsatisfactory Portfolio
Performance:

- >30 percent problem projects

Satisfactory Performance of Significant Slippage in
Progress Monitoring 
Governance:

indicators 

- lack of progress in

implementing procurement
and int'l accounting standards

Bank Performance and Self-evaluation

122. The monitoring indicators will provide input on one of the key themes of this
CAS-the evolution of the Bank's relationship with Uruguay. To some extent,
substantial deviations from the monitoring indicator targets would be a signal that the
decision to pursue the strategy of a gradual reduction in our role may have been
premature. In addition, the Country Department will implement "feedback" fora with
civil society, and a new client survey will be conducted (given that the attempt in 1999
had a very limited response). Since lending operations will be highly selective, the
Country Department will monitor portfolio performance carefully and define project level
triggers with precision, as in the proposed APL for the water and sanitation sector. More
details of Bank self-evaluation indicators are provided in Annex B9.

- 34 -

Risks

123. 
In relative terms, there are few risks associated with the Bank's operations in
Uruguay. On the basis of recent performance at the project level, and overall macro-
economic and social development during the 1990s, Uruguay has shown itself to be a
reliable partner. Nevertheless, it remains a small and open economy, dependent on
commodities which has experienced a significant deterioration in its terms of trade, and
its Mercosur partners (as discussed in paragraphs 70-72). The economic deterioration in
1999 is testament to that. Climate and natural disasters have to be considered as
potentially very damaging. There are some other potential risks in terms of its ability to
continue to pursue the path of increasing its competitiveness while maintaining some of
the inflexibility inherent in its traditional ways of doing business both in the public and
private sectors. Yet, Uruguay has shown that it can adapt and move forward. The goal of
the Bank is to help the country to continue along that path.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Sven Sandstrom

Washington, D.C.
May 5, 2000

Attachments

Annex A2 - Page I of 2

Uruguay at a glance

Latin Upper_
America middle-
Uruguay & Carib. 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond*

1998
Populaton, mid-year (millions) 
GNP peF capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas rethod. US$ billions) 
Average annual growth, 1992-98
Population f%{ 
Labor force f%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1992498) 
Poverty (% of populatfon below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 gime births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% ofpopu4iat/onj 
llrrteracy (%of populaton age1+) 
f 
Gross pmary enrollment (% of schoolage population) 

3.3 
6,140 
20.2 

502 
3,940 
1,978 

583 
4,860
2,862

Life expectancy

0.7 
1.1 

1.6 
2.3 

1.4
2.0 

GNP 
capita 

Gross
enrollment

per ~ ~ ~ ~~Iprmary

-
91 
74 
16 
4 
89 
3 
109 

75 
70 
32 
8 
75 
13 
113 

77
70
27
w> 
79
11
108 

Access to safe water

Uruguay

Male 
Female 

109 
108 

-- 
.

.

Upper-middle-income group

..

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1977 
4.1 
21.5 
19.9 
18.7 
17.2 
-4.1 
1.5 
27.0 
36.1 

1987 
7.3 
14.3 
21.6 
16.7 
12.7 
-7.0. 
3.7 
58.8 
36.5 

1997 
21.5 
13.9 
21.0 
13.7 
13,2 
-1.4 
1.7 
33.3 
17.6 
33.3 

199S
22.4
15.0 
20.4
14,5
13.9
-1.9 
1.8 
32.8 
26.9
32.8
179.9

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domesticinvestrnentlGDP 
Exports Qf goods and servicesfGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
GrossnatatalsavingslGDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest paymentsfGDP 
Total debttGDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debtlexpofts 

Trade

Domeste
Does t i 
Savings

Investment

.. 

.. 
., 

.. 

159.2 

Indebtedness

197747 1988-98 

1997 

1998 4999-03

(average a-nual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 

-0.3 
-1.5 

3.7 
3.2 

4.8 
4.2 

4.9 
3.2 

1.4 
0.8 

-Uruguay
Upper-middle-income group

Exports of goods and services 

3.3 

8.2 

9.6 

0,2 

8.0

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and Investment (%)

(% of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manuftacturing 
Services 

16.1 
31.9 
25.1 
52.0 

13.7 
35.8 
28.9 
50.5 

7.3 
27.1 
18.5 
65.6 

7.2 
27.5 
17.9 
65.3 

30

30
20

1 

Private consumption 

68.5 

70.0 

73.6 

72.7 

.10 

93 

94 

9s 56 

97 
a-GDP

9O

General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

12.7 
22.7 

13.2 
19.2 

12.7 
21.2 

12.8 
20.9

GDI 

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 

0.8 
-1.4 
-1.3 
0.3 
-0.4 

4.1 
0.9 
-0.1 
5.0 
5.2 

-7.2 
5.5 
5.8 
5.6 
6.1 

5.2 
5.3 
2.3
4.8 
5.7 

30

20

1o
o

General govemment consumpton 

2.6 

2.2 

2.8 

3.3 

93 

94 

ss 

96 

97 

98

Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

-8.3 
-1.5 

9.2 
12.6 

6.1 
13.8 

14.8 
8.1 

-10

Exports 

lmports

Gross national product 

-0.9 

4.0 

4.5 

3.9

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2 - Page: 2 of 2

Uruguay,

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

InflatIon 1%1

Domestic prices 
(% change)
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Govemment finance 
(% of GDP, includes cunfent grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 

8

.

666.7 
_

15.2 
18.6 

8.6 
9.7 

so 

55.6 

72.8 

40 

20

o

.. 
.. 
.. 

16.3 
0.5 

18.9 
0.2 

19.3 
0.8 

93 

94 

95 

98 

97 

98

GDP deflator 

CPI

Overall surplus/deficit 

-1.3 

-1.6 

-1.2

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and Import levels (US$ millions)

Total exports (fob) 
Wool 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

1,182 
257 

2,726 
729 

2,832 
823

4900

Meat 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 

99 
623 
1,142 

478 
1,224 
3,727 

440 
1,244 
3,811 

3,000

2,000

2000 i i i "

Food 

93 

239 

267 

1,000

Fuel and energy 

176 

492 

512

Capital goods 

.. 

341 

685 

722 

| 

o 

9 _ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_

Export price index (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

76 

98 

99

Import prce index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

109 
70 

102 
95 

99 
100

U Exports 

U Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions,l 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

(US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:

808 
914 
-106 
-68 
7 
-167 
334 
-167 

1,589 
1,804 
-214 
-307 
8 
-513 
597 
-84 

4,217 
4,386 
-169 
-197 
74 
-287 
618 
-330 

4,225 
4,507
-282 
-197 
67 
-400 
762
-362 

0

a|

3' 

-

-2
-3

-4-

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 

.. 

.

2,149 

2,511

Conversion rate (DEC, local/USS) 

4.68E-3 

0.2 

9.4 

10.5

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of total debt, 1997 (US$ mllions)

1,105 4,299 
76 
301 
0 
0 

6,712 
403 
0 

7,600
475 
0

A: 393

Totaldebtservice 

296 

618 

744 

1,136 

G:1,901_ 

:849

IBRD 
IDA 
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
Worid Bank program 
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

14 
0 

45 
0 

83 
0 

79
0 

E: 318

0 
-19 
85 
66 
21 

3 
72 
164 
45 
13 

7
189 
471
113 
174 

.. 

I

164
424 

F: 3,191
E - Bilatera
DE-OthermulBiliateral
G - Short-term

A-IBRD 
A- IDA 
c - IMF 

0 
4 
8 

105 
63 
25 

201 
50 
68 

193 
144 
64

Net flows 

-4 

38 

-18 

80

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

6 
-10 

20 
18 

28 
45 

28
52

Development Economics

Annex B2 Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2 -
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 

Supervision Resources (total US$'000) 

Average Supervision (US$'000/project) 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

10 
5.5 
10 
2.7 
20 
6.56 

16.88 

Yes 

7 
4.87 
0 
0 
14.29 
33.43 

13.53 

Yes 

699 

52 

7 
3.19 
0 
0 
0 
0 

8
3.51
0
0
0
0

22.67 

14.98

Yes 

659 

63 

Yes

658

57

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 

Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

25 

945.5 

8.3 
7.79 

8

344.97

0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

CAS Annex 83 - Bank Group Program Summary 

Uruguay

Annex B3 Page 1 of 1

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Project 

USS(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

FIN SCTR REFORM (Actual) 
APL OSE MOD&REHAB. 
TOTAL '00 

MARITIME MANAGEMENT 
TA REGULATION 
TOTAL '01 

BASIC EDUCATION III* 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT* 
TOTAL '02 

COMMUNITY-BASED SOCIAL* 

APL OSE II 

HEALTH II 

TOTAL FY01-05 

80.9 
27.0 
107.9

20.0 
2.0 
22.0

40.0 
30.0 
70.0

20.0 

40.0 

20.0 

172.0

H 
M 

M 
M 

H 
M 

H 

M 

M 

H
M

M
M

M
M

M

M

M

a/ Most recent fiscal year and FY01-05 expected lending program
bl H=High, M=Medium, L=Low
*Indicates projects that would likely remain under the low case scenario (althogh there could be delays in their preparation, as well).

Annex B3 (IFC MIGA) Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Uruguay

Uruguay - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

1997 1998 1999 2000

IFC approvals (US$m) 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.00 38.00 

0.00 

2.70

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -Uruguay

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) Audiencea 

Objectiveb

Annex B4 Page 1 of 2

Recent completions
Poverty Assessment - Phase I 

FY99 

87.8 

Local Government Finance 

FY00 

Health Policy Note 

FY00 

47.4 

13.9 

Underway
Social Expenditure Review 

FY00 

50.0 

Policy Option Notes 

FY00 

84.0 

Poverty Assessment - Phase II 

FY00 

93.0 

Financial Sector Review/c 

FY00 

32.0 

Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving
Government, Knowledge
Bank, public 
generation,
dissemination problem-
solving

Govemment,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

Government
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

Government,
Bank, public 
Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

Govemment,
Bank, public 
Knowledge
disseminabton generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
disseminabon generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -Uruguay

Annex B4 Page 2 of 2

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) AudienceA Objectiveb

100,000 Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

50,000 

Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

100,000 Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

100,000 Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

190,000 Government,
Bank, public Knowledge
dissemination generation,
public debate,
problem-
solving

Product 

Planned
Rural Conditions 

FY01 

Financial Sector Update 

FY02 

Trade in Mercosur 

FY03 

Competitiveness Study 

FY04 

Poverty Assessment 

FY05 

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.

b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

c. Prepared in conjunction with project preparation of the FSAL.

Annex B5 Page 1 of I

Uruguay Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionrincome group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

Latin America & 
Caribbean 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food pnce index (1995=100) 
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 

Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to safe water
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

2.8 
0.1 
83.1 
3.0 

.. 

3.0 
0.6 
87.2 
2.6 

..

-

1,540 
0 

.. 

1,500 
1 
1 

.. 

..

.. 

3.8 
10.7 

.. 

2.8 
12.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

69 
66 
72 

46 
57 

183 
98 

.. 

89 
89 
88 

83 
95
27

59 
63 

.. 

71 
68 
75 

33 
42 

176 
91 

.. 

3.3 
0.6 
90.8 
2.4 

.. 

*-

6,070 
170 
162

1.9 

3.3 
20.5 

94 
94 
95 

89

80 
88 
4

74 
70 
78 

16 
19 

171 
76 

21

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Upper-
middle-
income

588.1
1.2
76.6
2.4

501.7 
1.4 
74.5 
2.7 

..

3,860 
130 

4,870
122

3.3 

3.6 
7.4 

94 
95 
93 

93 
82 

70 
67 
73 

31 
38 

216 
116 

3.3

5.0
7.9

96
97
95

92
82

71
67
74

26
31

210
110

Annex B6 Page 1 of 2

Uruguay - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator 
f'ationai accounts (as 1/e ot lir)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod) 

199: 

199( 

I9Y/ 

IWYZ 199I 

LUUU 

iuuI 

ZIJUZ 2UU0

Estimat Proj ected

100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
8.5 
8.0 
7.5 
7.5 
7.6 
7.6 
7.7 
7.7 
7.8
29.1 
28.5 
28.3 
28.8 
28.9 
28.9 
28.9 
28.6 
28.4
62.5 
63.5 
64.2 
63.7 
63.5 
63.5 
63.4 
63.6 
63.9

85.2 
13.0 
3.1 
9.9 

19.0 
19.1 

14.8 
14.0 

85.6 
13.4 
3.1 
10.2 

86.3 
13.2 
3.1 
10.1 

19.7 
21.0 
19.9 21.2 

14.4 
13.9 

13.7 
13.2 

85.5 
14.3 
3.3 
11.0 

20.4 
20.9 

14.5 
13.9 

87.1 
12.3 
2.8 
9.5 

19.3 
20.7 

12.9 
11.7 

86.6 
13.2 
2.8 
10.4 

19.9 
21.7 

13.4 
13.1 

86.7 
13.3 
2.8 
10.5 

20.4 
22.6 

13.3 
13.5 

86.6 
13.4 
3.0 
15.5 

20.7 
22.7 

13.4 
14.1 

86.3
13.5
3.0
15.6

21.0
22.9

13.7
14.4

19330 20521 21534 22351 19716 20653 22059 23561 25213

5120 5780 6130 6180 6176 6177 6181 6184 6188
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1983 prices)
Gross domestic product at market price 
-1.3% 5.6% 4.8% 4.9% -3.4% 2.0% 4.0% 4.0% 3.5%
Gross Domestic Income 
-0.1% 6.3% 5.5% 7.3% -9.0% 1.3% 3.6% 3.0% 2.9%
Real annual per capita growth rates (%/O, calculated from 1983 prices)
Gross domestic product at market price 
-2.0% 4.9% 4.1% 4.2% -4.1% 1.4% 3.4% 3.4% 3.0%
Total consumption 
-3.2% 8.1% 5.6% 5.4% -6.6% 0.5% 3.6% 1.9% 1.8%
Private consumption 
-3.7% 8.7% 6.1% 5.7% -7.2% 0.3% 3.6% 1.7% 1.5%
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

3507 3847 4217 4225 3796 4101 4503 4878 5286
2106 2397 2726 2832 2307 2768 3074 3348 3650
3568 3974 4386 4507 4077 4481 4976 5354 5762
2711 3135 3498 3594 3195 3532 3922 4225 4560
-62 
-127 
-169 
-282 
-281 
-380 
-473 
-476 
-476
76 
83 
74 
67 
-733 
-573 
-445 
-343 
-261
-213 
-233 
-287 
-400 
-600 
-455 
-424 
-328 
-288
157 
137 
113 
164 
256 
261 
266 
272 
277
187 
373 
723 
679 
673 
283 
321 
200 
231
4 
49 
252 
193 
74 
121 
28 
-67 
-147
183 
324 
471 
486 
399 
162 
293 
267 
378
78 
-133 
-218 
-81 
-314 
-39 
-71 
-44 
-120
-209 
-144 
-330 
-362 
-15 
-50 
-93 
-100 
-100

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR83 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-0.3 

-0.6 

-0.8 

-1.3 

-1.4 

-1.8 

-2.1 

-2.0 

-1.9

17.1 
25.1 
9.1 
9.5 

8.2 
12.0 
3.7 
10.1 

5.2 
4.6 
5.8 
3.4 

-3.1 
-3.2 
-3.1 
-2.3 

-3.5 
-5.0 
-1.6 
-13.6 

5.9 
3.0 
9.3 
5.3 

6.4 
4.2 
8.9 
5.8 

6.5 
4.2 
9.0 
2.6 

6.6
4.2
9.0
3.8

(Continued)

Annex B6 Page 2 of 2

Uruguay - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

I1't 

1Y99 

199/ 

199S 

19Y9 ZUUU ZUUI ZUUL LUU3

Estimate 

Projected

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

17.4 17.8 18.9 19.3 20.2 20.5 20.5 20.6 20.7
17.2 17.6 18.7 18.5 21.4 20.0 19.6 19.5 19.5
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.8 
-1.2 
0.5 
0.9 
1.1 
1.2
2.1 
2.1 
1.9 
2.2 
2.3 
2.1 
1.9 
1.8 
1.7
0.3 
0.0 
0.3 
0.6 
1.1 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
0.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth / 

total credit growth (%)

37.7 
39.0 
82.1 

38.6 
36.6 
87.2 

39.9 
41.3 
28.4 
19.3 
92.8 120.6 

44.2 
4.9 
82.6 

44.4 
7.8 
87.0 

44.5 
9.0 
87.0 

44.4 
8.0 
87.0 

44.5
8.0
87.0

Price indices( YR83 =100)

Merchandise export price index 

Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 

100.6 

97.5 

98.7 

99.6 

96.5 96.9 98.2 95.2 90.8 94.3 94.0 94.0 94.9
104.2 100.7 100.5 104.6 95.7 93.5 96.6 97.7 97.9

86.9 

88.2 

90.8 

91.8 

92.9

Realexchangerate(US$/LCU)f 

100.0 101.4 106.7 108.8 112.4 111.3 109.1 106.9 104.7

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

35.4 24.3 15.2 
40.6 26.2 18.6 

8.6 
9.7 

4.2 
1.4 

5.8 
5.4 

4.0 
4.5 

2.5 
4.0 

2.5
3.5

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.

d. Includes use of IMF resources.

e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7 Page 1 of 1

Uruguay - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

Estimate Projected
1999 
2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

5320 

5901 

6712 

7600 

8185 

8590 

8921 

9149 

9337

Net disbursements (US$m)' 

281 

684 

957 

787 

202 

373 

275 

206 

291

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%/-)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaUTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (/o)
IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%/o)
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)' 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%/6) 
IDA TDO (US$m)Y 

IFC (US$m) 
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity /d 

MIGA
M1GA guarantees (US$m) 

863 

665 

744 

1136 

1228 

1289 

1338 

1372 

1401

134.5 
27.5 
21.8 

134.4 
28.8 
15.1 

138.5 
31.2 
15.3 

155.8 
34.0 
23.3 

215.6 
41.5 
32.3 

209.5 
41.6 
31.4 

198.1 
40.4 
29.7 

187.6 
38.8 
28.1 

176.6
37.0
26.5

15.2 
28.3 

3.0 
536 

0.5 
0 

23 
16 
7 

18.3 
36.3 

2.3 
467 

0.4 
0 

23 
16 
7 

15.3 
33.6 

2.0 
403 

0.4 
0 

28 
22 
6 

9.5 
22.3 

1.9 
475 

0.4 
0 

34 
18 
16 

11.2 
33.8 

2.2 
476 

9.6 
27.8 

1.9 
563 

13.6 
36.3 

2.1 
553 

12.7 
46.2 

1.9 
532 

11.2
43.3

1.7
495

0.4 
0 

0.4 
0 

0.4 
0 

0.4
0

0.4 
0 

30
13
17

24

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of 1MF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex BS - Uruguay

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Annex B8 Page 1 of 1

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements at

Develooment imolementation 
Obiectives 
Progress
S 
S 
HS 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
HS 

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

41 
31.5 
15.6 
125 
76 
64.5 
28 
80.9 

462.5 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

5 

8.74 
5.58 
2.52 
100.41 
60.45 
37.31 
19.75 
0 

8.74 
3.58 
7.52 
69.35 
35.45 
6.51 
5 
0 

234.76 

136.15 

0
0
2.52
0
0
0
0
0

2.52

Closed 30
Projects

Board
Date 
Fiscal
Year Active Projects 

1994 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1999 
1999 
2000 

P008173 
IRRG NAT RES MGMT 
P008171 UY-BASIC ED. QUALITY IMPR 
P008161 UY-HEALTH SECTOR DEVELO 
P008177 POWER TRNMSN & DISTR 
P039203 FOREST PROD.TSP 
P049267 TRANSPORT II 
P041994 UY-BASIC EDUCATION QUALI 
P063390 FIN SCTR REFORM 

TOTAL 8 

a. Intended disbursementseto date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8 (IFC) Page 1 of I

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Uruguay

Uruguay

Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of 3/31/00

(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1985/92 
Azucitrus 
1995 Consorcio Aerop. 
1991 Granja Moro 
1980/88/96 Surinvest 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
1.46 
3.45 0.00 0.00 1.46 
3.45 
0.00 0.00
2.67 
0.00 4.00 5.45 2.67 
0.00 4.00 5.45
1.78 
0.75 0.00 0.00 1.78 
0.75 
0.00 0.00
0.00 
1.79 4.53 0.00 0.00 
1.79 4.53 0.00

Total Portfolio: 

5.91 

5.99 8.53 5.45 5.91 

5.99 8.53 5.45

Note: There are no approvals pending commitment.

Uruguay CAS Program Matrix (FY2001-FY2005) 

Annex B9 Page 1 of 4

1. Pockets of Poverty and Social Exclusion

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives 

Strategies 

Country Performance World Bank Group World Bank Group Major Related Activities
Indicators 
Instruments 
Self-Evaluation 
of Other Donors
Indicators
Delivery of tightly 
focussed AAA work 
program

IMF Stand-by
Arrangement

Fiscal consolidation 

Improving the 
efficiency of 
public spending, 
focus role of the 
state (links with 
section 3 below) 

-GDP growth 
-Fiscal Deficit 
-Indebtedness 
Indicators 

Continuing policy 
dialogue, study tours, 
AAA on Social 
Expenditure Review 
(00) and Poverty 
Assessment (00) 

Economic growth and 
stability is a necessary but 
not sufficient condition 
*for improving the welfare 
of the poor. Need to 
provide bridge for 
excluded groups to
engage in economic 
growth, rather than 
economic stagnation. 

Financial sector 
strengthening 

Continue with 
-M3/GDP 
reforms 
-Public sector share of 
recommended in banking system 
Financial Sector 
-Banking sector 
Review (See Box portfolio performance 
2, CAS text) 

-Export performance 

Improved 
Competitiveness 

De-regulation 
and de- 
monopolization 
is the key, 
reform of public 
utilities, adoption 
of technologies 
for diversifying 
exports 

IDB Reform of the State
(ongoing)
IDB Multi-sectoral Credit

IDB Strengthening of the
Public Works and
Services Concession
System (ongoing)

IDB Support for Capital
Market Development
(ongoing)

Monitor 
FSAL (00) and Fin'l 
implementation of 
Sector Review (00) 
Financial Sector 
follow-up monitoring Review 
of fnancial sector 
recommendations and
their impact 

High case: FSAL 11 or 
other adjust. Lending 

Satisfactory or better
Water sector APL (00) project supervision 
IDB Labor Relations
Continuation of 
reports (with focus on Modernization Program
Power, Transport II, 
public enterprise 
(ongoing)
Forest Products 
reform components) 
IDB Pilot Program for
Transport (public 
New Exports (ongoing)
enterprise reform
components) 
Crop diversification in 
Nat'l Resource
Management Project 
(all ongoing) 
Agriculture AAA (01) 
Regulation TA (01)

IDB Competitiveness of
Small Farming
Enterprises (ongoing)

IDB Energy Sector
Reform (ongoing)

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives 

Strategies 

Country Performance World Bank Group World Bank Group Major Related Activities
Indicators 
Instruments 
Self-Evaluation 
of Other Donors

Indicators

Access to Education and 
Basic Health Care 

Improve access of the Keep children 
poor to social 
from poor 
services in order for 
families in 
human development 
school; provide Average number of 
to advance, and 
day long 
years of schooling 
creating the 
schooling/day 
conditions for 
care; expand 
poverty reduction 
access to pre- 
school education 

Percentage of children AAA on Social 
in school. 
Expenditures (00); 
Poverty Assessment 
(00); and Health
Policy (00)

Attendance of children Second Basic 
from poor families 
Education Project 
(under supervision) 

Incidence of public 
health expenditures by 
income level of 
recipients 

Improve 
targeting of 
public 
expenditures in 
health to the 
needy, and 
improve quality 

Basic Education III 
(02) 

Health Reform Project
(ongoing) 

Community-based 
social development 
(03)

Health Project II (05)

Satisfactory project
implementation 

Timely delivery of
new projects 

Access to Infrastructure 

Improve access to 
Target 
markets and access to communities, 
basic water, 
plus look for 
sanitation, energy 
innovative ways 
services as a way of 
to provide 
improving economic 
infrastructure 
services (eg, 
opportunities 
private sector, 
cooperatives)

Poverty rates 
Ongoing infrastructure Satisfactory project 
(infrastructure as means portfolio 
implementation 
to an end) 

Water Sector APL (00 Timely delivery of
and beyond) 
new project(s) 

AAA of Rural 
Conditions(01)

Rural Poverty Project
(02)

Annex B9 Page 2 of 4

IDB Secondary Education
Modernization Program
(ongoing)

IDB Strengthening the
Training Market
(ongoing)

IDB Program to
strengthen social areas
(ongoing)

IDB Uruguayan
foundation for AIDS and
Assistance for Women
(ongoing)

IDB Program for
Integration of Irregular
Settlements (ongoing)

IDB Various
infrastructure projects,
ongoing and in the future

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives 

Strategies 

Strengthen 
sustainable land use 
practices 

The economic base is 
dependent upon natural 
Strengthen 
resources -- for traditional sustainable water use 
agriculture, fishing and 
management 
livestock activities, and 
for tourism services. 

Strengthen 
sustainable fishery 
management 

Identify poor 
land use 
practices, 
provide
information, 
technical support 
and 
infrastructure 
(where
necessary)

Establish 
appropriate 
regulatory 
framework, 
enforcement 

Develop 
sustainable fish 
regulations and 
enforce them

Protect scenic coastal Establish 
areas for 
coherent coastal 
tourism/leisure 
management 
industries 
plan, 
enforcement

Measure of water, air 
quality in coastal areas

2. Environmental/Economic/Sustainable Development Nexus 

Annex B9 Page 3 of 4

Country Performance World Bank Group World Bank Group Major Related Activities
Indicators 
Instruments 
Self-Evaluation 
of Other Donors
Indicators
Irrigation and Natural 
Satisfactory project 
Resource Management implementation 
Project (ongoing) 

IDB Agricultural
Development Program
(ongoing)

Agricultural and 
livestock productivity 
per hectare 

Forest Products
Transport (ongoing) 

Agriculture AAA (01)

Delivery of AAA,
impact on policies

Water Sector APL (00
Water quality measures and beyond) 

Levels of known 
potable/usable water 
reserves

Monitor fish stocks 

Delivery of lending 
IDB Metropolitan
program, satisfactory Montevideo Sanitation
implementation

IDB Strengthening of the
Environmental
Management Directorate
(ongoing)

Regulatory TA Loan 
(01)

Maritime Management 
Project with 
accompanying GEF 
(01) 

GEF mid-size grant
for Methane Gases
(01)

GEF for Energy
Efficiency (02)

3. Role of the State, Public Enterprise Reform and Governance 

Annex B9 Page 4 of 4

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives 

Strategies 

If privatization is not Convert legal 
politically viable, 
status of 
then convert public 
enterprises, 
enterprises into more perhaps issue 
commercially based 
stock 
enterprises and end 
monopoly power. 

Gradually 
introduce 
competition 

Clarifying the role of the 
state can enhance 
efficiency in the private 
sector and improve public 
sector performance by 
allowing the govermnent 
to focus on core 
responsibilities 

Country Performance World Bank Group World Bank Group Major Related Activities
Indicators 
Instruments 
Self-Evaluation 
of Other Donors
Indicators
Satisfactory portfolio 
implementation 

Legislation passed 

AAA on 
Decentralization/Role 
of Local Governments 
(00) 

IMF Stand By
Arrangement structural
benchmarks:
-External audits of public
enterprises
-Publish annual reports

Ongoing portfolio: 
New firms established Transport II
in current monopoly 
Water APL ('00)
sectors 
FSAL
Power Trans'n and 
Distribution 
Forest Products 
Transport 

Regulatory agency 
established and 
functioning 

Establish 
objective 
regulatory 
environment, 
ending privileges New 
Water APL (00 and
for state-owned 
regulatory/supervisory beyond) 
enterprises (e.g, 
regime with respect to 
banking sector) 
publicly owned banks 

FSALII (high case) 

Timely delivery and 
appropriate selection
of future lending
program

IDB Montevideo Punta
del Este Toll Road

IDB Central
Administration
Modernization (ongoing)

Good governance -
including transparent and 
efficient public 
procurement practices -- 
can provide a better link 
between public sector 
activities and the needs of Establish more 
the population 
transparent 
accounting, and 
budget processes than 
those existing today 

Establish clear legal 
Identify existing New legal framework 
framework for public deficiencies in 
passed, and put into 
procurement, 
legal framework. practice 
consolidating/ 
refining existing set 
of laws. 

Prepare new law. 

CPAR (00) 

IDF grant to improve 
procurement (01) 

IDB Strengthening of the
public works and
Successful assistance Concession System
in developing new law

IDB Support for the
Center for Conciliation
and Arbitration (?)

Promote more 
transparent 
budget practices. 

Improved dissemination Financial sector
of budget information monitoring, policy
dialogue on
accounting for quasi-
fiscal expenditures

CAS Annex BIO - Uruguay
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B10

Network area 

Country 
performance 

Major issue 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank priorities

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

good 
good 
good 
good 

good 
good 
good 

good 
good 
good 

social exclusion 
stability 
efficiency 
poverty-related issues 

moderate moderate
high 
high
high 
high
moderate moderate

targeted quality improvements 
targeting of public spending 
reaching excluded groups 

high 
high
moderate moderate
moderate moderate

rural poverty 
water management/ coastal zone 
exclusion/ pockets of poverty 

moderate moderate
low 
moderate ongoing dialogue
high 
high

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
fair 
Private sector 
fair 
fair 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 
good 

government controlled banks 
deregulation/ demonopolization 
regulatory issues 
regulatory issues 

high 
high
high 
high
moderate moderate
moderate moderate

MAP SECTION

vi;~~~ 

~~~~~ 

AP, T GA.

N,~~

4t 

b 

ske 

ff 

) 

' 

\ 

RIVERR

31' 

1tn 

t1 

/ 

\\ 

r' / 

'V

_ 

t~ 

/ 

U 

nA-'u\)

-

I 

Z 

_ 

A 

! <, < 

2

.X4

SOUTH 

~gj~ 

P .. $ Mo,n 

R.a

AMERICA ~ ~ ~ 

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 

a 

-

.~ 

0 

-35- A R G E N T 

I 

N A 

s:atMONTE00DEO 

-

-

& ed

.

.

-

~~~~~~~~~~~UR 

UGUAY

S OU TH 

-

,,_ 

p 

,Rd

AMhAER I CA 

, 

b-d=& 

R-

, 

Tbsol4rtrsd.bTbf3RlsordS=FO~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~bP 

y 

+~~~-I-S- Rsdslad.

Z 

.

, 

+ 

D 

*"k 

AwPO'l'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I,s,atf., 

;.,

S3 ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~ 

sTa 

tOK TE Rq 

1'N9, 

$wlo 

GC

5- 

,,_ 

l3 :s epes la Rsesd.,es,
>'- 

0

_____:_- 

__ 

5 

,_ 

,5, 

Sr 

, 

_-, 

055 

-

:0 

0-4 

-35"- 

55 

~~~~~~~~~~- 

d

