Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 21408 TU

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE

WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF TURKEY

November 28, 2000

Turkey Country Department
Europe and Central Asia Region

International Finance Corporation
Central and Southern Europe Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistance Strategy for Turkey was discussed by the Executive Directors on
September 6, 1997 (Report No. 16992-TU, dated August 6, 1997).

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit: Turkish Lira (TL) as of October 6, 2000

US$ 1 =TL672,268

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

FISCAL YEAR

Metric System 

January 1 - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB 
APL 
ARIP 
ASCU 
BHSM 
BRSA 
CAS 
CEM 
CHRMS 
DIS 
EBRD 
EDB 
EERL 
EIB 
EMAT 
ERL 
EU 
FAO 
FDI 
FIAS 
FSAL 
FY 
GEF 
IBRD 
IFI 
IFC 
ILO 
IMF 

Asian Development Bank 
JBIC 
Japan Bank for Intemational Cooperation
Adaptable Program Loans 
LIBOR 
London Interbank Offer Rate
Agricultural Reform and Investment Project 
MEER 
Marmara Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction Project
Agriculture Sales Cooperative Union 
MIGA 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Association
Basic Health Statistics Module 
MOH 
Ministry of Health
Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency 
NBFR 
Non Bank Financial Institution Review
Country Assistance Strategy 
NEAP 
National Environmental Action Plan
Country Economic Memorandum 
NGO 
Non-Govemmental Organization
Core Health Resource Management System 
OECD 
Organization of Economic Cooperation Development
Direct Income Support 
PAYG 
Pay-as-you-go pension system
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
PEIR 
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
European Development Bank 
PSBR 
Public Sector Borrowing Requirement
Emergency Earthquake Recovery Loan 
PSS 
Private Sector Strategy
European Investment Bank 
PSSP 
Privatization Social Support Project
Emergency Management Agency of Turkey 
QAG 
Quality Assurance Group
Economic Reform Loan 
SDIF 
Savings Deposit Insurance Fund
European Union 
SME 
Small & Medium Enterprises
Food and Agriculture Organization 
SRS 
Sustained Reformn Scenario
Foreign Direct Investment 
TCIP 
Turkish Catastrophic Insurance Pool
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
TESEV 
Turkish Economic & Social Studies Foundation
Financial Sector Adjustment Loan 
TICA 
Turkish Intemational Cooperation Agency
Fiscal Year 
TRS 
Truncated Refonn Scenario
Global Environment Facility 
TUSIAD Turkish Businessmen Association
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development UNDP 
United Nations Development Program
Intemational Financial Institute 
UNFPA 
United Nations Population Fund
Intemational Finance Corporation 
UNICEF United Nations Children Fund
Intemational Labor Organization 
WHO 
World Health Organization
Intemational Monetary Fund 
WTO 
World Trade Organization

WB Managers and Staff Responsible for this CAS

Vice President 

Country Director 

Responsible Staff 

Mr. Johannes Linn

Mr. Ajay Chhibber

Ms. Sally Zeijlon

Mr. James Parks

IFC Manamers and Staff Responsible for this CAS

Vice President 
Director 
Responsible 

Staff 

Mr. Assaad J. Jabre
Mr. Khosrow Zamani
Mr. Antonio David
Mr. George Konda

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .

............................................................ 

1. OVERVIEW ....................................................................

II. TURKEY'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ....................................................................

........

1

2

ECONOMIC CONTEXT AND SOCIAL OUTCOMES ..........................
.
GOALS OF THE CURRENT REFORM PROGRAM ....................................................................
RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND REFORM SCORECARD 
............................................................
REFORM PRIORITIES ................................................................... 

...................

III. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS, EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND EXTERNAL
FINANCING ....................................................................

3.................... 

3
6
8

10

11

IV. BANK GROUP TRACK RECORD 

................................................................... 15

THE FY98-00 CAS AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION 
................................................................... 
STATUS OF THE PORTFOLIO ................................................................... 

V. BANK GROUP STRATEGY ................................................................... 

15
1 8

20

IMPLEMENT REFORMS FOR GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT GENERATION 
................................................ 2 1
IMPROVE PUBLIC MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY ................................................................... 
24
EXPAND SOCIAL SERVICES AND SOCIAL PROTECTION ................................................................... 
25
STRENGTHEN DISASTER MITIGATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ................ 
....................... 27
ACCELERATE CONNECTIVITY AND TECHNOLOGICAL CAPABILITIES ..................................................... 
28
BENCHMARKING SUCCESS ................................................................... 
29
SELECTIVITY AND PARTNERSHIPS ................................................................... 
29

VI. LENDING SCENARIOS ................................................................... 
VII. MANAGING THE RISKS AND IBRD EXPOSURE ................................................................... 33

31

MANAGING THE RISKS ................................................................... 
IBRD EXPOSURE ................................................................... 

VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS ................................................................... 

33
35

36

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

BOXES, TABLES, AND FIGURES

Box I 
Box 2 
Box 3 
Box 4 
Box 5 
Box 6 
Box 7 
Box 8 
Box 9 

Table I 
Table 2 
Table 3 
Table 4 
Table 5 
Table 6 
Table 7 

Figure I 
Figure 2 
Figure 3 

Figure 4 

Figure 5 

ANNEXES

Annex AI 
Annex A2 
Annex B2 
Annex B3 
Annex B3 
Annex B4 
Annex B5 
Annex B6 
Annex B7 
Annex B8 
Annex B8 
Annex B9 
Annex B 10 
Annex B I I 

Poverty and Vulnerability in Turkey ................................................ 
The Health Care System in Turkey ................................................ 
Turkey's Eight Five Year Development Plan .......................................... 
Bank Support for Basic Education Reform ............................................. 
Earthquake Response ................................................. 
CAS Consultations and Assessments ................................................ 
Work on Anti-Corruption and Governance ............................................ 
Selectivity ................................................ 
Triggers for the High Case ................................................ 

Selected Social Indicators - Country Comparison ..................................... 
Key Program Indicators ................................................ 
Sustained and Truncated Reform Scenarios ............................................ 
World Bank Commitments by Sector ........................... 
..................... 
Turkey Portfolio Review ................................................ 
CAS Indicative Lending Program ................................................ 
Summary of Key Exposure Indicators in the High Case .............................. 

Historical Growth and Inflation Rates ................................................ 
GNP and Per Capita Rates in Emerging Economies (1965-1998) ................... 
Comparison of Growth and Inflation Under Sustained and
Truncated Reform Scenarios .13
External Debt and Current Account Under Sustained and
Truncated Reform Scenarios .................... 
IBRD Net Flows and Debt .................... 

3
5
6
16
17
21
24
30
32

5
8
12
18
19
31
35

4
4

14
35

Private Sector Strategy
Country At a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Bank Group Fact Sheet - IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Nonlending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Program Matrix
Summary of Development Priorities
Actions for Second Tranche Release ERL and FSAL

MAP 

IBRD No. 24110

| This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
As Turkey enters the 21" century, it has embarked on fundamental changes in economic
and social policies. Turkey is attempting to tame inflation and achieve high and stable growth,
modernize the role of the state in the economy, and begin to address long neglected social and
environmental problems. It is a huge and ambitious undertaking which if successful could
transport Turkey to much higher levels of income, modernize its institutions and set the country
on a path of sustained and steady economic development. It will enable Turkey to make
progress in reducing the high incidence of economic vulnerability and eradicate the remaining
pockets of poverty among its population. The objective of this Bank Group CAS is to support
strongly this effort.

A Time of Opportunity

ii. 
The conjunction of three factors in 1999 reshaped Turkey's economic and social agendas,
and led to this opportunity for constructive change.

* 

* 

-

First, Prime Minister Ecevit and the three-party coalition that took office in the spring of
1999 have shown consistent determination to carry out urgently needed economic reforms,
and launched an extensive program to defeat an entrenched pattern of high inflation and
restore stable growth.
Second, the country was hit with two large earthquakes in the second half of the year,
which caused over 17,000 deaths and heavy losses of property and livelihoods, and
strengthened the demand for renewal and reform.
Third, in December 1999, Turkey was admitted to pre-candidacy status for the European
Union; this status is providing an additional motivation for economic and social
transformation.

iii. 
The Government's agenda includes a three-year economic reform program, longer-term
social programs and disaster prevention, as well as measures to move towards EU accession.
Structural transformation of social security, agriculture, banking, and the infrastructure sectors,
initiated by legislative action, is now being implemented on the ground. The landmark basic
education reform introduced in 1997 is making excellent progress in expanding provision of
compulsory education to eighth grade (from fifth grade) for all girls and boys. The Government
is taking steps to build consensus on broader reforms in public administration, municipal finance,
and local administration to modernize its public institutions. Turkey is within sight of removing
the last vestiges of state ownership in the industrial sector through the privatization program
underway, and the Government wants to encourage further private entry into energy,
telecommunications and other infrastructure. Concern over the possible social impact of reform
is leading to the introduction of new specific support programs, as well as efforts to target better
social assistance in general. Turkey has not undertaken such intense reforms since the early
1 980s, when it opened its economy to the rest of the world.

iv. 
The Government's reform effort in the first year of this program has indeed been
impressive-although much remains to be done. Inflation has dropped to the lowest level in the

ii_ 

Executive Summarv

last two decades and interest rates have fallen sharply. The economy has revived, led by a
strong private sector response to the disinflation program. The budget balances have shown
striking improvements and the public debt stock has stabilized. The Government has prepared an
ambitious macro-framework and budget for 2001 designed to further the disinflation program,
contain the growing current account deficit and strengthen the foundations for sustained
economic recovery. Building upon the progress on structural reform and privatization achieved
in 2000, the Government intends to deepen these reforms in 2001. While the recent turbulence
in Turkey's financial markets shows that the program faces significant risks a if the reforms
aretackled with steadiness and determination Turkey could emerge with a much stronger
economy that would be better able to handle internal development challenges and external
shocks.

Addressing Poverty and Economic Vulnerability

v. 
The key objective of the CAS is to assist Turkey to lay the basis for reducing economic
vulnerability. The design of the CAS program is driven by recent careful analysis of economic
reforms, living standards, and social welfare which shows that while absolute poverty is low, the
bottom third of the population is unable to purchase the basic needs basket. Unemployment and
lack of education are important factors in explaining vulnerability and poverty in Turkey. For
Turkey to reduce economic vulnerability and poverty, it must focus on restoring stable and
higher growth, creating employment, reducing inflation, improving public management and
accountability, and expanding social services and social protection. The Government's current
priorities reflect these strategic elements. In particular the emphasis on achieving stable growth,
generating productive investment, and providing education is aimed at addressing fundamental
causes of economic vulnerability. The Bank's support for Turkey centers around these
objectives through a balanced combination of adjustment and investment lending, as well as non-
lending services, designed to produce maximum leverage, in close coordination with our
partners.

vi. 
As was demonstrated in the last CAS period, Turkey's vulnerabilities are not only
economic, but also stem from natural factors, in particular seismic risk. Hence the Bank Group's
efforts to support Turkey's disaster prevention and broaden the environmental agenda must
continue. Finally, the Bank Group hopes to use selective catalytic interventions to help ensure
that Turkey can exploit rapid global technological changes and reap their benefits for education,
public management, and growth.

vii. 
In line with Turkey's current and upcoming priorities, the CAS will focus the Bank
Group's FYO1-03 program on five broad themes:

a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 

implement reforms for growth and employment generation;
improve public management and accountability;
expand social services and social protection;
strengthen environmental management and disaster mitigation; and
accelerate connectivity and technological capabilities.

iii 

Stepping Up Bank Group Support

Executive Summary

viii. 
Just as the World Bank was asked to step in with extensive technical and financial help to
support the trade and financial sector liberalization of the 1980s, so too has the Bank been
requested by the current Government to provide large scale assistance to help carry out the
ambitious reforms currently underway. The previous CAS anticipated the possibility of such
reforms and the Bank's technical assistance helped Turkey prepare its economic program-
especially on structural and social aspects. The Bank triggered the high case of that CAS on the
basis of almost one year of implementation of strong up-front reforms, and approved the
Economic Reform Loan of US$760 million in May 2000. In FY00, the Bank provided almost
US$1.8 billion to support Turkey. The IFC program has also remained at a high level.

ix. 
This CAS continues with a high case program of up to US$5 billion which includes
US$2.4 billion of additional adjustment lending to help complete the reforms. The CAS period
FYOI-03 coincides with Turkey's ambitious economic reform program and which justifies
significant assistance from the Bank Group, especially in the design of the structural reforms and
mitigating any negative social impact of the overall reform. The proposed FSAL I and the
Privatization Social Support project presented to the Board with this CAS match the latter aims
and form part of the high case. The support is triggered by a series of carefully specified actions,
spelled out in the CAS document. The high-case program, along with the IMF's Stand-By of
US$4 billion (initiated in December 1999), will assist Turkey's economic reforms and help
catalyze the substantial private inflows needed during 2000-2003 to meet Turkey's sizeable
external financing needs-around US$100 billion gross. The IFC and MIGA programs also will
have a catalytic effect by demonstration, provision of guarantees, and attracting other investors
to transactions.

x. 
Turkey's previous reform attempts in the 1990s weakened rapidly once the economy
recovered. Turkey's current reform has lasted much longer than previous ones-and 
the reform
momentum remains strong-but 
if the reforms were to slow down, the Bank would reduce its
lending level to a base case that would focus on selected investments in support of Turkey's
longer term development needs. This assistance would be focussed on rural development, and
education and other social interventions, if sectoral policies and the institutional framework
permit the operations to have a lasting impact on vulnerable populations. The lending envelope
for the base case would be up to US$1 billion. Given its large external financing needs, if
market sentiment were to turn against Turkey while commitment to reform remained strong, the
Bank, although remaining within the CAS high case envelope, would review the high-case
program in close concert with the IMF to reflect the changed macroeconomic circumstances.

xi. 
IFC will continue to play an important role in Turkey to assist the private sector to take
advantage of widening opportunities. Its work will cut across several CAS themes and IFC will
accompany its investment with targeted provision of technical assistance. IFC will improve
access to long-term financing for companies in selected cases which demonstrate the tangible
benefits of reform. With a view to promoting Turkey as a technological hub for the region, IFC
will assist Turkish companies to increase their technological competitiveness and invest in the
CIS and the Balkans. In financial markets, IFC will focus on developing domestic long-term

iv 

Executive Summary

contractual savings institutions. IFC's investments in infrastructure, along with those financed
by the Bank, are intended to improve Turkey's prospects for sustained growth and meeting EU
infrastructure standards.

xii. MIGA is also very active in Turkey, both in terms of guarantees and capacity building for
foreign investment promotion. While MIGA's portfolio in Turkey has until now been
concentrated in the financial sector, other sectors are expected to grow in its portfolio-
particularly infrastructure investments. MIGA's Investment Marketing Service will continue to
be an active supporter of the Center for Private Sector Development in Istanbul, which is a joint
undertaking of the OECD and the Turkish Development Agency (TICA), to catalyze and support
the transfer of expertise and experience related to private sector development to economies in the

region.

xiii. The Bank Group's decision to decentralize management of the program has played a key
role in the successful implementation of the previous CAS and will be critical to ensuring that
the Bank Group responds quickly and effectively to emerging issues. The Bank Country
Director moved to Turkey in 1998 and the IFC Regional Director will be relocated to Turkey by
the end of 2000.

Working With Our Partners

xiv. The Bank Group works closely with a range of international and domestic partners in
assisting Turkey. Bank teams have worked closely with IMF colleagues in assisting Turkey to
design its economic program; the Bank has concentrated especially on structural and social
issues, while the IMF has focused on macroeconomic issues. Closer dialogue is developing
between the Bank and the EU, as Turkey and the EU gradually establish the mechanisms for
candidacy discussions. The Bank expects to work in coordination with UN organizations,
bilateral partners, the European Investment Bank (EIB), the Islamic Development Bank and
other financial organizations. The Bank, IFC and MIGA collaborate with a range of private
sector and financial organizations, while the Bank country team is expanding outreach and
consultative activities with NGOs in Turkey. The active involvement of other organizations
allows the Bank to be selective during this CAS period; for example, the Bank will reduce or
eliminate financing for infrastructure, conventional power generation and distribution, and
irrigation, since these areas are attracting funding from other organizations or from the private
sector.

Managing the Risks

xv. 
The Government of Turkey is taking actions to manage the risks inherent in this reform
program, and the Bank's program will assist in this process. The main risk factors include
political pressures, economic considerations, administrative constraints, and the possibility of
another large natural disaster. On the political side, the coalition has demonstrated its resilience
by meeting tough challenges over the past 18 months, including the election by Parliament of a
new president in May 2000. Nevertheless, as in any coalition, risks do remain. A second
political risk is the possibility of social backlash from tough reform measures. To address this,

v 

Executive Summarv

the Government is ensuring adequate funding of existing safety net provision, including
severance payments and other programs for workers displaced by privatization, and is moving to
introduce additional social programs, including unemployment insurance and direct income
support for farmers. Three of the Bank's proposed operations are being designed to support
these aspects of the safety net.

xvi. The Government's reform program takes into account some of the key economic and
financial sector risks confronting Turkey; in fact the program itself is a direct response to the
risks posed by the large macroeconomic imbalances that had accumulated over a decade of
inaction and partial reforms. The Government's response has been appropriate, but should the
program fail, the downside scenario would be worse than the pre-reform position, with enduring
effects from the loss of credibility. The Government placed great emphasis on up-front fiscal
measures in designing the program, and is using further targeted fiscal actions in the 2001 budget
to address the risks emerging from the private-sector led surge in demand and resulting
widening current account deficit (and is aware that it could need to take further measures in
future). These measures and the cushion provided by the level of international reserves reduce
the risk stemming from the external imbalance. 
In late November, Turkey experienced
significant turbulence in the financial markets to which the Government responded with
temporary liquidity injections and accelerated announcement of its macroeconomic policy
package for 2001. A legacy of weaknesses in the financial sector, which will be exposed further
during the macroeconomic stabilization, is a source of concern. Management of these
vulnerabilities is a core element of reform, in which respect there have been significant
accomplishments, as the FSAL documents presented with this CAS explain. A continuing risk
for Turkey as a major emerging market with substantial external borrowing needs is its
vulnerability to contagion from adverse developments in international financial markets. The
Government has demonstrated its ability to respond to such shocks with appropriate fiscal and
monetary policies. A core reform objective is to reduce Turkey's external vulnerability, which
will result in a gradual decline in the risk of contagion. Minimizing the risks stemming from
institutional weaknesses is also a part of the Government and Bank programs, examples are the
design of investment loans in concert with adjustment lending to support implementation of
reform, and actions to improve public expenditure management, promote transparency and fight
corruption. Finally, Turkey is conscious of the risk of a large natural disaster and the Bank
continues to support rapid strengthening of emergency response and disaster prevention
measures to mitigate this risk.

Turkey's Success Will Have Regional Implications

xvii. The Bank Group's ability to assist Turkey has vital consequences within its borders as it
tries to implement changes to improve the living standards of its population. But given Turkey's
size, regional importance and its inherent dynamism, its success will have a major impact well
beyond its borders. Turkey is re-emerging as a strategic hub in the region; its economic success
will benefit its major trading partners, and the broader regional economy of which it is an
important part. The confluence of internal political alignments that has emerged to shape
Turkey's ambitious economic and social transformation may not coalesce again so fortuitously
and should be encouraged with the Bank Group's vigorous support.

vi 

Issues for Board Discussion

Executive Summarv

xviii. The Executive Directors may wish to address the following issues for discussion:

* 

* 

Is the program adequately designed to support Turkey's comprehensive reform effort and
substantial long-term development needs?
Is there adequate burden sharing among the Bank Group, other IFIs and the private
sector?
* Have the risks been appropriately identified and addressed?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TURKEY

I. OVERVIEW

1. 
Turkey had long been identified as a country that defied economic rules. It managed to
grow at a rate of around 4 percent through the 1990s despite high inflation. With the economy
growing-even if below its potential-it was difficult to convince the politicians, or even much
of the public, that Turkey needed tough reform measures; even high inflation was tolerated. But
this challenge to economic orthodoxy had to end sooner or later. In 1999, the economy suffered
a deep recession as domnestic interest rates topped 100 percent and public debt soared. Output fell
over 6 percent and prices increased by some 70 percent. On top of this, two major earthquakes
shattered people's lives and contributed to the recession.
2. 
Three events in 1999 dramatically changed Turkey's economic and social agenda and
created an opportunity for the Bank Group to set up its support for the country's transformation
into one of the world's leading emerging markets. The Bank Group's response to these events is
changing our work in Turkey in a very significant way.

i) 

The determination of Prime Minister Ecevit and the three-party coalition to carry
out urgently needed economic reforms. The strong consensus of the governing
coalition, installed after national elections in early 1999, on the importance and direction
of economic reforms is providing Turkey with a golden opportunity to tackle inflation
and long awaited structural reforms. Three out of the five parties represented in the
Parliament participate in the coalition that controls 350 out of 544 parliamentary seats.
The coalition has already weathered significant challenges to its unity, including the
election of the new President in May 2000. Since the summer of 1999, the Government
has carried out significant structural reforms in all areas discussed in the previous
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)'. The Bank's response to the Government's resolve
has been to intensify greatly our economic dialogue, in coordination with the IMF, and

'Report No. 16992-TU dated August 6, 1997.

2 

ii) 

iii) 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

activate the high case program for Turkey. One adjustment operation-the Economic
Reform Loan (ERL) for US$760 million-was approved by the Board on May 18, 2000.
The proposed Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (FSAL I) for US$778 million along with
the Privatization Social Support Project (PSSP) for US$250 million is presented for
Board approval with this CAS. The IMF approved a US$4 billion three-year Stand-By
Arrangement in December 1999.

The devastating earthquakes in Marmara and Duzce with over 17,000 dead and
heavy loss of property and livelihood. The earthquake physically shook the Marmara
region but psychologically shook the entire nation and moved Turkey's citizens closer
together and the country closer to Europe. The Bank responded very rapidly with an
that helped catalyze foreign assistance to Turkey of roughly
US$3 billion, of which the Bank Group provided about one third (Box 5).

Earthquake Assessment 

Turkey's candidacy status with respect to the European Union, attained in
December 1999. This provides a long-term goal for economic, social and political
reforms. Turkey is now more likely to push beyond its economic program into reforn of
public administration, judicial reform, and other broader governance issues. The Bank
expects to work closely with the EU on these and other reform issues-such as municipal
and local administration reform.

3. 
Using these new opportunities to shape support for Turkey and encourage reforms that
will improve living standards and reduce vulnerability and poverty, the Bank Group remains
focussed on Turkey's long-term development needs and specifically the need to improve social
services-such as education and health. Conscious that Turkey's past growth and development
strategy have shown some striking physical and economic vulnerabilities that must be addressed,
the CAS includes selected interventions to help the Government address these issues as well.

II. TURKEY'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

4. 
Turkey faces three major economic challenges. First, it must continue to improve
macroeconomic fundamentals through durable fiscal adjustment aimed at taming chronic
inflation and breaking the grip of high real interest rates that constrain growth. Second, it must
raise productivity by eliminating costly incentive distortions and improving the quality of
institutions and rules that govern markets in order to promote competition and encourage private
investment in productive activities2 . Third, it must address disparities in economic opportunity
and the social issues critical to realizing its full development potential and ensuring that the
benefits of economic growth are broadly distributed (Box 1).

2A full analysis of the macroeconomic and structural reforms needed to sustain high growth is available with the

recent Turkey Country Economic Memorandum: Structural Reform for Sustainable Growth (September 15, 2000,

No. 20657-TU)

3 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

Box 1: Poverty and Vulnerability in Turkey

The Bank report, Turkey: Economic Reforms, Living Standards and Social Welfare Study (No. 20029-TU,
dated May 17, 2000), highlights the nation's high rate of economic vulnerability and large income inequalities.
Absolute poverty is low, with only 2.5 percent of the population below the international one-dollar-a-day standard
line and 7.3 percent of the population below the line defined by a local minimum food basket. But 36 percent of the
population is economically vulnerable-unable to purchase the basic needs basket including non-food items.

Inequalities are high: The Gini coefficients for per capita income and consumption using 1994 data were
0.45 and 0.41, respectively. The pattern of pre-transfer income inequality in Turkey is very similar to that in other
OECD countries, with a Gini coefficient of about 0.4. But whereas most other OECD countries have progressive
safety nets and redistributive taxes that reduce inequality, Turkey lacks such programs. As a result, among the
OECD countries, only Mexico has a more unequal distribution of post-transfer income than Turkey. While
extensive, Turkey's social protection system faces significant problems and it is not targeted to the most vulnerable.
As a result, a large share of Turkey's population is vulnerable to falling into poverty through an event such as job
loss or disability of the household's principal wage earner.

A significant share of total inequality in Turkey is explained by differences in endowments, geography, and
opportunities in the labor market. Education and employment status together explain almost half of the inequality,
while rural/urban differences and regional factors explain 10 and 11 percent, respectively. It is important to note
that regional differences are growing, but the provinces at the extremes of the distribution are by and large the same
ones over the last twenty years: richer provinces (mainly in the Marmara area or around Mediterranean and Aegean
port cities) are converging towards each other, but provinces that were poor in 1975 were further behind in 1995.
Existing Sources of Information. The most comprehensive existing survey of poverty in Turkey is
provided in the above mentioned report. Survey data from the 1994 Household Income and Consumption
Expenditure Survey were the main source for this study, but these data were supplemented with more recent
information from other sources-including the semiannual Household Labor-Force Surveys, the 1997 population
enumeration, economic performance data series, service delivery data for social services, and case studies of poor
communities. As part of the preparation of the Economic Reform Loan, the Bank carried out a preliminary study of
the social impact of the reform program which looked at the effects on a range of vulnerable groups, and considered
specific interventions to minimize adverse effects on these groups. Among the proposals outlined in this study was a
life-line electricity tariff schedule to cushion the effects of reform-linked price increases for lower income groups,
which the Government introduced in September 2000. Other safety-net measures proposed in the study are being
implemented or are under consideration by the Government.

Improving Monitoring. The Bank is working with various partners in Turkey to deepen our
understanding of who the poor are, why they are poor, what can be done to improve their living standards and how
to prevent others from falling into poverty. The Bank worked closely with the State Institute of Statistics to develop
an improved, LSMS-based questionnaire for use in the 2001 Household Income and Consumption Expenditure
Survey. The Privatization Social Support Project will monitor the social impact of the reform program. The Bank
is supporting improved social data collection in education and health, including a major effort to collect improved
data on the causes of mortality and morbidity throughout the country.

Source: Bank Staff

Economic Context and Social Outcomes

5. 
Despite the potential to be an emerging market leader, Turkey's economy has historically
been plagued by persistent fiscal imbalances, chronically high inflation, and sharp swings in the
business cycle. Over the past two decades, several attempts to stabilize the economy fell short,

and high growth was never sustained for long. Inflation was higher and growth was lower on

4 

Turkey: Countrv Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

average, in the 1990s than in the 1980s. Annual inflation averaged 44 percent in the 1980s
before climbing to 76 percent in the 1990s (Figure 1). In parallel, annual growth fell from over 5
percent to just under 4 percent, while the volatility of growth doubled as the standard deviation
increased from 2.7 percent to 5.5 

Figure 1: Historical Growth & Inflation Rates

percent. While 4 percent average

growth is respectable, Turkey has 

not 
achieved 
performance of 

income 

countries 

the 
high 
top middle- 

(Figure 

2). 

Moreover, job creation has not 

kept up with rapid expansion of 

the labor force. The employment 

rate fell from nearly 70 percent of 

the population in 1975 to only 50 _ 

percent by 1997.3

Growth 

Inflation

34

2 

f 

2 

_0 

1 

-

_ 

I !.

-

I 

-

-

_ 

_ 

_ 1990'99 

7

60 

0

= 

-- 

=.

~~~~~30 

20

-

19B__ 90 

199!!99

199__ 99

6. 
Turkey is the world's 1 7 th most industrialized nation, but it ranks 86 th out of 180
countries as measured in the 1999 UNDP human development indicators, far behind most middle
income countries (Table 1). Some of the factors contributing to this low ranking are the 17
percent adult illiteracy rate and poor health outcomes (Box 2). In particular, infant and adult
mortality rates and life expectancy are all worse than in middle income economies in Latin
America, Asia and Eastern Europe, which have comparable or higher levels of per capita
income. Despite considerable progress in recent
years, maternal and child health outcomes, 
maternal and infant mortality rates, as well as 
regional disparities, remain unacceptably high. 
The poor carry the highest burden of disease, 

Figure 2: GNP & Per Capita Growth Rates
in Emerging Economies (1965-1998)

8- 

lo

_

___ 

premature death, and preventable disabilities. 

Infant mortality, at 38 per 1000 live births (in

1998), is one of the most significant health 
problems in Turkey. Only 50 percent of Turkish 
children are immunized against polio, BCG, 
DTP, and measles 
in the first year of life. 

6 a 

-L

2-

_ 

l 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_

le

, 

I

Fe5NP 

P,Capa.

' 

According to the World Health Report of 1999,
maternal mortality per 100,000 was estimated at 180 in 1998. Preventable factors that increase
the risk of maternal mortality are still prevalent. They include poor education, high fertility
rates, poor birth spacing, early teenage and later age pregnancies, multiple deliveries (especially
in eastern provinces), malnutrition, and inadequate access to appropriate health care for women.
It is clear that improving educational opportunities for women can have a large impact on
improving utilization of maternal health care services in the future.

3 While recorded unemployment remains moderate by OECD standards, urban unemployment rates are much higher
and greater still if underemployment is included.

5 

Turkey: Countra Assistance S rate.v FYO0-03

T 

U 

F. 

Table 1: Selected Social Indicators - Country Comparison
Chile 
Colombia Mexico 
Poland Hungary Malaysia 
1.6 
2.0 
2.0 
0.2 
-0.3 
2.8 
75.0 
70.0 
72.5 
72.5 
71 
72.5 

Indicator 
Population Growth (J) 
Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)
Infant Mortality Rate
(per 1,000 live births) 
Maternal Mortality 
(per 100,00 live births)II
Literacy Rate 
(% of adult population) 
Female Literacy Rate 
GNP per Capita (US$) 
1/1998 data
Sources: World Development Indicators, 2000; WHO World Health Report 1999; Turkey Demographic and Health Survey, 1998 (Hacettepe
University, Institute of Population Studies); Turkey Human Development Report, 1997 (UNDP).

Tunisia 
2.0 
69.5 

100 
3,900 

81 
3,600 

56 
2,050 

.

i5. 
2, 0. 

95 
4,810 

99 
4,510 

91 
2,600 

88 
3,970 

13 
34 

86 

0 
100 

91 

3 
110 

90 

1: 

94V 

5 
19 

100 

170 

67 

1 

65 

95 

1 
30 

99 

I 

EU
N.A
77.4

.
N.A

100

100

100
N.A

Box 2: The Health Care System in Turkey

The overall utilization of health services in Turkey is relatively low compared to international standards. In
1998, the average bed occupancy was about 56 percent in hospitals. Hospital admissions per 10,000 population are
less than 700, as compared with the OECD average of 1,639 admissions per 10,000. Average annual doctor contacts
were 3.5, below the OECD average of 5.5 in 1995. This low utilization rate may be due to financial constraints of
the population and low quality of services. Results from the Bank-financed Health Services Utilization Survey of
1994, indicated that utilization rates were higher among females and in urban areas. In addition, results indicated
that the insured population is more likely to use health services than the uninsured, which in general, has much
lower incomes than the insured. Inefficient use of limited resources and poor management of services have resulted
in a largely run-down public provider system. Long waiting times and lack of drugs and qualified staff discourage
people from seeking care even when covered by insurance.
The health system in Turkey has been under-funded for a long time. Since 1963, total health care
expenditure has accounted for between 3.0 percent and 4.3 percent of GDP. This is the lowest of any OECD
country, where the average is 7.5 percent. Overall health expenditure also includes spending by social security
organizations and university hospitals, as well as out-of-pocket payments. Social insurance funds account for only
17 percent of the total health expenditures equal to about I percent of GDP. Per capita health expenditures have
been about US$100 p.a. over the past 2-3 years. In the 2001 budget, Turkey has decided to protect health
expenditure as a share of GNP (3.6 percent of GNP allocated for 2001 compared to an estimated 3.5 percent in
actual spending in 2000) despite tight constraints on total budgetary expenditure.
Besides resource mobilization, there are also several resource allocation and utilization issues, particularly
in the way that the state-run health system is financed and managed. There is widespread evidence of misallocation
of public resources: public funds are spent on health interventions with low relative cost-effectiveness, while highly
cost-effective-and more critical-interventions remain under-funded (preventive care and maternal and child
health receive roughly 12 percent and 2 percent of the total MOH budget respectively). Overall, the general
inefficiency and inequity in government expenditure on health raises concerns about the capability of Turkey's state-
run system to continue to reduce premature mortality and disability rates, and respond to new emerging disease
patterns.

Source: Bank Staff

6 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

Goals of the Current Reform Program

7. 
The goals of Turkey's economic program are very clearly to reduce inflation and restore
stable growth in order to improve living standards, generate employment at a faster pace, and
reduce economic vulnerability. These goals are clearly articulated in the Eighth Five-Year Plan
(Box 3). The stagflation of 1999 lowered living standards, and increased unemployment and
economic vulnerability of the lower income population. A major reform program was needed to
reverse these trends.

Box 3: Turkey's Eighth Five Year Development Plan

Turkey's Eighth Five Year Development Plan (2001-2005) provides the most recent and comprehensive statement
of development policy. The Plat, was prepared by the Govemment and endorsed by the Parliament on June 26,
2000.' The main objectives are to improve living standards, achieve sustainable growth and accelerate the accession
process into the European Union. The Plan clearly spells out the Government's determination to implement
economic reforms to stabilize the economy, achieve a high level of suistainable growth and employment creation,
reduce poverty and income inequality, and address corruption.

Main Developnent Objectives:
* achieve macro-economic stability
* attain sustainable growth in a competitive environment
* expand technological capacity
* 
improve human resources
* create employment, reduce poverty and improve income distribution
reduce the regional disparities
* 
improve the social security system
* prevent corruption
improve infrastructure

+ 

+ 

+ 

Key Economic and Social Policies:
* 
fiscal adjustment
+ public sector reforms including acceleration of the privatization program
* 
structural changes in educationi and health services including efficiency improvements
* development of high value added sectors in industry and services
* 
improvement in knowledge and science
increase in R&D expenditures
+ additional support to small and medium scale industries
improvement in competitiveness
* 
increase in FDI
* creation of an efficient agricultural sector
* creation of additional employmnent through productive investment
' The Plan was published in the Official Gazette on July 5, 2000.

+ 

8. 
The Government's economic program rests on three core elements: (i) a strong up-front
fiscal adjustment to put public finances on a sustainable path; (ii) major second generation
structural reforms in agriculture, pensions, banking, energy and telecommunications; and (iii) a
pre-announced crawling peg for the exchange rate backed by tight incomes policies to break
inflationary expectations. The program targets a drop in annual inflation to under 10 percent by
the end of 2002. It also aims for a sustainable growth rate of 5-6 percent per annum in the
medium term (Table 2). The ambitious privatization program aims to raise US$17-18 billion

7 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategv FYO1-03

* 

* 

over three years. Achieving a high level of sustainable growth is a key test for the program and
central to the Government's strategy to improve living conditions and reduce poverty and
economic vulnerability. Turkey can raise average growth to 5 percent or more per year without
increasing investment (at 24-25 percent of GNP in the 1990s) by raising productivity and
employment. In addition to macroeconomic stability, this will entail deep structural reforms to
create an enabling environment for private investment and competition, together with measures
to develop the enormous potential of Turkey's young and vibrant population. By emphasizing
structural measures, the Government's program takes into account the lessons learned from
previous aborted economic programs.
The key structural policies to achieve a high level of sustainable growth form a five point
9. 
agenda for the Government:
Establish a stable, pro-growth macroeconomic environment based on strong fiscal
adjustment designed to put public finances in order. 
Improve public expenditure
management, deepen structural fiscal reforms and reorient public institutions in order to
ensure the quality of the fiscal adjustment and protect public investments in human capital.
Strengthen the social protection system and provide more targeted support to vulnerable
groups. Turkey has made good progress with a well-designed policy reform of the public
pay-as-you-go (PAYG) pension system and the introduction of national unemployment
insurance. The latter compliments active reinsertion methods for the unemployed in
facilitating labor shedding and redeployment. Administrative reform of the social
insurance system is being initiated to improve coverage and compliance, and a legal
framework for voluntary funded private pensions has been prepared. The Government is
ensuring full funding of existing social safety net programs such as severance payments
for workers displaced by privatization and a broad consolidation of social assistance
programs is under consideration.
Reform energy and telecommunication in line with international best practice and EU
norms in order to avoid bottlenecks to growth and the fiscal pitfalls of growing contingent
liabilities. This requires further structural measures to create an enabling legal and
regulatory framework, restructure state monopolies, and accelerate privatization. Proper
structural reform will pave the way for effective liberalization of the energy and
telecommunications sectors to promote private investment and competition.
Carry through with the current ambitious agricultural reform agenda to modernize support
polices and withdraw the state from a direct role in production and marketing. This
program is based on the introduction of direct income support to farmers and privatization
of state enterprises in agriculture.
Pursue financial sector reform to improve the efficiency of financial intermediation and
promote macroeconomic stability. Consolidate the new legal and regulatory framework
for bank supervision which is consistent with international and EU norms, oversee the
adjustment of the private banking sector to the new incentive framework and regulatory
environment, and privatize and restructure the state banks.

-

* 

* 

10. 
Investing in the educational development and physical well being of the population
continues to be an important objective of the Government. Turkey is in the midst of a major
basic education reform with the goal of expanding compulsory education from five years to eight

8 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

and increasing girls' enrollment. The Government intends to expand and improve secondary
education. A comprehensive health reform is needed as well. Reforms of public sector
management, the judicial system, local government, and municipal finances are also medium-
term goals of the Government. With more peaceful conditions in eastern Turkey, the
Government intends to reinforce economic and social development efforts in that part of the
country. Along with these major initiatives, Turkey is trying to upgrade environmental and
natural resource management, and preserve its very rich cultural heritage.

Table 2: Key Program Indicators

2000 

2003

(6.4) 
69 
7.3 

Pro ected 2/
2001 
2002 

Actual 1/ 
1998 1 1999 
OUTPUT, INFLATION AND INTEREST RATES
GNP Growth 
3.9 
CPI Inflation (Dec-Dec) 
70 
Unemployment rate 3/ 
6.3 
PUBLIC SECTOR BUDGET
Primary Balance (%GNP) 
Overall Deficit (%GNP) 
Net Public Debt (%GNP) 4/ 
Privatization ($ bn) 
EXTERNAL BALANCE
Current account balance (%GNP) 
0.9 
(0.7) 
Extemal Debt/GNP 
51 
55 
Foreign exchange reserves ($ bn) 
20 
23 
I/Government figures as adjusted by IMF and WB estimates.
2/ Projections for 2000-01 are based on updated Stand-By program figures; projections for 2002-03 are
World Bank estimates.
3/ Projections for 2001-03 are from the 8th Five Year Plan, SPO.
4/ Includes the stock of duty loss claims of the state banks on the govemment as well as the US$6
billion in government securities issued in November 2000 to recapitalize the banks taken over by the
BRSA.
Source: Govemment, IMF and WB estimates.

(1.8) 
(24) 
61 
0.1 

4.0 
12 
6.0 

5.0 
(9) 
56 
6-7 

1.1 
(15) 
44 
2.2 

5.0 
7-9 
5.8 

5.0 
(6) 
53 
4 

7.0 
35 
6.2 

3.0 
(18) 
60 
3.5 

(6.0) 
59 
26 

5.5
5-6
5.0

4.0
(4)
51
4

(3.8) 
60 
29 

(2.7) 
59 
30 

(2.5)
57
30

Recent Economic Developments and Reform Scorecard

11. Macroframework. The first year of reform witnessed impressive results. The economy
has rebounded sharply, with GNP growth in the range of 7 percent now expected in 2000 (Table
2). In tandem, inflation has fallen and is expected to be in the 35 percent range (CPI) by the end
of the year. While above the program target of 25 percent, inflation is at a 15 year low. Fiscal
adjustment has been very strong with the primary surplus of the public sector (including the
central and local governrnents, the central bank, the social security institutions and the state
enterprises) exceeding the program target of 2000 by some 1 percent of GNP. In parallel,
interest rates have fallen sharply with t-bill rates dropping to the 35 percent range from well over
100 percent in mid-1999. The overall public sector borrowing requirement is projected to fall to
about 18 percent of GNP in 2000, a decline of some 6 percentage points relative to 1999.
Together with privatization revenues of about 1.75 percent of GNP, lower public borrowing is
projected to generate a reduction in the net public debt to GNP ratio of some 1 percentage point,
reversing in part the rapid build up of 1999. Restored growth has already beneficially impacted

9 

Turkey: Countrv Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

the labor market with the recorded unemployment rate dropping from 7.3 percent in 1999 to 6.2
percent by mid-2000. Boosted by lower interest rates, both private consumption and investment
have boomed. Important factors contributing to the recovery include solid fiscal performance,
the sharp drop in inflation and real interest rates, earthquake reconstruction activity and tourism.
An expansion in credit from the banking sector has also played a key role, with credit to the
private sector growing in real terms by about 23 percent during the first nine months of 2000.
12. Nevertheless, rapid economic recovery has brought additional challenges and risks. The
recovery has created the risk of overheating and, along with higher oil prices and a weak Euro,
has put pressure on external balances. The current account deficit has widened sharply, with
import growth outpacing exports, and is now projected to reach up to 6 percent of GNP in 2000.
Recognizing the need to cool off the economy and reduce the current account deficit, the
Government introduced additional measures in September including an increase in the levy on
consumer credit and in the VAT for luxury cars, as well as a 50 percent surcharge on electricity
In late November, the pressures spilled over into the
consumption over 150 kwh/month. 
financial markets leading to sharp increases in interest rates and a fall in the stock market. To
strengthen the macroeconomic framework, the Government has prepared an exceptionally tight
budget for 2001 which targets an increase in the primary surplus for the public sector from 3
percent of GNP in 2000 to 5 percent of GNP in 2001. The 2001 budget is underpinned by a
tough fiscal package aimed at generating 3.2 percent of GNP in additional net revenue (in part to
replace temporary earthquake taxes introduced last year) and another 1 percent of GNP in
expenditure savings relative to 2000. Measures are also planned to shore up the balances of the
state enterprise sector by some 0.5 percent of GNP including further cuts in agriculture support
prices and higher electricity tariffs. The tight fiscal stance underpins an inflation target of 12
percent by the end of 2001, a further reduction in the public debt to 56 percent of GNP, and a
drop in the current account deficit to some 3.8 percent of GNP in 2001 (with the latter figure
dropping further in 2002). Growth is projected to ease to 4-4.5 percent in 2001 before increasing
to 5-6 percent thereafter.
13. 
Structural Reform. Central to achieving the macroeconomic targets and sustained
recovery will be an acceleration of structural reform. While the Government has already
established an impressive track record in its first eighteen months, passage of some essential
legislation has been delayed and a long road still lies ahead. Structural reform kicked off in
earnest immediately after the Government was installed in mid-1999. A new banking law was
adopted in June 1999 and further amended in December. Legislation underpinning the pension
reform and introducing international arbitration for public concession contracts was enacted in
August, only weeks after the Marmara earthquake. In January 1999, Parliament passed new
telecoms legislation which created an independent regulatory authority and set the stage for
opening the capital of Turk Telekom to private participation. This was followed in May by
legislation giving autonomy to the Agriculture Sales Cooperative Unions. 
In parallel, the
privatization program has made important strides with the sale of a majority stake in POAS, the
state petroleum distribution company, a successful IPO for 27 percent of TUPRAS, the state
refinery, and the sale of a third GSM license. All told, the Government now expects the
privatization program to raise about US$3.5 billion in cash revenue in 2000;4 impressive, but still
short of the original US$7.6 billion target, largely due to the delay in the sale of a sizeable stake

4An additional US$2 billion (excluding VAT) from the GSM license sale in 2000 will be paid in early 2001.

10 

Turkey: Countrv Assistance Strategv FYO1-03

in Turk Telekom. In September 2000, Turkey established an independent banking authority
which has already shown strong action on the problem banks. The state bank law finally passed
in November 2000 clearing the way for Board presentation of FSAL I and setting the stage for
further significant reforms in banking. Reforms in the areas of social security, agriculture,
energy, telecommunications, public expenditure and privatization are being supported by the
Economic Reform Loan.

Reform Priorities

14. 
The Government has declared 2001 to be the year of structural reform. Key objectives
include rollout of the agriculture direct income support program at the national level, initial
restructuring of the state banks, and passage of the legal and regulatory framework for
restructuring the energy sector. Privatization will remain a priority with the planned sale of the
national airlines (THY) and state-owned electricity distribution and thermal power plants,
together with renewal of the tender for a strategic investor in Turk Telekom. The privatization
process for state enterprises in agriculture and the state banks is scheduled to start in 2001 and
continue in 2002-03. Privatization is targeted to generate some US$6-7 billion in cash revenues
in 200 1.

15. Agriculture. In a major effort to increase agriculture productivity and incomes, Turkey
has announced its intention to shift away from the current commodity support system towards
providing direct income support to farmers. Similar programs in other countries, such as
Mexico's PROCAMPO program, have led to large scale transformation of the agricultural sector
with important productivity increases and sustained improvements in the quality of life for
farners. Despite Turkey's abundant land and water resources, agriculture remains a low
productivity, backward sector and a major drain on the country's public finances. In recent
years, the sector received roughly US$4-5 billion annually from the budget in the form of price
supports and other indirect subsidies, and another US$6-1 0 billion from consumers through high
prices due to tariff protection. But this largesse did not lead to increased productivity or higher
incomes for most farmers. Agriculture has held back overall economic growth. With Bank
support, Turkey implemented a pilot direct income support program and farmer registration
system in 2000. The Government now plans to introduce this program at the national level in
2001. The shift to direct income support is being accompanied. by actions to eliminate credit
subsidies, phase out fertilizer subsidies and support prices for major crops, and restructure and
privatize state enterprises in the agriculture sector. Much of this reform program, including
important legal changes and the complete elimination of the credit subsidy, has already been
implemented. Under the Bank-supported Participatory Privatization of Irrigation Management
and Investment Project (FY98), Turkey has initiated a scheme to transfer management of
irrigation infrastructure to farmers organized in water user associations and encourage farmers to
participate in the funding of irrigation investments. This scheme could be expanded in the future
with World Bank assistance.

16. Banking and Finance. The Turkish authorities are pursuing a three-pronged approach to
financial sector reformn involving strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, supporting
restructuring and consolidation in the private banking sector, and taking steps to commercialize
and restructure the state banks in preparation for their privatization. Turkey's banking and

I I 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

finance sector has grown rapidly over the last two decades, but financial deepening has been held
back by high inflation. With successful disinflation, the financial sector will be compelled to
adjust. The overall objective of the regulatory reform effort has been to bring the supervisory
regime for the Turkish banking sector up to the level of international best practice in line with
Basle and EU standards. The new banking law and accompanying decrees for loan loss
provisioning, capital adequacy, and foreign exchange exposure set very clear international
standards. The independent Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (BRSA) became
operational in September 2000. The private banking sector will have to restructure as public
borrowing declines. The Government launched a bank resolution operation involving the
takeover of five insolvent private banks by the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (SDIF) and the
liquidation of one small investment bank at the end of 1999. Two more banks were taken over in
October 2000, and an action plan has been announced for their resolution. Through this
operation, the Government moved to correct weaknesses in the private banking system and send
a clear signal that the new legal and regulatory framework will be vigorously enforced. State
banks will be operationally restructured and their financial position strengthened in order to
improve efficiency and put management on a commercial basis. The Government intends to
privatize three of the four state banks by 2003, reduce disincentives to merger and consolidation,
and further reform the deposit insurance system.
17. Energy. Turkey is making a difficult transition from the current centralized energy sector
based on state monopolies and government-guaranteed contracts to a competitive market model
anchored by transparent regulation consistent with EU directives. As part of the global trend,
Turkey has turned increasingly towards the private sector to meet its energy needs. However,
this program has generated mixed results given the lack of competition and regulation, and the
continued predominant role of the state. Without deeper reform, energy problems could block
economic growth through excessive tariffs, unmanageable contingent liabilities, and shortfalls in
supply. By shifting to a market model, the Government intends to transfer over time the
commercial risks inherent in electricity supply and distribution to the private sector and eliminate
the need for government guarantees. The Government intends to separate TEAS, the state-
owned electricity company, into legally distinct generation, transmission and electricity trading
firms. A financial recovery plan, including tariff increases, to address the growing financial
imbalances in TEAS has been prepared although implementation has been slow. An electricity
markets law, prepared with technical assistance from the Bank, is scheduled for enactment in the
coming months. The law will establish an independent regulatory agency and set the stage for
full privatization of distribution companies and state-owned thermal power plants. Similar
reforms are planned for the gas sector.

III. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS, EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND EXTERNAL
FINANCING

18. 
In order to illustrate a range of outcomes in Turkey over the medium term, two
macroeconomic scenarios: a sustained reform scenario (SRS) and a truncated reform
scenario (TRS) have been developed. The SRS assumes that the current pace of reform is
maintained throughout the CAS period.5 If Turkey falls back to the "muddle through" approach

5 The policy framework underlying the SRS is presented in detail in the recent Turkey CEM.

12 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

that characterized policymaking throughout much of the past decade, with rapid erosion of the
improvement in macro balances achieved since mid-1999, the TRS scenario describes the likely
outcome (Table 3).

19. Under the SRS, sustained adjustment and structural reform is projected to engender a
robust private sector response. The primary surplus would remain above the medium-term
benchmark of 3 percent of GNP as per the fiscal sustainability analysis in the recent CEM. Deep
structural reforms in line with the Government's program, including structural fiscal measures

Table 3: Sustained and Truncated Reform Scenarios

Sustained Reform Scenario 

Actual 

Projected 

Truncated Reform
Scenario
Projected

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

20011 2002 

5.0 
6.2 
1.3 
7 
24.4 
6.2 
(2.7) 

4.0 
8.8 
(1.1) 
12 
30.5 
7.9 
(3.8) 

7.0 
10.5 
33.4 
35 
29.0 
12.3 
(6.0) 

(6.4) 
(7.0) 
(3.7) 
69 
19.5 
1.4 
(0.7) 

National Accounts (real annual change, %)
GNP at market prices 
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 
CPI Inflation (Dec-Dec) 
Extemal Financing Requirement (bn. $) 1/ 
o/w Current account balance 
(% of GNP) 
Extemal Financing Plan (bn. $)
Foreign Direct Investment (net) 2/ 
Mediumandlongternlending(gross) 
o/w World Bank 
Other capital flows (net) 
Foreign exchange reserves excl. gold, CB 
only (months of GFS imports)
1/ Current account deficit plus MLT repayments and increase in international reserves.
2/ Direct investment only, includes projected revenues from block sales including Turk Telekom in 2001.
3/ Includes portfolio investment in securities and net short-term capital.
Source: Govemment, IMF and WB estimates.

2.5 
3.0 
(6.6) 
68 
17.7 
5.3 
(2.5) 

5.5 
5.4 
3.6 
6 
22.6 
6.0 
(2.5) 

0.8 
17.5 
0.6 
(0.6) 
3.7 

3.3 
25.4 
1.6 
1.8 
4.9 

0.1 
14.1 
0.4 
5.3 
5.1 

0.1 
23.7 
0.8 
5.2 
4.5 

1.7 
19.1 
1.7 
3.6 
4.8 

1.9 
17.0 
1.7 
3.7 
4.5 

2003

2.0
2.9
(3.9)
87
13.8
0.7
(0.3)

0.5
13.6
0.6
(0.3)
3.3

2.0 
2.9 
(7.8) 
80 
14.7 
3.4 
(1.6) 

0.6 
13.7 
0.5 
0.4 
3.4 

(on the revenue side, but most importantly on the expenditure side), and further privatization,
will be essential to underpin sustained fiscal adjustment. Under this scenario, the PSBR is
projected to decline to 6 percent of GNP by 2002 and to 4 percent by 2003. Accordingly, the
ratio of net public debt to GNP would continue to decline, falling close to the key 50 percent
mark by 2003. This fiscal adjustment will accommodate the sizable transitional costs of
restructuring (e.g., social safety net programs and resolution of problem banks). The dampening
effect of tight fiscal and income policies on demand would be more than offset by a sustained
decline in inflation and interest rates as well as accelerated foreign direct investment in response
to disinflation and structural reform. Increased FDI will contribute to the creation of a virtuous
circle by improving Turkey's competitiveness and promoting export-oriented production. The
economy is expected to sustain its recovery under the SRS with growth of 4-4.5 percent
projected for 2001 and in the 5-6 percent for 2002-03 (Figure 3). 
In parallel, inflation is
projected to decline to single digits by 2002. 
Economic recovery would permit both rapid
growth in private consumption as well as a higher saving rate ensuring that the current account

13 

Turkev: Countrv Assistance Strategv FYO0-03

returns to sustainable levels. By the year 2003, per capita income in US dollar terms is projected
to be about 20 percent higher than in 1999 in the SRS.

-

_ 

' 

_.

_ 

2003

999 

2000 

6

25

2001 

2002 

(2)

4)

4)

(E)

(SRS) 

20 

0 

90

80 

70 

(TRS) -Iftion 

(SRS) Grth 

- s0 

20. Under the TRS, the fiscal adjustment Figure 3: Comparison of Growth and Inflation
Under Sustained and Truncated Reform
Scenarios

initiated in 2000 would not be sustained. The 
PSBR would deteriorate and domestic interest rates 
would rise sharply. The decline in the public sector 
debt to GNP ratio would be reversed and progress 
in taming inflation would unravel. Simply stated, 
without a large and manifestly sustainable fiscal 
adjustment, 
the 
conditions 
for 
permanent w 40 
disinflation will not materialize. Faced with an 
acute trade-off between inflation and growth in a 
difficult macro environment, policies would likely 
favor the latter. However, difficulties with public 
finance and the balance of payments are likely toth 
arise, forcing the authorities to adopt stop-go
policies. An accompanying slowdown in structural reform would hurt productivity growth and
increase pressures on the budget. Capital inflows would dry up. The projected outcome would
be lower growth, higher inflation and increased volatility. Annual GNP growth under the TRS
is projected to fall to 2.5 percent in 2001 and 2 percent in 2002-03, not enough to prevent an
increase in unemployment.
21. External Environment, External Balance and Financing. While Turkey is highly
exposed to external shocks, it has proved its resilience time and again over the past decade. The
economy faces numerous factors which increase its vulnerability to external shocks including: (i)
macroeconomic imbalances, (ii) an open capital account and large external debt stock, (iii)
limited FDI inflows, (iv) dependence on imported oil, (v) exposure to fluctuations in
international exchange rates and interest rates, and (v) the importance of shuttle trade with the
CIS countries. Despite this, Turkey has weathered many impacts over the past decade without a
full blown crisis. An important "stress test" was the Russia crisis in 1998 when some US$6
billion left the country in a matter of months without creating noticeable external payment
problems. An even tougher test came earlier in 1994 when the Lira was devalued sharply to
avert an external payments crisis. Under the current program, Turkey has already withstood the
sharp increase in world oil prices which has added about US$3 billion to the import bill in 2000,
as well as the depreciation of the Euro vs. the US dollar and the shock of the 1999 earthquakes.
The reform program should gradually reduce Turkey's vulnerability to external shocks, in
particular by correcting macroeconomic imbalances and establishing a more attractive
framework for foreign direct investment, currently less than US$1 billion per year. Structural
reforms will also boost exports by encouraging more private investment in productive activities
thereby allowing Turkey to benefit more fully from the trade liberalization undertaken in the
1980s.

22. 
The high level and short maturity of external debt represents an important source of risk
for Turkey given its open capital account. Turkey's external debt stock at the end of 1999 was
reported as US$102 billion (some 55 percent of GNP) of which about US$23 billion was short
term. External debt service of US$20 billion is projected in 2000, equivalent to about 35 percent

14 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FYO1-03

of exports of goods and services. The non-financial private sector has also borrowed heavily
overseas, often with guarantees from the domestic banking sector, creating an additional source
of foreign exchange exposure for commercial banks. Turkey remains vulnerable to sudden
reversals in capital flows and the country's access to international capital markets is constrained
by its below investment grade sovereign rating. These risk factors are counterbalanced by
Turkey's excellent track record of debt service and its demonstrated ability to withstand external
shocks.

23. 
The medium term projections suggest that
Turkey must manage 
large external debt 
urkepaymusts, 
fanceathe 
incrgeasexinthemalrrebt 
repayments, finance the increase in the current 
account deficit generated by the disinflation
program, and ensure adequate 
levels of 
international reserves. Export growth in the SRS 

would be higher than in the TRS and there would 

Figure 4: External Debt and Current
Account under Sustained and Truncated
Reform Scenarios

62 

60 X_

10

5 56 

-. 

-

_ 

0)

56

48 

I 

5*_ 0)

1999 

2000 

2001 

(7.0)

2002 

2003

2 

52 

54 -0)

so 

CA'D SRS) 

1(60)

-CAD TRS)

be a greater inflow of export-oriented FDI. -
Stronger export performance would sustain high 
import levels and output growth. The reforms 
would improve confidence and help ensure that 
external financing needs are met. As the boom in 
the private consumption and investment generated 
by falling interest rates eases, fiscal adjustment is 
sustained and exports expand, the current account
balance is projected to gradually improve over the medium term. By 2002, the current account
deficit would be below the benchmark of 3 percent of GNP consistent with a declining ratio of
external debt to GNP (Figure 4). Under the SRS, external debt is projected to fall from a peak of
60 percent of GNP in 2001 to 57 percent of GNP by 2003. In the TRS, the nominal exchange
rate anchor would become nonviable as rapid real appreciation would cause export growth to
decelerate sharply. The resulting loss of confidence would severely curtail Turkey's external
borrowing capacity requiring a sharp correction in the current account with negative
repercussions for growth. The risk of crisis would be substantial. Under any scenario, Turkey's
medium-term gross external financing requirements will be very considerable. Under the SRS,
the simulations call for gross capital inflows of about US$100 billion over the period 2000-03
and substantial fast-disbursing resources will be required from official sources. With official
financing in place and structural reforms underway, commercial financing prospects are expected
to improve rapidly. Foreign participation in the privatization process will be a key instrument-
as shown by Latin America's recent example. FDI is expected to increase steadily as the
structural reforms take hold.

24. 
Capital inflows are also needed to accommodate a shift to a more balanced mix of
internal and external borrowing by the budget compared with the nearly exclusive reliance on
domestic markets in recent years. The Stand-By program targets about US$15 billion in net
external borrowing by the consolidated public sector over the 2000-02 period. Although the
Government could receive US$4 billion from the IMF under the Stand-By and around US$3
billion in adjustment lending from the Bank, the lion's share of new money is expected to come
from private creditors. The Treasury has already raised over US$7 billion in new bond issues in
2000. Over the past year, international credit rating agencies have upgraded Turkey, although it

15 

Turkev. Country Assistance Strategy FY0-03

remains below investment grade. 
In late January 2000, the Treasury successfully issued a
US$1.5 billion global bond with a 30-year maturity, a new milestone. The prospect (albeit long-
term) of membership and better access to EU markets is an additional attraction for investors.

IV. BANK GROUP TRACK RECORD

The FY98-00 CAS and its Implementation
25. 
The central thrust of the last three years' work was to increase the development impact of
the Bank Group's activities in the country, which had been lower than hoped during prior periods
of instability and in light of weak institutional capacity. This implied four key elements:
a) increasing the intensity of our work in social development and poverty alleviation, notably
through shifting the focus of investment activities to poorer regions; b) strengthening institutions
to reduce the likelihood of policy reversals, and improve implementation; c) increasing support
for economic management through technical and advisory services, and working to improve the
Government's own capacity to design and implement reforms; and d) making concentrated joint
efforts with the Government to improve portfolio management.
26. 
The base case financing to support these basic thrusts was for up to US$1.5 billion in
investment lending. The Bank also stood ready to provide up to an additional US$3 billion in
high case adjustment financing over three years, if the Government adopted and implemented a
comprehensive program of structural reforms, underpinned by a strong macroeconomic
framework endorsed by the IMF-a 'strong adjustment' scenario.
27. CAS implementation has progressed well. Investment lending under the base case
totaled US$1.38 billion, for basic education (Box 4), power transmission, water and sewerage,
privatization of irrigation, commodities market development, industrial technology, export
financial intermediation, and emergency flood and earthquake recovery (responding to natural
disasters in 1998). In late 1999, authorization to move beyond the CAS envelope was approved
in order to support the recovery from the Marmara earthquake. That support involved
reallocation of portions of eight ongoing loans, totaling US$236.3 million, and new lending of
US$758 million (Box 5). Turkey also met the triggers for the high case and an adjustment
operation for US$760 million-the first of an envisioned series of four-was approved by the
Board in May 2000. The Bank's lending to Turkey reached US$1.8 billion in FY00, up from
US$20 million in FY97. The World Bank is once again viewed as a key partner with Turkey
because our timely support has contributed to important reforms and innovative changes.
28. Major non-lending services have included the Economic Reforms, Living Standards and
Social Welfare Study (see Box I above), an energy and environment review and workshop, an
informal forestry sector review, and workshops on selected topics in agricultural support,
stabilization, municipal finance, health insurance, and financial risk management. The CEM (on
Structural Reform for Sustainable Growth) was sent to the Board in September 20006; it presents
a comprehensive analytical framework for the Government's reform program. In general, the
dialogue with the Government has strengthened enormously, particularly in light of three factors:

6 See footnote 2 above.

16 

Turkey. Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

the move of the Country Director to the field in 1998; recognition by the Government of the
strong support the Bank provided following the Marmara earthquake and its catalytic effect on
other sources of external support; and the shared views on the reform agenda ahead and the kind
of support the Bank Group can offer for its implementation.

Box 4: Bank Support for Basic Education Reform

In August, 1997 the Government adopted a new Basic Education Law which extends the duration of compulsory
education from five years to eight years, and launches a major expansion and upgrading of eight-year basic
education schools. The Bank is supporting this US$ 18 billion initiative with a series of two Adaptable Program
Loans (APLs) of US$300 million each. The program is also supporting the introduction of computer education
and English language instruction in over 5,500 basic education schools throughout Turkey, and includes a
number of targeted interventions to raise the educational performance of students in the poorest regions of the
country. The program has brought about a sharp increase in basic education enrollments, which have grown by
more than 900,000 since the start of the program. Enrollments in grade six, which became mandatory for the
first time in the 1997-98 school year, increased over 30 percent from 866,000 in September 1997 to 1,127,000 in
September 1998. In rural areas, the gains were dramatic: boys' enrollments in grade six increased by 62 percent;
girls' enrollments increased by 162 percent. Overall, girls' enrollments are lower than boys' enrollments, but
more rapid growth of girls' enrollments is narrowing this gap. The Bank will also continue support an
innovative and successful collaboration between the Ministry of Education and an NGO in delivering pre-school
and mothers' education. The 2001 budget allocation for education (4.0 percent of GNP, equal to the level of
actual spending estimated for 2000) will sustain the resource base for the education reform. The Government
has announced its intention to extend for two years the special education levy (Law 4306).

PiodPgress Ui&rTurkeys Basic FiaicationPram 

Orjs' Erolmnrns amr Ning 

e (O.p'i'dth Bqs'

f1rdinx,nts

I 1t,W0- 
,0

IQ5O,O00C-

9,50D,0OO , 

t 

4,500,000 

-

- Efulllts 1-8 Fbpti,Lbon 7-1

Source: Official Data of Government of Turkey, including State Institute of Statistics, Ministry of National
Education

29. 
Lessons. Although overall the last CAS period witnessed solid achievements in Turkey,
some aspects yielded lessons for future improvement. The established wisdom that individual
projects cannot fully succeed in a flawed policy environment was confirmed. For example,
Turkey's own commitment to the large-scale expansion of basic education coverage is being
effectively supported by the Bank, but without similar coherence 
in the country's health
program, Bank-supported projects have not had such positive impacts and weak health indicators
remain a serious concern (as indicated in Section II above). Another key factor in achieving

17 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

developmental impact has been choosing and building appropriate institutions. In some cases,
this has required patient and intensive supervision; in others, pilots for shared learning have
worked well. Three examples of pilots that are leading to solid results are in commodity
markets, water user associations for irrigation, and the now expanding micro watershed
management activities. On the other hand, the desired demonstration effects of private service
provision and measures to raise efficiency in urban water supply have been slow in coming, thus
contributing to the view that a broader reform of municipal management of infrastructure and
service provision is needed. Another area of lessons was reiterated in a recent OED study of
projects that had supported lines of credit for industrial and technological development in Turkey
over more than a decade: in a distorted financial policy setting, these largely had an
unsatisfactory impact. This latter message was well known by the beginning of the last CAS,
and reflected in the design of the industrial technology and export finance operations, as well as
more importantly in the future financial sector strategy outlined in Section V below. A further
noteworthy lesson has also reconfirmed: sound analytical work done in conjunction with the
Government is essential for laying a basis for constructive dialogue and contributing to
consensus for change. The Bank's decision to do major sector work on health in FYOI-02
reflects this lesson. Finally, the importance of political conditions for the timing of the Bank's
work was illustrated when the reform agenda was fully initiated only after elections and the
formation of the coalition government.

Box 5: Earthquake Response

The swift response of the Bank Group to the earthquake earned the respect of the government and the
international community. The World Bank emerged as the central external institution helping Turkey coordinate the
response to the earthquake. The Bank's assistance of US$1 billion can be divided into four categories, each
receiving about US$250 million:

- Relief to families living in temporary facilities in the form of cash grants through the Social Solidarity
Fund under the Emergency Earthquake Recovery Loan (US$253 million, of which all but US$30,000 for
institutional strengthening has been disbursed).
- New permanent housing-12,100 urban housing units to be completed by April 2001, and 2000 rural
units by the summer of 2001 (under the Marmara Emergency Earthquake Reconstruction, or MEER, project).
- Rehabilitation of schools, hospitals, health centers and other infrastructure as well as replacement of
equipment in hospitals and health centers and social and trauma programs (most financed through reallocations of
ongoing loans).
- Institutional strengthening including compulsory housing insurance, establishment of the Emergency
Management Agency of Turkey (EMAT) and improving land registration and building codes (under MEER).

IFC established an Earthquake Region Development Facility to assist in the economic recovery of the
earthquake-affected region. The Facility comprises individual lines of credit in the aggregate amount of up to
US$50 million to be made available to existing bank clients of IFC in Turkey for reconstruction of physical facilities
and working capital.

30. 
In summary, experience during the previous CAS has highlighted four significant lessons
for the Bank:

* 

the Bank was able to respond quickly and effectively to the Government's recent requests for
support to the reforms because a solid series of economic and technical work had been
completed prior to the initiation of the reforms;

18 

Turkey. Country Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

* 

investment and technical assistance projects have failed in sectors where the commitment to
reform was weak in the past, but where reform commitment has been strong, Bank projects
are succeeding;
* building stakeholder consensus is essential to project success even if this appears to slow
down project implementation in the early phases; and
* Turkey's vulnerability to natural disasters remains high, and can only be reduced by building
institutional mechanisms to mitigate the impact of such events.

31. 
IFC. During FY98-00, IFC invested US$584 million in Turkey for its own account and
over US$1 billion including syndication with other banks. IFC has been the only significant
source of long-term project finance in Turkey, particularly for the medium-sized companies,
since the international commercial banks have been focusing exclusively on top tier companies.
Following FY98-00 CAS strategic priorities, IFC has invested in financial sector development,
export-oriented companies, credit lines and technical assistance to SMEs, and in Turkish
investments abroad. IFC has been pursuing a conscious strategy of scaling down its projects
with larger conglomerates.

Status of the Portfolio

32. 
The Bank's Turkey portfolio consists of 21 active IBRD financed projects, including one
adjustment and one fast disbursing emergency operation. In addition, we manage one GEF and
one Montreal Protocol project. Total net commitments for IBRD projects amount to US$3.8
billion, of which 60 percent (US$2.3 billion) remains undisbursed. The average age of loans has
decreased from five years at the beginning of FY97 to under four years at present. This average
will fuirther decline with the closure of three projects in December 2000. Over the past five
years the emphasis in the portfolio of investment operations has gradually shifted away from
large energy, infrastructure and rural credit projects towards higher commitments in the human
development sectors, and special assistance for recent emergencies (Table 4).

Table 4: World Bank Commitments by Sector

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

JuY 1994 

__ 

JulY 1997 

October2000

US$m 
o oftotal US$ m % oftotal US$m % oftotal
Emergency Assistance and Recovery 1/ 
285 
6 
243 
8 
1,126 
30
I Adjustment 
0 
0 
0 
0 
760 
20
Social Sectors 
389 
9 
498 
17 
532 
14
Infrastructure 
1,217 
28 
1,075 
36 
473 
12
Private Sector Development 
504 
11 
605 
20 
408 
11
Energy 
1,042 
24 
305 
10 
298 
8
Rural Development 
963 
22 
177 
6 
150 
4
Public Sector Management 
9 
0 
71 
2 
57 
1
TOTAL 
4,409 
100 
2,973 
99 
3,804 
100
Notes: 1/ Emergency Assistance and Recovery includes Emergency Earthquake Recovery Project, Marmara
Emergency Reconstruction Project, TEFER project and Erzincan Earthquake Reconstruction Project.

19 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

33. 
Portfolio Performance. The performance of the Turkey portfolio compares favorably to
Bank-wide and ECA regional averages and remains significantly stronger than it was during the
early and mid-1990s. As of October 2000, three out of 23 projects (13 percent) were at risk and
posted unsatisfactory ratings for implementation performance, achievement of development
objectives, or both. Currently 13 percent of commitments are at risk (compared to 23 percent in
ECA and 15 percent Bank wide). The portfolio contains several projects that have achieved
remarkable results and may serve as best practice for future operations, such as the Basic
Education Project, the Eastern Anatolia Watershed Project, the Marmara Earthquake Emergency
Recovery Project, and the Emergency Earthquake Recovery Loan. On the other hand, the mixed
performance over time of the health and infrastructure portfolio will ultimately only be resolved
in the context of sectoral strategies and clear priorities for implementing agencies.

34. 
The Turkey portfolio is performing substantially better than in the mid-1990s (Table 5).
This is largely due to an increasingly strong working relationship between the Government and
the Bank on the ground. Field posting of a portfolio manager, several program team leaders, and
one procurement accredited specialist (PAS) substantially contributed to this. QAG has assigned
a Realism Index and a Proactivity Index of 100 percent each to the Turkey portfolio; both
compare favorably to the regional average.

Table 5: Turkey - Portfolio Review
FY95 
FY96 
FY97 

FY98 

FY99 

22 
2,763 
1,633 
329 
20 
20 
86 
20 

22 
2,434 
1,233 
259 
21 
21 
53 
603 

20 
2,632 
1,509 
264 
17 
17 
104 
528 

FY00 FY01
Q1
23 
21
4,023 3,803
1,673 2,418
957 
95
20 
5
57 
5
41 
5
1,770 
0

25 
3,021 
1,994 
611 
20 
31 
63 
312 

25 
3,333 
2,371 
288 
12 
12 
338 
250 

Number Of Projects at FY end d/ 
Net Commitments ($m) at FY end b/ 
Undisbursed Balance at FY Start ($m) c/ 
Gross Disbursements during FY ($m) 
Disbursement Ratio Investment Projects (%) a/ 
Disbursement Ratio incl. Fast Disb. Loans (%) a/ 
Cancellations ($m) 
New Commitments ($m) 
Unsatisfactory Projects
Number 
8 
5 
1 
3 
4 
4 
Percent 
32 
20 
5 
14 
20 
17 
Notes: a/ Disbursement ratio is disbursement during period as a % of outstanding balance at beginning of FY.
Disbursement ratio including fast disbursing loans includes disbursements for Earthquake Emergency
Recovery Loan and Economic Reform Loan in FY00, and disbursement from three credit lines in FY96.
b/ Net Commitments = Original Loan Amount - Cancellations
c/ Undisbursed balance on October 1, 2000 was US$2.3 billion.
d/ Infornation includes only IBRD financed projects under implementation. Inclusion of GEF and Montreal
Protocol Projects raises number of projects in FY01 to 23, lowers share of projects at risk to 13% and raises
total net commitments to US$3.82 billion.

3
14

35. 
Implementation experience over the last CAS period has shown that several issues need
to be addressed up front to assure effective project implementation and help prevent slow project
start-up. These include: (i) the need to assure that new projects fit within each implementing
agency's overall budget envelope and that agencies will be in a position to allocate sufficient
funds from within agency's budget allocations for the projects it manages, throughout the

20 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

implementation period; (ii) the need to assure that implementing agencies receive necessary
support from consultants and the Bank to proceed promptly with large procurements, particularly
during the initial phase of project implementation; (iii) continuous close interaction between the
implementing agency, including high level agency managers, and the Bank. The Joint Portfolio
Performance Review which the Country Team completed with the Government in FY00
identified procurement delays, weak project management (partly due to frequent change of staff
responsible for project management and implementation) and limited financial management
capacity as problems which often contribute to slow project implementation. To help address
these issues, the Ankara Office has strengthened its procurement unit (a second PAS was
accredited in October 2000) and will shortly hire a financial management specialist. Most of the
proposed operations in this CAS are closely linked to the implementation of the Government's
reform program. They thus have a more narrow focus and a high degree of counterpart
commitment to rapid implementation, which make them less susceptible to some of the
implementation problems that have traditionally afflicted our investment projects. On the
Bank's side more timely follow-up and streamlined procedures could also be helpful in speedier
implementation, as would more intensive supervision during the start-up phase of any project
involving an agency that is not familiar with project procedures.

V. BANK GROUP STRATEGY

36. 
The primary objective of this CAS is to help Turkey meet its goals of improving living
standards and reducing economic vulnerability and poverty. The Government's economic
reform program aims to defeat inflation and restore the economy to high and sustainable growth
in output and employment, in order to improve living standards and reduce poverty. This
program needs and merits continuing support from the Bank under a high-case program.

37. 
In line with Turkey's current and upcoming priorities, the Bank Group would focus the
FYO1-03 program on five broad themes:

-
* 
* 
* 
* 

implement reforms for growth and employment generation;
improve public sector management and accountability;
expand social services and social protection;
strengthen environmental management and disaster mitigation; and
accelerate connectivity and technological capabilities.

The choice of these themes reflects Government priorities, as discussed in Section II above,
continuation of valid priorities from the last CAS where success is being achieved on the ground,
and reflections shared with the Bank Group through a variety of social assessment and
consultative activities (Box 6).

21 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

Box 6: CAS Consultations and Assessments

For this CAS, the Bank and IFC aimed to take into account the priorities of Turkey's society, and learn more
about how those priorities are expressed by different social groups and organizations. In general, the informal
consultations and working discussions on Turkey's needs and the Bank's program are continuous. Nevertheless for
CAS preparation a specific consultation program was designed.
Client survey. Early in 1999, the Bank did a client survey, with a respectable response rate. The survey
included both the standard Bank-wide modules of questions, the special modules about the move of the country
director to the field office, and a set of questions designed to compare the country team's views to those of the
clients. This survey revealed that the expertise and dedication of Bank staff is valued in Turkey. The move of the
Country Director to the field was praised. Areas where clients felt we were not placing high enough priority or not
doing well were chiefly related to identifying and addressing poverty issues, working on governance, supporting
reform, communicating widely enough, and working with NGOs. In each of these areas, we have in the past 18
months done much, as reflected in this CAS.
Collecting our own learning. A consultant study drew together the results of the consultative activities,
and social or beneficiary assessments done for specific tasks over the past three years. Collective learning is
growing, and some projects are models of beneficiary and social assessment, as well as building stakeholder buy-in.
Consultative sessions for the CAS. The Bank and IFC jointly had four formal consultative sessions for
CAS preparation, and the Bank held one session with NGOs. A half a day meeting was arranged by TUSIAD in
Istanbul, for "big business" interests, and a similar session was held in Izmir with representatives of smaller
businesses with more local concerns. A session was organized in Istanbul with banking representatives. These
groups shared views about Turkey's development priorities, in particular the effect of the reform program on the
private and financial sectors. In Ankara, the Bank met with representatives of 23 NGOs, who expressed views on
the nation's priorities and on the future of the NGO segment in the country, as well as how the Bank and the NGOs
could interact in the future. Subsequently, another meeting with NGOs was held with Mr. Wolfensohn during his
visit to Turkey, in which the potential role and effectiveness of NGOs and issues of organization amongst NGOs
were discussed. The Bank Group hosted a one-day retreat outside Ankara with about 30 representatives of external
partner agencies, which gave a rich exchange of knowledge and a commitment to build further our informal
coordination through strengthened communication. Mr. Wolfensohn and the Bank team also met Parliamentarians,
gleaning insights on the strength of the consensus for reform.
Filling a gap in our knowledge about social inclusion. Early in the CAS process it became clear that the
Bank's knowledge was not complete on issues of social inclusion and social groupings. An academic paper was
commissioned from a local expert to review Turkish academic literature and analytical approaches on these issues.
This paper has brought us several useful paradigms for understanding social groups in Turkey, their priorities, and
their ability to attain these priorities, and offered explanations of the informal safety net and strong social cohesion
in many segments of society in Turkey. This complements the work done in the Economic Reform, Living
Standards and Welfare Study. A paper on the Political Economy of Reform in Turkey is currently under
preparation.

Implement Reforms for Growth and Employment Generation

38. 
The Government's proposed reforms to restore stable growth and employment will be
supported through four adjustment operations, of which the first one, ERL, was approved on
May 18, 2000 under the high case of the previous CAS, while the second, FSAL I, is presented
with this CAS. This support is closely coordinated with the IMF's Stand-By Arrangement. The
ERL has been the key instrument for Bank support to major reforms in agriculture, energy,

22 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

telecommunications, social security system and privatization. An innovative feature of this CAS
is the design of investment projects to closely complement the adjustment loans. This support
responds to the Government's wish to avoid implementation and institutional problems in key
sectors. Three such investment projects are linked to the ERL program:

* The Privatization Social Support project (PSSP) presented with this CAS focuses on
strengthening social protection mechanisms for groups affected by the privatization
undertaken within the reform program.
* The Agricultural Reform and Investment Project (ARIP, FY01) will support conversion of
the agriculture sales cooperative unions (ASCUs) into autonomous private cooperatives,
introduction of the direct income support program for small farmers, transition of farmers out
of low value-added cash crops, and privatization of large state-owned agribusiness
companies. Turkey's plans to improve agricultural productivity and better target agriculture
subsidies to small farmers through the switch to direct income support conmmand special
attention because farmers make up a large share of the economically vulnerable population.
The loan for the ARIP project will be a two-phase APL of US$600 million to allow phased
support over the longer term, with the first phase supporting the reforms and the second
phase supporting follow-on investments. The agriculture reforms under ARIP will be
complemented by steps to improve land and forestry management.
* An energy project (FY03) would support reforrn implementation in power with special
emphasis on renewables. This project could include a guarantee component. Dialogue on
reform of the gas sector (an area of possible future support) is ongoing.

39. 
The Bank also plans to carry out a series of economic and sector studies, both formal and
informal, to continue to inform the debate on key reform issues. Currently underway is work on
the livestock and forestry sectors, energy and the environment. In FY02, a note on the gas sector
would be prepared, and throughout the CAS period, monitoring and focused assessment of
related energy issues in Turkey and the neighboring region will continue. In FY03, the Bank
would review the economic situation in the context of a CEM focusing on the path towards EU
accession, and its implications for future change.

40. 
IFC is collaborating with the Bank on private-sector inputs for the structural reform
program. Bank-supported improvements in the legal and regulatory framework for the
telecommunications, energy and financial sectors are expected to increase opportunities for IFC
investments in these areas. FIAS has reviewed the new draft investment law and will conduct an
administrative barrier study. The complementary focus of the Bank and IFC in infrastructure
and financial markets will enhance the quality of the Government's economic reform program
and will contribute to strengthening the partnership between Turkey and the World Bank Group.
In keeping with this complementary focus, key issues and ongoing dialogue between IFC and the
Turkish authorities are as follows:

* Encouraging regulatory reform to improve the climate for financing large infrastructure
projects;
* Developing additional means to assist SMEs, second tier and regional companies
efficiently; and
* Supporting privatizations in the banking, agribusiness, communications and energy sectors.

23 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

41. 
Support to the Financial Sector. Given its critical importance to the economic
stabilization program, the financial sector will account for a significant part of the World Bank
Group's program in Turkey, focussing on reducing systemic risks and vulnerabilities, while
increasing the sophistication, productivity and competitiveness of the financial sector to bring it
up to global standards. In response to request from the authorities, IBRD's planned assistance in
the financial sector is built on four elements:

* FSAL I (FYO), will focus on strengthening the legislative, regulatory and supervision
infrastructure for banks through the establishment of the BRSA and the new Banking Law,
updating bank prudential regulations to EU standards, strengthening problem banks, and
initiating the restructuring/privatization of state-owned banks.
* A formal Non-Bank Financial Institutions Review (NBFR) will be done during FYO, to
analyze existing development issues and future priorities related to: (i) financial markets,
including Government securities, money market, bond markets, equities, commodities and
derivatives; and (ii) non bank financial intermediaries like securities firms, investment
companies, contractual savings institutions such as insurance companies, mutual funds and
pension funds, and the near-banks like leasing, factoring and consumer finance companies.
* The State Bank Restructuring Project (FY02) would provide technical assistance and
financing to prepare the state banks for viable privatization by placing them on sound
financial footing and removing distortions in their lending practices. The Bank could also
consider helping BRSA to access international lines of credit to recapitalize the SDIF
through a guarantee operation, which would be within the overall CAS envelope.
- The FSAL II (FY03), will build upon FSAL I and address the remaining reform agenda in
the financial sector, especially issues related to: (i) the privatization and commercialization
of state banks; (ii) further reform of the deposit insurance scheme; (iii) regulatory issues
related to capital markets, insurance and other non-bank financial institutions like leasing,
factoring, mutual funds and private pension funds; and (iv) creation of a consolidated
supervision entity.

42. 
IFC will focus on institution-building and introduction of new products in financial
markets-in particular, development of mortgage finance and long-term contractual savings
institutions such as private pension funds and life insurance companies, development of venture
capital/private equity funds, support for bank privatization, and technical assistance on
securitizations. IFC will support SMEs by providing term-financing through lending to leasing
companies and selected banks, and catalyzing creation of essential business infrastructure for
SMEs, such as business and technical advisory facilities and internet-based access to
international markets. IFC is working with a number of Turkish banks and leasing companies on
joint investments in the region, leveraging the strong technical skills and sophistication of
Turkish companies to partner for establishment of new financial intermediaries in Central Asia
and also in Albania, Azerbaijan, Bosnia, FYR Macedonia, Moldova and Romania. Joint
ventures of this kind in the region are expected to increase, as consolidation and competition
within Turkey spurs financial intermediaries to seek opportunities abroad. IFC has also provided
US$150 million in financing in support of Turkish investments in Central and Eastern Europe
and Central Asia, and expects to continue pursuing this line of business. (See Annex 1.)

24 

Turkey. Country Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

43. MIGA is also very active in l'urkey, both in terms of guarantees and capacity building
for foreign investment promotion. While MIGA's portfolio in Turkey has until now been
concentrated in the financial sector, other sectors are expected to grow in its portfolio-
particularly in infrastructure investments. MIGA's Investment Marketing Service will continue
to be an active supporter of the Center for Private Sector Development in Istanbul, which is a
joint undertaking of the OECD and TICA, to catalyze and support the transfer of expertise and
experience related to private sector development to economies in the region.

Improve Public Management and Accountability

44. 
The Government is giving increased priority to governance issues ranging from high
profile remarks by top leaders about improved administration, effectiveness, and transparency to
plans for reform of public expenditure and related institutional mechanisms. The Bank is already
working with the Government to improve enforcement of housing codes following the August
1999 earthquake. There is growing realization in the country that Turkey must modernize its
public institutions in order to deliver better services to people, and help Turkey's private sector
in a fast-paced global environment, and accelerate its prospects for EU entry.

45. 
The Govermnent aims at addressing governance and anti-corruption issues in four ways.
First, it has begun a process of introducing more independent regulatory institutions to manage
the interface between the public sector and the private sector and privatization. Second, recent
measures in the financial sector are improving governance, regulatory and prudential guidelines,
and enforcement. Third, explicit standards are being set for the public sector, and audited.
Fourth, measures are being designed for improving and strengthening public institutions
entrusted with enforcement of anti-corruption activities and the legal system more broadly. The
Bank's planned assistance to Turkey in this area is presented in Box 7.

Box 7: Work on Anti-Corruption and Governance

The Bank's approach to the issues of governance and transparency under the CAS is three-fold:

* Support establishment of independent regulatory bodies that manage the interface between the public and
private sectors. The World Bank has helped Turkey establish the new independent banking authority and the
telecommunications regulatory board, and is now working with the government to create regulatory bodies for
electricity and gas.

* Help Turkey improve public procurement, auditing, accounting and public management. Turkey has begun the
process of eliminating budgetary and extra-budgetary funds. The Bank will complete a Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review (PEIR), a Country Financial Accountability Assessment, and a Country Procurement
Assessment Review in FYOI. These activities complement the Fiscal Transparency Review carried out with the
IMF and published in July. The preparation for the PSAL (FY02) would include reaching agreement on the
launch of key reforms in public management, including those that would improve public expenditure
management and reduce off-budget expenditure.

* Help public offices (such as the Prime Minister's Inspection Board) and civic organizations (such as
Transparency International, TESEV and TUSIAD) highlight these issues more broadly in the country including
through a WBI Governance Workshop in FY02. Bank support has been requested for an anti-corruption
initiative.

25 

Turkev: Countr Assistance Strategy FYOJ-03

The PSAL (FY02) would be a key instrument for reaching agreement with the Government on
improvements in budgetary practices, ensuring improvements in auditing and procurement
standards, ensuring appropriate budget allocation (including towards well targeted interventions
to improve basic health outcomes) and beginning important reforms in public administration.
46. As Turkey's economic program progresses, it will need to start focussing on a wide-
ranging set of issues related to decentralization. This would include a re-alignment of local
administration and municipal finances. In developing these activities, there is close cooperation
with Germany's Development Ministry and the EIB. The Government has requested Bank
support to help establish a new funding mechanism for municipal projects and restructure
Turkey's Iller Bank through an APL (Municipal Project, FY03), in support of an overall effort to
improve municipal services for the rapidly growing urban population. The APL structure-of up
to US$600 million, with two phases of US$300 million each-for this proposed operation is well
suited to the long term nature of the municipal reform agenda.
Through advisory services for municipal agencies the IFC plans to support on-going
47. 
Turkish Government efforts to decentralize financing responsibility for public services to
municipalities and a growing demand for private sector participation in delivery of utilities and
municipal services. The technical assistance under the Bank's Municipal Project (FY03) will
complement IFC's activities on private sector participation.

Expand Social Services and Social Protection
48. 
Social Services. While creating and sustaining growth will be a challenge for Turkey,
growth alone will not suffice. Strengthening education, health and social assistance are other
critical aspects of the strategy. The Bank will continue to support Turkey's successful basic
education reforms which are leading to very substantial improvements in school enrollment-
especially among girls (Box 4). The Bank's commitment to the series of adaptable program
loans (APLs) in support of the Government's program for expanded coverage and improved
quality of basic education up to grade eight remains strong, and Bank management expects to
approve in FY01 the second phase APL, which will include support for pre-school education as
well. In response to the Government's expressed willingness to address the reform agenda for
secondary education, the Bank is preparing to support that segment with an investment project
(FY02).
49. 
Bold reforms are similarly needed in health, but sufficient consensus for this effort does
not yet exist. In recognition of this need, Bank strategy in the health sector aims to help Turkey
build the necessary consensus through economic and sector work, and to ensure that sufficient
funding is available for basic health services. The Government's current large-scale program to
provide at least eight years of basic education for all children will make an important
contribution to improved health status. So will the various economic measures to reduce
regional income disparities, and improve municipal water supply and sanitation. But improving
health status and delivering better health services in the areas with the greatest needs will also
require fundamental, systemic changes of several kinds, including: a) providing better incentives
for public health professionals to serve in areas where they are most needed; b) providing
stronger incentives for hospitals and other health facilities to use inputs efficiently; c)
diversifying financing of health services and drug provision; d) rationalizing the provision of

26 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy EYOI-03

health care by developing family physicians as the initial care providers for most patients and by
rationing access to specialized care; e) investing in vaccinations and vector control for
communicable diseases; and f) promoting lifestyle changes to reduce smoking, accidents, and
other health-degrading behavior. The Bank and the Government are working to remedy the poor
implementation performance of our health projects. The recent restructuring of the two ongoing
health projects should lead to better performance in achieving these projects' relatively limited
objectives. Nevertheless, achieving significant improvements in health indicators-particularly
in rural areas and urban slum areas (gecekondus)-will require much broader initiatives, and a
concerted effort on the part of Government and other partners.

50. 
The ongoing PEIR is developing recommendations to address the needs in areas (a), (b),
and (c), above. Together with UNICEF, WHO, UNFPA, and other partners, the Bank is
addressing the other needs initially through the Health Sector Review (beginning in FY01, for
completion in FY02). The review will analyze in detail the problems of the sector and provide
recommendations on how to deal better with resource mobilization, resource allocation and
utilization, low utilization rates, inefficient hospital financing, low coverage, declining health
status, and deficient services. It will also address issues of evaluation, replication and policy
formulation. This review will develop a prioritized action Program to improve health status, and
options for institutional reform of MOH. Implementation of this Program is expected to require
a large-scale, multi-year effort, involving financing from a variety of sources -
including
Government, the private sector, other donors, and the Bank. Our initial implementation support
for this Program would be in the form of a Health Project (FY03) focussed on reducing
disparities in access to quality health care services.

51. 
IFC's strategy in the social sectors complements the efforts of the World Bank to
improve the quality and scope of the services in these sectors. IFC plans to invest in health and
education to create models of high quality and efficient services in these sectors that are critical
to the sustainability of economic growth and to alleviating the burden on public social systems.

52. 
Social Protection. A principal challenge for social protection policy in Turkey, as in
other countries, is to balance protection and opportunity: to reduce the impact of poverty and
protect against lifetime risks associated with drops in income, while promoting economic
growth. This involves four elements: (a) social insurance that allows individuals to smooth
consumption over lifetimes; (b) social assistance-including cash, in-kind benefits, services and
subsidies-to provide an affordable standard of living for the poor; (c) labor market policies that
reward labor productivity and allow labor to be allocated to its most efficient uses; and (d)
mechanisms to mobilize community effort and promote asset creation among the poor.

53. 
The Government has taken actions that strengthen the pension system and mitigate the
effects of unemployment (see para. 9). Greater emphasis is also being placed on social
assistance, and in particular on approaches outside the cash transfer system, such as social
services related to rural-urban migration, de-institutionalization of children and stronger
community-based services, and on further exploring the positive role that NGOs can play in
poverty alleviation. The Bank's recent studies and project work have enhanced the
Government's understanding of vulnerable and needy population groups in the country and
supported the four elements of social protection to some degree. Nevertheless, existing safety
net mechanisms are still inadequate: coverage is limited, leakage is high, and access is

27 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategv FY01-03

particularly difficult for the poor. More needs to be done in order to support the establishment of
a safety net that not only provides protection, but also offers a springboard out of poverty.
54. A social protection strategy for the reform and beyond will need to develop effective
targeting procedures in the provision of social assistance, innovative approaches to community-
based services (including developing partnerships with communities and NGOs), mechanisms
that will improve access for the poor to asset development (for instance micro-credit facilities
and incubator schemes), and improved family welfare. These aims would be reflected in a Local
Initiatives and Social Assistance project (FY02), which will build upon the experience of the
current pilot social development projects (funded by a Japan PHRD grant) and help expand and
better target Turkey's social assistance program. The Bank will support building on the
successful model of the micro-catchment component of the East Anatolia Watershed Project, to
replicate the approach to improvement of community livelihoods. A special project, the Village
and Township Services project (FY02), would aim to improve health and education services in
remote village communities and improve the income earning opportunities there. The Bank will
continue to encourage Turkey's social security reform, which would include the introduction of
an optional private pension pillar and continuation of the institutional reform designed to
harmonize and eventually unify the three public pension funds. On labor market issues, the
Bank would be willing to participate with the Government and other partners in a policy
dialogue, with the aim of fastering more competition. The PSSP (FY01), aims at facilitating
enterprise privatization through its mitigating effects on the labor shedding process, as well as
building on an earlier employment and training project by further developing the public
institutions in labor market intermediation.

Strengthen Disaster Mitigation and Environmental Management
55. 
Turkey has high seismic risk, and also a history of flooding. Occasionally, natural
disasters cause extensive loss of human life as well as large economic costs. The Marmara
quake of 1999 demonstrated the urgent need for much more comprehensive disaster
preparedness, catastrophic insurance, sound governance of construction practices, and other risk
The current portfolio includes the Marmara Emergency Earthquake
minimization. 
Reconstruction Project (MEER, FY00), and the Emergency Earthquake Recovery Loan (EERL,
FY00), as well as reallocated components of eight other projects, one of which supports
reconstruction from floods and an earthquake in 1998. The most important work in this respect
now is the strong joint effort with Government to ensure sound and timely implementation of
these projects, which will build better institutions and mechanisms such as insurance systems,
disaster response, and building codes to ensure that future losses are minimized and emergencies
are handled effectively. The Bank has also supported early preparation for retrofitting public
buildings for earthquake resistance in Istanbul and Izmir, in coordination with local agencies,
and could finance a project to bolster the seismic risk mitigation capacity of Istanbul, in FY03.
Under the ARIP, the Bank will support work to lay the foundation for the Government's program
to put in place an official system of agricultural insurance to substitute for the current expensive
and ineffective ad hoc disaster payments.
Turkey's efforts at environmental management have been spotty and sporadic.
56. 
Environmental awareness is growing but institutional capacity to deal with it is weak. The
prospect of joining the EU will encourage enforcement of European environmental standards.

28 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

Implementation of the National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP), prepared with World Bank
help, will be a key element of our effort to help Turkey in this area. The ongoing study series on
energy and environment issues is engendering national awareness of areas and methods for
improvement. Ongoing work in water and sewerage is expected to build a track record for some
replicable municipal resource management. The Micro-Watershed Management Project (FY03)
would build on the successful community-level experience of the East Anatolia Watershed
Project. Also in FY01, dissemination of the Forestry Review (FY01) and Livestock Sector Note
(FY01) should contribute to public debate and policy changes in support of sustainable
livelihoods and resource use. The implementation of the GEF Biodiversity Project (FY00) will
provide four examples of sound management of biodiversity in four different ecosystems within
Turkey, all of which contain unique species of global importance, while another GEF project in
FY03 will contribute to a regional effort to reduce chemical run-off into the Black Sea. The
Natural and Cultural Heritage Project (FY02) would help restore one of Turkey's treasures
(Pamukkale), as well as strengthening the institutional framework for managing and preserving
other important historical sites.

Accelerate Connectivity and Technological Capabilities

57. 
Turkey's ability to share in global prosperity will depend to a great extent on deepening
connectivity and expanding technological capabilities, particularly information technology.
Otherwise Turkey will lag behind in its quest to modernize the economy, and the economic
reforms will only be partially successful in getting the economy to reach its potential. To help
Turkey secure its future, the proposed strategy will encompass initial work in this area vital to
strengthening the country's ability to benefit from globalization and the new information
economy. Turkey is making impressive strides in technology development applications but lags
behind East Asia in technological capabilities. Its industrial structure remains anchored in low
technology industries. Computer literacy and connectivity are improving rapidly with the
number of PCs increasing from 1.2 million in 1997 to 3 million in 2000 and the number of
people with internet connections approaching 1.5 million. However, Turkey remains well below
averages for the OECD, and must accelerate the pace of technological upgrading to catch up.

58. 
The Bank's support for technological upgrading of SMEs and key research centers
through the 
Industrial Technology Project (FY99) will also strengthen the outreach of the
Technology Development Foundation of Turkey. Technopark and cyber facilities are also
planned under this project. The Basic Education Project's IT component is financing the largest
upgrade of school computer and laboratories in the developing world and Turkey is participating
in the World Links project. A major automation of the customs administration in line with the
Customs Agreement with the EU is underway with support from the Public Financial
Management Project (FY96). The Bank proposes to help expand significantly Turkey's distance
learning capabilities by supporting under the second APL for Basic Education (FY 2001) the
initial training of preschool teachers through distance learning techniques. Under the
Computerized Management and Support System sub-component of the Health II Project, the
Bank is financing two information systems initiatives-the Core Health Resource Management
System7 (CHRMS) and the Hospital Information System-as well as related investments in
training, technical assistance and operational improvements. A Country Gateway for Turkey is

7 This complements the Basic Health Statistics Module (BHSM) financed under Health 1.

29 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strate2V FYO0-03

being considered in the context of the Bank's Global Gateway initiative; this would be launched
with collaboration between industry, Government and academia. The Municipal Project (FY03)
could also help enhance computerization and electronic services at the local municipal level on a
pilot basis, since such measures have led to improved transparency and better services elsewhere.
Turkey also plans to computerize its social security and health institutions and has taken
important steps to streamline and computerize its health insurance payment system. Further
needs in the area will be determined on the basis of a Technology Assessment planned for
completion in FY02.

59. With a view to promoting Turkey as a technological hub for the region, IFC will assist
Turkish companies to increase their competitiveness and take advantage of trade opportunities
created by the ongoing customs union with EU and future accession, by: (i) financing
information technology related projects; (ii) emphasizing proper and transparent corporate
governance among its clients; (iii) growing its equity and quasi-equity portfolio in Turkey in
support of the above strategic focus; (iv) bringing major corporates to the international
institutional investors market, using innovative IFC enhancement instruments; and (v) assisting
second-tier, export-oriented industrial and agribusiness companies for projects which require
innovative financial structuring or which meet specific country needs. IFC will also support
Turkish outward investment in the Southern Europe and Central Asia region and promote Turkey
as a regional financial and technology hub. (See also Annex 1.)

Benchmarking Success
60. Detailed benchmarks for each strategic theme have been worked out with the country
tearn and Government counterparts. In summary, the CAS for FY 2001-2003 will be judged by
the following nine monitorable indicators:

* 
taming inflation to single-digits;
* achieving growth of 5 percent per annum on average over the period;
* 
introduction of direct income support system in agriculture;
* establishment of effective regulatory bodies in banking, power, telecommunication and
gas;
restructuring and privatization of at least three state banks;
* 
* girls enrollments in basic education to reach at least 4.8 million in the 2002-3 school
year, and total enrollments in basic education to increase by at least 100,000 over current
levels;
* 
increasing financing for primary health care;
* establishment and effective functioning of Turkey's institutions for disaster management;
and
* establishment of more effective safety nets for people affected by reforms.

Selectivity and Partnerships
61. 
The new CAS, while expanding Bank Group interventions, has been designed to
maximize our partnership and is selective (Box 8) in light of the complementary or joint work of
In general external assistance to Turkey is limited in view of its
others in each strategic area. 

30 

Turkev. Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

relatively high income level. Turkey does not currently have access to financing from the ADB
and the EBRD because it is a donor country in those institutions and, therefore, relies more on
World Bank assistance. A handful of countries and international institutions provide external
credits and technical help. Coordination among these is relatively straightforward and does not
require elaborate consultative mechanisms. Nevertheless, informal "friends of Turkey"
meetings, organized by the Bank and used for CAS consultations, have been found to be very
useful. In particular, the matrix in Annex B9 was worked on jointly with the external partners
mentioned there. The Ankara Office also organizes economic briefings and special briefings on
issues such as earthquake response. The Bank Group expects to continue these less formal
consultation mechanisms. Bank staff are also in heavy demand from private capital markets and
financiers for consultations regarding economic developments in Turkey.

Box 8: Selectivity

Selectivity is a major feature of Bank Group interventions. The primary objective of Bank assistance is to help
catalyze, whenever feasible, private sector investment and initiative and to ensure that close collaboration and
partnership is developed with other bilateral and international lenders. The Bank Group's work "crowds in" rather
than "crowding out" others. In keeping with this objective the Bank will focus more on:

* 
* 
* 

structural and social aspects of reforms, with increasing emphasis over time on Turkey's goals for EU entry;
education and health programs, in partnership with UNICEF, WHO and UNFPA;
rural development and resource management activities in collaboration with EU and FAO as well as local
institutions;
* governance and anti-corruption work in partnership with EU and local institutions;
* municipal reform in partnership with the EU and selected European countries;
* disaster management in partnership with EIB and UNDP; and
* 
banking sector reform in collaboration with the IMF.

During this CAS period, the Bank will not be heavily involved in infrastructure financing (which will rely more
on bilaterals and private financing), judicial reform (EU will take the lead among donors), livestock (where the EU
has expressed an strong interest), macroeconomic management (IMF), or power generation and distribution
investments (bilaterals and private financing). As Turkey's macroeconomic and structural reforms are advanced, its
access to extemal private financing (including direct foreign investment) is expected to improve. As this occurs, the
Bank Group will evaluate implications for the IFC program and Bank financing related to infrastructure.

62. 
Bank teams work closely with the IMF on the reform program. With the addition of
Turkey to the EU accession list, the EU is set to become an increasingly important partner for the
country. The European Commission (EC) has launched a process of consultation with the
Turkish authorities; during the second half of 2000, an accession partnership document will be
drawn up and the EC will prepare its annual "regular report" by which it assesses all candidate
countries' compliance with the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership. The EC has also
expressed interest in close collaboration with the Bank, especially as regards its adjustment
lending, so as to ensure that conditionalities are consistent with Turkey's acquis communautaire
compliance requirements. The EC has approved the first of a series of parallel financing
operations of the Bank's adjustment lending program under the existing Mediterranean
Development Assistance program structural adjustment grant facility, although the amounts
involved are limited (Euro 300-350 million in total). The Bank already enjoys good working
relations with the EIB, the Japan Bank for International Cooperation, and the Islamic
Development Bank, strengthened through our close joint work after the 1999 earthquakes.

31 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FYOJ-03

Table 6: CAS Indicative Lending Program (US$ million)*
Base Case

High Case 

FSAL I 
Privatization Social Support 
Ag. Reform and Investment (APL 1) 
Basic Education (APL 11) 

778 Basic Education (APL II) 
250
400
300
1728 

Local Initiatives and Social Assistance 112 Local Initiatives and Social Assistance 
State Banks Restructuring 
500 Natural and Cultural Heritage 
PSAL 
820 Village/Township Services 
Natural and Cultural Heritage 
50 Secondary Education 
Village/Township Services 
100
Secondary Education 
175
1757 

Municipal (APL I) 
FSAL II 
Energy 
Seismic Risk Mitigation 
Health 
Micro Watershed 

300 Municipal Services 
800 Seismic Risk Mitigation 
200 Health 
80 Micro Watershed 
100
35
1515 
5000 

300

300

112
50
100
175

437

48
80
100
35

263
1000

Year 

FYOI 

Sub-total 

FY02 

Sub-total 

FY03 

Sub-total 
Total 

* plus US$500 million for emergency lending.

Japan has also been a strong supporter of Turkey, following the earthquakes and in the
63. 
dialogue about financial sector reform. The UN maintains an active multi-agency presence in
Turkey, with notable programs in child health care, rural education, and strengthening urban civil
society organizations, among others. The Bank is also increasing its work with NGOs, and will
assist in the establishment of an NGO Resource Center, as well as continuing to bring informed
and skilled NGOs into project design and implementation (the latter is already particularly strong
in human and social development, and natural resource management).

VI. LENDING SCENARIOS

64. 
Bank lending in FY00 to support the structural reforms through the Economic Reform
Loan (ERL) was strongly linked to upfront actions. This linkage will continue in FYOI-FY03
and is well recognized by the Government. Bank operations are carefully followed by the
markets as a signal of the strength of the Government's structural program. The proposed CAS
incorporates high and base-case lending programs corresponding to the sustained and truncated
reform scenarios (SRS and TRS) respectively. The key macro-economic, structural and social
triggers based on actions that would be needed to meet the assumptions under the SRS are

32 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FYO1-03

outlined in Box 9-all of these triggers must be met to keep the program in the high case. Turkey
is currently in the high case. Remaining in the high case will require that the Government
sustain implementation of the ERL supported program, deliver on its commitments under the
FSAL program, and maintain a strong macroeconomic framework conducive to disinflation and
sustained growth. The key actions agreed under the ERL and FSAL I, which are expected in
2001, are outlined in Annex 11.

Box 9: Triggers for the High Case

The core policies underpinning the Sustained Reform Scenario (SRS) and the triggers for maintaining the high case
are:

* Sustained fiscal adjustment yielding a primary surplus of at least 3 percent of GNP; and
* Sustained tight incomes policies and appropriate exchange rate policies to reduce inflation and maintain
competitiveness over the medium term satisfactory to the Bank; and
* External financing plan based on adequate burden sharing satisfactory to the Bank, and a sustainable current
account deficit not to exceed 4 percent of GNP beyond 2000; and*
* Rigorous implementation of structural reform programs in social security and agriculture sector as outlined in
the Letter of Development Policy for the ERL; and
* Sustained and transparent privatization effort in line with the Govemment's announced targets for 2000-02; and
establishment of credible legal and regulatory frameworks to promote private investment in the energy and
telecommunications sectors as outlined in the Letter of Development Policy for the ERL; and
* Effective functioning of the banking supervisory authority, privatization and commercialization of three state
banks and commercialization of Ziraat Bank by end 2003, and further strengthening of the prudential system
and bank resolution mechanisms, as well as full implementation of banking reforms outlined in the Letter of
Development Policy of FSAL I; and
Introduction of reforms in public sector management and public accountabililty, and maintenance of adequate
expenditure allocations for health and education.

* 

* to be reviewed if there are extraordinary external shocks.

65. 
In 2001, after completion of the ERL and FSAL I, subsequent adjustment lending would
take a more programmatic approach to reach agreements on a package of reforms under the
proposed PSAL and FSAL II. The major focus under the PSAL would be twofold: a) to
complete reform started under ERL; and b) to undertake reforms of public management and
improve accountability. Under FSAL II, completion of privatization of state banks, reform of
deposit insurance, and strengthening the non-bank financial system would be the principal focus.
The high case also requires that the IMF Stand-By remain on track. The high-case lending
program would be for a total of US$5.0 billion, of which US$2.4 billion would be in adjustment
lending and US$2.6 billion in investment lending to support reform implementation, institution-
building and other long-term goals. The base-case lending program would total US$1.0 billion8 .
for investment projects linked to the social services and environmental management thrusts of
the CAS. The Bank expects to continue support to education and other aspects of the human and
sustainable development agendas as long as institutional conditions and sectoral policies allow
such projects to have a strong positive effect on beneficiary populations. Indicative high and

8 If the reform slows down after the FSAL has been approved by the Board, Bank exposure would be between the high and base
case lending scenarios, as the first tranche of the FSAL I would have been disbursed.

33 

Turkey: Country Assistance Strategy FYOJ-03

base case lending programs are presented in Table 6. 
In the event of a large scale natural
disaster, if needed, the Bank would be ready to step in with additional financing of up to US$500
million.

VII. MANAGING THE RISKS AND IBRD EXPOSURE

Managing the Risks

66. 
The Government of Turkey is taking action to manage the diverse risks inherent in its
ambitious reform program, and the CAS program supports important risk-mitigating measures.
The main risk factors in Turkey include political pressures, economic considerations,
administrative constraints, and the possibility of another large natural disaster. First and
foremost are the political risks. The primary political risk is that the coalition could break apart.
While this risk cannot be entirely discounted, the coalition has demonstrated its resilience by
meeting tough challenges over the past 18 months, including the election of President Sezer last
in May 2000. A second type of political risk is the possibility of a social backlash from tough
reform measures. To address this, the Government is ensuring adequate funding of existing
safety net measures, including severance payments and other programs for workers affected by
privatization, and is moving to introduce additional social programs including unemployment
insurance and direct income support for farmers. The proposed Privatization Social Support
Project and Agricultural Reform and Investment Program support those programs. The
continued success of the program is in itself an insurance against political instability, because
any coalition partner threatening to bring down the Government would be blamed for the
resulting economic disruptions. It should be noted that Turkey's recorded unemployment rate
has declined by I percentage points since the start of the program.

67. 
The Government's reform program takes into account the key economic risks confronting
Turkey. The program itself is a direct response to the risks posed by the very large
macroeconomic imbalances that had accumulated over a decade of inaction and partial reforms.
The Government's response has been appropriately bold, but should the program fail, the
downside scenario would be worse than the pre-reform starting point, in part because the loss of
credibility would have enduring effects. Given the central role of fiscal policy in determining the
success of exchange rate based disinflation, the Government placed great emphasis on up-front
fiscal measures in designing the program. However, the balance of economic risk has shifted in
recent months from the fiscal adjustment to the external accounts. Through the first nine months
of 2000, the current account deficit has exceeded projections due mainly to stronger than
expected private-sector led import demand resulting from the economic recovery and higher oil
prices, together with the negative impact on export receipts of the depreciation of the Euro vs.
the US dollar. Exchange rate appreciation resulting from higher-than-expected inflation under
the crawling peg (over 10 percent in CPI terms since the beginning of the year) has also played a
role. The Government has taken additional measures to dampen demand. These measures will
be complemented by the additional fiscal tightening under the 2001 budget in an effort to bring
inflation down to targeted levels. The financial market turbulence which appeared in late
November has posed a further challenge to macroeconomic policymakers. In response to the
financial market pressures, the Government provided temporary liquidity injections and
accelerated announcement of its new fiscal package and other policies underlying the 2001

34 

Turkey. Country Assistance Strategy FY01-03

macroeconomic framework. Should the envisaged policies prove insufficient, the Government is
committed to take further steps to ensure the viability of its macroeconomic framework. A
continuing risk for Turkey as a major emerging market with substantial external borrowing needs
is its vulnerability to contagion from adverse developments in international financial markets.
The Government has demonstrated its ability to respond to such shocks with appropriate fiscal
and monetary policies. As the reform progresses, Turkey's external vulnerability will be reduced
and the risk of contagion will gradually decline. If market sentiment were to turn against Turkey
while commitment to reform remained strong, the Bank, although remaining within the CAS
high case envelope, would review the high-case program in close concert with the IMF to reflect
the changed macroeconomic circumstances.

68. Managing the vulnerabilities of the financial system is an integral part of Turkey's
reform. A legacy of weaknesses in the financial sector, which will be exposed further during the
macroeconomic stabilization, is a source of concern. These risks emanate from a small segment
of the banking system. Turkey's economic managers are well aware that these risks would
spread if not handled well. Thus, management of these vulnerabilities is a core element of
reform, in which respect there have been significant accomplishments, as the FSAL documents
presented with this CAS explain. Turkey moved swiftly to take over five problem banks in
December 1999 and two more in October 2000. 
It has consolidated and strengthened
supervision under the BRSA. It is gradually moving the system toward international standards
of auditing, loan-loss provisions and capital adequacy. Also, the Government is aware of the
risks involved in the current foreign exchange exposures in the banking systems, and is
strengthening the supervision and enforcement to ensure that these exposures are not excessive
and any forward contracts used by the banks to hedge such risks are legitimate and creditworthy
contractual arrangements. Action by the BRSA to strengthen enforcement of the new prudential
regulations for banks will help reduce financial sector vulnerability and ease demand pressure by
slowing credit expansion. This will also act as a safeguard against sudden reversals in short-term
capital flows. The Government has also shown that it is ready to provide short-term liquidity if
needed. Turkey is also beginning to tackle the issue of 100 percent deposit insurance, a root
cause of poor incentives encouraging risky behavior. Support by the Bank and IMF for credible
implementation of reforms will be critical to reducing the vulnerabilities of the financial system.

69. 
Learning from the past, the Government has explicitly recognized the need for
institutional change as part of its overall reform program. Reforms on the scale envisaged for
Turkey depend on strong and dynamic institutions in order to be effective and sustainable. Weak
and bureaucratic institutions have at times impeded past reform efforts, and slowed
implementation of investment programs. As part of a broader plan to alleviate the risk that
administrative weaknesses could derail reform implementation, the Government has requested
the Bank to prepare a package of investment loans in concert with the adjustment lending
program to support implementation of key reform measures. Actions to improve public
expenditure management, promote transparency and fight corruption are a second dimension of
this plan where the Government has asked the Bank to provide support under the new CAS,
starting with the Public Expenditure and Institutional Review and following up with the PSAL.

35 

Turkev: Country Assistance Strategy FYOI-03

70. 
The Government is also keenly aware that Turkey continues to face the risk of a large
natural disaster, which could bring about extensive human loss and disrupt the economic
recovery. To mitigate this risk, the Government is strengthening Turkey's emergency response
capabilities and compulsory natural disaster insurance was introduced in September 2000. The
Government is looking to the Bank to continue to support these efforts under the new CAS
through supervision of the ongoing emergency projects and additional support to help strengthen
urban disaster management capabilities. It is our intention to provide additional financial support
through reallocations and potential new lending, if needed following a major natural disaster, as
well as to act as a catalyst for emergency support from the broader international community in
the event we are asked to do so by the Government.

IBRD Exposure

71. 
If Turkey undertakes the macroeconomic
and structural reforms envisaged under the high 
case, its overall creditworthiness should improve.
This should 
improve Turkey's 
to access 
international capital markets and 
lower 
its 
borrowing costs. Bank exposure to Turkey 
declined steadily during the 1990s (Figure 5). As 
of October 2000, total IBRD debt outstanding and 

disbursed was $3.2 billion, equivalent to 2.7 

percent of the total IBRD portfolio. Under the o 

Figure 5: IBRD Net Flows and Debt

10000 

sooo _ _ 

7000

60 

5000 

low .

_ 

=_ 

-

_ 

1

__ 

_

1600

1100

- 60

-900

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

high case 

lending program, IBRD debt 

outstanding and disbursed would increase to $6.6 
billion or around 6 percent of the total IBRD
portfolio (Table 7). Despite this rapid projected increase IBRD exposure, IBRD debt service as a
share of exports of goods and non-factor services and as a share of total public debt service are
projected to remain within IBRD's prudential guidelines. Preferred creditor debt service as a
share of total public debt service is also projected to remain within IBRD's guidelines.

|E-ODOD (1 -- FkEl

Table 7: Summary of Key Exposure Indicators in the High Case

IBRD DOD (million US$) 
Share of IBRD Portfolio 
IBRD Debt Service/ XGNFS 
IBRD Debt Service/ Total Public Debt Service 
Preferred Creditor DS/Total Public Debt Service 
Memo Items, US$ millions
IBRD Interest payments 
IBRD principal repayments 
Source: Staff Estimates

|Actual |Projected

1999 
2,902 
2.4 
2.1 
7.7 
14.2 

345.0 
616.0 

2000 
3,158 
2.6 
1.6 
4.8 
10.5 

245.8 
540.0 

2001 
4,253 
3.5 
1.4 
3.2 
8.9 

296.7 
465.0 

2002 
5,437 
4.6 
1.4 
3.8 
6.8 

373.1 
470.0 

2003
6,578
5.9
1.7
4.7
10.8

460.6
592.2

36 

Turkev. Countrv Assistance Strategy FYO0-03

VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

72. 
Turkey is at a major turning point. It has a committed Government, a dynamic private
sector and a young population striving to meet the challenges and grab the opportunities of
globalization. It is trying to make a break from an inflationary past, restoring stable growth and
reduce inequalities and social and economic vulnerabilities. International support, including
from the World Bank Group is vital to make this journey successful. Turkey's success in this
effort will contribute to stability and prosperity in the region. It is the time and the opportunity
for the Bank Group to step up to the challenge.

James D. Wolfensohn

By:
Sven Sandstrom 

Washington DC.
November 28, 2000

Peter Woicke

TURKEY: Private Sector Strategy

Introduction

1. 
Sustained and stable economic growth is essential for reducing economic vulnerability in Turkey;
the private sector is crucial in ensuring this growth. This Private Sector Strategy (PSS) is a central
element in the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the World Bank Group, since the country's
development strategy hinges on creating enabling conditions for the private sector to reach its growth
potential, create employment, and help the country to take advantage of its unique location at the
geographic, economic, political and cultural confluence of Europe, Asia and the Middle East, and of its
future accession into the European Union.

2. 
The PSS is organized in three sections: (i) a description of the private sector and an overview of the
current business environment in Turkey; (ii) a summary of the Government strategy to promote the
private sector; and (iii) an outline of the Bank Group's proposed support to Turkey's private sector
development, in the context of the efforts of the Government, the private sector, and other agencies.

Turkey's Private Sector

3. 
The potential for Turkey's private sector stems in large part from three factors: (i) the strategic
location, between the former Soviet Union, the Balkans, Central Asia and the Middle East; (ii) a well
developed entrepreneurial and mercantile culture (characterized by risk taking, motivation and
dedication); and (iii) a large domestic market, well endowed with human resources. These factors have
been enhanced by the opening of the economy-including a customs agreement with the EU.
Nevertheless, Turkey's private sector has not reached its potential, and economic performance has
remained below that of the fastest growing developing countries. Factors that have inhibited the sector's
growth until recently have included: (i) macroeconomic volatility; (ii) large fiscal deficits leading to high
public sector borrowing requirements and high real interest rates; (iii) a regulatory environment that was
not conducive to private investments, particularly in infrastructure and energy; (iv) weaknesses in the
financial sector; and (iv) weaknesses in corporate governance. Improvements are underway in each of
these areas, heralding new prospects for private sector development.

4. 
The combination of uncertainties created by an unstable macro-economic environment and the
limited availability of reasonably priced term credit financing to the private sector resulted in relatively
low private investment rates in productive sectors over the 1990s. Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF)
as a percent of GDP dropped sharply in the early 1980s and has since recovered very slowly. Public
investment has steadily declined, and while overall private investments have accounted for about 20
percent of GDP since the mid-1990s', private investment outside of the housing sector has stagnated at
only 10-12 percent of GDP. In particular, despite Turkey's export boom, private sector investment in
manufacturing has remained very low compared to other upper middle income countries. While housing
investments averaged 40 percent of total private sector investments between 1996-99, investments in
industrial production (manufacturing and mining) averaged only 21 percent (Table 1). Private sector
investments in infrastructure and energy have been well below their potential, as state ownership of
infrastructure has prevented private investments in a number of critical infrastructure services and a
regulatory framework conducive to private investments in these areas was lacking. Low investment rates
in productive activities considerably slowed down economic growth over the past two decades.

I Between 1996 and 1999. Turkey's private sector accounted for about 74 percent of industrial production, 76 percent of total
gross fixed investment, and 82 percent of manufacturing employment.

Pake 2 

Annex Al: Private Sector Strategv

Therefore, raising investment rates in the productive sectors is essential for the generation of faster
growth and employment opportunities over the medium term.

Table 1: Relative Importance and Sectoral Distibution of Puivate Sector lnvestnents

Pnvate Investment/Gross Domestic Fixed Investment 

Pnvate Sectoral Investmentliotal Pnvate Investment

Agriculture 
Mining 
Manufacturing 
Energy 
Transport & Communications 
Tourism 
Housing 
Education 
Health 
Other services 

Total 

64% 
74% 
96% 
35% 
66% 
86% 
99% 
31% 
61% 
44% 

79% 

56% 
70% 
97% 
52% 
68% 
93% 
99% 
23% 
66% 
41% 

78% 

64% 
73% 
96% 
36% 
64% 
96% 
99% 
19% 
70% 
39% 

75% 

53% 
69% 
94% 
33% 
55% 
96% 
97% 
25% 
67% 
36% 

72%

5% 
1% 
26% 
2% 
17% 
2% 
40% 
1% 
2% 
4% 

4% 
1% 
23% 
4% 
22% 
3% 
36% 
1% 
3% 
4% 

5% 
1% 
22% 
3% 
20% 
4% 
37% 
1% 
4% 
4% 

4%
1%
20%
2%
17%
5%
42%
2%
3%
4%

5. 
Low foreign direct investment was a particular disappointment in the 1990s (see Table 2, below).
Foreign direct investment (FDI) flows of less than US$1 billion per year (less than 0.5 percent of GDP)
have been modest by Asian or Latin American standards. The prospects of membership and better access
to EU markets is an additional attraction for investors, and has already improved Turkey's risk profile in
financial markets. Increasing FDI will be an important ingredient to help modernize the productive
sectors to compete with EU countries, and obtain sufficient private financing in energy and infrastructure
to keep pace with the country's needs and meet the EU infrastructure standards in the coming years.

Table 2: Private Sector Investments, Foreign Direct Investments and Credit to Private Sector

rkey 
hailand 
alaysi3 

| 
| 
| 

Ne.ico 
Br%ti| 
Upper Middi iniome Contnes 
High incone Conn(res 
source WODI 2000

~~ ~ 
~~ ~ 
~~ ~ 

26 
21 
23 
21 

~~ 
~~ 
~~ 

78 
68 
73 
82 
89 
83 
79 

~ 
~~25 
~~35 
~~23 

2 
7 
1 2 
1 2 
11 
11 
4 

| 
| 
| 

0.4 
2A4 
52 
3.1 
2 4 
1 3 
1.1 

| 
| 
| 

1 

2
3
16
15
31
39
125

1 

6. 
As discussed in the main CAS text, most of the 1 990s was characterized by high real interest rates
and the virtual absence of long term credit for the private sector. As a result, the private sector had to
shorten its planning horizon. and rely heavily on self-financing for investments. Financial intermediation
is small compared with the size of economy. There is an unusually high degree of self-financing of
business investment, and few homes are mortgage financed. Credit to the private sector, as a share of
GDP is significantly lower in Turkey than in comparable countries (Table 2).

7. 
Economic agents adapted to high real interest rates and limited availability of credit financing by
shortening the duration of their financial contracts, while banks focused on government securities, which
provided a strong source of income. With the largest private banks belonging to powerful family
conglomerates, private bank lending has typically been provided mainly to customers with known credit
credentials. The small and medium scale enterprise sector (SME) has been particularly starved of credit.
SMEs are often handicapped by lack of collateral and a low level of financial literacy, making financial
institutions reluctant to lend to them. In addition, most banks use the same lending technologies for

Pa,e 3 

Annex Al: Private Sector Strate0v

SMEs as they do for large corporations. This is costly, making the risk-weighted return on SME lending
low. As a result, financial intermediaries' outreach to SMEs is poor, and highly selective.

8. 
Turkey's banking and finance sector has grown rapidly over the last two decades, but financial
deepening has been held back by high inflation. 
State-owned banks represent about 40 percent of
banking system assets and deposits. Most private financial institutions are part of financial
conglomerates, with the main group commercial banks at the center of such conglomerates, and other
bank and non-bank financial institutions formed and managed as subsidiaries. Issues related to regulation
and supervision, financial reporting and comprehensive risk management gain more relevance because of
this group structure. As Turkey's public sector borrowing needs decline, restructuring in the private
banking sector will become inevitable. The banking sector is likely to see a major expansion into a range
of financial services, and consolidation. Entry of reputable foreign banks will also push this process
further. Yet, lessons of experience from other countries show that the banking sector will continue to be
reluctant to offer long-term financing throughout the reform implementation phase. The emphasis is
expected to be on consolidation and strengthening of balance sheets, rather than credit expansion. In
addition, although the situation has begun to improve, it is likely to be a while before Turkish banks will
be able to access funding of significantly longer maturities. As a result, during the next two years of
reform implementation, while it is likely that blue-chip Turkish companies may have better access to
long- term financing, the rest of corporate sector and smaller firms will continue to lack access to long-
term debt, even from the domestic market.

9. 
Non-bank financial services, which are critical for improving access of smaller firms to domestic
financing in many countries, do not play a significant role in intermediating capital in Turkey. Although
there are a limited number of sizeable leasing and factoring companies, the capital market lacks depth and
much needs to be done to develop the corporate bond market, equity, and housing finance. A major
development priority is institutional investors such as pension and mutual funds. The insurance industry
is small and still in the process of development. Developing non-bank financial services is critical for
improving access to domestic financing in Turkey, as they are expected to play an increasing role in
improving domestic savings and providing long-term funds for smaller firms.

10. Turkey has a fairly open economy with the total of exports and imports exceeding 50 per cent of
GDP. In order to take advantage of trade opportunities created by the custom union with the EU and
respond effectively to greater competition in the domestic market, Turkish industry would need to
upgrade from low-quality, labor-intensive products, which have limited growth prospects, towards the
production of higher value-added goods and services, from low-skill goods to technology and skill
intensive products at international standards.

11. Agribusiness is one of the strongest sectors in Turkey and the major exporter. It contributes around
15 per cent to GDP and accounts for around 42 per cent of all employment. The development of the
sector has taken place in a context of high levels of protection and distortionary policies, with state-owned
enterprises handling many marketing and processing functions, but the reform strategy aims to change
this. The country has a dynamic market for processed foods with its large and young population. Rising
income levels, urbanization, the influence of western life styles through travel, tourism and advertising
are all causing radical change in the attitudes and consumption patterns of the population. Rapid
urbanization and the growing number of working women are two social factors that are driving the
increased demand for processed foods. Modernization of the food-processing sector is also accelerated
by the rapid development of modem retailing formats. The share of hypermarkets in the overall retail
market is still low, estimated at around 4 per cent, but rapidly growing since sales through super-and
hypermarkets are increasing at an annual growth rate of 47 per cent. International retailers established in
Turkey have been a driving force in the sector, demanding higher, EU-level quality standards from
Turkish food manufacturers, which has led to investments and quality improvements. Local investors

Page 4 

AnnexAl: PrivateSectorStrate_a

established most of the industry, but foreign investment is increasing. In 1998, FDI in the food and
beverage industries amounted to 8 per cent of all FDI in the country.

Government Strateev for Private Sector Development

12. The Government recognizes that a stronger private sector will be key to restoring and maintaining
economic growth and generating employment in Turkey. The Government's strategy to support private
sector led growth is based on four pillars: (i) macro-economic stabilization, (ii) deregulation and
privatization; (iii) improved efficiency and assured integrity of the financial sector and; (iv) improved
delivery of social services 
to help strengthen the human resource base. The Government's reform
strategy and the proposed IBRD approach to supporting it are given in some detail in the main CAS text.
Here, particular emphasis is given to the opportunities created for private investment, and greater detail is
provided on the IFC, MIGA and FIAS programs.

13. Energy. Demand for energy has grown at about 9 percent per year for the last ten years and is
expected to grow at only slightly lower rates over the next decade (see Table 3 for comparison of energy
supply with other countries). Private investments in energy sectors will be crucial to help supply
adequate amounts of gas and electricity at affordable prices. The Government has therefore decided to
restructure and deregulate the energy sector. The restructuring program centers on the introduction of a
competitive regulated market model for electricity and gas to replace the current centralized model, which
is dependent on government guarantees to privately owned plants. The reform will establish a transparent
legal framework for regulated competition in line with EU norms. Under the new regulated market
model, private suppliers will be able to sell directly to private distributors without government
intermediaries. The competitive regulated markets model will provide investors with adequate legal and
regulatory safeguards to ensure that their investments will earn a competitive rate of return without
government take-or-pay guarantees. Based on experience elsewhere (most notably Latin America, where
the competitive regulated markets model has been successfully introduced), private investors can be
expected to make the necessary investments to adequately meet the growing demand for electricity once
the new system is fully in place.

Table 3: Turkey's Infrastructure Compared to Other Countries

Country 

Turkey 
Brazil 
Mexico 
Middle Income countries 

Source: SIMA and WDR.

Income 
(per capita, 
Atlas) 

3,160 
4,630 
3,840 
2,990 

Electric Power 
Telephone 
Population
(kwh/person) Mainlines (per with access to
1 000 persons 
safe water
(% of total)

1,275 
1,743 
1,459 
1,928 

254 
121 
104 
145 

92
92
87
na

14. 
Information and Communication Technologies. Turkey has made significant progress in
liberalizing the telecommunications sector, partly driven by the Government's need to generate cash for
the budget. After awarding two cellular licenses to private operators in the early nineties, the Parliament
passed legislation to reform the sector in January 2000, entailing: (i) the conversion of state-owned fixed-
wireline operator, Turk Telekom, into a joint stock company, paving the way for its eventual
privatization; (ii) the establishment of an independent regulatory body; and (iii) the liberalization of all
value-added services. The Government has established the telecommunications regulatory agency. New

Paie 5 

AnnexAl: PrivateSectorStrategy

private entry is envisaged with the issuance of mobile licenses and the opening of the capital of Turk
Telecom. Although in the early stages compared to many other OECD countries, Turkey has been at the
forefront in the region in introducing information technologies, the Internet and e-commerce to the
economy. The growth of Internet access as well as the integration of the Internet into the economy are
crucial to bridge the digital gap to the industrialized countries and important for economic growth.

15. Physical Infrastructure. 
Turkey faces two key problems in ensuring adequate physical
infrastructure to support private sector development and reduce poverty: (i) high cost logistics systems
constraining the industrial sector; and (ii) rapidly growing demands on urban utilities. Inefficient gateway
ports, cumbersome procedures and limited inland transport options limit cargo handling technologies
available to Turkish exporters and importers. High logistics costs act like export or import taxes on
economic activities, reducing output and job creation in industrial and commercial sectors. Turkey needs
to support privatization and efficiency improvements in the transport sector. In particular, it will need to
commercialize the provision of transport infrastructure and services and to introduce accountability and
transparency. The prospects of Turkey's joining the EU raises transport sector reforms to the forefront, as
EU requirements demand that the provision and financing of social services be clearly separated from that
of commercial services. This requirement will have a particular impact on the operation and financing of
Turkey's main ports and the railways systems. The two are currently operated by the same agency, with
revenues from ports operation cross-subsidizing the loss making railways system, and the profitable
freight sector subsidizing passenger transportation. During the 1 990s Turkey's urban population
expanded by about 15 million people, straining cities' capacities to provide basic services like water and
sanitation and expanding demands for environmentally friendly urban services like gas distribution and
mass transit. 
Increased public and private investments in physical infrastructure and improved
management of the infrastructure base are thus crucial to help support economic growth. The
Government is taking the necessary steps to allow for increased private sector involvement in the
provision, operation and maintenance of physical infrastructure.
16. Privatization Program. Accelerated implementation of the Government's privatization program is
a top priority for strengthening the private sector and generating resources for the budget. The 2000
privatization program has three pillars: telecommunications, energy, and the program of the Privatization
Administration (PA). The Government is also planning to privatize the state banks. Telecommunications
privatization involves opening the capital of Turk Telekom and selling two additional GSM wireless
licenses to private investors. Electricity sector privatization will proceed in two phases. The first phase
in 2000 focuses on implementation of the transfer of operating rights program. For thermal generation
and distribution companies remaining under state management, the Government will launch a new
approach starting in 2001 based on full privatization of the underlying assets. The third pillar is the
enterprise privatization program managed by the PA. The PA's program includes privatization of 28
large enterprises including many of Turkey's biggest public companies such as petroleum refineries,
petroleum retail distribution network, petrochemicals, steel plants and the Turkish national airlines. A
number of smaller but still important companies in the insurance and textile sectors are also slated for
privatization.
In the context of broad-based agriculture sector reforms aimed at spurring agricultural growth,
17. 
raising rural incomes and reducing the sector's burden on the budget, the Government is also initiating
privatization of state enterprises engaged in agro-processing. State owned purchasing agents and agro-
processors will be restructured and privatized and those not viable will be liquidated. Privatization of
state controlled agricultural enterprises and cooperative unions is occurring in parallel to the phasing out
of price supports and input and credit subsidies to the agricultural sector, which will be replaced with a
system of direct income supports to farmers.

Page 6 

AnnexAl: Private SectorSrateRv

18. 
Social Service Delivery. The quality of and access to social services have a direct impact on the
labor force, which in turn is a crucial input to sustainable private sector led growth. Efforts to improve
the population's educational standards will raise the educational qualifications of the labor force;
improved provision of health services will lower morbidity in the labor force; and the recently initiated
reforms of the social security system will support greater labor market flexibility. While provision of
basic social services will remain a key responsibility of the public sector, the private sector is expected to
get increasingly involved on several fronts, including growing investments in health care; increased
engagement in the provision of job-specific vocational training and higher education; and, as the reforms
of the social protection system proceed, in the establishment of private pension funds.

Bank GrouD Strateev

19. The World Bank Group has provided considerable support to Turkey. IBRD has a current portfolio
of active projects for which loan commitments total over US$3.8 billion. IFC's Turkey portfolio is
presently the fourth largest in terms of exposure, accounting for about 5.4 percent of the total IFC
portfolio (see Box I below). With a gross exposure of US$225 million, Turkey is the fourth largest
country in MIGA's portfolio. Thus, the role of the World Bank Group has been especially important, as a
leading multilateral source of long-term finance for the Government and the private sector.
20. The World Bank Group's strategy in support of private sector led growth in Turkey in FY01-03
will focus on supporting the Government's program to spur private sector development. IBRD will
support the Government's economic reform program through adjustment lending and lending for
investment projects in support of reforms in key areas, as detailed in the main CAS text. IFC will build
on its established multi-prong strategy focussing on projects and activities with tangible benefits of
growth and reform and on "frontier" projects which could also be replicated in the Balkans, Caucasus and
Central Asia regions. MIGA will broaden its portfolio to include infrastructure investments in addition to
the existing financial sector guarantees and continue its Investment Marketing Services' support to the
Center for Private Sector Development in Istanbul. FIAS is working with the Government on a strategy
and legal framework to attract more Foreign Direct Investments.

21. 
IFC's Comparative Advantage. As a significant source of long-term project finance, IFC has an
important role to play in Turkey. IFC is able to support viable Turkish private enterprises and put
together financing packages often with longer term than private enterprises are otherwise able to obtain.
IFC also has growing experience in particularly difficult sectors, where fewer other institutions have
developed experience. Notable examples would include housing finance, securitization, private pension
funds, private health care and education, SME and micro-finance.. It's global experience and particularly
its 35 years of experience in Turkey, enables IFC to judge the international competitiveness of Turkish
enterprises in changing times. IFC prestige and worldwide credibility as a careful professional investor
acts as a strong catalyst for attracting other long-term sources in Turkey. New lenders and investors
often follow where IFC has led, coming aboard with IFC. In addition, IFC's catalytic role will be
strengthening through a strategic focus on advisory activities, aimed expressly at improving the enabling
environment and increasing long-term investment flows. IFC participation in a project means that the
project is beneficial to the country, that it creates employment, improves the physical environment, and
helps develop markets.

Page 7 

Annex Al: Private Sector Stratefy

Box 1: IFC Investments and Fund Mobilization

Turkey is an important country for IFC, the fourth largest in terms of exposure after Argentina, Brazil and Mexico,
accounting for 5.4 percent of the total IFC portfolio. The total own-account held portfolio in Turkey is US$693
million. In addition, IFC has mobilized US$479 million in B loans, and has invested over US$150 million with
Turkish companies outside of Turkey. IFC has been the only significant source of long-term project finance in
Turkey, particularly for the medium sized, "second tier" companies, since the international commercial banks have
been focused primarily on top tier companies. Following FY98-00 CAS strategic priorities, IFC has invested in
financial sector development, export-oriented companies, credit lines and technical assistance to SMEs, and Turkish
investments abroad. IFC has been pursuing a conscious strategy of scaling down its projects with larger business
groups.

Financing. Approvals for IFC's own account, which averaged about US$170.0 million per year over the last few
years, picked up to US$252.0 million in FY98 and were US$181 million for FY00. Given the shift in IFC's
development strategy in Turkey to catalyze the private sector amidst the ongoing economic reform, its annual
investment program is not expected to increase during this CAS period, but the composition of investment program
would be different. IFC will focus on activities that demonstrate tangible benefits of growth and reform with
emphasis on sector development work in the financial sector, SMEs, information technology, infrastructure and
IFC expects its gross investments in
social sectors, and will actively promote Turkish outward investments. 
Turkey, including syndication with other banks, to total approximately US$800 million to US$1 billion over the
next three years. Given the market-driven nature of IFC's investments, overall volumes are difficult to forecast
accurately. The indications provided here are subject to significant changes, particularly if the reform program were
not implemented as it is presently anticipated.

Advisory Program. The Turkish market for stand-alone advisory services is already very competitive and adequately
served by a host of international investment banks and consulting groups. IFC's advisory program will focus mainly
on financial sector, infrastructure privatization, micro-finance and SMEs, and improving business environment.

IFC is collaborating with the Bank on private sector inputs for the structural reform program. Bank
22. 
recommended 
improvements in the legal and regulatory framework for the telecommunications, energy
and financial sectors are expected 
to increase opportunities 
for IFC investment 
in these areas. As
appropriate, IFC and MIGA could play a catalytic role in the privatization of one of the state banks. The
complementary focus of the Bank, IFC and MIGA in infrastructure and financial markets will enhance the
quality of the economic reform being supported by the Bank Group, and will contribute to strengthening
the partnership between Turkey and the World Bank Group.

Box 2: IFC's Strategic Directions in Turkey

While it takes time to restore confidence in the market and create positive long-term expectation among economic
players, restoring growth is critical to maintaining support for reform. Turkey's dynamic private sector will play a
key role in the restoration of growth and contribute more broadly to the success of the ongoing economic reform.
IFC will have an important role to play during the reform implementation stage, improving access to investment
financing for companies that will create growth and employment, and supporting activities which demonstrate
tangible benefits to reform. IFC will attract long-term foreign capital, both equity capital by strategic investors and
term debt. IFC's work will cut across several CAS themes and it will accompany its investment with targeted
provision of technical assistance. With a view to promoting Turkey as a technological hub for the region, IFC will
assist Turkish companies to increase their technological competitiveness and invest in CIS and the Balkans. In
financial markets, IFC will focus on developing domestic long-term contractual savings institutions. By considering
the geographic location of projects, assisting SMEs and establishing microfinance institutions particularly in
disadvantaged regions, IFC will support poverty reduction and equitable growth. IFC's investments in infrastructure
will improve Turkey's prospects for sustained growth and meeting EU infrastructure standards.

Page 8 

Annex Al: Private Sector StrateL

23. The World Bank Group will help Turkey to attract more FDI into the country. FIAS is reviewing
the new draft investment law, which is soon to be discussed in Parliament. Also, FIAS is in discussions
with the Government about conducting an administrative barrier study to review and assess the
administrative procedures that investors need to fulfill in order to establish and operate an enterprise in
Turkey. As the complex bureaucratic machinery is often viewed as a major hurdle for private sector
development in the country, this assistance should be particularly helpful in improving the business
environment in Turkey. IFC is in the process of organizing a conference, expected to take place in 2001,
the main objectives of which will be to promote FDI in Turkey, and to improve the internal business
environment in Turkey. Using its guarantee program, MIGA's support for FDI is expected to increase
particularly in the infrastructure and power sectors. IFC and MIGA will support Turkish outward
investments in the region and promote Turkey as a regional financial and technology hub.

24. 
IFC's representative office is being converted into a regional hub and the Director for Southern
Europe and Central Asia expects to relocate to Istanbul to provide a greater client focus in the region.
This reflects a recognition of Turkey's role as a gateway to the entire region and its growing influence in
the Balkans, the Caucasus and Central Asia.

Financial Sector

25. Given its critical importance to the economic stabilization program, the financial sector will
account for a significant part of the World Bank Group's program in Turkey, focussing on reducing
systemic risks and vulnerabilities, while increasing the sophistication, productivity and competitiveness of
the financial sector to bring it up to global standards. IBRD's planned assistance is explained in the main
CAS text.

26. 
IFC will seek to assist Turkey in this key sector in areas where IFC's comparative advantage is
important. IFC's role in the financial sector in Turkey has traditionally focussed on two areas: (i)
institution-building, through the provision of technical assistance and the development and support of
new financial intermediaries, often the first of their kind in the country; and (ii) through the provision of
term funding for on-lending to support productive investments by SMEs. This role will continue in the
future, even as it evolves. In the near term IFC will continue to play a role in providing term funding to
SMEs through loans or credit enhancements to leasing companies and banks in Turkey. For instance,
IFC will focus increasingly on innovative projects in the financial sector (housing/mortgage finance,
pension reform, development of local currency debt market, etc.), in particular taking advantage of new
opportunities related to the emergence of a lower-inflation economy, and the shift from state-provided to
market-provided services in areas such as housing, pension, and infrastructure, to help Turkey introduce
competition and "best practice" in these areas:

(a) 

There is strong demand for housing mortgage products, which IFC could support, initially through
the development of long-term local currency fund source, and subsequently through the
development of secondary market institutions and products. IFC has considerable experience in
this area through its work in other parts of the world, which can be applied in Turkey.

(b) Reforming the social security system is essential to restore the system's solvency over the medium
term and secure adequate and sustainable level of benefits. IFC is examining the feasibility of
establishing private pension funds, which will go hand in hand with the reform of this sector.

(c) 

In December 1999, IFC pioneered the first transaction in Turkey involving the securitization of
onshore lease assets. IFC is prepared to provide technical assistance to the Government to further
improve the securitization environment in Turkey and has been approached to do other projects of

Page 9 

Annex Al: Private Sector Stratenv

a similar structure, whereby IFC's involvement and structuring helps to boost the credit rating of
the project, lowering funding costs.

27. 
IFC is working with a number of Turkish banks and leasing companies on joint investments in the
region, leveraging the strong technical skills and sophistication of Turkish companies to partner for
establishment of new financial intermediaries in Central Asia and also in Albania, Azerbaijan, Bosnia,
Macedonia, Moldova and Romania. Joint ventures of this kind in the region are expected to increase, as
consolidation and competition within Turkey spurs financial intermediaries to look for opportunities
outside.

Infrastructure

28. The introduction of constitutional amendments allowing international arbitration and improvements
in the legal and regulatory framework for the telecommunications and energy sectors are expected to
increase private sector participation in infrastructures. Thus, infrastructure is expected to account for a
larger share of IFC activity in Turkey during the next CAS period. Also, the complementary focus of the
Bank, IFC and MIGA in infrastructure will enhance the quality of the economic reform being supported
by the World Bank Group. IFC, in conjunction with IBRD and MIGA, will use its advisory, structuring,
and mobilization capacities to: (i) broaden the reform process, through supporting demonstration projects;
(ii) complement the market; (iii) build domestic financing capabilities. IFC will seek to provide a
demonstration effect through financing of pioneering transactions in infrastructure sectors where private
financiers have not yet penetrated deeply, such as water distribution projects and transport facility
projects. Helping demonstration projects to achieve financial closure will remain a core part of the IFC's
work. Projects will be financed also by blending IFC's financing instruments with MIGA guarantees.
One of the most important roles of IFC's private infrastructure promotion efforts will be helping Turkey
to develop the capacity of domestic financial markets, through promoting long-term contractual savings
institutions such as insurance companies and pension funds.

29. Physical Infrastructure. The Bank Group is actively supporting Turkey's efforts to overcome
constraints in physical infrastructure. IBRD is doing so through its ongoing Road Improvement and
Traffic Safety Project and ongoing water supply and sanitation projects, which aim at transferring the
operation and maintenance of water supply systems to the private sector. These efforts will be
complemented by the proposed FY03 Municipal Reform Project. The Turkish Government has listed
several potential urban utility projects for the private sector but few have been realized. However, over
the medium term we expect private investor interest to improve as ongoing private infrastructure projects
in ports and power come to fruition. As investors for the urban utilities emerge, IFC will focus on
choosing model projects that could serve as demonstrations for others. In this respect, IFC is planning to
implement a marketing strategy focused on providing advisory services for the privatization of municipal
infrastructure, especially the water and sanitation sector. IFC's efforts in this regard are aimed to
complement the Bank's support for the urban centers under the above-mentioned Municipal Reform
Project and will be built on the IFC's vast experience in the privatization of the water and sanitation
sectors, especially that of advisory mandates for Manila and Bucharest. IFC's strategy to engage in
municipal infrastructure is in line with on-going Turkish Government efforts to decentralize financing
responsibility for public services to municipalities and a growing demand for private sector participation
in delivery of utilities and municipal services. IFC has financed a private container terminal on the
Marmara Sea and will continue to assist and finance other privately managed gateway and inland
terminals facilitating intermodal movements. In the longer run, when the state railroad may be proposed
for privatization, IFC would be prepared to consider financing for the successor private rail company or
companies, to support investments if that would improve service to customers and further reduce inland
goods movement costs.

Page 10 

AnnexAl: PrivateSectorStrate_e

30. 
Information and Communication Technologies. The World Bank Group strategy will be to
support the Government's efforts to liberalize the telecommunications sector, increase competition, and
foster the integration of Internet in the Turkish economy. IFC's presence would help to mobilize
commercial financing with longer tenors and mitigate commercial and political risk. Turkey is the leader
in the region in expanding its Internet capabilities in preparation for an increasingly information-driven
economy. IFC will seek to provide a demonstration effect through pioneering transactions to help
introduce and integrate the Internet in the Turkish economy with a view to eventually transferring
successful business models to the region. Given Turkey's role as an investment hub for the Southern
Europe and Central Asia Region, IFC is exploring the possibility of supporting Turkey as a technology
hub for the region. In addition, due to the country risk perception by commercial banks, IFC as well as
MIGA might be needed to help finance the huge capital needs of the newly licensed cellular operators.

31. Power. The World Bank Group is assisting the Turkish authorities to restructure the power sector.
The Bank is assisting the Government in reforms for establishing a competitive power market and
regulatory commission (see main CAS text, section IV). This will result in a demonopolized power
sector with growing private sector participation. The.Bank Group is also exploring ways to facilitate
economically attractive investments in renewable energy. IFC strategy is to encourage privatization and
private investment, and to pursue opportunities for competitively bid power projects. IFC's and MIGA's
activities in the power sector will focus on generation and distribution. 
IFC and other financial
institutions are awaiting confirmation that the constitutional amendment and new laws, allowing for
international arbitration of concession contracts, will be applied retroactively to certain projects that have
already signed concession agreements. To the extent the constitutional changes make it easier for
sponsors to finance infrastructure projects, there can be an expected increase in demand for MIGA's
Breach of contract coverage.

Improving Efficiency and Competitiveness of SMEs

32. The WBG's overall strategy for assessing SME rests on four pillars: (i) capacity building; (ii)
information and technology; (iii) access to capital; and (iv) policy and business environment. Whatever
the World Bank Group does directly with SMEs will be small as measured against total needs. Therefore
our program will be high quality and focused, and will provide good demonstration effects to encourage
replication by others, and generate local capacity, for example, access to financial markets and products
that are appropriate and accessible to SMEs. Developing more sustainable and better regulated financial
systems, better information, improvements in collateral law, and better credit assessment systems will
also help. IFC will continue to play a role in providing term financing for SMEs through loans to leasing
companies and banks. IFC will catalyze creation of essential business infrastructure for SMEs, such as
business and technical advisory facilities and internet-based access to international markets. SMEs, and
especially micro-enterprises in less developed regions of Turkey, are a major focus of efforts for IFC and
the WBG. Deficiencies in these areas have been the principal obstacle to private sector-led development
in the region. IFC will endeavor to promote a micro-finance institution to support the development of
commercially sustainable services for micro and small enterprises that have limited access to the formal
financial system. Based on its experience in other countries IFC will implement appropriate models for
delivering financial services to micro businesses and will use specialized financial and information
technology. The joint World Bank/IFC department for SMEs is planning a mapping exercise for small
enterprises in disadvantaged regions of Turkey, the results of which will allow consideration of a new
facility in such areas.

Page 11 

Annex Al: Private Sector Strateev

Privatization
33. 
IBRD is supporting the Government's privatization program under the ongoing ERL and the
proposed PSAL and FSALs, as well as proposed projects for privatization social support and state banks
restructuring. IFC is supporting privatization in banking, communications, energy, infrastructure, and
agribusiness through technical advice and possible provision of financing for key privatized enterprises.

Agribusiness
34. 
IFC will support restructuring of the agribusiness sector through a variety of interventions
including: (i) investments and technical assistance to support food processing enterprises, second tier
companies and particularly SMEs, to improve their operational efficiencies and overall competitiveness
of the food supply chain, with priority in the interior and eastern part of the country; (ii) support for the
privatization of state-owned enterprises involved in farm production, food processing and marketing
activities; and (iii) support for the development of private market infrastructure, particularly in sub-sectors
(e.g. grains) where the State's omnipresence had previously crowded out the emergence of a genuine
market. IFC will focus on projects which require innovative financial structure or which meet specific
country needs. MIGA has been approached by agri-business companies for investments in Turkey and
will make its guarantee program available for sound projects.

Improving Social Service Delivery.

IBRD would assist the Government to upgrade the quality of the labor force through the proposed
35. 
Secondary Education Project. The Economic Reform Loan is actively supporting reforms of the social
security system and the proposed Privatization Social Support Project will help mitigate effects of
enterprise restructuring and privatization. IFC's strategy in the social sectors complements the overall
efforts of the World Bank to improve the quality and scope of the services in these key sectors. Higher
incomes and growing dissatisfaction with the access to and quality of the public health care facilities have
raised the demand for high quality private health services. There are therefore opportunities for IFC to
invest in private health care, including direct medical and ancillary services. IFC and the Bank are also
exploring possibilities of joint activities to support sustainable development of the private health
insurance industry. IFC investments in education will help speed the diffusion of best practice to the
public system. Given the relative paucity of tertiary education in Turkey, IFC is emphasizing
investments at this level, trying to help deliver quality education in a cost efficient manner at this level.
Projects in this area will also act as quality enhancing competition and at the same time free spots at the
public universities.

Supporting Foreign Investment Flows: MIGA and FIAS
36. Turkey has great potential to expand foreign investment flows-both as a significant source of
private investment into neighboring countries and as a large recipient of foreign investment. As a result,
MIGA is very active in Turkey. With a gross exposure of US$225 million Turkey is the fourth largest
country in MIGA's portfolio. To date, the total amount of investments facilitated by MIGA in Turkey is
approximately US$554 million. Turkish companies have also used MIGA's guarantee program for their
investments in Russia and Central Asian countries. With a total gross exposure of US$116 million,
Turkey is number 9 among all investor countries in MIGA's portfolio.

37. During two weeks in FY99, MIGA held a mobile office in Turkey and a follow-up mission in the
fall of the same year. This attracted much news coverage and MIGA met with hundreds of private sector
companies. MIGA also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Turkish Eximbank, which
calls for additional cooperation between the two Agencies. The MOU is expected to lead to future

Page 12 

Annex Al: Private Sector Stratefy

coinsurance and reinsurance for Turkish overseas investments where the two agencies would like to
leverage their respective guarantee portfolios. MIGA also co-signed an MOU for cooperation between
IBRD, IFC and TUSIAD and Istanbul Chamber of Commerce.

38. MIGA continuous to receive strong interest in its program, both from foreign companies for their
investments into Turkey and Turkish companies for their overseas investments, mainly in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia. Due to the high exposure in the general banking sector in Turkey, the Agency will
focus on diversifying its portfolio and will concentrate its efforts on financial sector projects, which have
significant developmental effect. The need for MIGA's services in the general banking is expected to
decline as a result of macroeconomic stabilization and recent strengthening of the banking regulations.

39. 
Instead, other sectors are expected to grow in MIGA's portfolio. Turkey's abundant need for
infrastructure investments, especially in the power sector, is one example. Over the last few years, a great
number of consortia have approached MIGA for over 30 power sector projects for billions of U.S. dollars
in total investments. Recent constitutional amendments (so as to allow international arbitration) mean
that many projects will reach financial closing after years of stalemate. MIGA's increased per-project
limit of up to US$200 million, its ability to syndicate additional insurance in the public and private
markets, as well as providing guarantees against Breach of Contract, position the Agency very well to
facilitate infrastructure investments. A high demand is also expected for investments into the sectors
listed in the privatization program.

40. Turkish investors also show continuous interest in MIGA's guarantee program. The Agency is
currently underwriting Turkish investments in the telecom sector in several ECA-countries. MIGA also
expects to see Turkish demand for investments in the manufacturing and retail service sectors, especially
in Russia, Central Asia and the Balkan countries.

41. MIGA has been an active supporter of the Centre for Private Sector Development in Istanbul. The
Centre is a joint undertaking of the OECD and TICA to support of private sector development expertise
to transition economies in the region. It has been host to workshops related to investment promotion and
information technology, especially in areas where MIGA has been particularly active. Over the past five
years, MIGA has led the Centre's Expert Group on Investment Promotion and provided analytic
guidance in policy discussions related to foreign direct investment. Workshops offered by MIGA have
encompassed broad-based investment attraction strategies, as well as, the mining and tourism sectors.

42. FIAS is assisting the Govemment with the development of a strategy to strengthen foreign direct
investment (FDI) and is collaborating with IFC in the design and development of a FDI initiative. This is
expected to include a FDI conference organized in partnership with the Turkish Government and business
community, including key private sector associations. FIAS has undertaken an initial diagnostic study to
assess the issues and to delineate the objectives for the conference. The conference is currently planned
in Istanbul for 2001. As part of this same effort, FIAS is reviewing the new draft investment law, which
is soon to be discussed in Parliament, and may conduct an administrative barrier study to review and
assess the administrative procedures which investors need to fulfill in order to establish and operate an
enterprise in Turkey.

AnnexA2
Page 1 of 2

Turkey at a glance 

8/31/00

Europe & 
Lower-
Central midkk-
Asia 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Turkey 

Development diamond*

1999

Popitation, mid-year (mdl ions) 
GNP per capitaAtfas method, US$) 
GNP (Aflt$efod, USSbilions) 
Averae annual fgrowth. 1993-99
Popation (%) 
Labor force S) 
Most recent esntmalt (lates year avallable, 1993-99) 
Powty (' otpopiAW- bekwnabo,af pOvet iine)
Urbn populaon (% of total poouleon) 
Life expectancy at bith (yars) 
Infent mortality (per 1000 live bidhs) 
Chld malnutrlbon (% of Xchldwn 
Acce to impoved water source (% of populafion) 
Illiteracy (% of populaion age 155+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of scto-age popu/etion) 
Male 
Female 

64.3 
2,900 
186,6 

475 
2,150 
1,022 

2,094 
1,200
2,513

Life expectancy

1.5 
2.6 

0 1 
0.8 

1.1 
1.2 

GNP 
per 

Gross
Gpnmary

capita 

\ 

enrollment

74 
69 
38 
10 

67 
69 
22 
8 
,. 
3 
100 

43
69
33
15 
86
16
114 
114 
116

er 5) 

Access to safe water

.. 

15 
107 
11t 
104 

Turkey
Lower-middle-incone group

101 
99 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRNDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

-.

Economic ratios

GOP (US$ biors) 

91.7 
14.1 
31 
11.5 
14.4 
-1i5 
0.3 
17.4 
28.7 

107.1 
23.5 
16.2 
21.9 
26.6 
0.9 
2.5 
38.8 
32.4 

201.2 
24.2 
24.3 
20.6 
25.9 
1.0 
1,7 
48.2 
26.5 

185.7
23.3 
23.2
19.6
23.5
-0,7 
2.4 
54.8 
348 

Gross domesic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and servicesAGOP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross natonal savings/GOP 
Cu 
arent 
aount balnceGoP 
Interet payments/GOP 
TOt debtGP 
Total debt servieexports 
Present value d debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

Trade

Domestic
Savings 

Investment

.

1

Indebtedness

197949 11119894 1* 

1999 1t99-03

(average annual growfh)
GQP 
GNPpercapita 
Exports of goods and serices 

5.0 
24 

4.0 
2,5 
t 11.0 

31 
23 
12.0 

-51 
^7.8 
-7.0 

5.5 
4,1 
5.9

Turkey

Lower-rmiddle-income group

, 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investmentand GDP(%)
40

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Pnvate consumption 
Generalgovemmentconsumption 
Imports of goods and services 

27.9 
23.8 
16.0 
48.3 
77.0 
11.5 
5.7 

17.4 
32.8 
21.4 
49,8 
68.8 
9.3 
17.8 

18.5 
25.0 
15.5 
56.5 
66.7 
12.7 
27.9 

15.8
24.3 
14.6 
60.0 
65.2 
15,2 
26.9

20
0

-20
o40

-GO1 

C GDP

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports I%)

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

1.1 
7.3 
7.5 
4.0 

1.6 
4.5 
5.4 
4.0 

9.3 
1.8 
1.0 
3.1 

-5.2 
-6.7 
-6.0 
-3.9 

40
30
20 

p

10

0
-101. 

Prvate consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imporltsofgoods and services 
Gross national product 

.
.. 
.. 

4.0 
4.0 
4.6 
11.1 
4.1 

0.1 
7.8 
-1.4 
2.3 
3.9 

-3,9 
6.5 
-9.5 
-3.7 
-6.4

04 

95 

9 

97 

98

-20
-30-

.. 

-

E-orts 

imports

4.9 

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with is income-group average. I data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2

Page 2 of 2

Turkey

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(%/ change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation I%I

120 -100 4

63.0 
757 

83.7 
75.7 

63.5 
56.2 

Bo -
60

75.8 

40
20
0

Govemment finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overal surplus/deficit 

21.5 
4.2 
-5.2 

24.6 
-5.7 
-15.0 

25.4 
-14.4 
-24.0

1 

4 
-GOP 

96 
denator -

97 

98 
CPt

99

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)
soooo

Total exports (fob) 
Textiles 
Processed Agnicultural Products 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

2,261 
428 
1,081 
1,732 
5,069 
85 
1,817 
1,403 

11,780 
3,911 
1,971 
10,437 
15,792 
890 
3,406 
3,953 

31,221 
10,510 
2,141 
23,873 
45,921 
510 
4,501 
11,033 

29,326 
9,830 
1,840 
23,755
40,693 
444 

00,000 T
40,000

30.000

20,000 9y,,,

5,376 

10000 
o

.i0d

9,062 

Export Pice index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

, 

85 
90 
94 

87 
86 
101 

82
64 
98

tExports 

*l9pQrlS

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GOP I%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

2,969 
5,182 
-2,213 

17,612 
18,464 
-852 

52,037 
55,299 
-3,262 

44,548 
48,726 
-4,178 

3

2

i

Netincome 
Net current transfers 

-1,009 
1,810 

-1,745 
3,558 

-481 
5,727 

-2,361 
5,175 

D 

U
E s

, IE 94 

9 

I 

Current account balance 

-1,412 

961 

1,984 

-1,364 

2

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

1,300 
112 

1,801 
-2,762 

-1,537 
-447 

6,570 
-5,206 

-3
4

Memo:
Reserves (CB and DMBs) including gold(USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/USS) 

.

9,283 
29,499 
2,122 259,627 

34,128
416,686

31.1 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(USS millions) 
Total debtoutstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 1999 debt (US$ mill.)

15,929 
890 
190 

41,577 
5,869 
162 

97,211 
3,446 
112 

101,795
2,902 
107 

A: 2,902 
c: 890
G 23,472 
B 07 D 3 797

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,340 
105 
3 

7,092 
1,010 
6 

14,900 
882 
7 

18,321 
954
7

8:8.237

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Offical creditors 
Prvate creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolioequity 

52 
964 
3,068 
75 
0 

95 
-555 
1,631 
663 
56 

37 
-72 
2,724 
573 
-6,132 

80
-642
2,584
138
209 

F:62,390

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

306 
280 
36 
244 
72 
172 

604 
419 
506 
-87 
510 
-597 

956 
271 
643 
-372 
246 
-619 

1,165 
380 
616 
-236
345
-581

A- IBRD 
B-IDA 
c - IMF 

E -Bilateral
D -Othermoltlateral F-Private
G - Short-term

Development Economics 

11/18/00

Annex B2
Page I of 1

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - Turkey

As Of Date 1012412000

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

22 
4.3 
9.1 
7.2 
9.1 
7.2 
20.9 

Yes 
1.3 
51.0 

20 
3.9 
20 
8.3 
20 
8.3 
16.6 

Yes 
1.5 
61.0 

23 
3.8 
17.4 
13.2 
17.4 
13.2 
20.0 

Yes 
2.5* 
90.9** 

21
3.9
14.3
12.8
14.3
12.8
4.7

Yes"
2.22
93.32

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
84 
13
7915.7 
1550.7
32.5 
7.7
1.9
37.6 

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except FY00, FY01).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

FY00 are in full costs (Salaries, Benefits, and HQ and Field Activity Costs)

1/ JPPR planned for February 2001.
2/ Planned Budget for 2001.

Annex B3
Page I of 2

Turkey- Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal Year 

Proj ID 

US$ (M) 

Strategic 
Rewards 
(HIM') 

Implementation
Risks
(HIM/A)

2001 Agr. Reform & Investment 
Basic Education (APL 2) 
FSAL I 
Privatization Social Support 

Result 

2002 State Bank Restructuring 
Local Intiatives & Social Assist. 
Natural and Cultural Heritage 
PSAL 
Village Township Services 
Secondary Education 
Result 
2003 FSAL II 
Municipal (APL I) 
Energy 
Seismic Risk Mitigation 
Health 
Microwatershed 
Result 
Result 

Result 

400.00 
300.00 
778.00 
250.00 

H 
H 
H 
H 

11,728.00

500.00 
H 
112.00 M 
50.00 
M 
820.00 
H 
100.00 M 
175.00 M 
1,757.00
800.00 
H 
300.00 
H 
200.00 M 
80.00 
M 
100.00 
H 
35.00 
M 
1,51 5.00
5,000.00

H
L
H
M

H
M
M
H
M
L

H
M
M
L
M
L

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Turkey

Turkey - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2000

1998 

1999 

2000

IFC approvals (US$m) 

251.4 

151.3 

181.2

Sector (%!

CEMENT & CONSTRUCTION 
CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMS 
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
FOOD 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
MANUFACTURING 
MINING & EXTRACTION OF METALS 
MOTHER VEHICLES & PARTS 
SOCIAL SERVICES 
TEXTILES 
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER 

Total 

Investment Instruments M

IFC-Loan 
IFC-Equity 
IFC-Quasi-Equity 
IFC: Guarantee, Standby, and Risk Management 

Total 

MIGA Guarantees (US$m)

(US$ millions)

6 
5 
33 
4 
0 
7 
0 
0 
10 
9 
26 

32 
0 
26 
0 
0 
4 
0 
13 
0 
25 
0 

0
0
32
24
14
14
0
0
0
11
5

100 

100 

100

94 
1 
2 
3 

88 
4 
8 
0 

83
3
14
0

100 

100 

100

MIGA -- Guarantees Outstanding 

141,981 250,559 

246,924

Sector distribution (%)

AGRIBUSINESS 
FINANCIAL SERVICES 

Total: 

35 
65 

100 

0 
100 

100 

0
100

100

Anne-x B4
Page I of I

Turkey - Summary of Nonlending Services

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) Audience a 

Objective b

FY00 
FY00 
FY01 

FY01 
FY01 
FY03 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 

FY01 
FY01 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 

500 
400 
300 

345 
25 
60 
100 
100 
300 

130 
150 
320 
300 
215 
120 
145 
175 
400 

G DP B 
G D P B 
G D P B 

KG,PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS

G D B 
G D B P 
G B 
G B 
G B 
G D B P 

G D B 
G D B 
G D B P 
G D B P 
G D B 
G D B P 
G D B P 
G B P 
G D P B 

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG, PD, PS

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS

Product 

Recent completions
CEM 
Living Standards Study 
Livestock Sector Study 

Underway
PEIR Phase One 
Energy and Env. Review 
Caspian oil and gas dialogue 
CFAA 
CPAR 
Forestry Review 

Planned
PEIR Phase Two 
Non-Bank Financial Institutions Study 
Health Sector Study 
Technology Assessment 
Gas Sector Note 
Governance Workshop 
NEAP/Clean Air 
Global Development Gateway 
CEM (EU Accession) 

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5
Page I of 1

Turkey Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

Europe & Central 
Asia 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(/o of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US9) 
Consumerprice index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% ofGDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 

Male 

Female 

Access to safe water
(% ofpopulation)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(%/6 under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 1/ 

40.0 
2.5 
41.6 
5.0 

.. 

.. 

1,170 
0 

.. 

.. 

3.0 
57.0 

.. 

2.0 
0.3 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

58 
56 
60 

138 
201 

.. 

.. 

.. 

50.3 
2.5 
52.5 
3.8 

..

..

1,320 
1 
0 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

1.8 
0.2 

99 
100 
98 

69
73
65

30 
56 

.. 

62 
60 
65 

102 
133 

.. 

.. 

..

63.5 
1.5 
72.9 
2.4 

3,160 
618 
608

41.5
5.8
47.7

2.9 
2.2 
2.7 

100 
100 
98 

76 
79 
10

69 
67 
72 

38 
42 

186 
122 

1/ For 1989-95, this figure is 183, World Development Report 2000, p. 228
2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Upper-
middle-
income

588.1
1.2
76.6
2.4

474.7 
0.1 
66.2 
1.6 

2,200 
155 

4,870
122

4.0 
5.1 
8.8 

100 

100 

99 

91 
89 

69 
65 
74 

22 
26 

283 
120 

3.3
5.0
7.9

96
97
95

92
82

71
67
74

26
31

210
110

Turkey - Key Economic Indicators

Annex B6
Page I of 2

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)5
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savines' 

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

1998 

Fstimate 
1999 

2000 

Proiected
2001 
2002 

2003

100.0 
18.5 
25.0 
56.5 

79.4 
24.6 
4.4 
19.8 

24.3 
27.9 

20.6 
25.9 

100.0 
15.8 
24.3 
60.0 

80.4 
21.8 
4.2 
19.0 

23.2 
26.9 

19.6 
23.3 

100.0 
16.2 
25.1 
58.7 

83.1 
22.5 
6.8 
17.2 

24.5 
31.6 

16.9 
20.1 

100.0 
16.0 
25.0 
59.0 

81.3 
22.1 
6.9 
16.6 

25.7 
30.6 

18.7 
22.1 

100.0 
15.8 
25.2 
59.0 

80.3 
22.3 
6.8 
16.9 

26.5 
30.5 

19.7 
23.3 

100.0
15.4
25.7
58.9

80.3
22.0
6.6
16.9

26.8
30.6

19.7
23.2

201,154 

185,691 

199,064 

209,777 

222,195 

235,484

2,900 

3,170 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.1 
-5.1 
Gross Domestic Income 
2.5 
-4.4 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
1.5 
-6.6 
Total consumption 
-0.3 
-3.8 
Private consumption 
-1.4 
-5.3 

3,270 

3,300 

3,370 

3,550

7.2 
9.7 

5.6 
13.8 
14.4 

3.9 
3.6 

2.6 
-0.8 
-0.6 

4.8 
4.2 

3.4 
1.0 
1.3 

5.5
5.2

4.1
3.7
4.3

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

Other capital (net, inc[ errors & ommissions) 

Change in reservesd 

Mfemorandum items
Resource balance (%ofGDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

52,037 
31,220 
55,299 
45,440 
(3,262) 
5,727 
1,984 

573 
3,985 
(72) 
4,057 
(6,095) 

44,548 
29,326 
48,726 
39,773 
(4,178) 
5,175 
(1,364) 

138 
345 
(642) 
987 
6,087 

48,695 
30,709 
62,810 
54,878 
(14,115) 
4,964 
(12,329) 

140 
9,949 
621 
9,329 
4,005 

53,974 
33,996 
64,087 
55,812 
(10,113) 
5,430 
(7,938) 

3,322 
5,955 
1,614 
4,341 
654 

(447) 

(5,206) 

(1 765) 

(1,993) 

58,848 
36,151 
67,702 
58,465 
(8,854) 
5,672 
(6,164) 

1,723 
2,226 
2,662 
(436) 
2,431 

(216) 

63,099
39,249
71,984
61,705
(8,885)
5,923
(5,979)

1,900
926
2,246
(1,320)
3,675

(522)

(1.6) 

9.2 
0.8 

(2.2) 

(2.4) 
(8.1) 

(7.1) 

6.6 
49.9 

(4.8) 

11.1 
(1.5) 

(4.0) 

(3.8)

7.5 
0.7 

4.8
2.3

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Turkey - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

1998 

Estimate 
1999 

2000 

Proiected
2001 
2002 

2003

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2Y/GDP 
Growth of M2Y (%) 
Private Sector Credit growth 
Total Credit Growth (%)

Price indices( YR94 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

24.0 
29.6 
(5.5) 
7.6 
(1.2) 

39.2 
89.7 
63.3 

95.6 
99.6 
95.9 
120.6 

24.8 
38.2 
(13.4) 
8.5 
1.8 

52.5 
98.3 
52.6 

92.0 
96.0 
95.8 
124.2 

Consumer price index (% change) g 
GDP deflator (% change) 

83.7 
75.7 

63.5 
56.2 

27.8 
36.3 
(8.5) 
8.8 
4.2 

28.6 
27.9 
0.7 
8.8 
3.7 

27.7 
23.2 
4.5 
8.7 
2.9 

26.6
21.7
4.9
8.3
1.5

40.0 
22.6 
188.0 

41.7 
28.3 
101.0 

41.7 
14.2 
101.0 

41.7
10.2
101.0

90.4 
91.3 
98.9 
127.1

50.0 
50.0 

90.0 
94.4 
95.4 

89.0 
98.5 
90.4 

92.2
101,7
90.7

18.5 
18.5 

9.0 
9.0 

4.5
4.5

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated public sector.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
g. Annual average rates.

AnnexB7
Page I of 1

Turkey - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

1998 

Estimate 
1999 

2000 

Proiected
2001 
2002 

2003

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

97,211 

101,795 

117,828 

127,637 

132,287 

134,390

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

2,429 

5.155 

15.226 

9.809 

4.651 

2.104

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m) 
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m) 

14,900 

18,286 

20,121 

26,729 

24,558 

24,666

155.8 
48.3 
23.9 
6.0 

8.2 
15.9 

1.4 
3,446 

2.8 
112.0 

193.5 
54.8 
34.8 
5.6 

7.7 
14.2 

1.8 
2,902 

2.4 
107.0 

207.1 
59.2 
35.4 
4.8 

4.8 
10.5 

1.4 
3,158 

2.6 
101.0 

201.1 
60.8 
42.1 
4.5 

3.2 
8.9 

1.2 
4,253 

3.5 
96.0 

191.2 
59.5 
35.5 
4.3 

3.8 
6.8 

1.2 
5,437 

4.6 
91.0 

181.8
57.1
33.4
4.3

4.7
10.8

1.4
6,578

5.9
85.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.

Annex B8
Page 1 of 3

CAS Annex B8 - Turkey
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

As Of Date 10/2412000

Closed Projects 119

Active Projects 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating bI 

Original Amount In USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements "

PvoJent 

letives Proess 
ImOb 

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GE Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

P009044 
P009093 
P009089 
P044175 
P009065 
P008985 
P048851 
P009023 
P065188 
P068394 
P058877 
P009064 
P068792 
P009076 
P009073 
P068368 
P048852 
P038404 
P009095 
P009072 
P035759 
P038091 
P009071 
Result 

AGRiC RES 
S 
ANTALYA WATER SUPPLY 
S 
BASIC ED I 
HS 
BIODIVERSITY/NR MGT 
S 
BURSA WATER & SANITA 
S 
CESMEW.S.&SEWER. 
S 
COMMODITIES.MKT.DEV, 
S 
EANATOLIA WATERSHED 
S 
EFIL 
S 
EMG. EARTHQUAKE RECOV. - EERL S 
EMGY FLOOD RECOVERY 
S 
EMPLOYMENT & TRG 
U 
ERL 
S 
HEALTH II 
U 
INDUSTRIAL TECH 
S 
MARMARA EARTHQUAKE EMERGENC S 
NAT'L TRNSM GRID 
S 
ODS PHASEOUT 2 
S 
PRIM HEALTH CARE SER 
S 
PRIV. OF IRRIGATION 
S 
PUBLIC FINAN. MGT. 
S 
ROAD IMPR. & SAFETY 
S 
S 
TEK RESTRUCT 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

1992 
1995 
1998 
2000 
1993 
1998 
1999 
1993 
2000 
2000 
1999 
1993 
2000 
1995 
1999 
2000 
1998 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1996 
1996 
1991 
Result 

55 
100 
300 
0 
129.5 
13.1 
4 
77 
252.5 
252.5 
369 
67 
759.6 
150 
155 
505 
270 
0 
14.5 
20 
62 
250 
40 
3845.7 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
8.2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
14 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
22.2 

6 
0 
0 
0 
20 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
0 
12 
43 

7.5 
67.1 
184.4 
7.6 
6.3 
11.7 
3.4 
24 
216.8 
0 
235.5 
27.3 
375 
77.3 
143.7 
449.7 
269.8 
7.4 
14.2 
13.6 
41.9 
96.3 
22.1 
2302.6 

13.5 
33.3
178.6
-0.2
22.8 
4.6
2.4
35.3 
-35.6
0
176.5 
27.3
0
99.9 
-3.3
204.7
159.5
7.4
14.2 
10.7 
46.9 
97.8
32.7 
1145.1

7.5

-1.9

-1.7

75.2

7.0

4.2
1.5
12.4

20.7

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8
Page 2 of 3

Turkey
STATEMENT OF IFC'S
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of October, 2000

IFC Held 
Loan 
15.00 
4.44 
14.44 
39.90 
12.01 
9.62 
4.00 
20.00 
14.50 
15.75 
0.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.61 
11.90 
8.33 
19.50 
1.06 
3.00 
8.86 
24.50 
6.56 
10.00 
6.91 
4.00 
10.00 
23.85 
0.00 
12.35 
18.51 
5.71 
8.57 
9.00 
4.34 
2.14 
20.00 
10.18 

Euuity 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
12.07 
0.00 
3.65 
0.00 
0.64 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.66 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.36 
0.00 
5.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.99 
0.00 
0.00 

Partic 
8.00 
0.00 
12.00 
11.50 
7.99 
5.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
7.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.70 
24.84 
0.00 
35.00 
18.49 
0.00 
0.00 
30.43 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
13.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
3.55 

Comoanv 
Adana Cement 
ALease 
Alternatif Bank 
Arcelik 
Arcelik LG Klima 
Assan 
AYTAC 
Banvit 
Borcelik 
Cayeli Bakir 
CBS Boya Kimya 
CBS Holding 
CBS Printas 
Cerrahogullari 
Conrad 
Demir Leasing 
Demirbank 
Edirne 
Eldor 
Elginkan 
Entek 
Finans Leasing 
Finansbank 
Garanti Leasing 
Gumussuyu Kap 
Indorama Iplik 
Ipek Paper 
Isiklar Ambalaj 
Kepez Elektrik 
Kiris 
Kocbank 
Koclease 
Korfezbank 
Kula 
Medya 
Modern Karton 
NASCO 

FY Avoroval 
1998 
2000 
1998/00 
1995/96 
2000 
1994/97 
1994/97 
2000 
1994/95/96/97 
1992/96 
1995/96 
1994/99 
1996/01 
1992 
1990/93 
1997/98 
1994/96/00 
1989/97 
1993/96 
1998/93/96 
1995 
1997/98 
1992/99 
1994/98/00 
1999 
1998 
1998/00 
1998 
1990 
1988/90/96 
1997 
1997 
1992/97 
1990 
1993/96 
1997 
1991 

(Amounts in US$ Millions)
IFC Disbursed
Loan 
Eauity 
15.00 
0.00 
4.44 
0.00 
11.44 
0.00 
39.90 
0.00 
12.01 
0.00 
9.62 
0.00 
4.00 
0.00 
10.00 
5.00 
14.50 
12.07 
15.75 
0.00 
0.00 
3.65 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.64 
0.61 
0.00 
11.90 
0.00 
8.33 
0.00 
19.50 
0.00 
1.06 
0.00 
3.00 
0.00 
8.86 
0.00 
24.50 
0.00 
6.56 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
6.91 
0.00 
4.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.66 
23.85 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
12.35 
0.00 
18.51 
0.00 
5.71 
0.00 
8.57 
0.00 
9.00 
0.00 
4.34 
0.00 
2.14 
0.00 
20.00 
0.00 
10.18 
0.00 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.36 
0.00 
5.00 
8.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.99 
0.00 
0.00 

Partic
8.00
0.00
12.00
11.50
7.99
5.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.50
0.00
0.00
0.70
24.84
0.00
35.00
18.49
0.00
0.00
30.43
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
13.00
0.00
0.00
10.00
3.55

Annex B8
Page 3 of 3

Turkev
STATEMENT OF IFCS
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of October. 2000

IFC Held 
FY Approval 
CompanV 
Loan 
Eaultv Quasi 
1997 
Oyak Bank 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1998 
Pasabahce-Schott 10.58 
0.00 
0.00 
Pinar ET 
10.21 
0.00 
0.00 
1983/94198 
PinarSUT 
13.74 
0.00 
0.00 
1994/00 
Rant Leasing 
1.99 
0.00 
0.00 
1996 
19.59 
0.00 
0.00 
1999 
SAKoSa 
2.99 
0.00 
0.00 
1986188190/98 
Silkar Turizm 
0.00 
0.00 
1993/96 
SiseVeCam 
8.45 
0.00 
0.00 
1998 
Soktas 
9.71 
0.00 
1996 
TCRA 
0.00 
0.10 
1995196 
TDD 
0.60 
0.00 
0.00 
1999 
TEB Finansal 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1997 
Toprak Leasing 
1.78 
0.00 
0.00 
1979/82183/89/91/96199 Trakya Cam 
(0.00) 
1.18 
2.25 
1995/99 
Turk Ekon Bank 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2000 
Turkish Banks 
33.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1993/98 
Turkiye Garanti 
14.55 
0.00 
0.00 
1999 
Unye Cement 
17.66 
0.00 
0.00 
1998 
Uzel 
20.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1970171/82183/98 
Viking 
10.55 
0.00 
0.00 
1995 
Yalova Acylic 
2.50 
0.00 
0.00 
1997/98 
Yapi Kredi Lease 
4.34 
0.00 
0.00 
Total Portfolio 
595.78 
23.29 
29.10 

(Amounts in US$ Millions)
IFC Disbursed
Partic 
Loan 
Eauity Quasi Partic
10.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00
10.58 
10.58 
0.00 
0.00 
10.58
0.00 
10.21 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
1.99 
0.00 
19.16
19.16 
19.59 
0.00 
3.40
3.40 
2.99 
0.00 
0.00 
11.27 
8.45 
0.00 
0.00 
11.27
0.00 
9.71 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.05 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
1.78 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
(0.00) 
1.18 
2.25 
0.00
20.00 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
20.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
69.09 
14.55 
0.00 
0.00 
69.09
0.00 
17.66 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
15.00 
7.94 
0.00 
0.00 
5.96
0.00 
10.55 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
1.33 
2.50 
0.00 
0.00 
1.33
0.00 
4.34 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
352.85 523.99 
23.24 
27.10 343.81

2000 
1999 
1999 

1995 

2000 
2000 

Company 

BICT 
CBS Group Restr 
Ege Seramik 

ENTEK-KOC 

Erbakir 
Pinar Sea 
Total Pendinui 

Aoorovals Pendina Commitment
Loan 
Eauti 
Partic
20.00 
0.00 
0.00
5.80 
0.00 
0.00
18.00 
5.00 
0.00

5.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Quasi 

0.00 

5.00 
4.00 
52.80 

0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
5.0Q 

0.00 

5.00 
0.00 
10.00 

15.00

0.00
0.00
15.00

TURKEY - COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX

Annex B9
Page 1 of 10

1. IMPLEMENT REFORMS FOR GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT GENERATION

1. Restore and 
maintain 
macro- 
economic 
stability 

l-Unsustainable budget deficits 
-Reduce and restructure public 
resulting in high inflation anid spending to achieve a primary 
interest rates, and low growth 
and consolidated budget surplis 

-Year end inflation of I 0- 
12% and GNP growth of 5- 
6% in 2001 

IBRD lending: 
- ERL FY00 

- Underpiit fiscal adjuistment 
Reduice inflation to single 
through revenue increases anid 
digits in 2002 and maintain 
structural meastires to streitgthen GNP growth at 5% or
the tax system 
higher 

2. Assure 
sustained and 
more equitably 
distributed 
growth 
through 
productivity 
increases and 
employment 
generatiun 

- Volatile GDP growth, high 
and variable inflation, low 
productivity gains resulted in 
low employnsent generation, 
marked economic
vilnerability and inequiality 

- Input and credit suibsidies 
and price supports resulted in 
high costs to the budget and 
consumers, while failing to 
spur agricultural 
development through 
productivity increases 

-

Improve public expenditure 
management and control 

- Limit introduction of new 
projects in PIP and establish 
clear expetiditure priorities

- Carry out structural reforms
necessary to maintain macro-
economic stability and spuir
growth

Aericulture: 
- Replace price and credit 
suibsidies with unified national 
program of direct income 
support targeted over thne to 
poorer farmers 

- Restructure and privatize state 
commercial enterprises iti 
agriculture (Tekel, Seker, 
Caykur, TMO), state vaccinc 
production; laboratories aiud 
cliiiical veterinary services 

- Assure efficiceit operation of 
agricultural miarkets throuigh 
withdrawal of public sector from 
marketing activities, 
developnsent of independent
agficultural sales cooperatives 
anid regulations supportive of 
etficient inarkets; establish 
Agricultural Producer's 
Associations 

IBRD lending 
- ERL FY00 

- Commodities Market 
Dev LIL FY99 

- Direct income support 
program introduced .

- Ferilizer, output price 
amid credit subsidies 
phased out 

- Effective functioning of 
agricultuiral sales 
cooperatives and private 
entrepreneurs in agro- 
marketing, processing 
and animal lhealth services 

IBRD lending: 
- ISAL FY02 

- Compliarnce with IMF 
stabilization program

IMF: Stand-By

IBRD non-lending: 
Public Expenditure and 
Institutional Review FY01 

- Reduce inflation to 10- 
12% in 2001 and to single
digits in 2002

EU: Parallel finanicing of some
SALs (e.g ERL, PSAL)

- GNP growth 5% or higher

- Satisfactory
implementation of
stabilization measures
agreed upon under ERL
and PSAL

FAO: 1'A for the establishitieiit,
development and functioning of
producer unions, comniodity
exchanges, capacity building in
rural development planning and
investment promotion,
nationwide nutrition suirvey,
identification of food itisecure
groups, capacity building in food
safety and quality control.

ILO: Dialogte with urnions,
agricultural interests etc.

Ett: Support to uipgrade food
ilispection services

IBRD lending: 
- Agr. Reform and Investmciit 
Project FYO 

- Direct income support 
program fully introduced 
by 2002 

- PSAL FY02 

IFC: 
- Support financing of 
agribusiness sector 

- Support the development of 
private infrastructure in 
agribusiness 

- Sipport privatization of state- 
owned agricultural production, 
processing and marketiiig 
enterprises 

- Input subsidies, price 
supports and credit 
subsidies phased out as 
agreed with Bank under 
ERL, ARIP and PSAL 

- Agricultural ciiterprises
restructured and 
privatized as agreed with 
Bank under ERL, ARIP
and PSAL 

- Agricultural sales
cooperatives fully
autonomous

- Changed regilations for
commodity exchatiges,
incliding renmoval of
responsibility for tax
registration and collectioi

-Improvemrents 

in
marketing institutions for
cotton and grains

Annex B9
Page 2 of 10

K .Ob~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

.#w*A4tc!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Ad: 

.. .

jCIt-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Private Sector Development: 
- Implement deregulation and 
privatization program to 
facilitate growth of private 
investment in productive 
activities, infrastructure and 
energy 

- Efficient growth of SMEs 
through improved access to 
finance 

Although vibrant, Tttrkey's 
private sector is far from 
reaching its fitl potential. 
Low investment rates driven 
by absence of ternm financing 
and overall high cost of 
capital, coupled with strong 
involvement of the state in 
key areas, have constrained 
private sector growth 

Economic and political 
instability have made Tujrkey 
a high risk country for FDI, 
as a result FDI is 
significantly lower than in 
other middle income 
countries 

-

Increased private sector 
investment, including FDI 
an productive, energy, 
infrastructure and 
telecoms sectors 

IBRD lending: 
- ERL FY00 
- EFIL FY00 
- Industrial Technology 
FY99 
- Commodities Market 
Development LIL 
FY99 

MIGA: 
- Investment Marketing 
Service support to 
Center for PSD 

Energy system based on state Energy and Infrastructure 
monopolies and Treasury 
- Introduce regulated market 
guarantees have resulted in 
system in electricity and gas 
sector to allow for adequate 
high energy prices, large 
contingent liabilities and 
supply of electricity and gas at 
inability to meet growing 
affordable prices 
demand at competitive prices 

- Promote private investments in 
power generation and 
distribution 

- Promote private participation in 
telecommunications and 
infrastructure investments 

State ownership of 
infrastructure has prevented 
private investment in critical 
infrastructure services, 
leading to infrastructtire 
bottlenecks 

High cost logistics systems 
arld bottlenecks constrain 
development of a competitiv 
industrial sector 

- Adequate supply of 
electricity and gas without 
govemnment guarantees 

IBRD lending: 
- Nationai Transmission 
Grid FY98 

- TEK Restructuring 
FY93 

- Road Improvement and 
Traffic Safety FY96 

- FIAS: Assistance to 
revise Investment law 

UNDP: FDi promnotion with
GAP-RDA and others. Through
pamership with TESK,
strengthen SMEs' access to
support services tn earthquake
region and South East.

EU:
PSDP:
- Business Support Centers in
Kocaeli, Izmir, Gaziantep (T.A)

110: Strengthening SME's
within the ILO-IPEC
programmes implemented iii
Diyarbakir, Sinop and Mersin in
cooperation with the NGOs
TESK and TKV, through
implementation of SYB (start
your business) program.
Partnership with UNDP on
strengthening SME's in
particular in the urban areas of
Southeastern Anatolia Project
Region.

EU:
Energy
- inogate project (pipeline
connections)
- deregulation in line with EU
acquis

Infrastructure-
EU/EIB: Waste Water, water
supply

IFC: 
- Proposed credtt lines to 
banks for SME on-lending 
- Support SMEs through 
lending to leasing companies 
- Establish a micro-finance 
institution 
- Catalyze creation of essential 
business infrastructure for 
SMEs 
- Bank/IFC mapping exercise 
for small enterprises in South
and disadvantaged regions 

- Innovative equity and loan 
financing in internationally- 
competitive second-tier, 
export-oriented and 
agribusiness companies 

- Conference on promotion of 
FDI to Turkey 

FIAS: 
- Administrative barier study 

IBRD lending: 
- Energy Project FY03 

IBRD non-lending: 
- Energy and environment 
review FY01 
- Gas sector note FY02 
- Casptan oil and gas dialogue 

IFPC: 
- Investments in private power 
generation and distribution 
- Possible investment in a newly 
licensed cellular operator 

MICA: 
- Guarantees for power and
infrastructure investments 

- Implementation of 
privatization program as 
agreed under ERL and 
PSAL 

- Increased private 
investment, including
FDI 

- Complete deregulation of 
electricity and gas 
markets 

- Complete energy sector
restructuring as agreed 
under ERL 

- No new government
guarantees issued to
private investors in
energy, except possibly
for projects to be in
operation by 2002.

- Existing assets in
electricity and gas sectors
privatized as agreed with
Bank

- Turkey has been accepted 

- Et3 Accession 

as a EU accession candidate. Develop and launch detailed E1J 

This provides additional 
imnpetus for economic, social
and political reformnsd and
will bolster econotific growth

accessioti program 

EU accession progamn 

launched 

IBRD non-lending: 
CEM on EU Accession FY03 

3. 

Improve 
financial 
system 
soundness and 
performance 

- Financial stability and 
efficiency undermined by 
serious banking system 
weaknesses. State banks 
have large duty losses 

-

Implementation of cutting edge 
global financial sector standards 
and creation of an independent 
banking regulation and 
supervision entity 

- Strengthened finanicial 
sector, able to support 
private sector growth 
according to market 
criteria 

IBRD Lending: 
- EFIL FY00 

MIGA: Ongoing 
guarantees in Financial 
Sector 

- Restructuring and privatizution 
of state-owned banks 

IBRD lending: 
- FSAL I FY01 
- FSAL 11 FY03 
- State Bank Restructuring 
Project FY02 

- Establishment and proper
functioning of 
independent bank 
regulatory and 
supervisory agency 

IBRD non4ending: 
- Non-Bank Financial 
Institutions Review FY01 

- Four state-owned banks 
restructured and 
privatized

- IFC: Advice and investment 
in financial sector (long term 
contractual savings, insurance, 
private pension) 

- Resolution of insolvent 
private banks taken over by 
Government and continued
enforcement of revised
prudential standards

- Support state bank
privatization

- Assist in development of
mortgage finance sector

- Technical assistance on
securitization and investment
in asset securitization projects

Annex B9
Page 3 of 10

FA0:prA 

for agticuotutal polcy

reforms, adaption to EU and

\VTO norms and standards.

UNDP: Cooperation with the
EU and the GAP RDA in
program to reduce regional
development disparities and
spurring local economic growtlh.

UNICEF: Support for the
implementation of the UN
Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and the European
Convention on the Exercise of
Children's Rights. Reform of
the Juvenile Justice System.

JBIC: First United Two-Step
Loan to EXIM Credit Bank of
Turkey FY93, Second United
Two-Step Loan to to ECBT
FY99, United Two-Step Loan to
support SMEs mainly dainaged
by 1999 earthquakes FY00

Islamic Development Bank:
Trade financing among member
countries

.I 

; 

f 1; U- 

-1 

-A,

O~i 

_____.__ 

II. IMPROVE PUBLIC MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILTY

I. 

Increase 
effectiveness of 
public sector 
and strengthen 
transparency 
and 
accountability 
of public 
entities at all 
levels 

Lack of policy framework 
and institutional 
responsibilities in key sectors 

- Clarify roles and 
responsibilities of government 
agencies 

- Significant public sector off- 
budget activities witcli are 
not subject to scrutiny create 
opportunities for misuse and 
increase risks to fiscal 
managemetit 

- Make information on full scope 
of public sector activities 
publicly available on regular 
basis 

- Make formulation of public 
policy, resource allocation and 
implementation and reporting of 
budgets more accessible to the 
public 

- In return for more predictable 
budget allocations, evaluate 
public sector managers on 
service delivery standards 

IBRD lending: 
- Public Financial 
Management FY96 

- Program for public 
administration reform to 
improve effectiveness of 
public sector and increase 
transparency and 
accountability adopted and 
initiated 

- Fiscal and public 
expenditure management 
reforms that ensure 
sustainability and enable 
public sector to better link 
policies and service delivery 
to outcomes 

IBRD lending: 

- PSAL FY02 

IBRD non-lending: 
- Country Financial
Accountability Assessment 
FY01 

- Public Expenditure and 
Institutional Review (two 
phase) FY01 

- Country Procurement 
Assessment Report FY01 

- Governance Workshop (WBI) 
FY02 

- Enhance integrity and timeliness 
of national audit system 

- A broad-based anti-corruption 
strategy 

- Publicly announced anti- 
corruption strategy launched 

Annex B9
Page 4 of 10

_

Adoption and 
IMF: Fiscal Transparency
implementation of public Review and its follow up in the
sector reform program as 
context of the Stand-By
agreed under PSAL 
program,

- Public expenditures 
TESEV, TUSIAD and
rationalized taking into 
Universities: providing policy
account recommendations analysis and advice to GOT
of PEIR and agreements
under ERL and PSAL 

- Reduction of number of 
budgetary and non- 
budgetary funds as agreed 
with WB under ERL and
PSAL 

- Establishment of more 
effective expenditure 
management and control 
system

- Timely submission of all 
required annual audit 
reports in English for 

IBRD portfolio 

- All projects approved as 
of July 1, 1998 comply 
with LACi reporting

requirements 

EU: Support to GOT on
governance issues, including
strengthening judiciary and
border controls in line with
acquis communautaire

UNDP: Support for Local
Agenda 21 in 40 cities to
promote good local govemance
and the Govemnance Program
with the TODAIE.

UNICEF: Local Capacity-
Building in Area Based
Management Approaches to
Basic Services for Children aiid

Women (Advancing Quality of

LIife for All). Development of a
Child. Youth and Woman
Information Network.

Germany: Qualification of

Municipal Services to immiprove
the water supply, waste water
management and waste disposal

in selected locations in an
ecological, economical and
technicail respect.

2. 

Improve 
infrastructure 
management 
and remove 
infrastructure 
related 
bottlenecks to 
growth 

c Resource allocatioll decision 

in infrastructuic tend to lack 
transparency 
rivate 

Improve 

managemct of 

infrastructure basic and public 
utilities, incifidirig 
secnor 
effective and transparent 
resource allocation 

- Clear framework for 

allocation, use awid 
r public sect 
resources for infrastructure 

IBRD lending: 

ahe 
-Road Improveistent aid 
Traffic Safety Project 
FY96 

Lack ofrtransparency and 
coilipefition have failed to 
attiact sufficient private 
investments in infrastructitre 
(including utilities 
infrastructure) . As a result 
infrastructure bottlenecks 
have constrained growth and 
led to high prices of energy 
and transport related 
services (particularly ports) 

Local governments fail to 
properly inanage and 
maintain the isifrastructure 
base. Revenue collection by 
local authorities is inadequat 
to ttaintain infrastructure 

- Turkey lags behind other 
middle iticome countries in 
refortiting the transport secto 
froin a production oriented 
sector to one attutted to 
market needs. 

-Encourage private sector 
investments in infrastructure and 
public utionies tairough 
oflatid 
deregulation and introduction of 
competitive market systems 

- Strengthen local govermments 
and comtnunities' ability to 
manage and maintaili local 
infrastructure on a sustainable 
basis 

- Strengthen community 
involvement in design atid 
implementation of local projects 

- Bring traiisport sector in line 
with EU standards in view of 
EU accession 

- Develop framework for 
strengthening municipal 
govemnments' ability to 
manage and finance local 
infrastructure 

- Increased involvement of
communities in design and 
implementation of local 
projects 

- Strategy for restructiring 
transport (roads, railroads, 
maritime) sector to comply 
with EU standards 
developed 

-Bursa Water and 
Sanitation FY93 

-Antalya Water Supply 
FY95 

- Cesme Water Supply 
and Sewerage FY98 

- Privatization of 
Irrigation FY98 

IFC: 

- KANGAL TOR power 
generation 
rehabilitation 
- Belde Liman (container 
port terminal) 

- Advisory service to
ASKI on BOT scheme 
for water supply in 
Ankara 

Annex B9
Page 5 of 10

IBRD lending: 

- Municipal Project AePL FY03 

IBRD non-lending: 
- Public Expenditure and 
Institutional Review FYO01 

IF'C: 
- Investment and financing for 
private gateway and 
tertninal facilities 

MICA 
- Use its guarantee prograin to 
facilitate large infrastructure 
projects 

JBIC: Bosphorus Rail l'ube

Crossingd Road Isoprovement
project.

-Communities with water 
supply ptojects have 
established effective
managesitenit and 
Germany: Financing ofwaste
operations systemn and are water treatment plants, sewerage
collecting sufficient 
systems and solid waste disposal
revenues to effectively 
plants all over the countly,
maintain infrastrticture 
focusing regiotially on the
investments and repay 
poorer provinces Capacity
investment loans 
building of the mtiticipal
services managing the
infrastructure investments.

-

Germany and EIB:
Cooperation with WB in
dialogue/study of municipal
reform issues.

UNDP: Support for Local
Agenda 21 (civil-municipal
forum)

Irrigation strategy 
entailing reduction of
GOT expenditure on 
investment and O&M of 
irrigation infrastructure 
adopted 

- Area unider management 
control of water user 
associations increased 
and infrastructure base in
these areas is improved.

- MIS system for KGM is
operational and has
effectively increased
transparency and
accountability in roads
sector

- Development of National
Strategy for Road Safety
based on results of Traffic
Safety pilot under
ongoing Road
Improvement and Traffic
Safety project

O:I 

: 

I

111. EXPAND SOCIAL SERVICES AND SOCIAL PROTECTION

1. Reduce 
economic 
vulnerability 
and inequality 
by increasing 
vulnerable 
groups' ability 
to take 
participate in 
economic 
growth 

- Economic vulnerability and 
inequality remain significant, 
despite progress during the 
past two decades 

- Social indicators lag 
substantially behind those of 
countries with similar 
incomile levets and there are 
wide regional disparities. 

- Improve vulnerable groups' 
ability to participate in 
economic growth through 
employment creating growth 
and development of human 
capital base 

- Reduced economic 
vulnerability inequality 
rates and poverty rates. 

IBRD lending: 
Employment and 
Training FY93 

- Basic Education APLI 
FY98 

- Reduced regional 
disparities in literacy and 
educational achievements 

- Universal coverage of 
basic eight year education 

- Stronger and mom flexible 
secondary and vocational 
education system 
responding to marke 
needs 

IBRD lending: 
- Basic Education APLII FYOI 

- Secondary Education FY02 

- Village and Township 
Services FY02 

IBRD non-lending: NGO 
dialogue 

IFC: 
Invest in education to create 
high quality models 

-

Annex B9
Page 6 of 10

- Reduced poverty, 
economic vulnerability 
anid inequality rates 

All basic education 
schools provided with
improved educational 
materials, including 
textbooks and other 
teaching materials 

-Creation 

of at least 
100,000 additional basic
education places by 
September 2003 

- All basic education 
teachers receive yearly 
training in effective 
teaching 

- Girls' enrolments in each 
basic education grade
reach at least 4.8 million 
in 2002-3. 

-Community 

program in 
basic education schools 
developed and 
implemented 

Islamic Development Bank:
Assistance program gives
.priority to education
(Universitiesj and health
(hospitals)

EU: Basic and vocational
education projects SME
development. Support for
regional development,
community-based developinent,
work un employment policy

UNDP: Support for benter
access to social services and for
women's empowemoent. FDt
promotion with GAP-RDA and
others Through partnership
with TESK, strengthening of
SMES' access to suppor
services in earthquake regions
and South East.

[LO: Workers' rights and
protection, especially improved
child labor protection. Capacity
buildiug for formulation of
employment and HR strategies
Social dialogue and labor
legislation.

-vocational 

-Conteists 

specialties and UNICEF: Support to Early
categories streamlined by 
Childhood Care and
Sept 2003 
Development, Child Friendly
Learning Environtnent,
Adolescenlt Health and
Development and Children in
Need ofSpecial Protection.
Developmenit of Quality of Life
Indicarors at Provincial level.

of vocational 
training program in 
science, math. 
communications and 
problem solving 
strengthened by Sept.
2003 

Germany: Incomne generating
measures in poor provinces withi
major NGO's in Turkey us
implementing agencies.

sDevemop 
an 
equitable and 
rinancially 
sustainabl 
social 
protection 
system 

-'urkey' 
social protection 
systea ofxtensive 
ah 
but 
need of reform The social 
h insurance systend is fiscally 
unsustainable. Sucial 
assistance sclicemes are 
dispersed and disjointed 
and often fail to reach thc 
most vulnerable 
households 

seReform 
the social secufity 
system teni 
financially sussainable system 

-Strengthen 
sociai safety net 
atid improve delivery of social 
services to those in iieed 

-

Increase participation of 
disadvantaged grotips in 
decision making about 
communities' developmetit. 

3. Close health 
gap between 
Turkey and 
comparable 
middle income 
countries. 

- Turkey's health indicators, 
both in terms of health status 
and health system 
performance lag far behind 
average EU levels, even 
behind those of otlier 
countries with similar incom 
levels. Within Turkey there 
are wide regional disparities, 
as well as large differentials 
between urban and rural 
areas and between income 
grouips, 

- Improve equity of access to 
health services, service quality 
and effectiveness and ultimately 
health outcomes through 
targeted provision of publicly 
financed health care, appropriate 
public health programs, 
particularly in regions with poor 
health indicators. 

- Reduce the burden of disease 
due to avoidable illness anid 
disability and close the health 
gap between Turkey and Europe 
through health promotion, cost- 
effective delivery of basic 
services for primary care in rural 
areas and access to quality 
hospital services at the district 
levels, 

- Revitalize the core functions of 
the Ministry of Health, is terms 
of priority setting, 
epidemiological surveillance, 
monitoring of service quality 
and effectiveness. 

PAYG peitsion system 
o financially 
sustainable system with 
broader coverage s 
s 
-Framework 
for 
supplemnentary individual 
pensions introduced 

-Social assistance schemes 
streamlined and rendered 
more effective 

- Negative effects of 
reforms on disadvantaged 
minimized. 

-

Improved health 
indicators, iticluding less 
regional variability in 
health outcomes and 
service quality. 
Specifically, 
immunization rates, 
fertility rates, incidence of 
the predominant 
detenminants of the burden 
of disease will be 
monitored. 

- Successful completion of 
the Burden of Disease 
Study, allowing improved 
targeting of recources to 
specific 
regions/populations and/or 
disease patterns. 

- Improved equity of access 
to essential health 
services, and improved 
user satisfaction 
particularly in low income 
areas, as assessed by focus 
groups household and 
poverty surveys 

- Provision of primary, 
secondary and tertiary 
health services in 
provinces affected by the 
earthquakes, assessed as 
percentage of rehabilitated 
health infrastructure. 

Annex B9
Page 7 of 10

IBRD leading: 

- ERL FY 

IBRD ending- 
Privatization Social Support 
Project FY0 

Local Initiatives and Social 
Assistance Project FY02 

-Natui a[ and Ctiltural Heritage 
Project FY02 

IFC:
Possible stipport to 
establishment of private pension 
ftinds 

PAYG *efom completed 
as agraed under ERg 
t 
Social security systein
restruciired to expand 
coverage, separate 
pension systeiti from 
health insurance and
uiiemployment schemes, 
contribution arrears 
eliminated

ILO: Advisory work on social
protection and safe work
legislationa

UNDP: Enhaied 
civic
engagemenlt, e.g. local Agenda
2 1

FAO: National atid regiotial
food security programs

- Legal and regulatory 
framework for individual 
supplementary pensiotis 
established 

Turkish NGOs:
Implementation of Local
Initiatives and Social Assistance
Project

IBRD lending: 
- Health 11 FY95 

IBRD lending: 
- Health Project FY03 

- Marmara Emergency 
Health Care FY97 

IBRD non-lending: 
- Health Sector Review FY02 

IFC: 
- Possible support to 
investments in private health 
care and private health 
insuratice mechanisms, 

- Salety net for those
suffering short-terin
negative consequences of
reform implemented
- Burden of Disease Study 
which will allow to 
improve allocation of
public resources towards 
disease and equity 
priorities implemented 
with WHO assistance 

- Unit of National Health 
Accounts, (using OECD 
methodology) established 
to track public and private 
sectoral expenditure 
patterns with the objective 
of improving sectoral 
resource allocation and 
guide policy priorities. 

- Disease surveillance 
system at both provincial 
and central levels,
complying with WHO 
standards and established 
through Core Health 
Resource Management 
System financed under
Health 11 project. 

- Reversal of declitmitig 
funding trend for primary 
health care in general and 
specifically for public 
health programs with 
large positive externalities 
(immunization, Th 
cotitrol, family planning, 
etc,) 

EU: Ongoing health sector
project (reproductive health)

UNICEF:
-Partnership in implementing
psycho-social activities in
earthquake areas
- Support to Mother and Child
Health and Nutrition, i.e.
integrated managenient of
childhood illnesses, prevention
of perinatal and neonatal
mortality, immtnization, and
functional national nutrition
committee to develop and
implement a National Nuitrition
Plan of Action.
- Support to Adolescent Health:
Prevention and reduction of
HIV/AIDS and other problems.

Islamic Development Bank:
Support to health sector,
particularly university and other
hospitals and laboratories

UNFPA: Program in
reproductive health . Capacity
building for formulation of
stistainable population and
development strategies.
Cooperation with the World
Bank in all Reproductive
Health, Primary Health Care
and Gender related activities
with a particular focius on
reducing regional disparities.

- mprove-d efriciency of 
health -care provision 
focusing on- reonenting 
services tov,ards 
prevention and ontpatient
based pnmary health care,
assessed in performance
of basic public health
programs by WHO

IV. STRENGTHEN ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND DISASTER MITIGATION

- Mitigate the negative impact of 
natural resource utilization and 
industrial pollution 

- Reduction of noxious 
emissions in cities 

IBRD lending: 
- Agr. Research Project 
FY92 

IBRD lending: 
- Micro-Watershed 
Management Project FY03 

- Improve resource management 
to allow for sustainable use of 
natural resources and higher 
incomes rural populations 

- Successful replication of 
community based resource 
management system in 
micro-catchments on wider 
scale 

- E. Anatolia Watershed 
Mgmt Project FY93 

Village and Township 
Services Project FY02 

- GEF Biodiversity 
Project FY00 

- GEF Black Sea Agricultural 
Nutrient Reduction Proj. FY03 

Replace fertilizer subsidies and 
price supports with direct 
income stipport scheme to 
farmers. 

Measurable improvements 
in forestry management and 
community incomes in pilot 
regions 

- Ozone Depleting 
Substances Phaseout 11 
FY96 

IBRD non-lending: 
- NEAP/Clean Air Initiative 
FY02-03 

- Prepare a national forestry 
action programme based on the 
Forestry Master Plan 

- Energy and Environment 
Review FY0 1 

IBRD non-lending: 
- Livestock Sector Note 
FYO0 

- Forestry Sector Review 
FY01 

1. Reduce 
pollution and 
use natural 
resources in 
sustainable 
manner 

- Periods of rapid growth led 
to accelerated consumption 
of natural resources, 
generatioti of waste and high 
levels of urban pollution. 

- Periods of economic 
downtum led to resource 
mining and increased 
pressure on marginal lands 
by vulnerable groups left 
without other income 
sources They also led to 
higher pollutton as firms 
sought to cut costs 

- Agricultural input subsidies 
led to overuse of fertilizer 
and other inputs with adverse 
environmental impacts, while 
faling to promote efficieit 
rural growth. 

- Budgetary cuts led to 
reduced enforcement of 
environmental regulations 

- EU accession will require 
adherence to and 
enforcement of EU 
environmental standards 

Annex B9
Page 8 of 10

WHIO: Ongoing advice and
technical assistance through
local office and Regional EURO
office in Copenhagen.

EU: Livestock and rural
development projects.
Environmental protection with
emphasis on acquis standards,
involvement of civil society.

Germany:
- System building approach in
environmental issues, exploiting
experiences on the different
levels of administration (national
govermuent, provincial,
municipal).
- Environment counseling
center Bursa (a.o. awareness
building, advisory services
especially in the field of energy
saving and renewable energy,
training measures).
- Credit lines for environnent
related SMI investments amd
renewable energy resources
- Erosion management in
Bayburt.

UNDP: With GAP work on
regional masterplan, irrigation
strategy and natural resource
management

FAO: TA for Forestry
management, prevention and
control of forest firex, planning
and management of national
parks, protected and reserve
areas, the preparation of a
national forestry action
programme Sustainable
fisheries management in Black
Sea region. Prevention of animal
and plant disease transmission in
region. Implementation of Urban
Habitat Agenda. Environmental
sustainability of livestock
production (LEAD initiative).

- Increase in number of 
villages/areas with 
community-based natural 
resource management 
plans under 
implementation

- Agreement on 
implementation of action 
plan for livestock sector 

- Agreement on action plan 
for forestry management 

- Research Master Plan 
becoming basis for 
budget allocations based 
on program priorities 

- Farmers have adopted 
new technologies releascd 
by agencies funded under 
Ag. Research Project 

- Intersectoral planning
authorities for bio- 
diversity established. 
Management plams for 
biodiversity are under 
implementation

Annex B9
Page 9 of 10

theF G WliSal GAPants Pogra

envronmegytal nanualgesonrent

Wioh 40 ciies, sustainabl urban

environmental Prongramen
against pollution through the
tCruhteF ConsolidAteanda2
Regional GEF Black Sea
servicem delivery 
for rapi

develop working models in
adainistrpotorsiin theog chil
fnvriendlyenvil ronrmen.oep
survival, development and
protection at sub-national levels.
watCEr 
: Caitton,soldat psyho
Capacity building of local

social services),
EIB: Cofinancing of MFER
program

JBIC: Fast -disbursing funds
after Marmara quake, financing
for quake-damaged SMEs.

Islamic Development Bank:
Financing of earthquake
mitigation in Marinura area

ILO: Prevent children from
working in the streets of Yalova,
Golcuk and Adapazari.

Spain: Fuoiding of
reconstruction and rehabilitation
of damaged infrastructure

tJNDP: Support to
insitutionalisation of TEMAD;
nuimerous projects addressing
basic needs; rubble and waste
management; disaster
preparedness.

- Minimize losses from natural 
disaster through improved 
disaster preparedness, 
establishment of catastrophic 
insurance and strict 
enforcement of building 
standards and safety codes 

2. 

Increase 
disaster 
preparedness 
and minimize 
losses from 
natural 
disasters 

- Turkey has a high seismic 
risk and a history of 
flooding. Natural disasters 
have occasionally caused 
extensive loss of human lives 
and large ecoitoinic costs. 

- The 1999 earthquakes in 
Marmara and Duzce have 
demonstrated the need for 
more comprehensive disaster 
preparedness, catastliropic 
insurance and sound 
governauice of constriuction 
practices 

- Reconstruction in areas 
affected by 1998 and 1999 
quakes completed on 
schedule 

IBRD lending: 
- Emergency Flood and 
Earthquake Recovery
FY99 

- Disaster law amended, 
earthquake insurance 
decree enacted and TCIP 
established 

- Building safety codes 
revised and strictly 
enforced 

- EMAI established 

- In event of futurc quakes, 
human loss and pltysical 
damage measurably less 
than is past. 

- Marmara Emergency 
Earthquake 
Reconstruction FYOO 

- Emergency Earthquake 
Recovery Loan FYOO 

- Reallocations frout) 
eight ongoing loans for 
Marmara earhquake 
teCOvery FYOO 

I FC: 
- Earthquake Region
Development facility 
FY00 

IBRD lending: 
- Seismic Risk Mitigation FY03 

- Successful establislhment 
of EMAT 

- In the event of a natuiral 
disaster larger than 1999 
quakes or before completion 
of MEER: natural disaster 
recovery loans 

- Successful establishment 
of TCIP. Insurance 
premiums collected as 
planned

- Timely completion of 
housing, school and 
health care facilities
reconstruction 

- Restoration of health care 
supplies and services it
Marmara region 

V. ACCELERATE CONNECTIVITY AND TECHNOLOGICAL CAPABILITIES

1, Accelerate the 
pace of 
technological 
upgrading to 
support growth 
and 
employment 
creation 

- Turkey remains behind 
OECD countries, East Asia 
and India in terms of 
technological capabilities. 
Induistrial structure is 
anchored in low technology 
industries and computer 
literacy and connectivity 
remain below OECD 
standards. 

- Support private sector R&D 
efforts and technology 
upgrading. Increase linkages 
between Turkish R&D 
institutions and industry 

- Strengthen standardization and 
calibration capacity 

-

-

Iarmonize Turkish 
technology infrastructure with 
EU standards 

Increase students' computer 
literacy, interactive learning
capacity and access to world 
wide information 

- Connectivity indicators 
improve with respect to 
OECD benchmarks 

IBRD lending: 

- Industrial Technology 
Project FY99

- Increased interaction and 
cooperation between R&D 
institutions and private 
industry 

- Basic Education Project 
APL I FY98 

Annex B9
Page 10 of 10

UFlPA: 
lmplementatioI of a
project funded by ECHO in the
provinces affected by the two
earthquakes last year which aims
to assist the Ministry of Healthi
in restoring Reproductive Health

____________________________ 

_________________________ 
services in the affected areas.

IBRD lending: 

- Secondary Education FY02 

ILSIS system fully 
operational 

Univenities, Chambeis of
Commerce

- IBRD non-lending: 

- Global Gateway (FY01) 
- IFC: 
- Support and finance 
inforination technology and 
communication projects. 
- Invest in pioneering
transactions to help introduce 
and integrate the internet in 
the Turkish economy 

- 7,500 prinmary+secondary
schools fully equipped
with computer technology
and students trained in
interactive learning
technologies

- Capacity for interactive
distance learning at
higher education level
initiated.

-

Increased institutional
capacity of agencies
participating in ITP

Increased R&D and
productivity gains by
firms participating uinder
ITP

Annex BJO
Page I of I

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance' 

Major issue b 

Country priority' Bank priority 

Reconciliation of country
and Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management

Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department

Education (basic/sec'y,higher) 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development

fair 
good 
good 
fair 

inequality, high vulnerability rate 
structural reform 
effective mgmt., pub serv deliv. 
health, education, esp. rural 

moderate 
high 
high 
moderate 

high 
high
high
moderate

Ongoing dialogue

excellent/fair 
poor 
fair 

literacy/sector governance 
inequality, weak delivery, mgmt. 
targeting, burden on public 
finances

high/moderate 
low 
moderate 

high/moderate
high 
moderate

ESW to build consensus

Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

fair 
fair 
good 

productivity, agricultural reform 
urban air, sust'ble rural land use 
income generating opportunities 

high 
moderate 
moderate 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure

Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

good 
privatize state banks 
good/excellent privatization, FDI 
good 
move to competitive market model 
fair 
munic.reform (fin. & accountability) 

high 
high 
high 
moderate 

high
moderate
moderate

high
moderate 
high
moderate

Government and others lead

a. Use 'excellent," 'good," fair," or "poor."

b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;' for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, 'urban air pollution').
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Annex Bll

Actions for Second Tranche Release on the Economic Reform Loan
and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan

I. Economic Reform Loan (ERL).

For the ERL, the required actions for the second tranche release fall into four categories:
macroeconomic sustainability; social security reform; agricultural reform; and
deregulation and privatization.

A. Macroeconomic Sustainability

1. 
Satisfactory implementation of the macroeconomic framework for calendar year 2000 and
adoption of a satisfactory macroeconomic framework for calendar year 2001.

2. Adoption of a satisfactory fiscal package in the framework of the budget for calendar year
2001 designed to replace temporary measures with permanent measures and incorporating
expenditure reforms, in accordance with the recommendations of a public expenditure and
institutional review to be carried out with the Bank, that encompass:

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

(e) 

elimination of at least 25 budgetary funds;
reduction in the number of non-budgetary funds as agreed with the Bank;
limits on the introduction of new projects into the public investment program;
establishment of a public registry of government guarantees and limits on the
issuance of new guarantees; and
incorporation of more effective expenditure control mechanisms.

B. Social Security Reform

I .

Satisfactory implementation of the social security reform program encompassing:

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 

implementation of the pay-as-you-go pension reform;
implementation of the administrative and institutional reform program;
implementation of the plan to reduce all contribution arrears;
implementation of the unemployment insurance scheme; and
implementation of the legal and regulatory framework to support supplementary
individual pension schemes.

C. Agriculture Reform

1. 

Satisfactory progress in implementing the direct income support strategy including:

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

implementation of the pilot program;
preparation of the national farmer registry; and
adoption of a schedule, satisfactory to the Bank, for the initial rollout of the direct
income support program at the national level for the 2001 crop season.

Page 2 

Annex Bl)

2. 
Satisfactory implementation of the program to phase out price and credit subsidies in
agriculture, including:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

maintenance of the fertilizer subsidy constant in nominal terms;
implementation of the program to phase out agriculture credit subsidies; and
implementation of the support price reform including announcement of
additional measures for 2001, as agreed with the Bank.

3. 

Satisfactory implementation of the agricultural enterprise restructuring program including:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

initiation of privatization proceedings of agricultural state economic enterprises
as agreed with the Bank;
complete liquidation of all TZDAS assets and separation or reassignment of all
employees; and
effective autonomy of all agriculture sales cooperative unions (ASCUs) from the
budget as agreed with the Bank.

D. Deregulation and Privatization

I. 

Satisfactory implementation of the energy reform program as agreed with the Bank

including:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

enactment of an electricity reform law to establish an independent regulatory
agency with full authority over tariff policy, further liberalize the electricity
sector and ensure an adequate competitive environment;
implementation of the financial recovery plan for TEAS, as agreed with the
Bank; and
adoption of a time-bound plan for establishing an independent regulatory
authority and de-monopolizing the natural gas sector.

2. 

Satisfactory implementation of the telecommunications reform program, including:

(a) 
(b) 

establishment of the regulatory authority; and
implementation of the action plan for carrying out the conversion of Turk
Telekom into a joint-stock company.

3. 

Satisfactory progress in implementing the privatization program including:

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

(d) 

completion of sale of two additional wireless licenses to private investors;
sale of 20% of Turk Telekom to a strategic private investor;
launch of pre-qualification tenders for the sale of electricity distribution
companies as agreed with the Bank; and
privatization of at least three additional major companies by the Privatization
Administration of the Borrower.

Page 3 

Annex BlI

II. Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (FSAL).

The following actions are to be taken prior to second tranche release:

* 

.

* Satisfactory creation and full operationalization of the BRSA, with proper operational
policies and procedures, organizational structure (including a special unit to deal with
problem banks), budgets, staffing and salaries;
* The BRSA to issue internal supervisory guidelines for "Prompt Corrective Actions" for banks
falling below specific capital adequacy levels;
* Signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the BRSA, the Central Bank of Turkey
and other relevant agencies to ensure proper information exchange and policy coordination in
the financial sector;
* Further revision of the loan classification and loan loss provisioning rule to: (i) introduce a
satisfactory specific provisioning requirement for watch (Category 2) loans; (ii) lift the
exemption for agricultural support loans for which the Government has not explicitly
assumed the credit risk; (iii) include a specific provisioning requirement for equity exposures;
and (iv) introduce more prudent collateral classification; the implementation of this revision
to be gradually phased in up to the end of 2002;
Introduction of full tax deductibility of specific loan loss provisions; the implementation of
tax deductibility to be gradually phased in beginning in 2001;
Issuance of a BRSA regulation that will fully operationalize the new large/connected
exposure limits introduced through the December 1999 Banking Law amendment;
* Satisfactory monitoring by the BRSA of the banking system's compliance with the 75 percent
maximum exposure limit applicable as of January 1, 2001 as specified in the amended
banking law, and initiation of corrective actions in cases of non-compliance;
* The BRSA to announce its intention to undertake surprise on-site examinations, in
coordination with foreign supervisors where necessary (i.e., for banks with foreign
branches/subsidiaries), to verify compliance with consolidated FX open position limits
between reporting dates;
* The BRSA to further revise the consolidated financial reporting requirement for banks and
their financial subsidiaries to extend coverage of the consolidated reporting requirement to
horizontal conglomerates;
Issuance of a risk management system best practice regulation for banks;
Introduction in the bank capital adequacy rule of market risk charges (for securities price
fluctuation risk, FX and interest rate risk);
* Revision of accounting rules for banks to bring them substantially in line with IAS (i.e.,
securities valuation, pension accounting and disclosure requirements for banks in line with
applicable IAS);
* Satisfactory resolution of all known problem banks by Treasury/BRSA/SDIF;
* The Government to develop a time bound action plan to resolve the stock of duty losses on
the books of Ziraat and Halk and to issue Government bonds paying cash interest in line with
the action plan;

* 

* 

Page 4 

Annex B))

Initiating the process of developing and implementing commercialization, restructuring and
institutional development measures for Ziraat, through the development of a comprehensive
strategic plan and detailed corporate action plans for the bank;
* Complete the privatization of Vakif; and
* Complete the pre-privatization restructuring activities for Emlak and Halk (including the
development of a comprehensive strategic plan and detailed corporate action plans for Halk),
and give a mandate to completely privatize both banks to an investment bank or similar
privatization intermediary.

ELS LGb R I A 

1 

r 

osut 

306 

9 

:: 

: 

:: 

I 2 gJbv :: 

:'(cid:2);r;C:4s.!:l.J,l?&s 

GEORGI
GEORGIA 

1SINOP 

N 

AREIS 
,- 

L G A R I ~_J- 
" g '9' 

A 

* 

,.N R

310- APCR

ROMAN IA 

'O.SS6~~.TI<V'K I 

p ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 

.

.

iIN6 

ELI 

-1.T TRTll 

-~~~~~~~~~~i 

RIVERS~RSH 

REPORTS

IA

IR 

---c-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4~AROT

2.!RZIIoINPRVICECAITL

GREE 

> 

0 

0 

-R AZk A R H Y ETA 

Q 

] 

s S 
.

t 

~ ~ ~ ~ 

I; R c ' 

-

E E 

po 

\ 

0 

f 

? 

o 

n 

s 

P 

O 

P 

U 

L 

A 

T 

OLCCENTER5

fi 

r 

5 ~ W *A E -

UKRAINE 
NR 

' 

k 

KAX 

YhSIAN 

_ 

Af 

ffi 

p 

/ 

r 

h.dHhMr 

E 

t -

s.ifT 

.o JAIC 
RY 
olE 

K 

f AY R A N F A # S f A kYiEYtNr 
4.0 mililon 
INTERNATiIlio, 
INTERNAHIGAHWHIGH3A,

AIR OAHDA S

-nulA 

-

0 2 0 
1t<- 

3 0 

4 0 i S t K IL O M E T E R S

 

.

%> 

- ~~~~~~; ssilAN 

J r 35 4,0' SEPTEMEER 
% I K AO IEAN nlEwylyrAwrarPrdEszereswof 
195~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~SEPEMBR 
1

