d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20370 - EAP

PACIFIC

REGIONAL STRATEGY

May 2000

Papua New Guinea and Pacific Islands Country Unit
East Asia and Pacific Regional Office

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perfornance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ADB 
Asian Development Bank
AusAID Australia Agency for International Development
APL 
Adaptable Program Loan
CDF 
Comprehensive Development Framework
CRP 
Comprehensive Reforn Program
DWFN 
Distant Water Fishing Nations
ESW 
Economic and Sector Work
EU 
European Union
FEMM 
Forum Economic Ministers Meeting
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment
FFA 
Foreign Fisheries Agency
FIAS 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
FSM 
Federated States of Micronesia
FTMM 
Foreign Trade Ministers Meeting
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product
GSP 
General System of Preferences
GEF 
Global Environment Facility
HPI 
Human Poverty Index
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IAMP 
Infrastructure Management Project
IDA 
International Development Association
IFC 
International Finance Corporation
LIL 
Learning and Innovation Loan
MHLC Multilateral High Level Commission
ODA 
Official Development Assistance
OED 
Operations Evaluation Department
OECD 
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
PFTAC 
Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center
Pacific Island Country
Pacific Member Countries
Policy and Structural Reform Program
Research and Development
Regional Economic Report
Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Statement of Economic Strategy
State Owned Enterprise
South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission
South Pacific Project Facility
South Pacific Regional Environment Program
United Nations Development Program
World Trade Organization

PMCs 
PSRP 
R&D 
RER 
SPC 
SES 
SOE 
SOPAC 
SPPF 
SPREP 
UNDP 
WTO 

PIC 

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

Mr. Jemal-ud-din Kassum, EAPVP
Mr. Klaus Rohland, EACNI
Mr. Laurence Dunn, EACNI

CONTENTS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Executive Summary...............

1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ....................................................................

2. THE PACIFIC SETTING ....................................................................

1

2

A. Characterizing Pacific Economies 
.2
B. Geographic, Political & Social Diversity .................................................. 
C. Governance ............................................................. 
D. Basic Human Indicators ............................................................. 
E. Poverty in the Pacific ............................................................. 

........... 10
12
12
14

3. REFORM AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE PACIFIC ....................................................... 17

A. National Reforn Programs ................................................................... 
B. The Regional Dimension to Reform ................................................................... 
C. The Role of Development Partners ................................................................... 

4. PARTNERSHIP & STRATEGIC SELECTIVITY - IDENTIFYING THE BANK'S
ROLE ................................................................... 

17
19
20

24

A. The Banks' Experience in the Pacific ................................................................... 
24
B. Lessons Learned ................................................................... 
26
C. The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) in the Pacific ........................... 27
D. The World Bank Group's Pacific Strategy ................................................................... 29
E. Risks To Implementation Of The Strategy ....................
3 7
7........... 

5. CONCLUDING COMMENTS ..................................... 

Annex 1: The Bank's Pacific Experience ..................................... 
Annex 2: Pacific - Countries at a Glance ..................................... 

FIGURES IN TEXT

38

39
43

Figure 1: GNP per Capita (US$, 1998) .....
2................................2
Figure 2: Population (Thousands, 1998) ......................................
2
Figure 3: GDP Growth (%)-High, Low, and average (1990-98) .................................................3
Figure 4: Government Expenditure 1996-98 (% GDP) ............................................................. 5
Figure 5: Current Account Balance Before and After Official Transfers .......................................6
Figure 6: Suicide Rates in Selected Pacific Island Countries, by Sex and for Youth ................... 16

This dociment has a restricted distibution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank amthorization.

TABLES IN TEXT

Table 1: Main Merchandise Exports and Tourism Receipts ........................................................... 7
Table 2: Overall Fiscal Balance, 1994-98 ................................................................ 
8
Table 3: Debt Stocks and Aid Flows (Average, 1996-98) .............................................................. 9
Table 4: Basic Human Resource Profile ................................................................ 
13
Table 5: Human Poverty Index for the Pacific ................................................................ 
15
Table 6: The Pacific Reform Agenda ................................................................ 
18
Table 7: Bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to the Nine Pacific Member

Countries - 1994-1998 ................................................................ 

Table 8: Multilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to Pacific Member
Countries 1994 -1998 ................................................................ 
Table 9: Current Lending Activities ................................................................ 

20

22
31

BOXES IN TEXT

Box A: The Case of Kiribati .................................................................
11
Box B: The Solomon Islands' Reform Program .......................................... 
...................... 17
Box C: World Bank Approaches to Poverty, 1990 and 2000 ....................................................... 28
Box D: The World Bank's Approach to Private Sector Development in the Pacific .................... 32
Box E: The Biennial Regional Economic Report ................................................................ 
34

MAP: IBRD 29631

PACIFIC REGIONAL STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

CHARACTERIZING THE PACIFIC

i. 
The Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy will provide the framework for the re-engagement
of the Bank with the Pacific region and the nine Pacific countries that are Bank members'. It
follows the recent work of the Joint Commonwealth Secretariat-World Bank Task Force on
Small States and places the issues raised through that process in a Pacific context. A regional
strategy was considered appropriate given the size of the Bank's operations in the Pacific and the
shared nature of many of the problems facing countries of the region. The Regional Strategy
does, however, lay the foundation for future individual Country Assistance Strategies for Pacific
Bank members if required.

ii. 
The Bank's Pacific Member Countries (PMCs) share many characteristic with other
small states. They are all relatively small, open economies with limited diversification and
limited institutional capacity. They are vulnerable to external economic and environmental
shocks and have limited or nonexistent access to global capital markets. Size and remoteness are
strong defining characteristic of the nine Pacific Bank members with the total land area of only
some 64,000 square kilometers (equivalent to twice the size of Belgium), while the exclusive
economic zones they control exceeds the land area of the USA. The population of all members
totals some 2 million (of which Fiji accounts for over 40 percent).

iii. 
Unlike the Caribbean and Indian Ocean countries to which they are sometimes compared,
indigenous cultures and traditions have remained strong in the Pacific Islands and continue to
play a large role in political, economic and cultural life. The existence of these strong cultural
and social systems continues to ameliorate the incidence of absolute or abject poverty, but there
are clear indications that the systems and the values that underpin them are under strain.

iv. 
The challenges facing the PMCs are to overcome the constraints they share with other
small states, including economic and environmental vulnerability, changing global trade regimes,
lack of institutional and human capacity and identifying practical options in response to the
continuing process of globalization. A major challenge specifically confronting all PMCs is to
provide sustainable and meaningful economic and social opportunities and services for growing
populations and within a context fast paced social, cultural and economic change.

v. 
Most PMCs have broad based economic reform programs under development or in place
which have at their core macroeconomic and fiscal policy stability and recognition of the private
sector as the engine of sustainable economic development. Many also focus on promoting
development in rural and regional areas and improving access to health, education and training

' The Pacific Member Countries (PMCs) comprise Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, Kiribati, Palau,
Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of Marshal Islands. A separate CAS (19590-PNG) has been prepared
that covers Papua New Guinea; for East Timor a Transition Strategy will be submitted to the Board shortly.

ii -

-

services. The degree and extent of broader civil society involvement in and ownership of reform
programs varies.

vi. 
There is a strong history of dialogue in the region on how to respond to shared
vulnerabilities and opportunities and a number of regional institutions have been developed.
Prospects for continued regional and subregional cooperation loom strong in the areas of trade,
banking, transport, telecommunications, management of marine resources and bulk purchasing
of supplies and products; but the immense size of the region and the variety of cultures and
political systems limits regional cooperation.

THE ROLE FOR DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

vii. 
PMCs have all depended heavily on external assistance to help finance their development
expenditures. In line with both colonial history and national interests, some 20 developed
countries provide bilateral assistance to the PMCs, though the top four (Australia, Japan, New
Zealand and, in the case of compact countries, the USA) accounted for over 95 percent bilateral
Official Development Assistance (ODA) in 1998. Multilateral partners include the Asian
Development Bank (ADB), the European Union (EU) and specialized agencies of the United
Nations family. The ADB and EU accounted for 82 percent of multilateral ODA provided to
PMCs in 1998. The scale of involvement by development partners, and the lack of institutional
capacity of PMCs to manage and drive it renders importance to the issue of aid coordination.

THE BANK'S PACIFIC EXPERIENCE

viii. The Bank has extended 38 loans and credits to PMC since 1971, comprising 13 IBRD
loans ($US152.8m) to Fiji and 25 IDA credits to Samoa, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and Tonga.
The success of the Bank's lending to PMCs can only be described at best as mixed. The Bank
has maintained an expanded program of economic and sector work since the beginning of the
1990s, with the cornerstone of that program being the biennial Regional Economic Report
(RER). The main lessons drawn from assessing the Bank's Pacific program have been:

* The Bank's role in the transfer of resources to the PMCs has been and is likely to remain
limited, with the bulk of resources to be provided by bilateral donors, the ADB and the EU.

* 

In view of its limited lending, the Bank needs to carefully define its strategic objectives and
tailor its lending and non-lending activities to achieve those objectives.

* The absence of a long term strategy for assistance to PMCs has circumscribed the
effectiveness of the assistance that the Bank has been able to provide.

* A long-term strategy for development in the region has to include active collaboration with
other principal development partners in the region.

-

iii -

THE BANK'S PACIFIC STRATEGY

ix. 
The Comprehensive Development Framework, the Bank's evolving understanding of the
root causes of poverty and the shared work with the Commonwealth Secretariat on the
challenges facing small states all provide the basis of a long term strategy for assistance to the
Bank's Pacific members. This strategy has at its core the fight against poverty as manifested in
the Pacific, will be supportive of reform programs that are owned and driven by the PMCs
themselves, will acknowledge the central importance of the sustainable utilization of natural
resources in meeting the development aspirations of the Pacific peoples, will identify country-led
coordination with other development partners as a key element for success and will stress the
role that Pacific institutions, traditions and customs play in making sustained progress against
poverty.

x. 
The Bank's mission in the Pacific is based on partnership with the nine members and
their development partners. The Bank will provide a targeted and focused mix of project
financing, and a program of economic and sector work that brings global experience to the
development problems faced by PMCs.

i) The Bank's Lending Program

xi. 
The Bank's lending program will be largely IDA-based, focused in sectors that match the
Bank's overarching mission of poverty reduction and in which the Bank's has a proven track
record, will involve direct policy and strategic reform and will only involve financial assistance
where there are no other sources of financing available. This will entail a sectoral focus on
education and health, measures to address the remoteness and isolation faced by the Pacific
including in the transport infrastructure and telecommunications sectors and a focus on
strengthening the private sector's capacity to play a greater role in these areas. In the area of
environment and natural resources, the Bank will continue to address country priorities through
GEF medium-sized grants and by mainstreaming it into lending, policy and advisory activities.
Support for broad based economic reform and restructuring will be considered where PMCs can
articulate a coherent reform program and demonstrate commitment to carrying it through.

xii. 
In terms of overall scale, an indicative benchmark of 2-3 new lending activities per fiscal
year will see a portfolio under supervision of some 7-10 projects and will entail a call on IDA
resources of up to $US30-$40 million over the next three years.

xiii. 
In recognition of the circumstances that apply in the Pacific, including the capacity of
small states and the cost of doing business with International Financial Institutions, continued
efforts will be made to use existing instruments more flexibly and develop new instruments that
match the scale and capacity of Pacific countries. This will include fine tuning and more
extensive use of Adaptable Program Loans (APLs) and Leaming and Innovation Loans (LILs),
as well as development of sector and program lending and possibly regional based lending
operations.

ii) Economic and Sector Work

- iv -

xiv. The Bank's role as a global knowledge provider is the key strength that it can bring to the
Pacific. The Bank's biennial Regional Economic Report (RER) will continue to be the main
vehicle for bringing the Bank's global perspective to the Pacific. It will be supplemented and
supported by a more focused program of regional and sector based analysis developed and
undertaken in conjunction with PMCs and other regional and bilateral development partners. The
Bank will maintain its capacity to undertake country-specific economic and sector work.

xv. 
In the medium term, the main focus of the Bank's economic and sector work will focus
on the agenda identified through the joint World Bank-Commonwealth Secretariat Task Force on
Small States and on developing specific strategies that are relevant to the Pacific. This will
include:

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

iv) 

v) 

helping identify scope for cooperation at the regional level to share infrastructure and
institutional resources to overcome the lack of economies of scale that some individual
PMC face;

working with PMCs, regional organizations and bilateral development partners to see
what relevance the Bank's work on catastrophe risk management in Caribbean can have
for the Pacific;

analyzing and identifying adaptation strategies open to PMCs to respond to global
climate change, environmental degradation associated with the growth of towns and
population growth;

drawing on the Bank's involvement with trade liberalization experiences in other
countries to identify roadblocks to liberalization in the Pacific that could increase the cost
of adjustment; and

working with PMCs and other development partners to identify how the forces of
globalization, particularly technological and communication advances, can provide new
opportunities for reducing physical isolation and remoteness from markets.

ISSUES PROPOSED FOR BOARD CONSIDERATION

xvi. Issues that the Board may wish to provide guidance on include:

* 

the balance between lending and non-lending services in the Banks Pacific operations;

* strategic selectivity in terms of sectors identified and activities proposed; and

* how the issue of partnership is best handled in the Pacific context.

PACIFIC REGIONAL STRATEGY

1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE

1. 
The Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy will provide a framework for the re-engagement of
the Bank with the Pacific region and nine Pacific Bank members2 . It follows the recent work of
the Joint Commonwealth Secretariat-World Bank Task Force on Small States and places the
issues raised through that process in a Pacific context. A regional strategy was considered
appropriate given the size of the Bank's operations in the Pacific and the shared nature of many
of the problems facing countries of the region. The Regional Strategy does, however, lay the
foundation for future individual Country Assistance Strategies for Pacific Bank members if
required.

2. 

A broad Bank Strategy for the Pacific will:

* build on and refine the work of the Small States Task Force;

* provide member countries with a clear statement of the World Bank's ongoing commitment
to the Pacific region;

* articulate a set of principles on which World Bank activities in the region would be based and
on which their effectiveness could be judged;

* 

identify those areas and sectors in which the World Bank would focus its involvement in the
region; and

* provide an indication of the likely scale and composition of the support that could be
mobilized by the World Bank in the region.

2 The Pacific Member Countries (PMCs) comprise Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, Kiribati, Palau,
Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of Marshal Islands. A separate CAS (19590-PNG) has been prepared
that covers Papua New Guinea; for East Timor a Transition Strategy will be submitted to the Board shortly.

- 2 -

2. THE PACIFIC SETTING

A. CHARACTERIZING PACIFIC ECONOMIES

3. 
The total land area of the PMCs, dispersed among hundreds of small islands and atolls, is
only 88 800 square kilometers - equivalent to about twice the size of Belgium. However, the sea
area controlled through exclusive economic zones (EEZs) exceeds the land area of the USA. The
total population of the PMCs is about 2 million, with Fiji accounting for about 42 percent and
Palau less than 1 percent (Figure 2). In terms of GNP per capita PMCs range from low income
countries (Solomon Islands, US$750) to upper middle income (Palau, over US$7,000). All other
PMCs belong to the lower-middle-income group with GNPs per capita ranging from US$1,020
(Samoa) to US$2,110 (Fiji).

Figure 1: GNP per Capita (US$, 1998) 

Figure 2: Population (Thousands, 1998)

8000 

70002 
6000- 

3000 

2000 

'°700
6000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0
4000 ] 
5000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

4000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

900

800

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~500

0

-

4~ 00-

200J

2NO ' W S . N 0 zzEt 
, ,Et 
t & 

tO 

-

Growth and Vulnerability

4. 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in the PMCs has been modest ranging from -1.4
percent to 2.9 percent per annum between 1990 and 1998 (Figure 3). Growth however has not
been smooth and most countries' growth rate had a coefficient of variation of 2 or greater. The
volatility of incomes is to be expected given the nature of these economies-highly open,
commodity exporting with low levels of diversification, and prone to natural disasters. Despite
their relatively higher levels of income within the subset of developing countries PMCs are more
vulnerable than their larger counterparts. Here, vulnerability means exposure to exogenous
shocks over which they have no control, and have relatively low resilience to withstand and
recover from these shocks. According to a vulnerability index designed by the Commonwealth
Secretariat for 111 developing countries all PMCs rank amongst the 28 'most vulnerable'
countries.

-3 -

Figure 3: GDP Growth (%)-High, Low, and average (1990-98)

15%l

10%

5%L I 

-5%-

-1S% i~- 

-20% l

1~~~~~~

T 

-T

-

* Average

Structure of PMC Economies

5. 
The small size of the domestic market interacts with a narrow resource base to make
PMC economies relatively undiversified and highly open on the trade account, with openness
being expressed through a high share of exports to GDP or a high share of imports to GDP or
both. The remoteness and isolation of these countries from major centers of trade and commerce
makes it more difficult to compensate for the limited domestic markets by turning to world
markets. Transport costs are high because of small cargo volumes. The ratio of freight and
insurance debits to import costs (an indicator of transport costs) is 20 percent or higher for PMCs
compared with the median value of 14 percent for all developing countries.

6. 
The constraints of a narrow resource base and small size are most apparent in 'advanced'
manufacturing activities such as capital goods, metal working, and intermediates. These
activities are characterized by economies of scale in production, product development and R&D.
The share of manufacturing in GDP in PMCs is generally under 10 percent. Manufacturing is
thus limited to basic small scale 'low technology' activities like food processing and breweries
which are not greatly impacted by market size. The exception is Fiji where the share is 15
percent because of the sugar and garment industries.

7. 
In the absence of a large manufacturing sector PMCs are dependent on the primary and
tertiary sectors of the economy as a source of output, employment, and foreign exchange. In the
agricultural sector a large share of production is in the form of smallholder operated,
semisubsistence, household enterprises growing chiefly root crops and garden vegetables. In Fiji
agriculture is organized more along commercial lines, although the subsistence sector remains
important. Large scale agriculture comprises oil palm, coconut, cocoa, and coffee plantations,
and beef cattle in Vanuatu with the bigger and more capital intensive operations wholly or

-4 -

partially foreign owned. The sharp fall in prices of traditional PMC export crops has stimulated
producers to move into nontraditional crops to exploit niche markets in squash pumpkin, vanilla,
melons, and coconut cream.

8. 
The contribution of the tertiary sector ranges from 55 to 60 percent in Fiji, Samoa, Tonga,
and Vanuatu, while in FSM, Marshall Islands, and Kiribati it is greater than 75 percent. In the
tertiary sector the two important activities are public services and tourism related services.

9. 
The economic contribution of the fisheries sector comes from subsistence activities
employing traditional methods, commercial fishing, and downstream industrial processing.
National accounts statistics show a contribution ranging from about 2 percent in Fiji to about 9
percent in Marshall Islands, but these are greatly understated as they fail to take full account of
artisanal and subsistence production. For example, in Kiribati where commercial fishing
contributes about 3.5 percent to GDP, the share of subsistence fisheries is estimated at nearly 9
percent. Trade data show that fish exports figure prominently in most countries (Table 1), but
especially in Micronesian countries where they range from 50 percent to nearly 90 percent of
commodity exports. All PMCs also receive access fees from licensing of Distant Water Fishing
Nations (DWFNs) vessels. Total revenues from access fees varies significantly across countries
reflecting the great variation in the distribution of offshore fish resources. For the Micronesian
countries, fishing fees have in the recent past contributed amounts equivalent to 50 percent to
100 percent of revenues raised from taxes.

Public Sector

10. 
The size of the public sector in most PMCs is larger than virtually all countries at similar
levels of per capita income (Figure 4). Small but widely dispersed island nations cannot exploit
economies of scale in the provision of public services. The role of the private sector has been
small. Lack of private initiative stemming from social, cultural, and land tenure reasons partially
account for this, but it has been further aggravated by policies that inhibited private sector
development. The generous inflows of foreign aid which have been used mainly for public sector
projects have also contributed to this. PMC governments are engaged in a wide range of
economic activities such as utilities, development finance, commercial credit, overseas trade,
marketing of agricultural goods, operating fishing fleets, mines, plantations, aviation services,
and hotels. As government has grown it has failed to create many new opportunities in the
private sector and has become the 'default' employer of skilled and educated workers.
Government employment accounts for nearly 30 percent of total formal employment in Fiji and
Solomon Islands and about 50 percent in Kiribati. The wage bill amounts to about 45 percent of
total recurrent expenditure in Fiji and Solomon Islands.

11. 
The range of activities carried out by the governments is wide but is not matched by
requisite technical and managerial resources. As a result limited skills are spread thinly.
Governments have responded to this situation by over staffing agencies with partially qualified
personnel, spending heavily on overseas training, and relying on overseas technical assistance to
fill gaps. In some services technical assistance has become an almost permanent feature.

-5 -

Figure 4: Government Expenditure 1996-98 (% GDP)

i

120 

100

80 -

60

40

20

0~

Investment and Saving

12. During the 1990s, investment rates in the PMCs have been of the order of 25-35 percent
(save Fiji where it has been 10-15 percent), with the public sector playing an equal if not
dominant role in most. However, the growth rates achieved from this level of investment have
been relatively low. The low level of productivity of investment can partly be explained by
natural constraints imposed by size, spread and remoteness of PMCs which raise the unit cost of
economic activities. The volatility of output and incomes generated by external shocks to the
economy poses a tremendous challenge to the efficient utilization of capital stocks. However,
there is evidence that even after controlling for these factors there has been inefficient allocation
(poor choice of projects) and utilization of capital (weakness in implementation). A large part of
public investment in the PICs has been in low return areas such as public buildings. The
investments of public enterprises in loss-making commercial activities have also contributed to
this outcome. The policy environment, including distortions in trade, tax, and tariff regimes have
tended to support high-cost uncompetitive investment.

13. 
Public investment has had a crowding out effect on the private sector. Government
controlled enterprises operate in many sectors of the economy that could readily be undertaken
by the private sector and the involvement of the public sector in these commercial areas has
tended to discourage entry of the private sector. Crowding-out has also occurred through factor
market effects wherein public sector activities resulted in pushing up wages and interest rates and
the pre-empting of credit.

14. Domestic savings rates are low, reflecting a high propensity to consume, shallow
financial systems and the narrowness of the monetized portion of the economy. High rates of
investment have been sustained primarily through aid and remittances.

-6 -

External Sector

15. Because of their structural and resource characteristics PMCs produce a relatively narrow
range of goods and services but they consume a wide range. For some PMCs merchandise
imports are a multiple of exports, implying large merchandise deficits. Invisible earnings reduce
the gap in most countries except Solomon Islands, Marshall Islands, and FSM. Tourism earnings
are important for Fiji, Vanuatu, Tonga, and Samoa (Table 1); investment income for Kiribati,.
and remittances from nationals working abroad in the case of Kiribati, Tonga, Vanuatu and
Samoa. Despite these flows a large gap remains that is met through aid (Figure 5).

Figure 5: Current Account Balance Before and After Official Transfers
(% GDP, Average 1996-98)

40

30

20 

1 0

-10 

-20

-30

-40 A

-50J

i

0 Before Transfers
* After Transfers

cZo

16. 
Exports have been mainly confined to primary commodities with a high degree of
concentration on a single commodity (Table 1). Over the last few years, however, changes have
occurred in the export structure as countries begin to diversify by moving towards higher value
added products by finding niche markets. Fiji moved in to the manufacturing sector by exporting
garments others diversified within primary commodities - squash in Tonga; logging in Solomon
Islands, seaweed in Kiribati, and sashimi in FSM. Imports consist mainly of machinery and
capital goods and petroleum products.

17. 
The PMCs have benefited from preferential trade arrangements which convey duty free
or low duty access for their exports into the markets of major industrial countries. All of the
PMCs receive GSP treatment which accords them the lowest duties on offer for products
exported to OECD countries. FSM, Marshall Islands, and Palau have special trade access
agreements with the USA. The others are signatories to the Lome Convention that, in addition to
development assistance, extends them duty free access for most products to European Union

-7-

markets. Fiji, as a founding signatory to the Commonwealth Sugar agreement has an export
quota of 200,000 tons for its chief commodity export in the EU. In the last decade about 70
percent of Fiji's total sugar exports have been at preferential prices which were 2 to 4 times the
world market price. The tuna fish processing industries of Fiji and Solomon Islands have also
relied heavily on Lome preferences. Within the Southern Pacific, PMCs are provided duty-free
access to the markets of Australia and New Zealand. This preferential market arrangement has
been very important for the development of garments and footwear in Fiji and automotive wire
harnesses in Samoa. The preferential trading arrangements are, however, eroding under the new
World Trade Organization (WTO) rules, posing a stiff challenge to PMCs. It will not be possible
to sustain domestic industries built on preferential market access once it is eroded. The PMCs are
gearing up to face this challenge by forming a regional trading area and by proposing to become
a signatory to the successor of the Lome Convention - the Suva Convention.

Table 1: Main Merchandise Exports and Tourism Receipts
Main Merchandise Exports 
Tourism Receipts
(% total merchandise exports) 
(% exports of goods & services)

Fiji 

FSM 

Kiribati 

Marshall Is 

Solomon Is 

Samoa 

Tonga 

Vanuatu 

Sugar 

Garments 

Fish 
Garments/buttons 

Copra 
Seaweed 

Chilled fish 

Coconut oil 

Logs 
Palm oil 

Coconut oil 
Copra 

Squash 
Fish 

Copra 
Beef 

26.4 

22.3

87.7 
5.7

51.6 
7.2

67.4 
13.4

51.1
11.0

27.6 
15.9

44.4 
19.6

40.2 
12.1

25.1

7.6

15.7

8.3

51.3

29.1

41.7

* Average for latest three years for which data are available. Figures not available for Palau.

Macroeconomic Policy

18. 
Five of the nine PMCs have their own central banks and currency while the other four do
not have central monetary authorities-Kiribati 
uses the Australian Dollar and FSM, Marshall
Islands, and Palau use the US Dollar. In the countries with independent monetary authorities the

-8 -

use of monetary policies is limited owing to their small size and the openness of capital accounts.
The use of monetary policy is also restricted by structural and institutional constraints. These
include the existence of a large nonmonetary sector, the rudimentary stage of capital markets
which hinders smooth financial intermediation, a shortage of monetary instruments to implement
policy, and high consumption propensities that limit the savings flowing into the financial
system.

19. 
Fiscal policy is the main instrument of macroeconomic management for all PMCs
because of the limited role of monetary policy and the large share of public expenditures in GDP.
During the 1980s, even in the face of a large and growing government, PMCs record of fiscal
management was generally positive. In the face of budgetary imbalances most countries took
corrective action without undue delay so as to avoid major inflationary pressures or the build up
of debt. In recent years, however, several of the PMCs have faced fiscal stress (Table 2). In many
PMCs, weakness in public expenditure management has lead to a recurrence of unbudgeted
spending and arrears to government employees, to suppliers, or to holders of government paper.
More generally, budget management has been weak, with loose procedures for supplementary
appropriations, and an inadequate monitoring and review system.

Table 2: Overall Fiscal Balance, 1994-98
(in percent of GDP)

Fiji 
FSM 
Kiribati 
Marshall Islands 
Palau 
Samoa 
Solomon Islands 
Tonga 
Vanuatu 

1995 
-0.5 
1.6 
-10.1 
-14.1 
95.8 
-7.4 
-5.3 
-3.5 
-2.7 

1996 
-4.9 
6.9 
-35.6 
20.3 
-7.4 
1.6 
-4.4 
0.8 
-1.8 

1997 
-6.6 
1.4 
6.3 
3.9 
0.2 
2.4 
-4.8 
-1.2 
-0.7 

1998
3.8
0.4
24.0
4.2
6.0
2.1
0.1
-4.4
-13.3

20. 
On the revenue side, the tax base is narrow, relying largely on indirect taxes such as trade
and excise taxes. Trade taxes provide over 60 percent of tax revenues in Kiribati, Tonga and
Vanuatu and about 40 percent in Marshall and Solomon Islands. The tax base is made narrower
by numerous discretionary fiscal incentives in the forn of income tax holidays or import tax
exemptions, which often benefit multinational corporations. Fiji and Samoa have a broader based
tax system. Large external grants (ranging from 10 to 15 percent of GDP in Solomon Islands,
Samoa, and Tonga to over 40 percent in FSM, Kiribati, and Marshall Islands) have, in part,
permitted the fiscal profile to remain weak. These grants, while financing an enlarged
government sector did not compel the PMCs to prioritize its needs or generate more of their own
revenue.

21. 
In recognition of the fundamentally weak fiscal positions several PMCs have undertaken
comprehensive adjustment programs. The governments have made efforts towards downsizing

- 9 -

the public sector and reducing budgetary outlays, improving revenue streams with revised
taxation and tariff systems, and initiating privatization of state owned enterprises (SOEs) that are
a drain on the budget and can be sold. Efforts also have focused on improving the enabling
environment for the private sector.

Access to External Capital

22. 
PMCs depend heavily on external development assistance and official aid to help finance
their development expenditures (Table 3). Their access to external commercial borrowing is
either non existent or very limited. Information costs and country risk issues (especially for those
who suffer repeatedly from natural disasters) are perceived as making spreads very high or
prohibitive. Gathering information about the country's capacity to repay the loan has significant
fixed costs and the small absolute size of the loan amount makes it less attractive to the lender.
The cost of enforcing contracts are also perceived to be higher on account of differences in legal
and administrative systems. PMCs are also at a disadvantage in attracting foreign direct
investment (FDI) relative to larger developing countries. A recent study (Collier and Dollar,
1999) showed that small states are rated as being almost 30 percent more risky for FDI even
when they had good policies and human resource development indicators. To some extent this
may reflect the underlying riskiness of very small economies, but, importantly, it could also
reflect the weaker incentives that risk rating agencies and investors have to do their homework
and learn about opportunities in small states.

Table 3: Debt Stocks and Aid Flows (Average, 1996-98)

External 
Debt/GDP 

Concessional 
Debt/Total 
Debt

Aid/GNP 

Aid per capita
(US$)

Fiji 
FSM 
Kiribati 
Marshall Islands 
Samoa 
Solomon Islands 
Tonga 
Vanuatu 
Palau 
Low & middle income 
Low income 
Lower middle income 

11.7 

.. 
.. 
.. 

92.7 
43.3 
36.0 
23.0 

.. 

38.0 
37.7 

Aid Effectiveness

9.7 

.. 
.. 
.. 

89.7 
61.3 
80.3 
84.0 

.. 

16.3 
34.0 

2.2 
44.5 
17.6 
60.5 
17.7 
12.5 
15.7 
14.4 
45.9 
0.7 
1.4 
0.9 

53
868
182
1039
190
104
290
185
3492
9
7
17

23. 
Like other small states, PMCs receive significantly larger inflows of aid than larger low
and middle income developing countries. However, aid has not always been effective in
generating a good growth performance in PMCs, in part because of inadequate policy settings.
This is generally consistent with a recent study by the Bank on the effectiveness of aid to

- 10-

developing countries which has shown that financial assistance leads to faster growth and
poverty reduction in countries with sound economic management. This finding applies to small
states and larger ones alike. The combination of good policies and significant financial aid
decreases perceived riskiness of countries and leads to larger private capital flows. In other
words, aid "crowds in" private investment in a good policy environment. The presence of aid
increases investor confidence that good policies will be maintained. Aid also helps governments
finance investments such as schools and roads that are complementary to private investment. The
reform programs (discussed below) currently underway in the PMCs are likely to lead to more
effective utilization of aid, but the extent of success would depend on the strength of ownership
of reforms by the countries.

24. Donors too need to play a critical role in improving aid effectiveness in the PMCs. Aid
should be targeted to modernize the economy and aid allocations should reflect the country's
overall policies and entire public spending program rather than flows to individual projects.
Donors should also make major efforts to coordinate their activities in a country-led framework
as is already happening in some PMCs (discussed below). In the longer tern the combination of
good policies and aid should lead to decline in the aid needs of the PMCs. The larger and more
resource rich PMCs should be able to achieve a faster decline in aid requirements and eventually
'graduate' to a situation where aid is needed only in emergencies arising out of external shocks.

B. GEOGRAPHIC, POLITICAL & SOCIAL DIVERSITY

25. Geography continues to play a major role in shaping opportunity in the Pacific. The
region is remote from major world centers and the 2,700 islands that make up the region are
relatively small and dispersed, with the total land area being only 88,800 square kilometers.
Isolation, remoteness and internal dispersion have an impact on the economies and social fabric
of most Pacific Island countries (see Box A).

26. 
Strong identification with village and kin networks often supercedes affinity to any
national or regional groupings and diversity and differences within countries can be pronounced
as those between countries. For example, the 417, 800 citizens of the Solomon Islands live on a
scattered archipelago of mountainous islands and coral atolls with a land area of 27,556 square
kilometers and speak over 85 different languages.

27. 
The formal political systems that prevail in the region today reflect the interaction of
strong and vibrant traditional political systems, varied colonial histories and relatively recent
independence experiences. Colonial history in the Pacific, stretching back over 200 years, has
involved the USA, France, Spain, Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Germany and Japan. The
move to political independence in the Pacific is a relatively recent phenomenon, beginning in
1962, when Samoa gained independence.

28. This history has left behind a patchwork of different political systems and allegiances that
include strong US-styled republic models in Palau and the Marshall Islands; a federal system in
FSM; Westminster-based parliamentary democracies underpinned with varying degrees of
provincial and state structures in Samoa, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands; and a strong
monarchy in Tonga where the King both reigns and rules. All political systems allow and support

- 11 -

formal political oppositions and all involve, to varying degrees, the regular exercise of popular
elections.

Box A: The Case of Kiribati

Kiribati has a population similar in size to that of Andorra, but spread over an area roughly equal to that of
Europe. Most of the area is ocean: its land mass amounts to 810 square kin, compared to an Exclusive Economic
Zone of 3.55 million square km. The vast geographic spread of the 33 islands reaches from 4,000 km from east to
west and roughly 2,000 km from north to south. Transport within Kiribati is extremely limited and is primarily by
boat. The nearest large markets are 4,000 km away, in Honolulu and Brisbane. There are only six flight in and out
of the country per week, all by small plane. Hence distance from and access to markets not just externally but
internally presents challenges of a magnitude faced by few other countries.

The resource base is very narrow. The arid climate and poor soil offer little potential for agricultural
development. Ocean resources are the mainstay of the economy - about 80 percent of households make a living
or survive through fishing. The public sector dominates all spheres of economic activity. Fishing licensing are the
major source of foreign exchange and government revenue while import duties and remittances from I-Kiribati
employed in foreign shipping fleets provide significant additional government revenue, respectively.

The population of 88,500 is concentrated in the Gilbert Islands Group, which includes Tarawa, the capital. One-
third of the population live in the urban center on South Tarawa, where density reaches 1,610 persons per square
kin, while the Phoenix group is largely uninhabited. If present trends continue, population will double in 20
years; such an outcome will present even greater challenges to efforts to overcome environmental and health
problems, particularly in Tarawa where sanitation and water problems are already pressing. The demographic
profile of Kiribati is skewed to the young which is placing significant strain on the Government to provide basic
health and education services.

In addition to these constraints, Kiribati's potential to benefit form globalization is hampered by its limited
institutional and human capacity. The society has strong 'traditional' practices and values based on family
relationships, the sharing of resources and a co-operative approach to economic activity. The private sector is
very small and fragmented and the privatization program has not progressed very far. These factors present
challenges to the government in determining the most appropriate pace and sequencing of policy changes in areas
such as privatization, downsizing and improving the performance of the public sector, tax and duty reforms
(which would initially have negative revenue consequences), and the installation of modern technologies. And
while embracing the global trading regime will deliver certain benefits, commodity exports will continue to be
harnpered by Kiribati's remote location and irregular supply routes.

29. 
Shared throughout much of the region is the importance placed on land. Although
demographic shifts and population growth are changing the rural and urban balance in the Pacific
Islands, land ownership and use still forms an integral part of everyday life. Though systems of
ownership and use vary greatly, shared ownership is often based on common descent, residence
and participation in social and economic activities. Land helps identify family, clan and lineage
and is valued for what it symbolizes as well as the subsistence and livelihood it provides.

30. Unlike the Indian Islands and Caribbean countries, to which they are sometimes
compared, indigenous cultures have remained strong in the Pacific Islands. They continue to play
a large part in national life, and although continually modified and adapted, their influence
remains strong, retaining control over significant national resources and exerting influence on
national policies and decision making.

- 12 -

C. GOVERNANCE

31. A number of stresses are influencing patterns of governance and organization throughout
the Pacific. Traditional fonns of authority and organization are being modified by a variety of
largely imported substitutes and by the globalization of trade, investment and economic
governance. The first is primarily a social phenomenon with local roots, and the second primarily
economic and driven internationally, but they are connected, and each has reached beyond its
origins to shape social and economic structures and performance.

32. 
In some areas of the Pacific traditional governance systems that provided robust
accountability and participation are eroding and the introduced western structures erected
alongside or in place of them are seen to be costly and ineffective, not responsive to local needs
and priorities, and prone to capture by domestic and foreign interests. This is not to suggest that
'traditional' and introduced systems of governance are mutually exclusive, or that one is
necessarily better than the other, rather that changing patterns of governance are having a
significant impact on community access to decision making and levels of accountability. The
success of the PMCs in integrating the respective strengths of traditional and introduced
structures, institutions and practices will have a significant bearing on their ability to successfully
adapt to the internal and external challenges they face.

33. 
In the PMCs that are well endowed with natural resources such as fisheries and forests,
governance arrangements relating to the rewarding of contracts for their use assume great
importance. In the past, however, nontransparent negotiations between government officials and
politicians and resource users have resulted in resources being undervalued and large economic
rents have been appropriated by, mainly foreign logging and fishing companies. In some
instances negotiations over the granting of fishing rights have been linked to bilateral aid
negotiations. This has tended to weaken the negotiating position of PMCs and has reduced the
transparency of the actual levels of access fees.

34. 
The role of the kinship ties and 'wantok' type systems of support in providing for basic
human needs is one of the underlying strengths of many Pacific societies; however it can also
hamper transparent and clear governance and contribute to corruption. The small size of many
PMCs has some community leaders performing a number of different roles, ranging from a
church leader, to businessman or high level government minister. These competing roles can
lead to conflicts of interest and influence decision making processes.

D. BASIC HUMAN INDICATORS

35. Despite the diversity of population dynamics in the Pacific there are some common
trends. Over the past few decades fertility has declined or remained stable, life expectancy has
increased and urban population growth has outpaced rural population growth. Growth rates are
highest in the Micronesian countries at an average of 2.7 percent and lowest in the Polynesian
countries where growth averages 1.3 percent. The Melanesian countries average 2.2 percent
(Table 4). One of the most pressing concerns for many Pacific Island countries is growing
frustration and alienation among youth. About 40 percent of the Region's population is under 15
years of age and about 20 percent is between 15 and 24 years of age.

- 13 -

COUNTRY 

Table 4: Basic Human Resource Profile
Annual pop. Adult Life 
Human 
Global
Growth 
Literacy Expect Dev Index HDI
(1990-98) 
at birth 
(HDI)* 
rank

Federated States of Micronesia 
Fiji 
Kiribati 
Marshall Islands 
Palau 
Tonga 
Samoa 
Solomon Islands 
Vanuatu 

2.1 
0.9 
2.1 
3.6 
2.4 
0.3 
1.2 
3.3 
2.7 

71.3 
92.9 
92.2 
74.4 
91.4 
99.0 
95.7 
30.3 
33.5 

65.7 
66.5 
61.6 
65 
69 
68 
66.6 
64.7 
65.8 

0.569 
0.667 
0.515 
0.563 
0.861 
0.647 
0.590 
0.371 
0.425 

120
101
129
121
46
107
117
147
140

* The Human Development Index is derived from the combination of average life expectancy at birth, adult literacy,
gross school enrollments, and adjusted GDP per capita.

Sources: 

Secretariat of the Pacific Community, UNDP, various national censuses.

36. Although still far from satisfactory, with the exception of the Melanesian countries of the
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, access to basic educational opportunities is no longer the
overriding priority in many of the PMCs. It has been replaced by a focus on the quality of
education services and continued financing of schools and teachers salaries. A recent regional
education survey identified a number of issues that were commonly shared throughout the
PMCs. These included concern about: teacher shortages; how to ensure that education assisted
national economic growth; increased efficiency in the public and private education sectors;
promotion of national identity and culture; and resolving the growing mismatch between skills
and livelihood opportunities.

37. 
Life expectancy is generally high in the region but there has been an increase in mid-
adult mortality, especially of males.3 This is associated with an upsurge in so called "life-style
diseases", accidental deaths, and the resurgence and emergence of infectious and vector-borne
diseases. There has been an increase in communicable diseases in the Pacific, and many
communicable diseases that health officials had thought were almost eradicated, such as leprosy,
TB, malaria and measles have reappeared, while new types of communicable diseases have
emerged, including HIV/AIDS, and hepatitis C.

38. 
The shortage of financial resources in the social sectors is pervasive. The predicted
growth in future school enrollments, the demographic profile of the population (mainly the
vulnerable population-children and the elderly) and the growing burden of noncommunicable
diseases while communicable diseases continue to persist will continue to outstrip the ability of
governments to finance quality health and education services.

3IJNDP. Pacific Human Development Report. 1999. Pg. xi

- 14 -

39. 
The status of women in the Pacific varies considerably, often dependent on the systems
of land ownership and access to education. Matrilineal and patrilineal systems give women
different access to resources and power and are influenced by development changes including:
outer island and oversea migration; access to education and training, monetization of the
economy, reforms to the public sector that affect the terms of distribution of men's and women's
roles, and status in society. In general terms, women in Polynesian societies have traditionally
enjoyed high social status and more access to power in government and the commercial sector
than women in Melanesia, but this can also vary greatly within communities depending on
access to education and family position.

40. 
In most countries of the region the colonial experience resulted in a deterioration of
women's public position as the representatives of the patriarchal colonial countries preferred to
deal with men in public or business transactions and tended to marginalize women. Today
women's economic role is becoming more diversified. In many cases, this is making women's
lives more difficult in the context of serving as the head of households, persistence of the sexual
division of labor, a growing informal sector, low or nonexistent legal recognition of their rights,
and gender based violence. Women still lag behind men in many countries in the region across a
range of social and economic indicators, including school enrollment ratios, literacy rates and
access to the formal labor market.

E. POVERTY IN THE PACIFIC

41. 
Pacific Islanders are proud of the unique networks of support and sharing that sustain
many of their communities. Yet, while these networks of sharing food and resources still operate,
increasing economic strains and changing cultural patterns imply that Pacific Island societies are
not as egalitarian as they are sometimes portrayed. In many ways the gaps in income, access to
services, well-being and opportunities are widening.

42. 
Poverty in the Pacific is rarely as visible or as extreme as it is in some of the harshest
parts of the world. Yet recent surveys have shown big differences in income and well-being in
several countries, even after traditional forms of redistribution have been accounted for. There
are people who are truly disadvantaged or deprived compared to other people in their country.

43. 
The Human Poverty Index (HPI) rankings reflect quite marked differences between
Pacific countries, especially between Melanesian and Polynesian countries (Table 5). For
example, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu rankings put them on a par with countries such as
Guinea, Burundi, Senegal and Bangladesh in sharp contrast with Tonga and Fiji with rankings
similar to Costa Rica and Singapore.

- 15 -

COUNTRY 

Federated States of 

Micronesia

Fiji 
Kiribati 
Marshall 

Islands

Palau 
Samoa 
Solomon Islands 
Tonga 
Vanuatu 

Table 5: Human Poverty Index for the Pacific

Percentage 
of people 
not 
expected to 
reach 40 yrs 

Percentage Percentage Percentage Human
of adults 
of people 
of children Poverty
who are 
without 
>5 yrs who 
Index*
illiterate 
access to 
are under-
safe water 
weight

10.5 

7.4 
16.3 
13.2 

7.3 
10.3 
13.7 
8.4 
12.2 

28.7 

7.1 
7.8 
25.6 

8.6 
4.3 
69.7 
1 
66.5 

56 

23 
20 
23.5 

14 
10 
36 
5 
13 

15 

7.9 
12.9 
17 

8 
17 
21 
2 
23 

26.7

8.5
12.6
19.5

10.8
8.6
49.1
5.9
46.6

*The Human Poverty Index reflects deprivation in three essential elements of human life: longevity, knowledge and
a decent standard of living. Sources: Secretariat of the Pacific Community, UNDP, various national censuses

44. While instructive on a regional and national level, the HPI does not reflect growing
inequalities within Pacific Island communities. A series of surveys in Solomon Islands revealed
big differences in household incomes, even after subsistence production and traditional gifts
were accounted for. This was especially so in Honiara, the national capital and main urban
center, where 1 percent of households shared more than 50 percent of total earnings. Many urban
and rural households have very poor living conditions and lack safe water or sanitation, problems
in towns are compounded by contaminated groundwater and growing waste disposal problems.
Recent and continuing unrest between Guadalcanal landholders and settlers from Malaita has
disrupted schooling, access to facilities and the delivery of services and is likely to have
exacerbated existing poor living conditions.

45. 
The United Nations Development Program's (IJNDP) 1997 Fiji Poverty Report found that
poverty was an undercurrent in both urban and rural areas and in all ethnic communities. One in
four households could not afford a basic standard of living and these households often included
people who have little formal education or skills and had difficulty getting paid employment.4
The 1998 Samoa Household Income and Expenditure Survey found that one in three households
could not properly meet their basic needs and were poor relative to national standards of living.

46. A 1996 survey of Tarawa, the capital of Kiribati, found many aspects of the urban
poverty that is common in the Pacific. Many households live in badly overcrowded conditions.

4 Fiji Government and UNDP, 1997

- 16-

Most households depend on cash incomes, yet only few adults have paid jobs. Most of this cash
is spent on food, mainly rice, fish, frozen meat and sugar

5

47. Approximately 20 percent of the labor force of the PMCs is employed in the formal
sector. Rapid population growth, shifts in the age structure towards the working age group, the
diminishing capacity of the semisubsistence sector to absorb labor, and a growing need for cash
incomes means that the number of people seeking employment in the formal sector is fast
increasing. This, however, is not being matched by growth in formal sector jobs. Youth
unemployment is in excess of 10 percent in most countries, and higher than 20 percent in FSM
and Marshall Islands. To date, the issues of labor standards, including child and forced labor,
have not been identified as major concerns in the PMCs. In the rural informal sector people
mainly depend on semisubsistence agriculture and fishing. The few small-scale enterprises that
exist employ mainly family labor. In the urban areas, small-scale informal enterprises employ the
urban poor who often seek multiple sources of income. Many children, particularly those who
leave school early are also employed here. The informal sector is the main source of employment
for women, often because they lack the education and skills to join the formal sector.

48. A broader concept of poverty of opportunity is to include 'lack of education and health,
lack of economic assets, social exclusion and political marginalization', is a better description of
poverty for many people in the Pacific6 . Poverty of opportunity in the Pacific is evident in many
ways including rapid emigration from some countries, high but disguised unemployment, and an
emerging subculture of youth crime and high youth suicide rates (Figure 6). Overcoming poverty
of opportunity is a major challenge facing many Pacific economies so that people's talents, skills
and aspirations are not frustrated but utilized to benefit the domestic economy and improve
human development. Economic growth in most of the PMCs has been far less than that needed to
open up such opportunities.

Figure 6: Suicide Rates in Selected Pacific Island Countries, by Sex and for Youth

Samoa 

I _=1S a m o a

d 

FSM 

F S M 

F iji 

In dFians 

i 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~M 

Fem ale

r-1 F~~~~~~~~~Eje 

m ale Youth

M Male

iMale 

Youth

F iji

0 

20 

40 
60 
rate per 100,000 people

80 

100

Source: UNDP, Pacific Human Development Report 1999, pg. 64.

5 Govemment of Kiribati, Bureau of Statistics, 1996
6 ul Huq, M. 1997. Human Development in South Asia, Oxford University Press, Karachi

- 17 -

3. REFORM AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE PACIFIC

49. 
There are a number of public sector reforms underway throughout most of the Pacific
region and much is being done through national reform programs, supported by regionally
focussed institutions and action programs. The quality of the design and implementation of
programs has been mixed but the engagement of development partners in these reforms is
significant both in terms of sheer numbers and in terms of the resources they bring to the
development table.

A. NATIONAL REFORM PROGRAMS

50. Most PMCs have reform programs in place or under development (Table 6). In
Melanesia, Vanuatu's Comprehensive Reform Program (CRP), first endorsed in 1997, has
provided one extreme in terms of the breadth, scope and timing of reform approaches in the
region. The Solomon Islands' Policy and Structural Reform Program (PSRP), initially focussed
on the macroeconomic environment, public finances and the public sector, has broadened to
include a medium term development strategy and private sector development (Box B). In
Polynesia, the Samoan Statement of Economic Strategy (SES) has provided perhaps the most
successful example of reform, with the SES providing the overall macroeconomic framework for
the development of separate strategies focusing on health, education and rural development. In
Micronesia, explicit reform programs have been developed in Kiribati and the Federated States
of Micronesia.

Box B: The Solomon Islands' Reform Program

The Solomon Islands Government developed the Policy and Structural Reform Program (PSRP) in 1997 in response to a nexus
of critical issues in the fiscal, financial and forestry sectors. The program, supported by the World Bank through a Structural
Adjustment Credit and other partners including Australia, ADB and New Zealand, focuses on a three-pronged approach:
restoring and maintaining a sound macroeconomic environment; reform of public finances, including wider public sector reform;
and review and reform of the public service. The process is designed to achieve a number of major objectives:

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

Restoration and maintenance of a sounds macroeconomic environment.
Improving governance, accountability and productivity across the public sector, especially in the quality and quantity of

service provision in core areas (primary education, preventative health, agricultural support services, and infrastructure
support to private sector led growth)

Establishing conditions for the private sector to become the engine of economic growth in a competitive environment.
Creating the basis for sustainable and equitable development of renewable resources, including through and effective and

sustainable forestry policy.
Liberalizing the financial sector, particularly with respect to nonbank financial institutions and especially those that are
government owned and influenced, but with an accompanying enhancement of regulation and supervision.
Achieving greater self-reliance in rural areas by emphasizing projects in core activities which will support development of
economic activity in these communities and ensure a more equitable allocation of public funds between the rural and urban
areas and across provinces.

Progress on the PSRP reforms has been significant but recent ethnic tensions will have an impact on implementation. The
rehabilitation of public finances, the core of the PSRP, is threatened by the loss of revenues because of the closure of enterprises,
reduction in employment and lower levels of taxable activities. At the same time expenditure is rising to cover increased security
operations. Public service reforms and collaboration with the private sector are less effected, but privatization of state owned
enterprises may be more difficult because of the shock to investor confidence.

Table 6: The Pacific Reform Agenda

Prerequisites for 
Solomon Island -
Samoa - Statement Vanuatu -
Sustainable Growth Policy and 
of Economic 
Comprehensive 
and Development Structural Reform Strategy 
Reform Program 
Program 
Good and Clean Major focus 
Government 
Justice System 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

Major focus 

Major focus 

Kiribati -
Development 
Strategy 

Major focus 

Federated States of Regional 
Micronesia - Public Organizations 
Sector Reform 
Program 
Major focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC, FEMM, PlDP 

Non-Government & Multilateral and
Volunteer 
Bilateral
Organizations 
Engagement (past
& present)
ADB, Australia, New
Zealand, UN, UK
New Zealand,
Australia
ADB, Australia, WB

Focus 

Financial System Major focus 

Major focus 

Major Focus 

Major Focus 

Major Focus 

Social Safety Net No explicit focus 
and Social 
Programs 
Education 

Focus 

Health 

Focus 

Water and 
Sewerage 

No explicit focus 

Energy 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

Roads, 
Transportation & 
Telecommunication

s

Focus 

Focus 

Focus 

Focus 

Focus 

Focus 

Central role played Focus 
by village, churches 
and NGOs.
Separate strategy 
developed and linked 
to SES 
Separate strategy 
developed and linked 
to SES 
Separate water and No explicit focus 
waste management 
national policies 
Identified as a 
priority
Identified as a 
priority 

No explicit focus 

Focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

Environment and Major focus 
Natural Resources 
(forestry) 

Identified as a 
priority 

No explicit focus 

Focus 

No explicit focus 

Rural Strategy 

Major focus 

Urban Strategy 

No explicit focus 

Separate strategy Major focus 
developed and linked 
to SES
Not an explicit focus Major focus 

Focus 

Focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

No explicit focus 

South Pacific Forum, Focus 
FEMM
South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC 

Focus (retraining of South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
civil servants) 
SPC, USP 

No explicit focus 

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC 

No explicit focus 

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC, SPREP, 
SOPAC
South Pacific Forum Focus 

Australia, New
Zealand, UN

Australia, New
Zealand, WB, EC,
UN, UK, Japan
Australia, New
Zealand, Japan, WB,
UN, EC, Japan
ADB, Australia, EC,
UN, Japan

ADB

South Pacific Forum, Focus 
FEMM 

ADB, Australia, New
Zealand, EC, WB

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC, FFA, SPREP, 
SOPAC, CROP 
South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC, CROP, SPREP 

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
SPC, FEMM
South Pacific Forum, Major Focus 
FEMM 

New Zealand,
Australia, ABD, WB,
UN, EC, Japan
Australia, New
Zealand, EC, UN

ADB, WB, UN

ADB, Australia. NZ,
UN, EC, WB.

Private Sector 
Strategy 

Major focus 

Major focus 

Major focus 

Major focus 

Major focus 

Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), Forum Economic Ministers Meeting (FEMM), Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), South Pacific Regional
Environment Program (SPREP), South Pacific Applied Geoscience CommissionD(SOPAC), The University of the South Pacific (USP), Council of Regional
Organizations in the Pacific (CROP), Pacific Islands Development Program (PIDP).

-19-

51. 
In general, there are a number of similarities between many of these reform programs.
Most have at their core macroeconomic and fiscal policy stability and the importance of
stimulating the private sector as the engine of sustainable economic development. Many of the
reforms also focus on promoting development in rural and regional areas and improving access
to quality health, education and training services. While all reform programs have acknowledged
its importance, the degree and extent of broad civil society involvement in and ownership of the
reform programs has varied.

B. THE REGIONAL DIMENSION TO REFORM

52. 
There is a considerable history of dialogue in the region about how to respond to shared
vulnerabilities and opportunities. Coordinated action has led to the creation of the University of
the South Pacific, the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), the South Pacific Regional Environment
Program (SPREP), the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC), the Tourism
Council of the South Pacific and the Pacific Islands Development Program.

53. 
Pacific Island governments are developing a shared policy agenda for change in areas
including government accountability, environmental policy, trade and investment policy,
government involvement in business enterprises, and private sector development. The Pacific
Islands Forum focuses on economic and trade issues and has been a major force in regional
economic cooperation but moves cautiously and on the basis of consensus among its diverse
membership. The Forum Economic Ministers Meeting (FEMM) process has been one of the
main vehicles driving the reform agenda in the region and is particularly concerned with issues
such as government reform and private sector development. The Secretariat of the Pacific
Community (SPC), the oldest regional organization, has a wide range of programs including
demography, agriculture, fisheries research and development, education, health, gender and
community development.

54. 
Prospects for regional and subregional cooperation loom strong in the areas of trade,
banking, transport, telecommunications, management of marine resources and bulk purchasing
of supplies and products. The Forum Secretariat, Forum Economic Ministers Meeting, the Forum
Trade Ministers Meeting (FTMM) and the Melanesian Spearhead Group are working on
cooperation on regional trade, telecommunications and bulk purchasing of pharmaceuticals. The
June 1999 meeting of the FTMM endorsed a free trade area among Forum members to be
implemented in stages. There are a number of other ongoing initiatives such as work on the
Environmental Vulnerability Index for the Pacific, and the work of SPREP and SOPAC on
climate change. The Multilateral High Level Commission (MHLC) is currently looking at the
management regime for highly regulatory fish stocks. Underpinning this is an acceptance that
regional and subregional collaboration holds the best prospect of overcoming some of the
constraints that that the countries of the region face, such as lack of capacity and scale of
operation, and of maximizing the returns that the region as a whole can obtain from the
exploitable resources available.

55. 
There are limits to regional cooperation. The immense size of the region itself and the
variety of cultures and political systems it contains constrains efforts for regional cooperation.
Pacific Island countries are keen to maintain bilateral relationships with each other and with

- 20 -

donor countries and multilateral agencies. Importantly, some countries from outside the region
and which have direct interests in the region see value in maintaining the focus on bilateral
relationships. Increased regional cooperation is both possible and desirable, but must be seen in
the context of differences in domestic political agendas and constraints posed by existing
bilateral and other relationships.

C. THE ROLE OF DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

56. Upward of twenty bilateral and multilateral development partners maintain programs in
the Pacific. Most larger bilateral donors are present locally, with Australia having by far the
largest number or regional offices. The ADB has a regional office in Vanuatu and is in the
process of reviewing its regional representation to move to a subregional office structure. Fiji is
the main center for regional representation from the UN system and the EU.

57. 
The largest aid flows to the Pacific come from bilateral donors with significant economic,
geographic or political interest in the region including Australia, New Zealand, the United States
and Japan (Table 7). The majority of multilateral assistance stems from the European
Community, the Asian Development Bank and the United Nations system.

Table 7: Bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to the Nine Pacific Member
Countries - 1994-1998

Amount of Official Development Assistance ($US)

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

61.2 
0.1 

13.7 
4.3 
101.1 
0.4 
18.4 

12.7 

320 

51.6 
0.1

11.7 
1.5 
110.4 
0.9 
27.1 

8.6

216 

531.9 

427.9 

50.4 

0.2 
11 
1.8 
95.7 
0.6 
29.1 

49 

0.3 
9.2 
0.5 
97.6 
0.6 
29.7 

219 

407.8 

144 

330.9 

44.1

-0.2
9.9
0.9
89.4
0.4
25.5

179

349

Bilateral
Donors

Australia 
Belgium 
Denmark 
France 
Germany 
Japan 
Netherlands 
New 
Zealand
United 
Kingdom
United 
States
TOTAL 

Source: Geographical Distribution of Financial Flows to Aid Recipients. OECD. 2000

Bilateral Partners

- 21 -

58. 
Australia has significant economic and political interests in the region and is one of the
largest bilateral contributors to the PMCs. Australia's aid is largely directed to Fiji, Solomon
Islands, Vanuatu, Samoa, Tonga and Kiribati and is concentrated in education and training,
economic reform and governance, health, environment and private sector development. Australia
maintains a large network of AusAID offices throughout the region.

59. 
The overall goal of the Australian aid program is to assist developing countries reduce
poverty. In the Pacific this goal is expressed through a long term objective of helping Pacific
Island countries achieve the maximum possible degree of self reliance. Self reliance is defined
differently for the larger Pacific economies where it is taken to mean eventual graduation from
aid, than for the smaller less economically viable atoll states where it is taken to mean the
maximum degree of self reliance within an ongoing need for external support.7

60. As with Australia, New Zealand has a wide range of bilateral and regional economic and
political interests in the region. Its development cooperation with the Pacific Islands countries is
based on the key areas of health, education, the environment, human resource development and
the encouragement of private sector growth. New Zealand maintains a significant network of
offices throughout the region and a large and increasingly influential Polynesian Diaspora living
in New Zealand has helped ensure an active interest by New Zealand in these countries.

61. 
The guiding principals of the New Zealand program in the Pacific are a recognition that
development will be achieved primarily though the efforts of the countries themselves; capacity
building; sustainability; a primary focus on poverty reduction; greater participation of all people,
especially the disadvantaged in economic, political and social life and involvement of the New
Zealand community in development.8

62. 
Japan's engagement in the region is very significant and has focused on the development
and promotion of agriculture, forestry and fisheries industries, and the upgrading of basic
infrastructure including hospitals, schools and water supply facilities. The United Kingdom's
links with the Pacific region rest mainly on historical and commonwealth ties. In 1995 a decision
was made to move away from individual country programs and focus instead on a single regional
program. Key sectors are education and rights and good governance.

63. 
The United States remains the most significant bilateral development partner in the
compact of free association countries of Palau, the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of
Micronesia. The relationship and access to resources extended to these countries through the
compact of free association has a major impact on development prospects for them. The USA, as
it renegotiates the compact with individual countries, is seeking ways of moving from what has
essentially been united budget support to more focused program approaches that maximize
development outcomes.

7Australia & Pacific Island Countries: Partners in Development Australia's Overseas Aid Program December 1998.
8 New Zealand Official development assistance; Program Profiles 1998-99, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Multilateral

- 22 -

64. Of the multilateral agencies, the Asian Development Bank and European Community have
the largest programs, while the various UN agencies have established significant and high quality
programs, especially in the social sectors (Table 8).

Table 8: Multilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to Pacific Member Countries
1994 -1998

Multilateral Donors

Asian Development Bank 
European Community 
International Development Association 
United Nations Regular Program of Technical Assistance 
Intemational Fund for Agricultural Development 
United Nations Development Program 
Other Multilateral 

Total 

Amount of Official Development Assistance ($US)
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998

18.8 
13.8 
4.6 
3.8 
2 
3.7 
2.5 

49.2 

24 
12.9 
4.2 
10.7 
0.6 
3.6 
2.9 

58.9 

5.8 
12.2 
4.2 
3.5 
1.4 
2.1 
1.9 

22.7 
8.9 
3.4 
6 
0.2 
1.7 
1.6 

31.3 

44.5 

47.1
7.4
4.5
4.2
0.5
1.7
0.3

65.7

Source: Geographical Distribution of Financial Flows to Aid Recipients. OECD. 2000.

65. 
The Asian Development Bank has a major presence in the region. The ADB has
supported major public sector reforn programs in the Cook Islands, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Regional activities
supported by the ADB have been in the areas of fisheries, aviation, air transportation, financial
and investment advisory services and the provision of venture capital.

66. 

The ADB program has been guided by its 1996 Strategy for the Pacific: Policies and

Programs for Sustainable Growth. This strategy had as an overall objective the improvement of
living standards through sustainable economic development. The ADB is now in the process of
developing a new Pacific regional strategy that will specifically address poverty in line with the
ADB's overarching objective of poverty reduction.

67. 
The pattern of commitments by the European Community has been influenced by
STABEX transfers which has accounted for over 30 percent of all aid. Project aid constitutes
approximately 62 percent of assistance to the Pacific Islands and the main sectors supported
included; transport and communications, industry, mining and construction and the energy
sectors.

68. Various United Nations agencies work throughout the Pacific region and have well
established programs. The UNDP takes a coordinating role for most UN operations which are
particularly active in the social sectors. The UNDP's assistance focuses primarily on the creation
of employment and sustainable livelihoods, the advancement of women, empowerment of
disadvantaged groups, protection and regeneration of the environment, and improved
governance.

- 23 -

69. 
The International Monetary Fund is engaged in the Pacific Islands countries on a number
of levels. As well as its regular Article IV consultation meetings and reports, it jointly
established with the United Nations Development Program the Pacific Financial Technical
Assistance Center in Suva, Fiji. The Center is also funded by ADB, AusAID, the New Zealand
ODA and the Forum Secretariat, and its primary aim is to build the skills and institutional
capacity in PMC for effective and sustainable economic and financial management.

Partnerships and coordination

70. 
The sheer number of development partners operating in the Pacific, combined with the
limited absorptive capacity of most Pacific Island states and the characteristic limited
institutional capacity that they share with other small states, represents a major challenge for
PMCs as they seek to coordinate, direct and manage external support.

71. All donors in the region accord coordination and cooperation a high priority and there are
a number of mechanisms in place that support these efforts. The ADB convenes consultative
group meetings, while the main region-wide vehicle for donor coordination is the donors'
consultation meeting that is held following the annual FEMM. This meeting, convened on a
rotating basis, provides a forum in which issues and respective donors' programs can be
discussed. There are a range of other bilateral and multilateral coordination measures in place,
including bilateral high level consultations between the major donors and regional organizations.

72. 
The Bank takes an active role in coordination and was instrumental, for example, in
establishing annual trilateral consultations between AusAID, the ADB and the Bank. The Bank's
relations with the ADB in the Pacific are guided by the broader Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) between the Bank and the ADB in the East Asia and Pacific region. This MOU places a
premium on close cooperation between the two institutions, to ensure complementarity at the
regional, country and sectoral levels. The forthcoming relocation of the Pacific Country
Management Unit to Sydney will further enhance the close working relationship between the
World Bank, the ADB and other regional development partners. Dialogue with the ADB and
other donors will continue with a view toward establishing and maintaining clear understandings
of each agency's focus.

73. While a solid basis of cooperation between development partners exists, there is a need to
move beyond general discussion of cooperation and into more substantial measures. These
include the articulation of donor programs within broader PMC driven sectoral and reform
programs, alignment of program cycles, rationalization of reporting requirements and the
development of more flexible work programming and targeting within projects. The Bank, in
line with the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF), has actively sought out such
approaches. Early experience has been positive. In Samoa the Government has developed an
MOU that sets out the respective roles of the Bank and AusAID and ways of operating within the
broader context of the Government's health sector reform program. A similar approach is being
developed in the Solomon Islands, again in the health sector but which builds on the positive
experience of targeting donor assistance under the Solomon Islands reform program.

- 24 -

4. PARTNERSHIP & STRATEGIC SELECTIVITY -
IDENTIFYING THE BANK'S ROLE

A. THE BANKS' EXPERIENCE IN THE PACIFIC

74. 
The Bank Group's involvement in the Pacific Region effectively started in the 1970s. Fiji
became the first Pacific member country when it joined the Bank in 1971, with Palau being the
most recent, achieving membership in 1998. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s Bank assistance
tended to focus on lending operations, with a more substantial program of economic and sector
work only beginning in the 1990s.

75. 
Since 1971 the World Bank has extended 38 loans and credits, totally some $US284.2
million to Pacific Island members. Of these, 13 have been IBRD loans ($US152.9m) extended to
Fiji, while the remaining 25 IDA credits ($US131.3m) have been shared between Samoa (11)
Solomon Islands (8), Vanuatu (4) and Tonga (2). Half of the Bank's lending operations have
been cofinanced (5 with AusAID and 14 with the ADB). In terms of any qualitative assessment
of the effectiveness of the Bank's lending portfolio, three key phases can be distinguished.

A beginning in 1970s

76. 
In the nine years up to and including 1980, the Bank extended eight IBRD loans to Fiji
(including one supplemental loan) totaling $US83.7 million and three IDA credits to Samoa
($US14.4 million). In Fiji, the bulk of the loans were focussed in the infrastructure sector, with
one in agriculture. Project completion reviews found that the bulk of the projects were successful
in meeting their objectives. In the case of Samoa, however, where three IDA credits were
provided (one in infrastructure and two in agriculture) the results were far less satisfactory with
the first agriculture project rated as a failure, in part because the project's development objective
reflected Bank rather than the Samoan Government's priorities, and the second as suffering from
poorly defined project objectives.

Expansion in the 1980s

77. 
The period up to and including 1990 saw an expansion in the number, country coverage
and sectoral focus of the Bank's lending activities in the region. In addition to continued lending
in Samoa and Fiji, lending was also undertaken in Solomon Islands (1981), Vanuatu (1984) and
Tonga (1987). The expansion in country coverage was a reflection of a relatively rapid process
of independence in the region and growing Pacific membership of the Bank. It was based on a
formal cooperative arrangement with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) that saw the World
Bank participating as a cofinancier and the ADB playing the lead role in project processing and
implementation.

78. 
This arrangement, agreed in October 1980, had two main objectives: to minimize the
burden on the limited staff and institutional capacities of Pacific Island members; and to achieve
efficiencies through saving costs and avoiding duplication of effort. Of the 18 loans approved in
the 1980s some 11 were cofinanced with the ADB($US69.2 million) and a further 4 cofinanced
with AusAID ($US25.6 million). The 1980s also saw an expansion in the sectoral focus of the

- 25 -

lending portfolio, with lending activities undertaken in the following sectors: agriculture,
finance, education, transport, power, telecommunications and urban development.

79. An assessment of the Bank's operation undertaken by OED in 1991 and 1992 concluded
that "the Bank was generally unable to make an effective contribution to the development of the
Pacific member countries during most of the 1980s"9 Other conclusions reached by the OED
study were:

* 

* 

* 

* 

the Bank's direct contribution to resource transfers to the Pacific Island member states had
been very limited;

the Bank's lending had not been guided by any well conceived strategy to contribute to long
term sustainable development in the Pacific Island member countries;

the Bank had not been able to make effective use of project lending as an instrument of
policy dialogue; and

the Bank's past experience did not clearly establish areas of comparative advantage for Bank
assistance to Pacific Island members.

80. 
In terms of the arrangement with the ADB, the OED Report noted that "while the ADB
arrangement has provided administrative savings to the Bank, the benefits to the PMCs (Pacific
Island Member Countries) are less clear. The selection and design of projects has generally not
been underpinned by appropriate country strategies and ESW. It has been time consuming and,
in some cases, difficult to harmonize policies and procedures. The Bank, in practice, could not
give up fully its responsibility for cofinanced projects. Yet the limited contact with PMCs
appears to have weakened the country relations".

Refocusing in the 1990s

81. 
In response to the experience with the cofinancing arrangement, and discussions with
member countries and key donors, the Bank reassessed its strategy and made two major
adjustments. First, the Bank moved to take a more direct role in project lending. Second, the
Bank reassessed its approach to economic and sector work. A number of donors also felt that the
Bank could contribute more effectively to the Pacific in a leadership role through the provision
of advice on development strategy and policies in the region. A special South Pacific Facility,
supported by Australia, became operational in 1989 to support an expanded program of
economic and sector work, the center piece of which was a series of regional economic and
sector reports. (See Section 4D)

IFC and FIAS

82. 
IFC investment activities have concentrated on those industries in the PMCs that hold a
competitive advantage such as tourism and fishing. In the 1998/1999 financial year alone the

9 The World Bank and Pacific Island Countries: An OED Review, May 5 1992

- 26 -

South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF), helped secured financing for fifteen small businesses,
seven of them in the service sector.

83. Although the SPPF does not provide project financing, it finances part of the cost of
market, technical and feasibility studies and helps entrepreneurs secure financing from banks and
other sources of capital. It also assists companies during project implementation and startup,
reviews joint venture agreements and assists governments privatizing public sector enterprises.
The SPPF has agents in seven member countries and has carried out 43 assignments since it
began operations in 1990.

84. 
The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) supports PMC governments design
initiatives to attract foreign direct investment and has been active in a number of countries
including the FSM, Samoa, Fiji, Palau and the Solomon Islands as well as working on regional
projects such as oceanic fisheries with the FFA and the SPC. FIAS advises on laws, policies,
incentives, institutions, and strategies

B. LESSONS LEARNED

85. 
The same OED report cited earlier also identified a number of lessons to be incorporated
in the Bank's future program. These lessons remain relevant today:

* Poor definition of strategic objectives made it difficult to tailor lending to achieve these
objectives and had an adverse impact on project quality and sustainability;

* The absence of long-term strategy contributed to inadequate sector and economic work;

* Long-term strategy development needs to include active collaboration from the other
development partners in the region; and

• 

Future lending activities in member countries and with development partners need to be
based on shared strategy and policy goals.

86. 
The continuing validity of these lessons has been reinforced through the recently
published Asian Development Bank's (ADB) Assessment of its Assistance for Reform Programs
in the Pacific, which found that:

* Reform programs have to have broad political ownership and be open to and driven by wide
participation if they are to have any chance of success.

* 

In designing and supporting reform programs the issues of scope, phasing and pragmatism in
the design of interventions needs to be considered explicitly.

* Reform is a long term process and longer term perspectives, by both countries themselves
and development partners, are essential.

- 27 -

* There is a need to clearly establish the link between inputs, processes, outputs and impacts.
To be able to do this timely and reliable information is required.

* Culture plays a crucial role and needs to be accepted as a legitimate consideration in
designing reform programs.

C. THE COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK (CDF) IN THE PACIFIC

87. 
The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) establishes a balance in
policymaking by highlighting the interdependence of all elements of development-social,
structural, human, governance, environmental, economic, and financial. The CDF seeks to move
beyond discrete indicators of economic performance and human capacity to address, in concert,
the 'fundamental, long-term issues of the structure, scope, and substance of societal
development". It highlights four major areas of development-structural, human, physical, and
sectoral:

* Structural elements include honest, competent governments committed to the fight against
corruption; strong property and personal rights laws supported by efficient legal and judicial
processes; a well-supervised financial system promoting transparency; and a reliable social
safety net.

* Human development requires universal primary education along with a sound secondary and
tertiary system; and a health system that focuses on family planning and child care.

- Physical concerns center around the efficient provision of water and sewerage; expanded
access to reliable electric power; access to road, rail and air transport along with
telecommunications; and preservation of the physical environment and cultural heritage.

- Sectoral elements include an integrated rural development strategy; sensible urban
management; and an enabling environment for the private sector.

88. 
Fighting poverty is the central mission of the Bank and is at the core of the CDF. Poverty
in the Pacific varies both in terms of its incidence and its defining characteristics. The existence
of strong cultural and social systems in the Pacific continues to ameliorate and mask the
incidence of absolute or abject poverty, but there are clear indications that these systems, and the
values that underpin them, are under strain. Rates of youth suicide throughout the region are
some of the highest recorded in the world. Towns and informal settlements continue to grow at a
rate that see young people and their families removed from traditional support structures and the
incidence of urban poverty growing at an increasing rate. The demographic profile of the Pacific,
with some 40 percent of the population under 15 years and a further 20 percent between 15 and
24 years, points to continuing and sustained pressure on Governments' capacity to establish and
maintain health and education systems capable of providing even a basic level service. The
impact of poverty also varies within the region with the larger Melanesian countries of the
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu sharing some features, such as adult illiteracy rates and levels of
access to safe water, that place them on a par with experience in Sub-Saharan Africa.

- 28 -

89. 
Sustainable progress against poverty is conditioned on the development agenda pursued
by Pacific countries being broad based, owned and driven by the country itself and realistic in
terms of the timing and resources available. Only such an agenda can lead to broad based
economic growth and employment creation. While not uniform, there is an ongoing reform
process in the region. It is one owned and driven, to a greater or lesser extent, by the individual
countries concerned and which finds expression in both domestic reform programs and shared
regional action. The World Bank's engagement in the region supports such reform programs,
both at a country and regional level, and the scale and type of assistance to individual countries
in the region will reflect this (see also Box C).

Box C: World Bank Approaches to Poverty, 1990 and 2000

The definition of poverty has evolved over the past decade together with international knowledge about the nature of poverty
and its determinants. In 1990, the World Development Report expanded the traditional income-based definition of poverty to
further include capabilities - such as health, education and nutrition. This framework explicitly recognized the interaction
and causal relationship among these dimensions. It recommended a strategy for poverty reduction based on broad-based
growth in incomes and on investment in basic education and health care, together with safety nets for those unable to
participate in growth.

In light of the voices of the poor study and the evolution of events and ideas in the 1990s, the 2000 World Development
Report proposes to further extend the concept of poverty to include the dimension of vulnerability and that of voicelessness
and powerlessness. These added dimensions broaden the causal framework for analysis and expand the range of policies and
actions that can be considered to tackle poverty.

The key elements of an effective poverty reduction strategy are:
* A comprehensive understanding of poverty and its determinants. It will be necessary to identify who and where the poor
are and what prevents them from moving out of poverty, and to consider the various dimensions of poverty, including
low income, capabilities, security and empowerment.
* Choosing public actions that have the highest poverty impact.
* 
Policies that lead to more rapid economic growth-including macroeconomic stability, freer and more open markets and
a stable and predictable environment for private sector activity-will need to be outlined. Prioritization of public actions
in the poverty reduction strategy should, in general, be based on the expected impact on poverty in the short- and long-
run. It will also depend on specific national, regional and group priorities that are expressed during the participatory
processes. Social sector programs will generally be significant components of the effort, but actions with a more direct
effect on the incomes of the poor -based on actions in areas like rural development, local infrastructure, and to enable
private sector development - will usually be of equal importance. Strengthening capacity to implement is likely to be of
general importance. The availability of non-inflationary financing for the program will need to be assessed.
Transparency. The process of setting budget and policy priorities, and monitoring progress toward achieving poverty
reduction goals, should, in general, rely upon transparent processes for public dialogue and disclosure of information.
Greater transparency and accountability in fiscal management will help to boost the efficiency of public spending.
* Outcome indicators which are set and monitored using participatory processes. The identification and measurement of
poverty outcome targets, and assessment of the impact of priority interventions on the poor, are crucial mechanisms for
regular assessment of policy and program design and implementation. Broad participation is needed to ensure that the
most relevant targets are selected and that the results of regular monitoring of outcome indicators feed back to refine
policy and programs to improve their effectiveness.

* 

90. 
The sustainable utilization of natural resources, especially forests and fisheries, is crucial
for meeting the development aspirations of Pacific Island populations. In some countries,
however, economic growth has been at the expense of an overexploitation of natural resources,
and is, therefore, unsustainable. Expanding economic activity has also been accompanied by
rapid growth of towns. However, inadequate management of this process has resulted in
considerable stress being placed on the urban environment, especially in the areas of sewerage

- 29 -

and waste disposal. The emerging scenario thus calls for a greater integration of environmental
policy with economic policy both at the macroeconomic and sector levels. This is an area the
Bank has begun work in other regions which it could draw upon in assisting Pacific member
countries in ensuring that economic growth occurs in harmony with the natural environment.

91. A wide range of development partners are involved in the region, including both bilateral
and multilateral donors. Importantly, a significant element of the response of Pacific countries to
the development challenges they face has been to seek partnership with other Pacific countries,
both at regional and subregional levels and through development of a range of regional
organizations. Fundamental to the success or failure of development in the Pacific must be
notion of partnership that encompasses not only governments, bilateral agencies, multilateral and
regional organizations, but which extends to broader civil society. Examples of donor
coordination in the Pacific, such as the annual meeting between Pacific countries and their
development partners, the annual meeting of all Pacific donors, the annual tripartite meeting
between the Bank, AusAID and the ADB, and a range of regular high level consultations
between the major bilateral donors, all point to a solid foundation. Development partners must
now seek practical ways to build on this foundation and demonstrate an increasing willingness to
work cooperatively within broad sectoral and policy parameters set by Governments.

92. 
Part of the uniqueness of the region stems from the way in which Pacific traditions and
institutions have evolved and interacted with more recent modes of operation to form unique
contemporary systems. These Pacific institutions, traditions and customs need to be
acknowledged as important and legitimate elements of the broader governance process that
applies in the Pacific. They need to be explicitly taken into account in structuring the assistance
that the Bank and other development partners can provide. The consultation process followed
and role identified for villages in the management of coastal protection in the Samoan
Infrastructure Management Project (IAMP) is one practical example of how this is being done by
the Bank. At the same time it needs to be understood that such institutions, traditions and
customs continue to evolve and change and are subject to legitimate scrutiny and debate about
their inclusiveness, effectiveness and fairness.

D. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S PACIFIC STRATEGY

93. 
The Bank works in partnership with the nine Pacific members of the World Bank and
their development partners to achieve sustainable social and economic development. The Bank
brings its global knowledge to help address the development problems faced by Pacific members
particularly at a regional level, and provides a targeted and focused mix of development

financing.

The Bank's Lending Program - toward a targeted and innovative portfolio

94. 
In terms of overall resource transfers to the Pacific region the Bank's role has been
modest. In 1998, for example, the Bank accounted for less than 1 percent of the total net
disbursements of ODA to the broad Pacific region (excluding the French Territories). The major
sources of development financing in the region remain Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the
European Union and the ADB (see Section 2C).

- 30 -

95. 
The ready availability of other sources of development financing, particularly grants-
based support from bilateral donors, has enabled the Bank to take a more targeted and strategic
approach to the provision of lending in the last 2-3 years. The Bank has only accepted a role in
lending where it has a proven track record in the sector concerned or where the program of
economic and sector work has provided a sound basis for Bank involvement, where the proposed
activity has a strong link to an explicit policy reform agenda, is in keeping with the Bank's
mission of poverty alleviation and where there are no other sources of finance readily available.
Clearly, as a lending institution the Bank's role in the Pacific is secondary to the ADB and is
designed to complement ADB's activities. This is reflected in the current portfolio where the
four projects currently under supervision, along with the four at advanced stages of preparation,
are all in high priority sectors in which the Bank has a proven track record and which all involve
large policy reform components (Table 9).

Lending in the Medium Term

96. 
Lending operations would be open to all member countries. It is expected, however, that
lending will continue to concentrate on the larger Pacific economies in line with the economies
of scale associated with doing business with the Bank and given availability of grant based
financing opportunities for the smaller Pacific economies.

97. As the majority of the Bank's Pacific members are eligible for IDA, in principle,
(Kiribati, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu) the lending portfolio will continue to be
largely IDA-based, though access to IBRD support remains an option, particularly for Fiji. The
Bank's lending portfolio will stay within the current level of up to two new lending operations
per fiscal year. This would see over time a portfolio under supervision of some 6-8 projects and
could involve a commitment of IDA resources to the region over the next three years of $US30-
40 million.

98. 
The mission of IDA is to support efficient and effective programs to reduce poverty and
improve the quality of life in its poorest member countries. IDA helps build the human capital,
policies, institutions, and physical infrastructure needed to bring about equitable and sustainable
growth and its goal is to reduce the disparities across and within countries, to bring more people
into the economic mainstream, and to promote equitable access to the benefits of development.
The lending program in PMCs will maintain a strong focus on the social sector, particularly
health and education, and will complement ongoing Bank and other donor programs. In the
Melanesian countries of the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu a key focus will be on girls education.
In the health sector maternal and reproductive health would continue to have a high priority.
Gender issues will continue to be mainstreamed in all Bank lending activities. The transport
infrastructure and telecommunications sectors have also been identified as priorities given the
challenges posed by remoteness and isolation to the countries of the Pacific.

- 31 -

Table 9: Current Lending Activities

Country 

Project 

Solomon Islands Education III 
(Approved FY 93) 

Solomon Islands Structural Adjustment 
Credit 
(Approved FY 99) 

Solomon Islands Health Sector 
Development 
(Approved FY 2000) 
Infrastructure Asset 
Management 
(Approved FY 99) 

Samoa 

Samoa 

Health 

Vanuatu 

Education It 

Solomon Islands Education IV 

Tonga 

Telecom Sector 
reform 

Amount 
$USm 

|

Description and main focus

4.0 

14.4 

12.0 

16.9 

Under Supervision
The project has supported improved access to secondary education,
especially senior secondary Forms 4 and 5 and expanded female
participation; establishment of pilot lower unit-cost day schools (Day
Junior Secondary Schools (DJSS); enhanced educational quality including
teacher upgrading and curriculum improvements; expanded supply and
improved training of nurses; and improved management of the education
sector, including strengthening of budgeting and financial planning. Due to
close in December 2000. IDA financed.
The first Bank structural adjustment operation in the Pacific, the operation
supports the Govemment's broad Policy and Structural reform Program.
Other development partners supporting the reform program are the Asian
Development Bank, AusAID, the Government of New Zealand, and the
European Union. The IMF has provided advice on macroeconomic issues.
Due to close in December 2000. IDA financed.
The project supports improvements in reproductive health, malaria
prevention and capacity building in the national department of health and
provincial health services. Due to close in June 2005. IDA financed.
In line with the Government's Statement of Economic Strategy, the project
is helping change the role of government in the delivery and management
of infrastructure services in the three priority subsectors of air transport,
road transport and coastal protection Phase I and will help alleviate the
constraints imposed by remoteness and isolation. Due to close in
December 2002. IDA financed and cofinanced with AusAID
Under Development
5.0 (est) Within the framework of the Government's Health Sector Strategic Plan,
the project will provide support for the strengthening of policy
development and health care legislation and regulation; improvement of
health facilities planning; improving the quality of key infrastructure;
improvement of maintenance of health infrastructure and equipment; and
developing a health care waste management system. IDA financed.
10.0(est) Within the context of the Bank sponsored Vanuatu Education Master Plan
the project will support system wide reform, including the introduction of
mother-tongue instruction in community school grades K-2 and English or
French language instruction in primary school grades 3-8. IDA financed.
8.0 (est) The project will improve the quality of basic education and strengthen
institutional capacity with a particular focus on community based schools.
In particular, it will support the implementation of policy reforms in the
areas of education financing, textbook provision and management, and
preservice teacher training. It will also support increased female
participation in basic education.
2.0 (est) The project will support the implementation of the Government's sector
reform programn, focusing on: regulatory reform, institutional reform, in
particular, corporatization of TTC; and pilot IT Applications (e.g. tele-
medicine, tele-education, etc.). IDA financed.

99. 
Strengthening the private sector's capacity to play a greater role in the development of
these areas will be a key concern. The work of the IFC's South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF) on
accelerating the development of a productive private sector in the PMCs through supporting the
entry of private sector projects will continue (see also Box D). In the area of environment and
natural resources, the Bank would continue to address country priorities through GEF medium-
sized grants, and by mainstreaming it into its lending, policy and advisory activities. Support for
broad based economic restructuring and reform will remain an option where counties can

- 32 -

articulate a coherent reform agenda and demonstrate strong commitment to carry through with
that agenda.

Box D: The World Bank's Approach to Private Sector Development in the Pacific

The role played by the private sector in Pacific economies varies greatly but there is a general trend toward private sector
development and privatization or corporatization of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs). Given the dominance of the Pacific private
sector by small business, the Bank's approach to private sector development is strongly integrated with strategies in Small and
Medium Enterprise (SME) development and Microfinance.

SOE Reform and Privatization

Effort in this area is varied but in general there is a stated intention on the part of PMCs to privatize or corporatize state owned
enterprises. Some countries have embarked on programs but others are still grappling with what such programs can mean. There
is a general lack of community understanding of the processes and benefits associated with privatization and corporatization and
legislators and officials are not clear on the process involved or, in many cases, the governance and regulatory framework
required to manage the sale process in a transparent manner and create the environment for the successful operation of the
privatized or corporatized businesses. The Bank has a role to play in offering advisory support and technical assistance for the
process of privatization and corporatization. This support needs to be at all levels of the community but particularly targeted to
legislators and officials. Care swill continue to be exercised so that efforts are coordinated with other agencies, particularly the
ADB and the Pacific Forum.

Small and Medium Enterprise Development (SME) and Microfinance

Small and medium business is the dominant private sector activity in virtually all Pacific countries. Many development partners
are involved in the sector, particularly in training and education. There is a need for equity venture capital in the region and also
for stronger post-financing technical support for funded projects. There is also a developing focus in village based microfinance
largely through the NGO community which is in keeping with the Pacific environment. The Bank will continue to support
project development through IFC's South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF) with support from regional donors such as Japan,
Australia and New Zealand and will examine ways to offer stronger post-financing technical support. As the private sector grows
there will be a developing need for capital markets advisory and investment support, equity funds, leasing and other
mechanisms. Evaluation of capacity building in the region and identification of training gaps will also be considered. The Bank's
expertise and experience in the area of microfinance can also add value to the work of other development partners in the region.

Private Participation in Social Service and Infrastructure Development

The provision of social services and infrastructure in the Pacific is largely in public hands in all of the PMCs. There is a desire to
look at a role for the private provision of many of the these services, particularly as part of the SOE reform that is occurring in
the region. There are a number of development partners already working with the PMCs in this area. By drawing on its global
experience in this area, the Bank can add value to this work. This is likely to include advisory and credit/investment services but
in the context of careful targeting and coordination with other development partners.

Matching lending instruments with capacity and need

100. 
In recognition of the specific circumstances that apply in the Pacific, including issues
associated with vulnerability of small states and the cost of doing business with the Bank,
continued efforts will be made to both use existing instruments more flexibly and develop new
instruments so that they match the scale and capacity of member countries involved.

101. The development of Adaptable Program Loans (APLs), Learning and Innovation Loans
(LILs) has provided a greater range of lending instruments that more closely match the scale of
operation necessary in the Pacific. The lending program in the Pacific will seek to make more
extensive use of such instruments as well as fine tune their application in light of the experience
with the first Pacific APL in Samoa and broader Bank experience with APLs and LILs.

- 33 -

102. A number of Pacific member countries have expressed interest in the further development
of program and sector lending instruments, as opposed to project based lending. This will be
done by building on broader Bank experience and on experience with the bank's first structural
adjustment operation in the Pacific. Sector or program approaches will only be feasible,
however, in those countries where there are clearly articulated sector reform programs. Such
approaches will also be dependent on a willingness, flexibility and capacity of development
partners to work cooperatively within a broader country articulated sector program.

103. The countries of the Pacific have long recognized that shared action has a role to play in
addressing the development challenges they face. The Bank has started to develop lending
mechanisms that can provide resources to support such regional action and this early experience,
particularly in the Caribbean and Africa, may provide a model for the development of regionally
focused lending in the Pacific. This could involve rolling programs targeting a number of
countries or ones based on partnership arrangements with regional organizations. Discussions
with PMCs to further explore this option have only just begun.

The Bank's Nonlending Program-A Global Knowledge Bank for the Pacific Region

104. Unlike many other regions in which the Bank operates, its role as a knowledge bank is
perhaps the key strength that it brings to the Pacific. To date, the Bank's main means of
contributing knowledge at the overall regional level has been through the Regional Economic
Reports (RER) (see also Box E). The first of the Bank's RERs was produced in 1991 and the
fourth in 1998. The fifth is currently under preparation and due to be presented to Pacific
member countries in mid 2000. The role of the RER has been supported and extended by a
number of regionally based sector studies, including in the health, post-secondary education,
transport and energy sectors. In contrast, the Bank's country-focused economic and sector work
has provided a means of bringing the Bank's global experience to bear on development issues
specific to individual member countries. The Bank's economic and sector work has been
disseminated widely, including through the Pacific Islands Discussion Paper Series, as
standalone publication and through country and regional presentations.

105. The RER will continue to be the main vehicle for bringing the Bank's global knowledge
to the Pacific region but will be supplemented by a more focused program of regional and sector
based economic and sector work developed in conjunction with members countries and other
development partners, including sectoral studies undertaken on a partnership basis with regional
and other organizations. The country-specific economic and sector work undertaken by the Bank
has covered a broad range of sectors including health, fisheries, finance and forestry.
Importantly, it has been the means by which all member countries have been able to see tangible
returns for their membership. The Bank will maintain this capacity to respond flexibly to
individual members country requests for short term technical and analytical assistance.

106. Pacific members have indicated that they would like to see a significantly expanded level
of service provision by the Bank in terms of economic and sector work and in the provision of
short term technical assistance. There are resource constraints on the Bank's ability to increase
its capacity in this regard. One option that will be explored is whether it might be possible to
develop, in conjunction with other development partners, a grants based facility to support the

- 34 -

provision of technical assistance by the Bank ideally based on grant contributions by
development partners. The existing South Pacific Facility currently financed by AusAID and the
arrangements underpinning the very successful operations of PFTAC and FIAS provide some
possible models in this regard.

Box E: The Biennial Regional Economic Report

The Regional Economic Report (RER), prepared biennially, is a key piece of economic and sector work undertaken by the Bank
in the Pacific region. RER 2000, the fifth prepared by the Bank, is due to be presented to member governments in mid-2000 and
aims to help the people and governments of PMCs deal with some of the challenges and opportunities that will confront them in
the first part of the new centuly. Three aspects of managing unavoidable change are examined in detail in RER 2000: they are
the growth of towns, the effects of global climate change, and the management of the ocean and its interaction with its island
peoples.

These three themes were identified after consultations in the region and because of their region-wide relevance. They were also
chosen because of the immediacy of the challenges and opportunities they raise, the ability of the Bank to contribute to the
ongoing work on the issues, and because within each of the themes lie substantial opportunities to effect lasting improvements
to social and economic conditions. The growth of towns is handicapped by lack of understanding of the social and economic
nature of the process, poor physical management of the towns themselves, and failure of govemments to grasp the strongly
positive development potential of urban settlement. The effects of climate change and the scope for human response to it is a
vast and rapidly evolving subject, very difficult for communities and governments to grasp but of immense and immediate
impact on the Pacific Islands. The Pacific Ocean is by far the most important physical influence on social and economic activity
in the PMCs.

Woven through those three areas of concern, and strongly conditioning the way PMCs react to them, RER 2000 also identifies
two widespread sources of stress and assesses their significance: these are the changing forms of institutions and organization,
and the globalization of trade, investment and economic governance.

RER 2000 draws on the advice and experience of Pacific Island countries, regional and international institutions and individuals
to suggest what needs to be done, where and how to equip communities and governments in PMCs, and their regional
organizations, to meet and manage these inescapable challenges and their accompanying opportunities.

Economic and Sector Work in the Short & Medium Term-the Small States Agenda in the

Pacific

107. The recent joint work of the Commonwealth Secretariat and World Bank on identifying
the characteristics of small states has brought a new focus and shared perspective on the specific
problems that small vulnerable states face. A general focus on small states will be maintained in
the Bank's operations on an ongoing basis through the establishment of a Small States Network
and the holding of an annual Small States Seminar. The next step is to identify specific strategies
that are relevant to the Pacific. The Bank's global coverage, combined with the fact that forty
one World Bank developing country members have populations of less than 1.5 million and three
out of four of these are island countries, means it well placed to help identify world best-practice
approaches and solutions to the development problems that its nine Pacific member countries
face.

108. Managing the vulnerabilities that Pacific Island countries face requires innovative, sound
and focused thinking on the part of national governments. Sound macroeconomic policies must
be at the core of these efforts and scope of national reform programns currently being
implemented in the Pacific is testament to the commitment of many Pacific Island governments
to implement sound macroeconomic and fiscal policies. Diversification of the domestic

- 35 -

economic base will reduce the impact of specific trade or financial shocks and the small size of
many of the national economies and the associated lack of economies of scale could be offset by
giving more attention to cooperation at the regional level to share infrastructure and
institutional resources. The Bank will seek ways to support and foster such regional level
cooperation and will focus a significant part of its economic and sector at the regional and
subregional levels.

Managing natural disasters

109. Natural disasters, like cyclones, frequently exact a large toll on PMCs in the form of
human suffering, damage to infrastructure and loss of export earnings. The cost of such disasters
can be considerably reduced through comprehensive disaster management programs. This would
include ex ante mitigation measures such as appropriate zoning and hazard mapping,
establishment and enforcement of building codes, and disaster information mechanisms. A
second component would be the strengthening the capacity of national emergency management
agencies. Local communities could be involved by organizing, training and equipping
community disaster committees in disaster preparedness and mitigation. Third, the program
could include investment in protection of key infrastructure facilities. Such work needs to be
informed by the approaches already developed that are uniquely integrated with the social and
cultural institutions and understandings in the region. The Bank is undertaking work on the
development of catastrophe risk management in the Caribbean. This includes both catastrophe
insurance and the incorporation of catastrophe exposure into macroeconomic policy making. The
Bank will work with PMCs and other development partners to see what relevance such work
could have for the Pacific.

Tackling commodity price risks

110. The PMCs being largely dependent on export of primary commodities are vulnerable to
fluctuations in their prices. It would therefore be useful if the International Task Force ° on
commodity price risk management pay attention to issues and commodities of relevance to the
Pacific. The risks that the Pacific are faced with, however, including fluctuations in volumes and
tourism earnings and different land tenure systems are likely to require a combination of
different approaches.

Managing environmental vulnerability

111. Pacific Island countries are among the most vulnerable in the world to global climate
change. Most of the population, economic activities and infrastructure are located near the coast
and the combination of inherent small island vulnerability to environmental degradation and
population growth entails high costs during extreme climatic conditions such as cyclones or El
Nifo events. The region has been active on climate change issues, especially through regional
organizations such as SPREP and SOPAC. However, despite the progress that has been
achieved, knowledge gaps persist in regional impact assessment, economic valuation and
adaptation to climate change. Changing population dynamics and increasing numbers of people

10 This Task Force was convened by the World Bank in 1998 and includes participation from all stakeholders in
international commodity markets. See http://www.worldbank.org/commrisk.

- 36 -

moving to urban and peri-urban areas located near the coast or at sea level are also having an
impact on urban environmental services, including water supply, drainage, sanitation/sewerage
and solid water disposal and on urban infrastructure such as roads, power and telecommunication
services. The Bank's forthcoming Regional Economic Report will analyze ways for PMCs to
develop adaptation strategies and improve their access to international funding for adaptation.

Responding to worldwide trade liberalization

112. Recent years have seen the progressive liberalization of world trade following the
implementation of Uruguay Round agreements, the establishment of the WTO, and the
proliferation of regional trade agreements. As a result, the trade preferences once afforded to
PMCs are likely to be eroded. Both time and resources will be needed as PMCs adjust to this
new trading environment. Successful adjustment will require both policy change and external
support.

113. There is a recognition among the PMCs that they need to participate more fully in the
worldwide trend toward freer trade. The benefits of freer trade are not achieved without costs. It
takes time for efficient industries to respond to the new opportunities opened by freer trade. The
uncompetitive or less efficient industries may have to be scaled down or forced to exit, resulting
in reduced profitability and job losses. These 'adjustment costs' are inevitable and the movement
towards freer trade must be carefully managed so as to minimize them. The Bank's past and
continuing economic and sector work in the region places it on strong analytical base to help
PMCs manage this adjustment in their specific context. In addition, the Bank can draw upon its
involvement with liberalization experiences in other countries to identify roadblocks which could
increase the costs of adjustment. The Bank could examine whether policies that have been used
to successfully tackle the roadblocks in other regions could be adapted for the PMCs.

114. The Lome convention which had accorded preferential treatment to exports from
participating PMCs to the EU expired in February 2000. A successor convention is to be signed
later this year in Suva, Fiji. The new agreement would require the PMCs to conclude with the
EU a WTO-compatible arrangement by 2008. Current market access arrangements would,
however, be maintained over these eight years. The new WTO-compatible relationship will
likely involve a reciprocal trading arrangement of the PMCs with the EU. PMCs have already
begun negotiations for forming a regional free trade area amongst themselves which will greatly
facilitate a regional economic partnership arrangement (REPA) between the relevant PMCs and
the EU. The Bank could support the PMCs in accomplishing such agreements. It is likely that the
REPA with the EU would confer greater benefits to the PMCs than would a free trade area
among themselves.

Globalization

115. Economic policies and strategies need to be considered in terms of national priorities and
social circumstances, but national level decisions have to be informed by international events and
pressures. The fast pace of globalization accentuates the economic vulnerability of the region,
especially as most countries produce mainly primary commodities that have fluctuating and often
low value on world markets. National governments can find their policies superceded by larger
global forces over which they have limited or no control. Growing export markets for natural

- 37 -

resources can weaken traditional management systems, particularly when local leaders sacrifice
long-term sustainability to short-term gains. Conversely, the forces of globalization can also
stimulate an environment where innovative policies and incentives help remove some of the
traditional barriers of remoteness from markets. Technological and communications advances
can, if managed properly, provide new opportunities by reducing liabilities of physical isolation.
The Bank will work with PMC s and development partners to help identify how such advances
can be realized in the Pacific.

E. RISKS TO IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGY

116. The major risks to the Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy stem from the nature and
characteristics of Pacific states themselves and the region in which they are located. Major risks
include:

* A lack of political and institutional capacity in PMCs to follow through with reform
programs, to manage the resources available to them and to respond effectively to the
changing global economic environment. This risk is significant, particularly for those PMCs
whose reform programs are not yet far advanced. The measures set out in this strategy will
help build the institutional capacity of PMCs and the risk will decrease over time as progress
is achieved. The Bank's continued involvement in the region, along with the decentralization
of the Bank's PNG and Pacific Country Management Unit, will enable more sustained
dialogue with PMCs to help maintain the commitment to reform.

* Susceptibility of the region and countries in it to external economic and natural shocks. The
measures outlined in paragraphs 107-115, including in disaster mitigation and management,
environmental vulnerability and trade liberalization, will increase the resilience of PMCs. It
has to be acknowledged, however, that this risk will remain on an on-going basis as a part of
the Pacific operating environment.

* A failure on the part of development partners that are active in the region to follow through
with their stated commitment and willingness to work cooperatively within country-driven
reform and sector programs. This risk is rated as low as all development partners have clearly
stated their desire and commitment to work on the basis of partnership. The decentralization
of the Bank's Pacific operations will also enable enhanced dialogue with other development
partners to help ensure the realization of this commitment.

- 38 -

5. CONCLUDING COMMENTS

117. The Bank has a role to play in the Pacific. It involves working in partnership with the
nine Pacific Bank members and their development partners to identify solutions to the
development challenges they face. That role must be targeted and focused, playing to the Bank's
strengths and avoiding generating expectations that the Bank has neither the resources or clear
comparative advantage to satisfy. The Pacific Regional Strategy outlined plays to the Bank's
strengths, highlighting its global access to knowledge and combining it with a strategic and
targeted lending portfolio. The strategy provides a yardstick by which the Bank's involvement
can be predicted, measured and assessed; but perhaps the real value of the regional strategy lies
in the commitment it makes to its Pacific members and to the other development partners who
share that commitment.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Sven Sandstrom

Washington, D.C.
May 4, 2000

- 39 -

Annex 1

ANNEX 1: THE BANK'S PACIFIC EXPERIENCE

Table 1: The World Bank's Lending Program 1971 - 2000

Financier 

Project 

Principal 

Amount In Millions (USD) 
Undisbursed 
Disbursed
FIJI

Approval Date 

Closing Date

IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 
IBRD 

IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 

IDA 
IDA 
IDA 

IDA 

IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 

IDA 
IDA 

IDA 
IDA 
IDA 
IDA 

Highway - Suva - Nandi 
Highway - Suva - Nandi 
Telecommunication 
Telecommll 
Sugar Development 
Power 
Power II 
Cyclone Reconstruction 
Development Bank 
Road Upgrading 
Third Telecommunication 
Housing Project 
Roads Upgrading 

Highways I 
Agriculture Development 
Second Agr. Development 
Development Bank 
Multi-Project Loan 
Power 
Power 
Telecom 
Emergency Road Rehab 
Emergency Road Rehab 
Infrastructure Management 

DevelopmentBank 
1Primary Education 

1Agriculture Development 

|Guadalcanal Road 
Education 1; 
Education 
III 
SAC 
Health Sector Development 

Development Bank 
Development Bank I 

_______ 
____________________ 

Agriculture Research & Extension 
Multiproject 
Education 
Housing 

11.8 
4.2 
2.2 
5.0 
12.0 
15.0 
15.5 
18.0 
6.5 
23.4 
8.1 
16.2 
15.0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

SAMOA

4.4 
0 
8.0 
0 
2.0 
0 
2.0 
0 
2.5 
0 
3.0 
0 
1.0 
0 
4.6 
0 
14.0 
0 
5.1 
0 
14.4 
0 
SOLOMON ISLANDS
1.5 
0 
5.0 
0 
3.5 
0 

2.0 

5.0 
16.9 
12.0 
4.0 

2.0 
3.0 

_ 

1 

1 2.0 
2.0 
8.0 
3.4 

0 

0 
1.3 
5.0 
3.9 

TONGA

1 

0 
0 
VANUATU

-

0 
0| 
0 
0 

11.8 
4.2 
2.2 
5.0 
11.7 
15.0 
15.5 
18.0 
1.2 
23.4 
7.6 
12.9 
14.9 

4.4 
6.5 
1.0 
2.4 
3.1 
3.4 
0.4 
5.0 
15.3 
5.1 
0.4 

0.8 
4.7 
2.6 

2.2 

6.1 
16.0 
7.0 
0.1 

2.1 
2.3 

1.4 
2.5 
8.6 
1.6 

29 June 1971 
30 Jan 1973 
15 Jun 1972 
8Jul 1975 
23 Mar 1976 
15 Jun 1978 
29 May 1980 
25 Nov 1980 
2Jul 1985 
3 Sep 1987 
25 May 1989 
17 Apr 1990 
18 Jun 1992 

4 Mar 1975 
18 Sep 1979 
9 Dec 1980 
23 Apr 1985 
4 Feb 1986 
21 Apr 1987 
22 Apr 1993 
8 Jun 1989 
17 May 1990 
9 Mar 1993 
15 Apr 1999 

17Mar 1981 
2 Mar 1982 
20 Dec 1983 

22Jan 1985 

29 Apr 1986 
25 May 1993 
17 Jun 1999 
6 Jan 2000 

31 Dec 1977
31 Mar 1978
30 Nov 1978
31 Mar 1981
31 Dec 1983
30 Sep 1982
31 Dec 1983
30 Jun 1984
31 Dec 1989
31 Dec 1991
31 Dec 1996
30 Sep 1998
30 Jun 1999

30 Jun 1980
30 Jun 1988
31 Dec 1987
30 Sep 1990
31 Dec 1993
31 Aug 1994
31 Aug 1994
31 Dec 1994
31 Dec 1994
31 Dec 1997
31 Dec 2002

31 Dec 1987
31 Dec 1989
31 Dec 1990

30 Jun 1989

31 Dec 1992
30 Jun 2000
31 Dec 2000
30 Jun 2005

12 Jun 1987 
14Jan 1990 

131 Dec 1990
131 Dec 1995

2 Aug 1983 
20 Mar 1986 
15 Nov 1988 
|11 Jun 1991 

30 Jun 1989
30 Jun 1993
31 Dec 1998
30 Sep 1998

- 40 -

Annex 1

Table 2: SECTORAL COMPOSITION OF BANK LENDING, 1971-2000

Sector 

Education 
Health 
Agriculture/Rural 
Banking 
Housing/Informal Settlements 
Roads/Transport 
Asset/Infrastructure Management 
Cyclone Reconstruction 
Telecoms 
Structural Adjustmnent Credit 
Sugar Industry 
Multiprojects 
Power 
TOTAL 

Fiji 

USsm 

% 

Samoa 
US$m 

% 

6.5 
16.2 
54.4 

18.0 
15.3 

12 

30.5 
152.9 

4 

10 

36 

12
10 

8 

20 
100 

10 
2 

_ 

23.5 
14.4 

4.6 

2.5 
4 
61 

_ 

16 
3 

39 
24

7.5 

1 
1

4 
6.5 
100 

Analytical and Advisory Work

Solomon Islands 
Vanuatu 
USsm 
%N USm 
% 
26.9 
54 

52

8 

Tonga
US$m 

%

4 

3.5 
1.5 

8

7 
3 

2 

3.4 

13

22

5 

100

2 

4

_

12 

12 

24
24

2 

13 

_

49.9 

100 

15.4 

100 

5 

100

The Bank's analytical and advisory work in the Pacific has been substantial and included
regionally based work such as the biennial Regional Economic Reports and individual country
work. Regionally based advisory work has covered a wide range of areas including governance,
fisheries, education, health, transport, energy, agriculture, coastal management, inforrnation
technology, telecommunications, private sector investment and energy.

B) Analytical and Advisory Work-Listing of Substantial Pieces

Working Apart or Together
Pacific Islands Discussion Paper Series, Number 10, 2000

Voices from the Village: A Comparative Study of Coastal Resource Management in the
Pacific Islands
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 9, 1999

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Vanuatu
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 8, 1998

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Fiji
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 7, 1998

Samoa: Meeting the Challenges of Development.
Health Sector Review, 19998

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Solomon Islands
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 6, 1998

Enhancing the Role of Governance in the Pacific Island Economies
Regional Economic Report, 1998

- 41 -

Annex 1

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Kiribati
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 5, 1998

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Tonga
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 4, 1998

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Samoa
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 3, 1998

Aspects of the Industry, Trade and Marketing of Pacific Islands Trochus
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 2, 1997

The Use of First and Second Languages in Education
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 1, 1997

Pacific Islands, Building a Resilient Economic Base for the Twenty-First Century
Regional Economic Report, 1995

Pacific Island Economies: Sustainable Development of Fisheries
Regional Report, 1995

Pacific Island Economies: Sustainable Development of Forestry
Regional Report, 1995

Pacific Islands Education Study
Regional Report, 1995

Fiji: Restoring Growth in a Changing Global Environment
Country Report, 1995

Managing Urban Environmental Sanitation Services in Pacific Island Countries, Annotate
Bibliography
Regional Report, 1995

Health Priorities and Options in the World Bank's Pacific Member Countries
Regional Report, 1994

Managing Urban Environmental Sanitation Services in Selected pacific Island Countries
Regional report, 1994

Pacific Island Economies: The Role of the Private Sector
Regional Report, 1993

Post Secondary Education Study
Regional Report, 1993

- 42 -

Annex 1

Transport Sector Study
Regional Report, 1993

Pacific Island Economies: Towards Efficient and Sustainable Growth
Regional Economic Report, 1993
Pacific Regional Energy Assessment
Regional Report, 1992

Pacific Island Economies: Towards Higher Growth in the 1990s
Regional Economic Report, 1991

Fiji: Incentive Policies for Growth
Country report, 1991

Western Samoa: Agricultural Strategy Review
Country Report, 1991

Role of Remittances in Polynesian Economies
Regional, 1991

Tonga: Agricultural Sector Strategy Review
Country Report, 1990

Fiji: Performance and Prospects of Education Training and Health Services
Country Report, 1990

Fiji: Challenges for Development
Country Report, 1990

- 43 -

Annex 2

ANNEX 2: PACIFIC - COUNTRIES AT A GLANCE

- 44 -

Annex 2

Fiji at a glance 

911 

7199

East Lower-
Asia & middle-. 
Pacific 
Intcome 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

---

____ 

__ 

--

riji 

Development diamond'

Population. mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas methocd, US$) 
GNP (At/as methodf, US$ billins) 

0.83 
2,110 
1 7 

1,817 
990 
1.802 

908 
1,710
1,557

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1992-95

Population (%5) 
Labor force (I/) 
Most recent estimatte (latest year available, ISS2-08~ 
Poverty (% of poPulation below national poverty line)
Urban population (l% of total population) 
Life expectncy at birth (years) 
Infant mortaliy (pe 1, 000 live births) 
Child malnutritionl (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (%/ of population) 
Illiteracy ('A of population age 15.) 
Gross primary enrollment (l% of school-age popuflaion) 
Male 
Female 

1~5 
2.8 

1.~2 
1.6 

1.
1.5 

GNP 
per 
aiaerlmn

Gross
primary

42 
73 

3511 
58
37 ~ 38

69 

688

18 

8 
90 
8 
128 
128 
128 

20 
77 
is 
117 

., 

Accesa to safe water

1 75
14
103 
105 
100

"~~"F/ij
Lower-mtiddle-rncome group

1A9 

116 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1977 

1987 

4997 

1998 

--

GOP (U.S$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports ot goods andi services/GOP 
Gross domestic savIngs/GOP 
Gross national savings/GOP 

0.7~I 

1.2 
15.9 
45.0 
19.2 
15.2 

2,1 
124 
57.3 
10.7 
11,0 

1.8 
12. 
66.0Trd
13.-3
9.7
-2. 
06 
13,5 
1.8

Eonmcrais

23,2 
43.9 
20,4 
19~0 

Tad

Current account balanoe/GOP 
Interest payments/GOP 
Total debt/GOP 
i16,5 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GOP 
Present value of debt/exports 

-3.5 
0,7 

-1.1 
2.2 
39.5 
11,8 

0.2 
0$~ 
10,2 
3.1 
9.5
15.4

Doesi
DoetcInvestment
Svig

3.4 

.. 

.

.

, 

1977-87 1988498 

1997 

1998~ 1999-03 

Idbens

(average annual growth)
GOP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1.1 

2.4 
0.9 

-1.5 
-3.2 

-7 
-5 

Fj
Lower-middle-income group

-1.1 

____ 

2.2 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMVY

(56 of GDP) 

~ ~~~~~1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Gr~owthrates of -otput 

and -Investmenit l%lA

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

23.3 
20.7 
11.5 
58.0 

22.9 
21.1 
11.7 
56.1 

17.8 
28.2 
13.6 
56.1 

19.5 
31.0 
15.1
49.5 

20
151- 

-15 

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

64.1 
15.5 
46.7 

83.6 
17.3 
41.7 

72.9 
16.4 
59.0 

70.7 
16.0
64.7 

-3D

-'_.GDI 

-- *-GDP

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

(average annual growth)
Agricuiture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

2.0 
-0.1 
1.6 
2.3 

0.5 
4.7 
4.1 
1.1 

-12.5 
-1.3 
-3.4 
1.9 

-10.0
3.2
-5.0
-7.4

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

-0.2
4.3
-3.0
-0.7
0.8 

2.3 

-1.8 

-4.2

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

- 45 -

Annex 2

Fiii

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation

Domestic prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

1

7.0 
0.0 

5.7 
8.2 

3.4 
3.8 

5.7 
7.3 

8

4

4

Govemment finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 

2

o

Current revenue 

.. 

23.2 

26.5 

27.0 

93 

94 
95 
' GDP deflator 

96 

97 

98

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 

-0.9 
-5.0 

2.1 
-6.5 

1.5 
-2.4

CPI

.. 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (US$ millions)
soo-

Total exports (fob) 
Sugar 
Gold 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cii 

.. 
.. 

329 
150 
41 

511 
148 
51 
155 
829 

505 
60
40
152
768 

* 

.. 

374 

3 

idiilud

Food 

.. 

~~~ ~~~~ ~~~~~ ~~70 

133 
225 

114 
152 

30

Fuel and energy 

.. 

61 

114 

76

Capital goods 

.. 

73 

92 

93 

94 

90 

6 

97 

9

Exoort Dnce index (1995=100) 
ImDort orice index (1995= 1001 
Terms of trade (1995=100)

92 

93 
94 
Exports 

.

9
*Imports

.. 

.. 

.. 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 
530 
521 
8 

1997 
1,240 
1,241 
-2 

1998 
1,139 
1,117
22

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

318 
334 
-16 

6T

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-9 
-1 

-11 
-11 

-68 
74 

-86
25 

Current account balance 

-26 

-13 

4 

-39 

T 

-

Financing 
items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

43 
-17 

-50 
63 

-33 
29 

22
17 

-

Memo:
Reserves 
includina cold (US$ millions) 
Conversion 
rate (DEC. localVUS$) 

147 
0.9 

132 
1.2 

360 
1.4 

385
2.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(USS millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of total debt, 1998 (US$ millions)

121 
23 
° 

468 
80 
° 

213 
30 
° 

218
32
a 

G. 48 

A: 32

Total debt service 
IBRD 

11 
2 

67 
13 

39 
6 

21
7

IDA 

0 

0 

0 

0

Composition of net resource flows

Official grants 

8 

17 

14

Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

11 
8 
0 
0 

-1 
-16 
11 
0 

-8 
-12 
12
0 

-6
0 

F 41

E:11

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
5 
0 
4 
2 
3 

0 
1 
7 
-6 
6 
-13 

0 
4 
4 
0 
2 
-2 

0 
4 
5 
-1
2
-3

A- IBRD 
B- IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

D- Other multilateral 

Development Economics 

9/17199

°
- 46 -

Micronesia, Fed. Sts. at a glance 

Annex 2

9/23/99

East 
Micronesia. Asia & 
Fed. Sts. 
Pacific~ income 

rmiddle- 

;Low.r

~990 

0.11 
I.0 zo 
0.20 

1.817 

1 02 

90 
1710
1.557 

--- 

Development diamond'

Life expectancy

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

(minilions) 

1998
Pooulatio6, ~mid-vear 
GNP cer caoita (Atlas4methC4, US$) 
GNP (Alas method, US$ biflions)~ 
Avers annual arowth. 19912-98

Pooulation (96) 
Labor force (%l 

Most rvoentesthnate flatestvesr avaiwable. 199281 
Poverty (3 of ooolatiorr below national coverifv line)
Urban co6tulatioft (9% of total ooouLet/on) 
Life exoectancv at 1With (vears) 
infant mortalitvADoe 1.000 live births) 
Child malnutrition PA6 of childmen un,der 87. 
Access to safe water 1% pfOoculalion) 
illiteracy (% of oooulatidniao0 
Gross orimarv enroliment( Ofl soolft 
Male 
Female: 

ooq aioq 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENS
1977 

GDP (US$ billions) 

Gross domesticJnvestrnnflarGP 
Exowrts af coods and services/GOPTrd
Gross domestic savinos/GDP
Gross national savi-nos/GOP

20 

29 
87 
30 

22 

.

1.2 
1,6 

1.1
1~ 

GNP 
per 
caiaerlmn

Grs
primary

35 
69 
37 
20 
77 
is). 15 
117 
i 11 
116 

Ss6
66
38

..

75
1
10iroes,Fd.Ss
10.5 
:100

Access to safe water

Lowe r-middle4nrrome group

1967 

1997 

1998-

021 

0.21

Economic ratioe

Trd

.. 

30.& 

31.4 

Domestic 

/ 

SvnsIvsmn

nvsmn

C,urrenteccount balance/GOP 
Interest oavments/GbP1.Saig 
Total debtIGDP 
Total debt service/exoorts
Present value of debtlGDP;
Present value of debt/exoorts

(everaca annual oroWthl
GOP 
GNP oer caoita 
Exoorta of ogods end services

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(Y. of GOP) 

AoricultLure 
lndustrv4
Manurfactufino 

Services 

Private consumotion 
General covemment consumotion 
lmoorts of ooods and services 

(averaae annual aomwthl
Acriculture
Industrv
Manufacturino 
Services

Private c-onsumoton
General aovemment consumnotion
Gross domestic investment
I mDorts of aoods and servies
Gross national Droduct 

1977497 1966-98g 1997 

1998 199-03

Indebtedness

.. 

03 
-3 

-4 0 
-6 

-3.1 
-4. 

i~ 

"Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Lower-middle-/ncome group

~ ~~~~1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and investment (%1)

93 

'r 

93 

93

OU3/

.4 

-e

''GOl 

-- GDP

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

.

-0.2 

-4.0 

-3.1

Note:, 1996 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show tour key indicatora in the country (in bold) comoared with its inicome-aroUD averaae. If data are missina, the diamond will
be incomolete.

- 47 -

Annex 2

Micronesia, Fed. Sts.

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (/.)

Domestic prices
(6 change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

8 T

.

.

3.0 
3.0 

3.0 
3.0 

6
4

.. 

.. 

2

o

.. 

.. 

73.8 

75.7 

93 

94 

95 

95 

97 

98

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

15.0 

23.5 
0.3

- GDP deflator C

1.5 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and Import levels (USS millions)

.

.. 

33 

32 

300

n.a.

n.a. 

DD

Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 

..

109 

107

Food 

.

J.L

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

..

.. 

.

.

.

o- 

, 

;_ 

_ 

_

92 

93 

94 

95 

99 

97 

99

Exoort orice index (1995=100)
Imoort oice index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 
..

.. 

.. 

.. 

flExports 

*lmporls

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 
64 

1998 
62 

Current account balance to GDP ratio(%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

.. 

.. 

40

.. 

.. 

118 

115
-53 
1 

Resource balance 
Net income 

.. 

.. 

-54 
1 

130

.

20

Net current transfers 

t 

t 
67 0. _, 

116 

118 

E h lE 

i

Current account balance 

64 

al 

Financing items (net) 

.. 

-56 

-51 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98

Changes in net reserves 

.. 

-8 

-16 

-1

Memo:
Reserves includina oold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC. local/IUSS) 

.. 

.. 
1.0 

46 

62

.. 

1.0 

1.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA

..
..

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA

..
..

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

..
..
..
..
..

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments 
Net transfers

..
..

..

Development Economics 

9123/99

-48 -

Annex 2

Kiribati at a.glance 

92J9

East Lower.
Asais& middle--- 
Kiribati Pacific 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

-.

Development diarrond'

1998
Pooulation. mid-year (milhionsl 
GNP oer caoita (Atlas method. USSI 
GNP (Atlas method. US$ billions) 
Averacs annual orovAh. 1992-98

0.09 
1.180 
0 10 

1.817 
990 
1 802 

908 
1.710
1.~557

Life expectancy

PoDulation (%l) 
Labor force (VP). 

71 

1.2 
1.8 

1 1 
1.5 

/

GNP 
per 
capita 

-Gross

.. 

primary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latestveer available. 1992-981 
Povervt!y.( of Dooouaton below natinal ooverty' line)
Urban oooulation t% of total oooulatlonl 
Life exoethancv at birth (veers) 
lrrfantroratlity (oarl, 000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (%6 of cVidren under 51 
Accessato We water (%/ofoowatdaionl 
Illiteracy (% of Doooulation ace 15+1 
Gross orimary enrollment (1,1 ofschool-aeoenoou/atonl 
Male 
Femriale 

/ 

37 
60 
Ei0 

35 
89 
37 
20 
77 
1 
117 
119 
11e 

58
68
38

.Access 

to safe water

100 

75
14
103 
105 
100

.

-P'qKirbatf
Lower-middle-income group

.. 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TREN4DS
1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

-

_ 

Economic ratios'

GOP (USS bill/ansI 
Gross domestic investment/GOP 
ExDorts of aoods and services/GOP 
Gross domestic savinosGDP 
Gross nationl savinos/GOP 

0.04 
8 4 
55,8 
24.0 

0,02 
70.2 
!.3
-35.0

0.05 

0.05
-Trade

.

Current account balancelGOP 
Intwrest oavmertstaGDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exrcorts 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present vailue of debt/excorts

.. 

.

7.4 
0 0 

25.9 
00 

Dometic

0.0 
0.0 

4.0 
6881 
57 

nvsrnn
Ivsmn

Savins 

.

.

.

I

Indebtedness

1977-87 1988-98~ 1997 

1998 11999-03

(averece annual cr0wth)
GDP 
GNP cer caoita 
ExDorts of coods and services

-8.3 
0.5 

24 
-02Q 

3.3 

8.1 

Klrtibati
Lower-middle-rincomegru

.

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and investment(%

1%/ of GDP)
Aariculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturina 
Services 

-. 

25.1 
10.5 
2.2 
84.4 

.

.

.

.

.

.

-. 

.. 

.

Private consumDtion 
General covemment conSUMDtion 
Imoorts of noods and services 

49.0 
27.0 
38.2 

86.4 
48.6 
114.5GD 

.

..

93 

94 

95 

94 

97 

98

~Gl 

~ 

D
GP

-' 

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

(averaoe annual orowthl
Aoriculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturina 
Services 

-1.3 
3.2 
-0.4 
-3.1 

-0.8
-2.5
1.0
2.6

Private consumotion
General aovemment consumotion
Gross domestic investment
(moorts of 3ooods and services
Gross national Droduct 

2.9 

1.8

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show tour key indicators in the countrv (in bold/ comoared with its income-orouD averaeo. If data are missino. the diamond will
be incomolete.

- 49 -

Annex 2

Kiribati

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (/)

Domestic prices

(% change) 

15
10
s

Consumer pnces 
lmplicitGDPdeflator 

.. 

2.2 
-1.5 

4.7 
3.5 

8.9 

4.8 

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplusldefict 

o

93 

94 

95 

98 

97

.. 

.. 

122.8 
47.2 
6.3 

137.0 
64.5 
24.0

.-5

[ 

_GDP 

deflator 

*CPI

.. 

.. 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (US$ millions)

Total exports (fob) 

.. 

.. 

7 

6 

40

Copra 

3.
0

Fish 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 

.. 

.

,. 

..
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

37
.

29 

0

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

.

o 

.

.

..

Exoort owce index (1995=100) 
Imoort once index (1995=100) 

92 

93 

.

..

a Exports 

lnrlports

Terms of trade (1995=1 001

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millionsl 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (°)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

32 
58 
-26 

44 
60
-16 

40 T

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

3

Net income 

.. 

.. 

13 
17 

13 

20

Net current transfers 

.

.. 

1 5

Current account balance 

17 

54 

12

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

., 

.. 

4 
-7 

12 
-24 

92 

93 

94 

97 

98

.

-1 

-o

Memo:
Reserves incdudina oold (USs millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC. locaLWUS$) 

.. 

.

323 
1.3 

370
1.6

0.9 

1.4 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

0 
0 
0 

17
0 
0 

0 
0 

0
0

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

0 
0 
0 

1
0 
0 

0 
0 

0
0

Compositon of net resource flows
Official grants 
Olfidal creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

4 
0 
0 
0 
0 

10
0
0
0
0

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0
0
0
0
0
0

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

Development Economics 

9/22/99

- 50 -

Annex 2

Marshall Islands at a glance9229

East Lower-
Marshall; Asia & mtddle. 
Islands PacifIc Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

---

Development diamond'

¶998
Populalion, mid-year 1'milllons) 
GNP per capta (Adeasmethod, US$) 

0.06 

1.817 
990 

908 
1,710

Life expectancy

I1.540 

GNP (Atias method, US bm* 

1 

1,802 

57

Average annual growfth 1992.98

Population (5)1.2 
Labor force (%6) 
most recent estimate (latest year available, 1992.98)caiaerlmn

1.1 
1.5 

GN
GPGross
per 

6 

primary

Poverty (56OA ouainblwntoa 

oef 

line)

Urban population (56 of lotal population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality per 1,000o 
Ch IlId mnalnutrition ('A of children) under 8) 
Access to safe water (56 of populatioN) 
Illiteracy (56 of populafion.age 15+) 
Grossprimry enrollmient (% of schoo-ae pultn)17 
Male 
Female 

35 

58
68W
38

69 
37 
20; 
71 
15 

live bult hs) 

Access to safe water

75
103 ~ 
14
105 
¶00-

.. 

"-~Marshall Islands
Lower-middle-income 
group

.. 

119 
1is 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and'LONG-TERM TRENDS

1977 

19871 

1997' 

1998 

------ 

-- 

-

Economic ratios'

GOP (UJS$ billions) 

00 

0 

01

Gross domestic investment/GOPTrd
Fxports of goods and servicesIGOPTrd
Gross domestiasavings/GDP
Gross national savingelGDP
Current account balance/GOP 
Interest payments/GOP 
Total debt/GDPSaig
Total deot serviceexports
Present value of debt/GOP
Preset value of debtlexports

16.9 

22.2 

Domestic

Investment

Indebtedness

1977417 188611-9811 1997 

1998 1.999-03

(average annual growth)

GOP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services

.

09 

-

5,0 
-9 5 

~MrhlIsads

..

Lower-middle-income 
group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and investment (%)

(5/6 of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

10

.

.. 

14.8 
11.9 
2.3 
73.3 

T.

.

.

..

.

.

..

93 

94 

95 

5

.

.. 

-. 

-

Pr'ivate consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports oyf goods and services 

.

.

.

.. 

-20

-. 

GDI 

-4OGDP

.

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

(average annual growth)

Agricufture
Industry
Manurfacturing
Services

Private consumption
General govemment consumption. 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product 

-

-- 

.

.. 

-3.1 

-5.3 

-5.0

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimnates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

- 51 -

Annex 2

Marshall Islands

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

I lnfladon ()

Domestic prices

(% change)
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

4.8 
4.8 

4.0 
4.0

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants) o

Current revenue 

66.8 

66.5 

93 

94 

95 

99 

97 

99

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

18.4 
3.9 

16.2 
5.2

-GDP 

deflator 

¢ CPJ

.. 

.. 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 
26 
25
3 

1998 
22 

Export and Import levels (US$ millIons)

Total exports (fob) 
Fish 
Coconut oil 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Exmort Doce index (1995=100) 
ImDort orice index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995= 100)

IDO

.. 

75

.. 

..

62 
15 
14
6 

56 

s 

2.

ol

92 

93 

94 
aExprt 

95 

9s 

97 

98

.. 

.. 

*Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS millions) a 

v77 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

.. 

.. 

42 
91 
-50 

36 
82 
-46

25T

.. 

.. 

20

Net income 
Net current transfers 

20 
47 

20
47 

10

Current account balance 

16 

21
-24 

Financing items (net) 

-18 

9 

9

Changes in net reserves 

.

.. 

1 

3 

l5 92 

93 

94 

95 

9s 

97 

03

Memo:
Reserves includino cold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC. localMUSS) 

.. 
.. 

.. 

7 
1.0 

4
1.0

1.0 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(USS millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Compositon of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

..
..
.. 
.
..

.. 

.

.

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows

lnterestpayments

Net transfers

Development Economics 

9122/99

- 52 -

Palau at a glance 

Annex 2

9/22/99

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

.Asia 

1998
Population. mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (A1as metfod, USS)i 
GNP (Atlas method, U/S$ billions) 
Average anniual growth,119$2-98
Populatin ()2.5 
Labor force( 
Most recant estimiate (latest year avaHlable, 1992-98) 

.

Poverty (% of population be/ow national povery line)
Urban population (% of ltotarpopul at/on). 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Wnant mortality (per 1,1.000fivye births) 
Child malnutriton (% ofchildren undfe,r ) 
Access to safe water (56 of population) 
Illlitracy (% ofpopulation age; 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of schoo/-age population) 
male 

East Upper-
& middle~---
Palsot PacIfI 
inicome 

.0 

1.817 
990 
1,~802 

588~ 

4,860

2,862

Development dlamond'

Life expectancy

1.2 

1.4:

2,6 

.

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
erlmn

7 
25 

.. 

100 

.. 

.

35 
6 9 
37 
20 
77 
is 1 
117 
110 

77
70
27

.,Access 

70
11
108 

to safe water

-Palau
Upper-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM"TRENDS

1977 197 

,, 

.

1907 

0 3 

1998 

0,13'-

Economic ratios'

-__

Trade

16.6 

13.2 

Dmsi

.SvnsInvestment

197747 1963-98 

1997 

1998 1999-03

Indebtedness

.

-Palau
Upper-middle-income group

,

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

.

.

.

.

.

.

-

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

.

.

.

.

-

.

.

.

0.8

GOP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GOP 
Exports of goods and services/GOP
Gross domestic savings/GOP
Gross national savings/GDP 
Currnt account batince/GQP 
inerest payments/GOP 
Total debt/GOP
Total debt service/exports]
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value. of debt/exports

.

(average annua/ grawth)
GOP 
GNP per capita 
Eixports of goods and services 

STRUCTURE ot the ECONOMY

(96 of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports ot goods and services 
Gross national product 

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

- 53 -

Annex 2

Palau

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator

..

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

55.1 
10.7 
0.2 

56.8
14.4
5.9

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (USS millions)
1o

Total exports (fob) 
n.a.

.. 

.. 

12 

11 

n.a. 

7

Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 

.

7|

91 

79 

j j

Fuel and energy 

..

Capital goods 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

92 

93 

94 

95 

9S 

97 

98

Export price index (1995=100) 

..

Import price index (1995=100) 

.. 

.. 

., 

,. 

GExports 

RsImports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 
73 

1998 
69 

Current account balance to GDP ratio

Exports of goods and services 

.. 

.. 

30

Imports of goods and services 

.. 

.. 

93 

81

Resource balance 

.. 

.

-20 

-12 

20

Net income 

.. 
.. 

.
.. 

18 
24 

7 

10

Net current transfers 

22 

o.i

Current account balance 

.. 

.. 

22 

17 

92 

93 

94 

96 

97 

9g

-10 

Financing items (net) 

.

.

-25 

-13
-4 

Changes in net reserves 

.. 

.. 

3 

-201

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locatWUS$) 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
lBRD
IDA

..

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Composition of net resource flows
Offidial grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

..
..
..
..
..

World Bank program

Commitments 

..

Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

..
..

Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

..
.. 
.. 

..
..

Development Economics 

9/22/99

- 54 -

Annex 2

Samoa at a glance9129

Eat Lower-
Asia & middle- 
pacit 
incom 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

-

---

__

iSamoa 

Dvlopment diamond*

Pooutation. mid-year (millions) 

al 18 

1.1 
990 

988 
1,710

Life expectancy

GNP oer caalta (Atlas method. USS) 
GNP (Atlas method. US$ tbilions) 

1 020 

0.18 

1 ~802 1.557

Averace annu al orwftI 1992-98

PoDulation M%l 
Labrfore (%o) 

1.2 

1.2 ~1.1

1,6 

1.5 

GNP 
per 

Gross
primary

most recent estimat (latestyear wavalable. 1992981 
Poverty 1% of oDoUlation below national oovettv line)
Urban Docvlation (% of totatbooOuation) 

capita 

enrollment

21 
60 
22 

35 
69 
37 
20 
77 
I15 
117 
119 
118 

58
68,
38

Life exoectanwv at birth (vears) 
Infantn-mortality (oer 1,000lle,birth 
ChOdrmalnutrtion 1Y.of childre-nunder 5) 
Accesstosofa waterf% of Dooufaffon)l 
llliterav (% of oDoulation ace 15+) 
Gross orminav enrollment PA ot'school-aoe ooulatidn) 
Male 
Female 

.. 

Access to safe water

68 

75
14

.. 

103 
106 
100 

- Sa 

a

11005 
100

Loawmeor-middle-income 
group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1977 

198? 

1997 

199 

-

.

-

Economic ratios'

GDPWS(WSt/lr)~ 

, 

0.1 
35.2Trd
18,2 
-15.3
33.3

0.19 

0,18

Gross domesticinvestment/GOP, 

Exoorts of aoods and services/GOP 
Gross domestic savinca/GDP 
Gross nationa sawirroaGDP 

.

32,6 

36.3

,. 

.. 

current account balancelGDP 
Interest oavmnwts/GDP 
Total debt(GDP 
Total debt serice/exoorts 
Present value of debtIGOP 
Present value orf cdebtlexoorts 

.. 

7.2 
1,3 
78.8 
¶1,7 

4.7 
0. 
815 
5.9 
40.7 
91.7

11.4 
0A,8 
171I 
5.6

lomstic 
SvnsIvsmn
ai

ivsmn

.
.. 

13.0 

.

.. 

.

.

.

Inrdebtedness

1977-87 11988-98 1997 

1998 

999-03

(avew,e annual aomwth)
GOP 
GNP oe caoita 
Exoorts of ocods and services 

401 
1.6 
1,7 

1.1 
0.0 

1.6 
0.4 
-7.1

1.3 
0.1 

Samoa

.Lower-middle-income 

group

.. 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and investment (%/)

1% of GDP) 
Aariculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturino 
Services 

1

.. 

.

17.3 
2.8 

16.6
2.

..

.

.. 

.

6095. 

se 

97 

98

Private consumDtion 
General covemmrent consunmDtion 
Imoorts of coods and services 

.. 

95.5 
19.9 
68.8 

.

.. 

-10

.. 

-GD 

-'O'GDP

.. 

54.3 

52.8

1977-87 1988-98 

19197 

1998

(averace annual orowthl
Aoriculture 

.. 

.

-8.2
-3.6
-5 5
7.5

Industrv 

.. 

.

Manufactudna 
Services 

.

.

.. 

Private consumotion 
General aovernment consumnotion 
Gross domestic investmient 
Imoorts of aoods and services 
Gross national oroduct 

1.2
-5.8
-7.3
-2.6 
1.7 

.

-6.2
1.6 

1.2 

1.3

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the countrv (in bold) comoared with its income-orouo averaae. If data are tossina, the diamond wvill
be incomrnlete.

- 55 -

Annex 2

Samoa

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

.. 

.

4.6 
4.6 

6.9 
11.8 

2.2 
4.0 

Inflation
Inltn(%
125 T

2o

- 56 -

Annex 2

Solomon Islands at a glance 

9117/99

East
Asia & 
PacIfic 

POVERTY anid SOCIAL 

Solomon 
islands 

Low- 
income 

-

-- 

-

D-evelo-pme-nt di_am~o nd'

Pooulation. mnid-vear (mnill jons1 
GNP Der caoita (Atlas methocd. US$) 

0.42 
750 
0.31 

1.817 
990 
1.802 

3.5115 
520
1.844

Life expectancy

GNP (Atlas method. U13$ billions) 

Ave ace annual orowth. 1992.98

Pooulation (% 
3.1 
Labor force (%) 
3.1 
Most recent estimate (latest vesr available. 19%2-98)catanrlmt
Poverty (% of ocoulation below national ooverfv linel
Urban ooou lation (% of total Doculationi) 
Life exoectancv at birth (vesrsl 
Infant mortalitv (Loer 1 .000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of chIldre? tinder 51 
Access to safe water (% of aotaulation) 

1.2 
1.8 

1.7 
1.9 

GNP 
per 

Gross
primary

19 
70 
23 

35 
31
e9 
63
37 ~ 69
20 
77 
74
15 
32
117 
1 08 
119 
113Loinmegop
¶18 
-03

.

..

Access to safe water

64 

Illiteracv (%/ of OODulatiOn aCo 154~. 

Gross orimarv enrollment f% of schodl-ace 000 letlarnl 
Male 
Female 

97 
103 
89 

-Solomon 

Islands

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRrENDS

1977 

1987f 

1907 

199$ 8- 

--

_____ 

.

Economic ratios*

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exoorts of coods arnd services/GOP 
Gross domestic savinosIGOP 
Gross national savinos)GDP 
Current account balance/GOP 
Interest osyvments/GOP 
Total debt/GDP 
Toltl debt servicetexiaorts 
Present value of debt/GOP 
Present valve of debt/exoorts 

0.06 

0,16 
34.0 
52.8
22.3
44.6
-2.8 
1.3 
S9.4 
5.1 

0. 7 

0.30

.. 

.Trade

.

.. 

.

9.0 
0.0 
13.3 
0,0 

-10.2 
0.3 
36.3: 
2.4 
23.5
374

5.5 
1.2 
50.9 
356

Doetc 
Savingsvestmen
Saig

neamt

, 

., 

.

.. 

(averaae annual crowithI 

978 
7.4 
3.1 
8.8 

989 
3.9 
0A4 

97IIdbens
-0 5 
-3 5 

GOP 
GNP Der caoita 
Exoorts of ocoods and services 

-70O 
-9.7 

4,0 

-~Solomon Islands
-Low-income group

1.0 

.

.

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

11977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output end investment I%)

(% of GDP) 
Aoriculture 
Industrv
Manufacturina 
Services 

5

.

..

9

Private consumotion 
General aovemment consumDtion 
Imoorts of aoods and services 

.. 

47.9 
29.8 
64.5

..-

10 

3 

94 

5 

9

.. 

_GDI 

-- *'-OP

.

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

(averaae annual arowthl
Acriculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
Private consumDtion 
General covermment consumtotion 
Gross domestic investment 
Imoorts of aoods and services 
Gross national Droduct 

2.2
5.4
2.2
2.7
5.8 

3.7 

-0.5 

-7.0

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
-The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold comoared with its income-arouc) aversae. If data are missino. the diamond will
be incomnDlete.

- 57 -

Annex 2

Solomon Islands

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices

(% change) 

15

Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 

11.0 

8.1 
9.7 

12.0 
12.3

1

8.6 

.. 

|

23.0 
-3.3 
-4.9 

24.5 
1.7 
0.1

93 

94 

95 

96 
deflator -O-CPI

97 

98

-1GDP 

.

.. 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Logs 
Fish (frozen) 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 

1987 

1997 
174 
80 
17 
20 
209 

1998 
141 
41

Export and Import levels (USS millions)

.. 

.. 

25D _

200
150

147

Foodmii

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods0

l1

Exportprice index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

11392 
92 
123 

93 
94 
rExports 

96 
97 
u Imports

98

|. 

.. 

.. 

122

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(UJS$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 

1977 
36 
39 
-3 

1987 
84 
119 
-35 

1997 
231 
302 
-71 

1998 
191 
206
-15 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

97

4

-4 
13 

T8 

-

7
40 

38 

38 

4 

95 

96 

Current account balance 

6 

-5 

-38 

17 

l4

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

1 
-7 

11 
-6 

32 
6 

4 
-21 

-8
-12

M-emo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/USS) 

.. 

37 
2.0 

32 
3.7 

49
4.8

0.9 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of total debt, 1998 (USS millions)

9 
0 
0 

98 
0 
10 

135 
0 
30 

153
03
33 

1

Total debt service 
IBRD 
O 
IDA 

0 

5 

6 

7

° 

F: 45

0 

0 

0 

0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program 
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

10 
0 
0 
4 
0 

34 
14 
0 
11 
° 

16
2 
-4 
22 
° 

14
0

E

D: 9

i

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

0 
3 
0 
2 
0 
2 

0 
2 
0 
2
0
1

A IROE 
B - IDA 
C - IMF 

- Bilateral
D - Other mrltilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

Development Economics 

9/17/99

-9- 

Annex 2

Tonga at a glance 

9/17/99

East 
Lowver-
Asia & middle-- 
Toncoa Pacific 
Income 

POVElRTYandSOCIAL 

-

Development diamond*

PODUlaton. mid-vear (rnIllioSl 
GNP oer cacita (Allas method, USSI 

0,10 
1.690 
0.17 

1,817 
990 
.1,802 

90 
1.710

Life expectancy

GNP (Atl.-S methoot US$ billions) 

.

-1,557

Averace annual orowth, 1992-09
Poculation I(%) 
Labor force (%) 

.

03 

1.2 
1.8 

11
1.5~ 

GNP 
per 

Gross
primary
nolmn

most recent estimate tlatest vear available 199241caia. 

Povertv (%/ of oooulaifon below national Dovertv ie

Urban ocoulatiori (% of total coouletion) 
Life exoectancv at birth (vears) 
Infant mortalitv (ber 1.000 live b/rt/rsl 
Child nialnutrition (% of children under 51 
Access to safe water (% of Dooulat,on) 
lltiterac (16. ofoooutaliein acre 15+1 
Gross. onmarv enrollment i'6 of school-aoe ooua"tion) 
Male 

44 
70 
22 

35 
69 
37 
20 
77 
75
1 5 
14
1 
103~ 
119~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i 
105 
118 
100

58
68
38

..

Access to safe water

100 

.

[ 

-Tonga

.

Lower-middle-income 
group

Female 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
19177 

1987 

1997 

1998 

--- 

-- 

-.

Economic ratios/

GOP (USS b/ikons) 

0.04 
20.1 
33,8 
-32 

0.08 
22.2Trd
31,0 
-1 1.,5
26:0

0,1 

.0.1f

Gross domestic investment/GOP 
Exoorts of ooods and services/GOP 
Gross domestic savinos/GDP 
Gross national savinos/GOP 

Tad

Current account balance/GOP 
Interest oavmehts/GOP 
Total debt/GOP 
Total debt service/exoorts 
Present value of debt/GOP 
Present value of debtVexoorts75

7.51 
0.4 
46,8 
24 

-0.8 
0 7 
33.5, 
12.3 
20.2

-12.3.
0,7 
41,6
11.8

.

Savings 

Investment

.

, 

.

, 

Indebtedness

(averaoe annual 
orowtl,l1977-87 

1988-96 

1997 

1998 1999-03

GOP 
GNP oer caota 
ExroortS of coods and services. 

3,3 
32 

1 4 

-A 

-1 

Ti15

0~5 

.4,6 

-23 

L 

Lower-middle-incomegru

.

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDPI 

~~~~~ ~~~~1977 

1987 
38.9 
12.8 
4.9 

1997 
36.9 
11.5 
4.2 

1998 
38.3
11.5 
3.9 

Growth rates of output and investment (6

(9/6 of GDP) 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~6

Acriculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturina 
Services 

43.8 
11.2 
6.7 

[3

44.9 

48.3 

51.6 

50.2 

1-3 

4 

959

Private consumotion 
General aovemment consumoition 
I moorts of ocods and services 

88.1) 
15.3 
57.1 

94.9 
16.6 
64.7 

.

.

-

I0 

-0GE)P

G

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998

(averaae annual aomwfhl
Aariculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturina 
Services 

0.5 
4.8 
11.0 
3.8 

2.4 
-1.7 
-0.4 
1.8 

-3.0 
-28.1 
0.6 
-2.4 

-3.8
1.8
-3.0
1.6

Private consumoton 
General covemment consurnotion 
Gross domestic investment 
Imoorts of aoods and services 
Gross national oroduct 

.

.

.

.

3.2 

0.8 

-4.4 

-1.5

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show tour key indicators in the countrv (in bold) comoared wiith its income-arouo averaae. If data are missina, the diamond will
be incomolete.

- 59 -

Annex 2

Ton-ea

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (%)

Domest?k prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

12

.. 
.. 

4.7 
11.0 

2.1 
2.9 

3.3 
5.6 

s

4

Government finance 
(%/6 of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

o

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

40.4 
14.0 
-1.2 

38.4 
10.7 
-4.4

-4

GDP deflator 

w CPI

TRADE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (USS millions)

(US$ millions)

Total exports (fob) 

.. 

.. 

13 

12 

150

Squash 
Fish 
Manufactures 

5
2 
1 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

-
2

oo

Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 

73 
24 

97

.

.. 

s

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

11 

.

1 .JJ 

IJ

Capital goods 

6 

92 

93 

94 

as 

so 

97 

98

ExDort Doce index (1995=100) 

.. 

93 

94 

..

Imoort Drice index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

., 
..

.. 

.. 

.. 

Exports 

* Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(UJS$ millions) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (°/.)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

1)0 
19 
-9 

25 
52 
-27 

44 
85 
-40 

40
100
-61 

o 

-wa

Netincome 
Net current transfers 

0 

4 
29 

2 
37 

3 
38 

92 

93

.. 

I5iwf

Currentaccount balance 

.. 

6 

-2 

-19

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.. 

-5 
-1 

4 
-2 

7
12 

-2 

_

Memo:
Reserves includina aold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC. localWUSS) 

.. 
0.9 

29 
1.5 

28 
1.2 

29
1.5

EXTERNAL DEST and RESOURCE FLOWS

(USS millions) 

1977 

1987 
36 
0 

1997 
61 
0 

1998 
65

Composition of total debt, 1998 (USS millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 

.. 

0 
4 

G: 

B: 4

IDA 

.. 

0 

4 

F 

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

1 

4 

4

0 

0 

0 

E. 11

.

0 

0 

0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 

12 

8

Official creditors 

.. 

2 

1 

3

Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

.. 
.. 

0 
0 
0 

-3 
3
0

-2

.

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

2 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

A - IBRD 
| B - IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilateral
F - Prvate
G - Short-term

D - Other multilateral 

.. 

0 

0 
0
0
0

.
.. 
., 

0 

0 
0 

Development Economics 

9/17/99

- 60 -

Annex 2

Vanuatu at a glance9229

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Asia & middle-. 
Vanuatu Pacific Ancomne 

---- 

___

Development dlarnond'

PoDulation. mid-vear (millions) 
GNP ner caDlta (Atlas method. US$) 
GNP (Atlas mefthd U.SS billions) 

018 
1,270 
0.2$ 

90 
1 710,
1,557

Life expectancy

990 
I .02 

Averace annual orowth. 1992-98
Pooutaton W% 
Laborforme f%) 
Most recent estimate tiatest year available. 1992481Iaiaennmn
Povetyv (16 of oouldation below national covertv fine) 
Urban Doculation (%o of total oooulationt 
Life exoectancv at birth (gears) 
Infant mortality Doar 1.000 live birthsl 
Child malnutrition t% of children under5) 
Acc-ess to sale water (% of DoDulation) 
Illiteac'y0 f% ofDnoDulation aae 15+1 
Gross onimarv enrollment 1% of schtp~oilac Dooulafionl 
Male 
Female 

26 

12 
1 

.1/
15 

GNP 
per 

//Goss

-

`prmary

20 
35 
65 
69; 
7 
37 
20 
87 ~ 77 
is 
.117 

58
68
3

.Accesa 

to safe water

75
1514
103 
105o 
100

98 
101 
94 

Vanulatu

119 
118 

Lower-midce-income group

.

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
'1977 

1987 

1997 
0.25 

1998
i~0.24

I Economiic ratloe

GDP fUS$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmerlVGD)P 
Exoocts of ooods and servicesIGOP 
Gross domestic savinas/GDP 
Gross national savinos/GDP 

.0,12 

35.3..
384Trade
5,9
42 ~
-20.0 
OA 

Current account basnoelG0P 
Ineetovents/GDP 
Inter" oavm 
Total debtGDP 
Tots debt service/exoorts 
present value of debtIGDP. 
Presengt valiue of debtlexoorts 

-.8.1 
0.2 

-15.7
02 

.

Domestic 
Sa19.ings

Ivsmn
Investment~~~~~~Svins 

.. 

39 

i's
13
200

, 

Indebtedness

1977.87 1988-98 

1997 

1998 11909-3

(averace annual aorwthl
GDP 
GNP cer caoita 
Exoorts of ooods and services

3.2 

16A 
-2.5 

27; 
1~ 

2,1 
-04.4 

Vanuiatu
Lower-middle-income group

.

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 

im 

Growth rates of output and Investment(%

1% of GDP)
Aariculture 
Industryv. 
Manufacturinoa. 
Services 

.. 

21.5 
11.2 
4.6 
67.3 

24.7 
12.2 
4.9 
63.2 

.

A

.

.. 

.

Private consumotion 
General oovemment consumotion 
I MDorts of cioods and services 

.. 

60.2 
33.9 
67.8

.

..

93 

54 

95 

96 
-0GDP

97 

98

.

.. 

.

GDI 

.. 

1977-97 1988-98 

1997 

1998

(averaae annual aoewhl
Aoriculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturino 
Services 

4.0 
-2.8 

4.7 
2.5 

6.2
1.0

.

4.1 

0.0 

1.6

Private consumrotion 
General aovemment consumotion 
Gross domestic investment 
I moorts of aoods and services 
Gross national oroduct 

.

.

.

.

.. 

0.2 

3.7 

2.1

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four kev indicators in the countrv (in bold) comoared with its income-orouo averace. If data are mriasina, the diamond will
be incomoILete.

- 61- 

Annex 2

Vanuatu

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (%)
6

(X change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 
.. 

16.1 
9.6 

2.8 
1.0 

5.0 
3.1

4 

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)

Current revenue 

.. 

.. 

23.3 

27.8 

93 

94 

95 
deflator 

96 
97 
-- *-CPI

98

Current budget balance 

.. 

.. 

1.5 

4.0 

-GDP 

Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 

.. 

-0.7 

-13.3

TRADE

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (USS millions)

(us$ mnillions)

Total exports (fob) 
Copra 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

35 

30 
13

150

17 
2 
2l-
94 

Cocoa 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ct) 

.

.. 

~

.. 
.. 

.. 

109

Food 

.. 

22 

.. 

so

Fuel and energy 

.. 
.. 

10 

J_iJIW

Capital goods 

.. 

24 

.. 

.

92 93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

8

Export price index (1995=100) 

..
.. 

Import price index (1995=100) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

F Exports 

*imports

Terms of trade (1995=100)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

.. 

50 
273 

129 
122 

1il 
131 

0

-20 E l
3

Resource balance 

.. 

-23 

7 

Net income 
Net current transfers 

.. 

-21 
9 

-31 
4 

-31
13

.. 

Current account balance 

.. 

-24 

-21 

-38

Financing items (net) 

.. 
.. 

37 
-13 

14 
7 

37 

i5

Changes in net reserves 

1 

t,8

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

.. 

40 
109.8 

37 
115.9 

45
127.5

79.4 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 

Composition of total debt, 1997 (USS millions)

5 
0 

24 
0 

48
0

IDA 

0 

2 

13 

G:9

Total debt service 
IBRD 

0 
0 

3 
0 

2 
0

3

IDA 

0 

0 

0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private crediors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

12 
0 
0 
0 
0 

32 
4 
0 
13 
0 

7 
0
0
30
0 

E: 

.. 

0:17

World Bank program

Commitments 
Disbursements 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 

A - IBRD 
B -IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilateral
F. Private
G - Short-term

1 

1 

D- Other multilateral 

Principal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
1 
0 
1 

0 
1
0
1

.. 

Development Economics 

9/22/99

IBRD 29631

140r 

f N-orira 

O 

17. 

1 

rso 

170r 'a0s

Isiland (US)

Gouna (US) 

MARSHALL
----....
ISLANDS

-- 

-

NORTH PACIOfC OCEAN

-10' 

1 

Is',- '

PALAU.;' 

,

G + 

' ' ~' 
' 

l 
l 

' 

i 

,> 

4 

g 

Atoll (US)

FEDERATED STATES OF 
MICRONESIA

...

> 

.

H~~~~~'obe,rn 
(US)Jas(S0

xi <, 
.

. sc 

,:, 

p,NAURU

K 

INDONESIA 

KIRIBATI

PAPUAt 
NEW
GUINEA 

4'd 4t- 

'.

SOLOMON 

TUVALU, 

TU-IEW 

I

'4'~~~~"~~-~~ 

t~~~.. 

-. ~~~ISLANDS 

TUAUTIEAJ(H)Mlnorl

-4' Cs ) ;/ 

t 

m ~ ~ ~ ~ ~- ~ ~ ' 

^ 

[ 

WoP r nd; 

SAMOA 5A oencrisSnAMOA
v' ~~ Samoa (US)
Wollo ood~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
FnIons In. (Er)

P..J"-' 

'>~~~~~~~~~t 

--....--

c.'" 

VANUATU 

'; 

Cook
(NZ)

Vi< 7 

,... 

t 

-; 

S 

>,, TONGA

'-.4' 

.. 

o 

; 

Nine(NZ,7 

FPrenchfi Plynesia (f

-2n 

t 

X 

cal~~ewfPi 

-x 

.

:J 

,,.; 

20r 

20' 

' 

Cldja£ 

.FIJI

50001c CiT C0'l'K!COIN 

+ 

_ 

1 

n, 

.. 

__._._ 

... 

_ 

.

_ 

.,=.,, 

,, 

TROPIC OF CAP'5fCOR

AUSTRALIA

as' / 

'Lord blows 

Norfolk (As) 

Is-lands(HZ) 

THE PACIFIC

g 

. C~~~Avs)

LINES OF DEMARCATION

-1 , % 

aSOUTH 

PACIFIC OCEAN 

ITERNATIONAL BOUNDARY

' 

r.-i' J{>3NEW

is rinpoinpsosFre 

nd by lbn. Mop Dtsign nitOr of The WUorld Book. 

I7ZAIAND

sboonos sIlls nimapdo not istnpl on ^7;^o 
or nceptoocs af so boond77i5n. 
nlb ss 
itsofsynrlos 

tWirlSosSiQ Csoo0'2i 
2 
Q,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ayopsn 
osny .od-,ossoo

00s (cid:1) 

\ 

L

40' 

s4o 

156' 

Iso' 

170' 

1 

b 

iOn' 

150'

JUNE 1998

