Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20161-TN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA

March 28, 2000

Maghreb Department
Middle East and North Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Unit of Currency = Tunisian Dinar (TD)

Period Average Exchange Rates (TD per US dollar)
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000*
0.946 
(0.973 
1.106 
1.139 
1.184 
1.274
* Rate for 2000 is average January I-March 25.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
AfDB 
APL 
BOT 
CAS 
CPPR 
DS 
ECAL 
EIB 
ENV 
EU 
FY 
GDR 
GEF 
GNFS 
GOT 
GTZ 
IDF 
IFC 
IsDB 
JBIC 
KfW 
LACI 
MENA 
METAP 
MLT 
MNCMG 
MNSRE 
NGO 
OED 
PAD 
PHRD 
PPI 
PSA 
SME 
SSR 
ST 
TD 
WSIL 

Analytical and Advisory Activity
African Development Bank
Adaptable Program Loan
Build Operate Transfer
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Debt Service
Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loan
European Investment Bank
Enviromnent Department, World Bank
European Union
Fiscal Year
Global Depository Receipt
Global Environment Facility
Goods and Non-factor Services
Goverrnent of Tunisia
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Islamic Development Bank
Japanese Bank for International Cooperation
German Development Credit Agency
Loan Administration Change Initiative
Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank
Mediterranean Technical Assistance Program
Medium and Long Term
MENA Country Management Unit for the Maghreb
MENA Sector Management Unit for Rural Development, Water and Environment
Non-governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Project Appraisal Document
Policy and Human Resources Development
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Private Sector Assessment
Small and Medium Enterprises
Social and Structural Review
Short-term
Tunisian Dinar
Water Sector Investment Loan

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

Kemal Dervis
Christian Delvoie
Hassan Fazel

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

3
4

10
11
1
14

15

20
21

25

26

28
30

: 

TUNISIA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................

L COUNTRY CONTEXT 
A. THE SETTING: LONG-TERM PROGRESS 
.1
B. KEY CHALLENGES AHEAD 
Heightened International Copetition. 
Upholding Social Cohesion 
Sustaining Environmental Protection 
Upgrading Governance 

.1

.5

.9

.9

H. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS .10
A. RECENTEcONOMICPERFORMANCE ... 
B. EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 
Medium-term Prospects ..
Risks and Vulnerabilities 

.

.

M. TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND THE BANK'S CAS .15
A. TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA. 
B. IMPLEMENTATION OF BANK GROUP'S PREVIOUS CAS .17
C. PROPOSED COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATGY 
Consolidating Long-term Development. 
Supporting Economic Reforms .23
New Initiatives 

.24

..

IV. BANK GROUP COUNTRY PROGRAM .25
A. VEHICLES FOR BANK ASSISTANCE 
Portfolio Management and Performance .25
Proposed Program ............. 
Lending Instruments .27
B. LENDING SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS 
C. PARTNERS AND PARTICIPATION 
Coordination with Other Donors .30
Participatory Process .31

..

..

..

V. COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT .31
A. COUNTRY CREDITWORTHINESS 
.31
Bank Lending Flows and E3xposure.32
Risks and Uncertainties .32
B. PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
.. 

......................................

33.......................... 

33

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents ma not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Text Tables 

Page

Table 1: SELECTED MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS ..................................................... 12
Table 2: MEDIUM-TERM FINANCING PLAN: BASE CASE (US$ Million) .......................... 12
Table 3: EVOLUTION OF BANK LENDING INSTRUMENTS IN LAST CAS ....................... 18
Table 4: PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT INDICATORS .......................................................... 25
Table 5: BANK TIME AND RESOURCE COSTS OF LENDING TO TUTNISIA ...................... 26
Table 6: PROPOSED BASE CASE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM .............................................. 27
Table 7: WORLD BANK LENDING AND EXPOSURE (BASE CASE) .................................. 32
Table 8: CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS .......................................................... 
.33
Table 9: CAS MONITORING INDICATORS - INTERMEDIATE MILESTONES ........ ......... 34

Text Figure/Box

Figure 1: SELECTED PERFORMANCE INDICATORS ........................................................... I
Figure 2: TRENDS IN LABOR FORCE AND GRADUATE ENROLLMENTS 
........................ 

8

Box 1: PROGRESS IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION ............................................................ 

6

Annexes

Annex A2 
Annex B2 
Annex B3 
Annex B4 
Annex B5 
Annex B6 
Annex B7 
Annex B8 
Annex B9a 
Annex B9b 
Annex B IO 
Annex B 11 

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
CAS Program Matrix: Diagnosis
CAS Program Matrix: Program
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
CAS Review of Environmental Issues

Map 

IBRD 24726R

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Stressing equitable development and macroeconomic prudence over a long period,
Tunisia has progressed remarkably to lower middle-income country status. Since
independence, real per capita incomes have grown over two and a half times while social
and economic well-being have improved significantly: poverty incidence has dropped
from 40% to 7%; almost all children enroll in primary school; life expectancy has grown
from 50 to 70 years; and the status of women has improved steadily, with women now
comprising a third of the labor force. Tunisia has also built up the strongest policy and
institutional framework for sustainable development in the region. With a liberalized
offshore sector in place since the 1970s, Tunisia opened its economy further when, in
1995, it signed a partnership agreement, including free trade provision, with the EU.

ii. Given Tunisia's limited markets, the EU agreement and, more generally, outward-
looking economic policies, are critical to stimulating higher growth and employment,
which is paramount among the country's development objectives for the medium term.
At the same time, the agreement poses challenges for Tunisia well beyond trade
measures. The heightened international competition will require it to develop a more
dynamic private sector; strengthen further its human capital base; and consolidate its
sound management of natural resources. This, in turn, will need a new framework for
economic governance, so far substantially led by the public sector, towards more neutral
and predictable policies for the private sector, coupled with increased participation of the
civil society in the development process.

iii. To team up with Tunisia in this endeavor, and in line with Government requests,
this CAS document proposes the following areas for Bank Group support:

* Consolidating long-term development through activities in sectors of traditional
Bank involvement, mainly human resources development, natural resources
management, transport, and rural and urban development;
* Supporting economic reforms to enhance competitiveness and 
employment, with safeguards against transitional costs of adjustments;
* New initiatives of catalytic nature to strengthen local institutions, launch new
development niches (e.g., information technology), and mobilize external finance.

increase

The program is fully consistent with Tunisia's poverty reduction strategy. In line with
the country's stage of development and emerging challenges, the CAS takes a broad
approach to poverty reduction; it focuses on labor-intensive growth, employment and
vulnerability issues in the wake of increased competition, and refinement and greater
coverage of the social protection system, while promoting decentralized and community-
based approaches in poverty pockets.

ii

iv. The above proposal ties in closely with other donor programs in the country. It
also ensures continuity with the last CAS (FY97-99), the implementation of which
proceeded closely as planned. The main objectives of the last CAS (deepening structural
reforms to foster competition; human capital development towards middle-income
standards; modernization of key infrastructure services, and environmental management)
were met, with the exception that the pace of private investment remained gradual.

v. 
The lending program proposed for FY2000-02 maintains the level of commitments
of previous years, averaging about US$200 million per year. It would sustain the change
in the mix of instruments begun with the last CAS, with fewer traditional projects and
more sector investment loans and adaptable programs loans. The lending program would
be applied flexibly, especially regarding the share of policy-based operations, depending
on the speed of reforms and the possible impact of fluctuations in the external
environment.

vi. Given Tunisia's access to external finance, the Government places greater weight
on policy dialogue than on the level of financing. To that end, the proposed strategy
emphasizes, even more than in the last CAS, non-lending services, analytical work and
seminars, with a view to broadening our dialogue and increasing the role of civil society
in the development process. The use of sector approaches, dialogue on the reform
program, and innovative projects in new areas would also serve as catalyst for bilateral
funding and private investments, thus complementing external finance available to the
country. Core performance indicators and intermediate milestones for assessing CAS
effectiveness are summarized in Tables 8 and 9 in the text.

vii. The strategy put forth in this document is subject to risks that include: (a) the
dependence of foreign exchange earnings on sources exposed to a foreseeable shock
(textile exports) or fluctuations (tourism and workers' remittances); (b) fiscal risks from
budget rigidities and contingent liabilities; (c) periodic droughts; and (d) the ability of
domestic manufacturing sector to adjust to competition from tariff-free imports. It is
expected that these risks would be mitigated by Tunisia's track record of sound economic
management and, correspondingly, the readiness of its partners, including the Bank
Group, to provide appropriate assistance.

viii. The following issues, given their importance to the proposed strategy, are
suggested for Board discussion:

* consistency of the assistance program with Tunisia's development challenges;
* shift in assistance instruments towards non-lending services linked to sector
investment lending operations.

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. THE SETTING: LONG-TERM PROGRESS

1. 
Tunisia has been a member of the World Bank Group in good standing since 1958.
During this time, the country has pursued equitable development, even in times of crises,
and has registered sound, steady long-term economic performance (Figure 1). Since
independence, real per capita incomes have grown over two and a half times and all
indicators of social and economic well-being have improved significantly: poverty
incidence has dropped from 40% to 7%; almost all children enroll in primary school; life
expectancy has grown from 50 to 70 years; and the status of women has improved
steadily, with women now comprising a third of the labor force.

Figure 1: SELECTED PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

Net Primary School Enrollment
(9 of age gro-'p) 

9 

o 

00 

eo ~ 

~ 

s .0 

Life Expectancy and Infant MortalityRates

00 

-

Fm,ala 

,,,01155-l 

7o -

-0ijgt 

00 

5

101 

c)z

,

150

1'"e

20~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. 

*910 

1070 

1400 

195 

1990 

sos 

079 

1975 

1900 

1505 

199 

1955

U.N. Human Development Index

(Ovlom 1 =hi9h development) 

O.S66

0.695

0.80s 

Poverty Incidence

(% o? Populatlon
below poverty line)

1.000 

0.900 

0.700

0.600 

0.000

0 400

0.300

0 200

0.000

1975 

1980 

190s 

1990 

1997 

1 

'ala 

l-0

Real GNP per capita

(in 1990 dinars)

1507-0.

Fiscal Deficit / GDP (%)

1970 

1975 

1900 

1909 

1990 

1995 

1997 

1999

2

2. Women in Tunisia have strong legal rights and privileges, enjoying equal rights in
virtually every respect under the law, including improving provisions for inheritance. The
legal advances from 1992, when Tunisia became the first country in the MENA region to
establish a unit in the Prime Ministry devoted to women's issues, have helped to
strengthen further the socioeconomic position of women in the country. Several
institutions have been established over the years to enhance opportunities for females.
These include:

* 

l'Union Nationale de la Femme Tunisienne, which promotes rural education, health
care and micro-enterprise development for women and young girls;
* La Chambre Nationale des Femmes Chefs d'entreprises, which provides management
training and helps women prepare investment proposals;
* Le Centre de Recherche, d'Etude, de Documentation et d'Informnation sur Ia Femme
(CREDIF), a scientific organ of the Ministere des Affaires de la Femme et de la
Famille (MAFF), that maintains a database and conducts studies on women and
tracks the status of women in the country;
- L'Observatoire National de la Femme set up by CREDIF to provide decision- makers
pertinent indicators on the evolution of women's status; and
* La Cellule d'Evaluation d'Impact des Projets de Developpement sur la Femme,
charged to promote the needs of women in development and assess the impact of
development projects on women.

In addition to the advances such as the above, efforts are also being directed to increase
women's access to credit, and to continue lowering the gender gap in high-level jobs in
government and the corporate sector.

3. 
Tunisia followed a state-led model of development until the mid-1980s under
President Bourguiba. During that time Tunisia was at the vanguard of countries in the
region in promoting human resources development, with particular emphasis on gender
equity. In the mid-1980s, the economic management doctrine began turning around
when growing financial imbalances, a poor crop year and the collapse of oil prices all
came to a head in 1986, followed a year later by accession to power by President Ben Ali.
Tunisia then initiated economic reforms aimed at: maintaining a stable macroeconomic
framework; improving resource allocation by gradually liberalizing prices, trade and
investment controls; and decreasing the emphasis on the public sector to free up
resources for the private sector. The reforms, supported by a series of Fund and Bank
programs, proceeded at a gradual but steady pace, consolidating past progress further,
although the state continued to keep a prominent position in the economy.

4. 
Tunisia is now entering a new phase of development. In 1995 it became the first
country in the region to sign a landmark partnership agreement with the European Union
(EU), including provisions for a phased establishment of a free trade zone for
manufactures over a 12-year period, from 1996 to 2008. The EU agreement will propel
the country towards fuller integration in the world economy. In view of Tunisia's limited
markets, the agreement is critical to stimulating higher growth and to improving further
the country's living standards. But, at the same time, the agreement poses challenges for
Tunisia which go well beyond trade measures. The onset of heightened international

3

competition will require Tunisia to strengthen its human capital base, increase labor
flexibility, and develop a more dynamic private sector. This in turn will put pressure on
the internally driven and directed model of governance so far adopted (see below). Such
considerations are all reflected in Tunisia's Ninth Five-year Development Plan spanning
1997-2001, and are reinforced in the President's electoral program of October 1999. The
Bank's last CAS for Tunisia, presented to the Board in June 1996, also acknowledged the
same considerations and designed a program to begin responding to them.

5. 
The new CAS is underpinned by three major activities initiated in FY99. These
included a Social and Structural Review (SSR); an update of Private Sector Assessment
(PSA); and an update of Social Conditions (whose main conclusions are incorporated in
the SSR) all intended to take stock of the reforms that had been under implementation.I
These works form the basis of our assessment of the key challenges ahead for Tunisia
and the proposed Bank program to help address them.

B. KEY CHALLENGES AHAD

6. With only modest resource endowment, Tunisia has made excellent progress thus
far in terms of economic and social achievements. While accomplishing all these, it
developed a style of economic governance characterized by:

* a consultative approach to making and implementing policy, with private sector and
trade union views incorporated in government deliberations;
* a broad-based participatory process in preparing its five-year development plans,
providing major directions on development priorities;
* a highly competent and centralized public administration;
* a gradual process of designing and implementing economic and social reforms,
emphasizing progressive liberalization and strong focus on smoothing out social costs
of adjustments; and
* all the above, under continued close guidance and direction from the central

administration.

7. 
The crux of the issue now is whether this model will remain applicable in future.
In the short term, it appears, the model could continue serving the country well. But in
the long term, a premium will need to be put on increased flexibility in a fast evolving
world. Already strains are starting to be felt in infrastructure services, the banking sector,
and the slow response of private investments. Tunisia's past success has also fostered a
large middle class that, with the country's young demographic structure, will press for
more decentralized governance. Employment pressures are now evident, and are likely to
strengthen unless there is greater flexibility in the labor market and new opportunities are
opened. The Government has always adjusted to new challenges in the past. It is aware
of these new demands, and is currently reviewing its response as it prepares its new Tenth
Development Plan. Key challenges are outlined below.

' Report numbers 20163-TUN and 20173-TUN.

4

Heightened International Competition

8. 
Even within the slow pace of economic opening agreed with the EU (12 years), it
had been expected that private investment in Tunisia, and the share of foreign direct
investment therein, would be brisk. In fact, however, private investment increased just
slightly, from 48% of total investment in 1995 to 51% in 1998. In the same period, the
share of foreign direct investment fell from 16% to 12% of total private investment in the
country. The reasons for this slow response of private and foreign investment are
elaborated in the Private Sector Assessment. Basically, the private sector is hamstrung
by complex incentives at the discretion of public officials, costly infrastructure, weak
corporate governance, and lack of training and expertise of lawyers, judges and court
staff expected to handle an ever increasing number of complex business legislation.
Meanwhile, the conditions that made Tunisia's success possible in the recent past are
being fundamentally altered by developments in the international markets.

9. 
Tunisian producers will face much stronger competition in their export markets,
following the elimination of the Multi-Fiber Agreements (textiles and leather make up
50% of Tunisian merchandise exports), and in the local market, with the implementation
of the free trade provisions of the agreement with the EU. Beyond the agreement with
the EU, and those with Egypt, Morocco and Jordan, trade liberalization will need to be
extended on a multilateral basis to avoid distortions associated with partial trade
liberalization. This too will increase competition. In such an atmosphere, rather than the
finely targeted incentives and discretionary interventions used in the past, a predictable
and clear policy environment will be more critical to facilitating enterprise adjustment.

10. As another aspect of international competition, the profitability of Tunisian
enterprises will increasingly depend on the cost and quality of infrastructure and financial
services. The agreement with the EU is expanding access to inputs at world prices to the
on-shore sector of the economy, and thus differences in competitiveness between
Tunisian producers and their competitors will be largely determined by cost and quality
of nontradables. Yet infrastructure services, especially in transport, telecommunications
and information, are provided mostly by the public sector in markets that are neither
competitive nor contested and lag those available to competitors in many other emerging
market economies. While the trade regime in Tunisia has become increasingly
liberalized, progress on trade facilitation has been slow. The administration of customs
clearance, port logistics and procedures, and quality checks overburden resources and
prove costly to both the Government and the private sector.

11. 
The financial sector is dominated by the banking system and a strong government
presence within it, with public banks representing 52% of total bank assets and set to
drop to 47.7% under ongoing reforms. In addition, despite important progress in the
liberalization of the financial sector (e.g. in 1996, mandatory lending requirements to
priority sectors and central bank rediscounting facilities at preferential rates 'were
eliminated) some interest rate restrictions on deposits remain, and the central bank's
priority refinancing facilities for certain sectors of the economy (e.g. agriculture) still
influence bank credit allocation.

5

12. The problems of the financial sector in recent years have included the large size of
non-performing loans in bank portfolios and the weakness of their capital base. The
share of bad loans in total commitments in banks decreased from 37% in 1993 to 24.4%
in 1999,2 but remains large as a share of GDP (8.4% in 1999). And while private banks
have generally exceeded the minimum capital adequacy requirement, public banks had
generally remained undercapitalized with an average capital adequacy ratio estimated at
4.7 % at the end of 1997. Since then, public banks have been strengthening their capital
base towards satisfactory levels in terms of prudential norms.

13. Government has recently taken steps to restructure the non-performing loans of
state owned enterprises, which accounted for about one third of total non-performing
loans. For non-performing loans of the private sector, Government has established the
framework to create private loan recovery agencies. One such agency was created very
recently and has already recovered 90 million dinars. Given the size of the non-
performing loans, however, sustained vigilance will be essential for this mechanism to
prove effective, and sound governance will be crucial in future to avoid a recurrence of
this problem.

14. On governance, the authorities are committed to strengthening operations and
management further by overhauling the banking law, tightening bank supervision,
merging selected development banks with commercial banks, and privatization. The
authorities also plan to soon adopt a new bank accounting framework in line with
international standards, and establish a more reliable and efficient inter-bank payments
system. When implemented, such measures would improve the services provided to
private businesses by increasing both competition among banks and their ability to
assume commercial risks. However, bringing the quality and choice of financial services
available to private enterprises in Tunisia to the level available to competitors will require
a more deep-rooted liberalization of the financial sector, including entry of foreign banks.

Upholding Social Cohesion

15. Social achievements and equity are among Tunisia's greatest assets, which have
distinguished it from other countries in the region and ensured internal cohesion. With
increasing international competition and closer integration with Europe, the enhancement
of those achievements are more important now with the presence of a strong middle class
(nearly 80% of the country's population) and a young population (64% of the population
under 35 years of age). This can be accomplished via: (i) further reduction of poverty
and particularly vulnerability, (ii) spreading high-quality education and health care, (iii)
employment growth and (iv) a sustainable and effective social protection system.

16. Further Poverty Reduction. Tunisia has had an impressive record of poverty
reduction over the years (see Box I below). Indeed, even in the process of severe
stabilization in the mid-1980s, the government's program promoted growth via labor-
intensive export activities and safeguarded its traditional pro-poor expenditure policies.

2 

The decrease has been faster for commercial banks, wherein the proportion of doubtful claims in
total commitments dropped from 34% in 1993 to 17.3% in 1999.

6

Box 1: PROGRESS IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION

Dimension of Poverty. Tunisia has had an impressive record of poverty reduction over the years, cutting the incidence of
poverty (using the national poverty line) from 40% in 1960 to 11% by 1985 and further to 7.4% by 1990. At the same time,
the growth rate of population declined and life expectancy increased markedly, regional disparities were reduced, and
improvements achieved in education, access to health care and basic infrastructure. The distribution of income too improved
when the Gini Coefficient fell from 0.434 in 1985 to 0.401 in 1990. Between 1990 and 1995, the latest year for which
household consumption data are available, the incidence of poverty hovered around the 7 percent mark, even though real
GDP per capita grew over 3 percent per year. In absolute term the number of poor increased from 600,000 in 1990 to
690,000 in 1995. Given that the distribution of consumption is quite steep near the poverty line, many households can be
vulnerable to sliding back into low incomes.

Poverty Reduction: Recent Trends

12T 

11.2 

112

T 044

- 043

8 + 

4 

\ 

74 

7 4 

7.6 

7 6 

t04A2

t O 42 

N N o 

o f P o o r, 

in

4Chrcvry o t 

o 

Pov 

e 

rmaiy a 

(ihs) 

no 

(hs

n i 

ncidence, 

o

2 

° 

In T 
-
;t- 

_ t0702 

; 

I;;-y;:00 

: 

t 

1985 

t1990 

1995 

0.40i: 
.
-. 
039 

.

+ 

°39G 
in i C o e ffic ie n t o f
in c o m e d is tr ib u tio n
( r h s)

Characteristics of th7e poor. 

In Tunisia, poverty remains primarily a rural phenomenon: in 1995, the incidence of rural

poverty was 13.9% compared to 3.6%in urban areas, and more than 70% of the poor live in rural areas. Geographically, the
incidence of poverty is highest in the mountainous North-West, and above the national average in the hilly and desert
areas of the Center-West and the South. On average the poor households, both urban and rural, have more household
members, and in particular more children, than the non-poor households. There is also a strong association between lack
of human capital and poverty in both rural and urban areas (over 60% of poor household heads have no formal education
compared to about 40% for non-poor households). Poor rural households engaged in production activities typically have
access to land, but their landholdings are small (averaging 2 hectares), rarely irrigated, and often exhibit low productivity,
especially in rain-fed areas. The urban poor are mostly wage earners in low-skill occupations. They face thin job
prospects as employment opportunities have been shifting toward higher skills while, owing to high dropout rates from the
primary school system, the ranks of unskilled working age population have grown.

Key Issues. Tunisia has been committed to pro-poor policies throughout its development program via extensive health,
education and basic infrastructure coverage, integrated rural development programs in the poorest areas, wide array of
public interventions, including micro-credit, social type fund, and food subsidies. Current issues are: (i) poverty has
reached a hard core nexus; (ii) programs have become costly and sometimes duplicative; and (iii) the issue of relative
poverty is becoming more complex. With demographic shifts, issues are shifting toward urban areas (unemployment and

idle youths), issues of quality in education (high drop out rates, especially among girls) and shifts in health patterns and
coverage. 
In addition, there is a need to review the financial viability of the social protection strategy of the country.
Interventions to reach the hard core poor also need to shift towards decentralized and NGO outreach efforts, with focus
on increased participation of the low-income communities themselves.

Link with Bank Group Program. The Bank has been an active partner in the whole human development effort of the
Government, with strong focus on participatory approaches in rural areas and in developing programs in poor and marginal
regions. Ongoing activities with specific poverty focus include the North West Mountainous Development Project, the
Forestry Project and the Natural Resources Management Project. This focus will continue in all our new rural development
projects, including the Water Management and the Agricultural Support Services projects under preparation. Over the CAS
period, we also intend shifting our approach progressively towards the urban poor and unemployed, and take a broader
approach to poverty reduction, namely, focus on growth and employment issues, followed by refinement and greater
coverage of the social protection system. We will also focus on quality issues in education, and shifting health patters.
Finally, we will maintain the outreach and participatory approaches aiready initiated in our recent rural projects.

Although poverty in Tunisia is low and comparable with higher income countries,
between 199O and 1995, the latest year for which household consumption data are
available, the incidence of poverty (using the national poverty line) hovered around the 7
percent mark, even though real GDP per capita grew over 3 percent a year. Thus,
contrary to past performance, economic growth in the first half of the 1990s did not lead
to further significant reduction of the incidence of poverty. It is not clear whether this

7

marked a change in the pattern of growth in Tunisia, or whether it was only a transitory
phenomenon, linked to large weather fluctuations.

17. More effective anti-poverty interventions will require more timely and more widely
shared information, as well as closer involvement of the affected communities in the
design and management of anti-poverty interventions. That poverty incidence remained
around 7 percent despite rapid economic growth in the first half of the 1990s is not
surprising, because targeting anti-poverty interventions becomes harder as poverty
incidence falls. Yet, information on the characteristics of the poor, the causes of poverty,
and the relationship between skills and opportunities has not been widely available thus
far, despite efforts to collect household-level data. This information is expected to be
available following the census planned for next year.

18. Two other aspects of the poverty situation now cause concern in Tunisia. One is
the appearance of poverty in urban fringe areas, and of large segments of young
graduates not finding jobs. The other is a recently observed increase in vulnerability, as
measured by the number of people having expenditures about 30% above the poverty
line. Thus defined, the share of vulnerable in total population rose from 14% in 1990 to
17% in 1995 (from 1.1 million to 1.5 million people). The challenge thus is to address
the remaining structural determinants of poverty by promoting community-based
interventions and increasing the efficiency of the social protection mechanisms to avert
slide-backs of those already out of poverty.

19. Education and Health Care. From a broader perspective of social betterment,
Tunisia--in view of its limited market and resources-has rightly placed great emphasis on
the development of its human resource base, in particular education and health.
Following on the issue highlighted in the last CAS, education completion rates have
improved somewhat but are still considered low. A great challenge in basic education is
ensuring that children entering each cycle complete their school satisfactorily, with an
adequate minimum level of quality and an emphasis on excellence for all.

20. Tunisia's public health system provides free or highly subsidized health care to
40% to 50% of the population, though only 7% fall below the poverty line. Yet, public
health services are under-financed, available resources are not efficiently used, and the
quality of services does not meet the population's expectations. The organization of the
health sector and the health insurance mechanisms are fragmented and financially non-
viable. These challenging deficiencies require strategies to improve efficiency in resource
allocation and utilization, enhance the quality of services, and ensure the sustainability of
the health system. This will also require careful integration of the private sector in
financing and providing health services.

21. Employment and Labor Market. At around 16% overall, unemployment remains
high,3 especially for first-time job seekers and new graduates, despite a decade of robust

3 Tunisian labor statistics count a set of inactive people, mostly household workers, as unemploved,
although they would not be counted as such elsewhere. Thlis tends to overestimate the number of
unemployed. Applying the measurement of unemployment commonly used in other countries to the 1989

S

growth and job creation and fairly stable participation rates. Compared to the early 1980s
when only 60% of annual additional demand for jobs could be met, Tunisia currently
meets around 90% of such demand. But, the pressure for jobs is expected to intensify
over the next five to ten years with an impending bulge in the working age population
and in the output of higher education institutions (Figure 2). The Government is acutely
aware of this issue, which the President has termed the nation's "absolute priority". Thus
labor market policies in Tunisia now face two main challenges-. (i) facilitating efficient
employment creation for new job seekers; and (ii) reducing the costs of adj'ustments and
competition on workers through efficient labor market programs, such as public works,
unemployment benefits, employment services and training.

Figure 2: TR-ENDS IN LABOR FORCE AND GRADUATE ENROLLMENTS

6.000 -
2c 6.0 

4.000 -

2.000 -

0 3.000- 

~~~ 3.000 -

405000 -
B55000-

E305000 
255000 

-

~~~~~~~~~~~W 

205000 -
1~~~~~~~~~~~55000
i 05000

Year 

I ~~~~~~55000~ ~ 

22. Social Protection. Tunisia's social protection system compares favorably with
those of many countries with higher income levels. But it needs to be more efficient, cost
effective, affordable and adapt to new needs of the economy. Social insurance benefits
(pension, health insurance and family allowance) are available to the working population
through membership, and the system covers about 80% of the labor force. Contributions
are adjusted periodically to maintain financial equilibrium. But the system involves
inefficient cross-subsidization among various benefits (pension and family allowance).
The progressive aging of the work force, coupled with poorly designed pension parameters,
will likely imply increase in expenditures, which will in turn require h~igher payroll taxes or
budget transfers in the fuiture unless structural reforms to promote long-term private
savings (e.g., non-mandatory private supplementary pension schemes) are introduced to
safeguard the long-term fiscal viability of the social insurance system.

23. Finally, although social assistance programs (particularly direct transfers) are pro-
poor and continue to play an important role in poverty alleviation, their targeting needs to
be improved. These programs involve high administrative costs and there is scope for
improving their coverage. The remaining challenges include: (i) developing a unified
framework for social assistance programs, and (ii)exploring partnerships with other
agencies and the civil society at large to implement the programs.

data indicated a lower unemployment rate of about 11.2% as compared to the official rate of 16.2%. This
said, high unemployment remains an issue for first-time job seekers.

9

Sustaining Environmental Protection

24. The growth of industry, tourism and vehicle traffic, which are concentrated along
the coast, accompanied by the rapid growth of Tunisia's urban population (from 36% of
total in 1960 to 50% in 1975 and an estimated 60%-65% at present), have combined to
exert tremendous pressure on the country's land and water resources, and have
contributed to the increase of air pollution in the coastal cities. A key priority is water in
view of Tunisia's limited resources. The water sector has always been at the center of
Government's development agenda. 
Its strategic importance is more pronounced in
agriculture, which consumes 85% of water resources. As such, it has benefited from
considerable public investments, which have translated into major water mobilization
infrastructure thereby reducing the country's vulnerability to irregular rainfall, bringing
irrigation potential to nearly 350,000 hectares, and potable water to meet the demands of
close to 80% of rural households, all urban households, tourism and industry.

25. A strong institutional setup and legislative framework, coupled with a strong
sustainable development policy, has also brought Tunisia to the forefront of the MENA
Region in natural resources management and environmental protection. Annex B 11
elaborates Tunisia's achievements in this area. While these efforts have provided
important gains, it has become clear to Government that if current trends persist, water
supply will be insufficient to meet growing demand by 2015 as, by then, Tunisia would
have mobilized its full potential while demand for water would continue to increase. In
this context, the challenge will be to act on a recently adopted new vision, the main
principles of which are to move from resource mobilization to demand management,
integrated management of ground and surface water, and water conservation. An
additional challenge would be to mainstream environment in the transport and tourism
sectors by decreasing the sulfur and lead content in fuel oil and gasoline respectively, and
by assisting in the development of integrated coastal zone management of the tourist
cities.

Upgrading Governance

26. The Tunisian government has developed a strong consultative approach and gone a
long way to ensure debate and participation in its economic decision making process.
But this process is mostly directed by the central administration. External contestability
has been subdued, due to security concerns caused by instability in neighboring countries
and a weak press. With the strong results in favor of President Ben Ali in the presidential
elections of October 1999, the emergence of a large and stable middle class, and the
easing of regional tensions, conditions seem right for a more active participation of civil
society in the development process. This development will be vital to promote stronger
governance in a more open environment, and all the more crucial as social tensions are
bound to occur during this transition.

27. The outsiders' image of the country's governance is that the system is overly
controlling and close-knit, increasingly at variance with the needs of a growing middle
class and globalizing economy. However, by and large, the rule of law prevails, a
consultation mechanism on economic issues exists, albeit centrally-orchestrated, and the

10

population values the all-round stability and prosperity engendered by successive
governments. Corruption has not posed any major risk to Bank Group projects so far,
and national and international surveys indicate that the extent of corruption has remained
ielatively low. Nonetheless, even minor perception of corruption is worrisome. The
government will need to address this issue through (i) a more transparent business
environment, (ii) a broadening of dialogue with the private sector, and (iii) progressive
engagement with the civil society.

28. 
It will also be crucial to ensure scrutiny of public policies in a transparent and open
manner. While the Tunisian administration has always enjoyed a strong reputation of
competence and propriety, much remains to be done to simplify bureaucratic procedures
and ensure a fair playing field, necessary to attract a much higher level of private
investments. 
In addition, there is a need to ease up information disclosure and
dissemination policies and to enable formation and functioning of independent research
bodies and think tanks. The Government recognizes these challenges and is starting to
open up its development programs to NGOs and local participation, while studying ways
to decentralize decision-making progressively, and streamline the business environment
for private investments. Furthermore, Government has moved to increase the
transparency of policies, including through the publication of the vIF Staff Report for
the 1999 Article IV Consultation, the participation in the IIM pilot project on the
transparency of economic policies and the intention to subscribe to the IMP's Special
Data Dissemination Standards.

29. 
In the end, a more open and diverse civil society could greatly contribute to
meeting successfully the challenges posed by the changing external environment, the
remaining incidence of poverty, the aspirations of Tunisia's middle class and its younger
generations entering the labor force. Tunisia has in fact demonstrated its flexibility and
capacity to learn from and absorb lessons of experience, but always in its own cultural
context, wherein social consensus is a key characteristic. This is what the Bank has to
work with and listen to, for it has ensured social stability and continuity in decision
making, and has underpinned the country's solid record of economic management so
important to future prospects and risks.

II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS

A. RECENT ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

30. 
In the absence of major shocks, Tunisia was able to register sound economic
growth in recent years, marked by a balanced macroeconomic stance, and backed by
productive investment in social and physical infrastructure. Overall, during 1997-99, the
first three years of its ongoing 9 th Plan (1997-2001), the country improved upon the
outturn of the 8th Plan (1992-1996). Real GDP per capita grew an average 4% a year in
1997-99 (compared to 3% during 1992-1996). This was not sufficient, however, to make
a dent in the rate of unemployment, which remained around 16% in the period.

I1

31. On the financial side in 1997-99, fiscal consolidation efforts were kept up. Despite
the onset of tariff cuts in the context of the EU agreement, annual fiscal deficits averaged
3.6% of GDP (3.7% during 1992-1996), and the external current account deficit averaged
3.2% of GDP (5% during 1992-1996). Inflation dropped to average 3.3% a year (4.9%
during 1992-1996). The limited exposure of the economy to short-term capital flows
helped Tunisia endure the turmoil in international capital markets. When conditions
hardened in 1998, the country refrained from borrowing; this decision was helped by
proceeds from privatization of two cement plants, finance available from official sources
(including from the World Bank) and use of official reserves. Official reserves thus
declined from about 3 months to 2.2 months of imports of goods and services at the end
of 1998, but turned up to an estimated 2.4 months of imports of goods and services by the
end of 1999. External debt amounted to an estimated US$10.8 billion at the end of 1999,
equivalent to about 51% of GDP, down from about 60% of GDP in the early 1990s. Short
term debt was about US$ 1.1 billion at end-1999, equal to 1.3 months of imports.

B. EXTERNAL ENviRoNENT AND ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

32. As a small open economy in an increasingly global world economy, Tunisia's
external environment over the medium term is likely to be characterized by a mix of
better trading opportunities and stronger global competition, satisfactory growth
performance in Europe--the main trading partner--in the short term, uncertainty about
future developments on international financial markets, and emerging hopes of stability
in the country's immediate neighborhood.

33. Against this backdrop, and the risks described below (see paragraph 44), Tunisia's
macroeconomic performance over the medium term will be mostly conditioned by the
country's policy response to the growing competition facing it, especially as, starting in
2000, a progressive industrial displacement will arise with the next round of tariff
adjustments under the agreement with the EU. This will in particular require a major
overhaul of the business environment and incentives regime, as discussed earlier.
Medium-term Prospects

34. Base case scenario. The base case scenario envisages that the structural reforms
introduced in the second half of the ending decade would be sustained, and that policy
measures in the government's ongoing reform programs in the financial, trade, and
transport sectors would be fully implemented. With such measures as well as broader
ones to improve overall governance and the private sector incentive framework, the base
case scenario assumes that private sector confidence in the policy environment would
improve--or at the minimum be maintained--so that investment intentions would remain
high. It is expected the government would continue supporting private firms to upgrade
their capacities and shift attention increasingly to improving the business environment for
all existing and potential firms. The privatization program would be pursued as in recent
years and would generate sufficient foreign investment, though not on a consistent basis.

35. The overall productivity of the economy--total factor productivity growth--could be
maintained at recent levels of 1.5 percent to 1.9 percent. The investment to GDP ratio is
likely to increase slightly from its current level of 28.9%, due to ongoing projects under

12

the 9h Plan and private investments to upgrade capacities in the manufacturing sector.
Public and private savings would increase so that, as a ratio to GDP, the current account
deficit would not widen dramatically. In the absence of major shocks to the economy,
and provided there is adequate policy response to the competitive pressures and an
improved business environment, during the CAS period, real GDP may grow on average
in the range of 5 to 6 percent per year, similar to the growth path of the late 1990s.

Table 1: SELECTED MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS

Growth Rates (%)
Real GDP 
RealConsumptionpercapita 
Export Volume, GNFS 
Irnport Volume, GNFS 
GDP deflator 
Ratios to GDP (%)
Gross Domestic Investment 
Gross Domestic Savings 
Fiscal Balance (excl. grants) 
External Current Balance 

Actual 
Est. 
Projected
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

7.1 
5.4 
5.0 6.2 5.6 
2.5 2.9 
3.3 
4.1 4.6 
-0.8 10.5 3.9 4.2 4.7 
-3.3 
8.9 
4.2 
6.4 5.8 
4.4 
4.0 
3.6 
3.4 3.6 

5.7 
4.3 
5.1 
5.5 
3.6 

5.8
4.0
6.0
5.6
3.6

25.0 26.7 27.5 28.9 28.9 29.0 29.1
23.5 24.2 24.5 26.0 25.5 25.2 25.3
-5.1 
-4.2 
-2.8 
-3.7 -3.2 
-3.0 
-3.0
-2.6 
-3.3 
-3.4 
-2.9 -3.7 
-4.0 
-3.9

36. The fiscal picture, while sustainable, would still exhibit rigidity in public
expenditures due to the large size of the wage bill (30% of all expenditures in 1999).
Monetary policy is likely to maintain a tight stance, keeping CPI inflation around 3
percent and the exchange rate would be managed flexibly to keep the real exchange rate
constant. With a sound macroeconomic framework and the continued implementation of
structural reforms, Tunisia should be able to mobilize sufficient external resources to
meet its financing needs (see Table 2).

Table 2: MEDIUM-TERM FINANCING PLAN: BASE CASE (US$ Million)

Actual 

1996 

1997 

1998 

Est. 

1999 

Projected

2000 

2001 

2002

Financing Needs 

1892 

Current Account Deficit a/ 513 
Debt Amortization 
982 
Reserves Accumulation b/ 
397 

1892 

615 
941 
336 

1523 

1975 

2704 

680 
618 
845 
1030 1072 1394 
-187 
284 
465 

2225 

979 
1040 
206 

1892 

1892 

1523 

1975 

2704 

2225 

Financing Sources 

MLT Loans 
1506 1481 
856 1467 2062 
1627 
Multilateral 
504 352 
302 
551 
683 
575 
Of which: IBRD 
202 
127 
141 
209 
210 
190 
Official Bilateral 
181 
335 
172 
531 
598 551 
Private Creditors 
821 
794 
382 
385 
781 
501 
ForeignDirectlnvestment 
261 
355 
697_1 411 
532 
480 
Capital Grants 
46 
95 
82 
85 
110 
118 
STCapital&Adjustments 
79 
-39 
-112 
11 
0 
0 
a/ Excludes official transfers (grants), which are shown among financing sources.
b/ Includes repurchases from the IIM'F.
c/ Includes $359 million from sale of two cement plants.

2284

1050
1027
207

2284

1643
523
192
472
648
515
126
0

13

The size of non-debt creating private financing (mainly foreign direct investment) will,
however, depend on privatization efforts, and the cost of debt-creating private financing
will depend in part on developments in other emerging market economies. In the base
case scenario, the debt to GDP ratio is projected to continue declining to about 48% in
2002, helped by continuing efforts at fiscal consolidation. After peaking in the year
2000, external debt service ratios are expected to decrease from 2001, thereby freeing
foreign exchange and permitting an increase of reserves to a level equivalent to 2.6
months of imports of goods and services (from an estimated 2.4 months at the end of
1999).

37. Low case scenario. The Tunisian economy faces a number of risks and
vulnerabilities described in the next section. If one or more of these risks were to
materialize and persist, the outlook of the economy may change. In addition to the
shocks to which the economy can be 3ubiected in the short to medium term, the
implementation of structural policies has important bearing on medium-term outlook. In
this regard, the Government's track record is encouraging and, from all indications, the
policy stance remains in favor of continued reforms.

38. 
If reform efforts were slowed down, however, a low case scenario could result.
First, for example, doubts about foreign competition in the banking sector might slow the
ongoing liberalization of that sector. Second, the privatization program might be slowed
if conditions offered by international investors are not deemed attractive by the
authorities, or if a worsening of labor market outcomes heightens labor union opposition
to privatization. Third, if some domestic firms fail to adjust to increased competition,
their ability to repay their bank loans will be impaired, there may be some output loss,
and employment opportunities may be reduced. A slow industrial restructuring would
decrease further opportunities for reducing the inflexibility of fiscal expenditures if--in an
atmosphere of sluggish employment--the government were inclined to postpone actions
to reduce the relative size of the civil service.

39. 
In the low case scenario, real GDP growth could decline to around 4 percent per
year. Moreover, if borrowing conditions on international markets remain tight, Tunisia
would face difficulties in meeting its financing needs. Foreign direct investment would
be lower as a result of slow privatization and limited investment opportunities. Attempts
to tap into external reserves would risk increasing the vulnerability of the country to
sudden reversals of capital flows. Above all, a low case outcome would jeopardize the
prospects for job growth in the country. Indeed, to meet the priority objective of
reducing unemployment, Tunisia needs to transition onto a higher economic growth path.

40. High Case scenario. In some year(s) of the CAS period, real GDP growth could
be higher than in the base case, given exogenous factors such as good agricultural
production and favorable ecoromic conditions in the EU. Favorable economic conditions
in the EU would increase both external demand for Tunisia's products (due to higher
purchasing power in export markets), and domestic demand (through higher workers
remittances).

14

41. Higher growth can be induced, beyond the CAS period, if the policy groundwork is
laid now for private domestic and foreign investment to respond to dramatic
improvements in the business and regulatory environment. Were the country to
accelerate and deepen structural reforms to improve rapidly its competitiveness in a
stable macroeconomic framework during the CAS period, economic growth could be
sustained subsequently at more than 6 percent in the medium to long term.

42. The policy bulwark for an eventual high growth scenario would involve the
authorities moving swiftly to implement the structural reforms that are underway,
including privatization of public enterprises and strengthening of the banking sector
through a combination of increased liberalization, privatization, and tighter regulation. In
addition, the authorities would introduce quickly new structural reforms to: improve the
business environment for all existing and potential firms; improve access to credit,
particularly for small and medium enterprises (SME); and strengthen the civil service
while reducing state intervention in the economy. On the macroeconomic front, the
authorities would adopt measures to strengthen the monitoring of contingent liabilities, as
well as external risks and vulnerability. Government would also adopt a strategy for
assets and liabilities management that is consistent with the evolving borrowing
conditions on the international financial markets.

43. Financing needs are likely to increase in the high case to meet greater import (for
productive investments) and reserve requirements (to reduce vulnerability to external
shocks). But these financing needs could be met readily from non-debt creating and
debt-creating sources alike. Privatization revenues could be higher than in the base case
scenario by as much as US$100 million a year. International financial markets, to which
Tunisia has good access, would be more likely to lend larger amounts at lower spreads to
the country (provided there are no overwhelming adverse developments in other
emerging market economies). Higher official lending is also likely to be available to
finance faster and deeper reforms.

Risks and Vulnerabilities

44. From the macroeconomic angle, the main uncertainties affecting Tunisia would be:
(i) the dependence of foreign exchange earnings on one dominant market (the EU
represents nearly 80 percent of Tunisia's exports), and on sources that are subject either
to a foreseeable shock (textile export earnings with the phase-out of the MFA) or to
fluctuations (tourism receipts and workers' remittances); (ii) the adequacy of foreign
exchange reserves in the event of significant shocks; (iii) fiscal risks from budget
rigidities and contingent liabilities; and (iv) vulnerability to droughts.

45. The authorities have been addressing the first element of risk and vulnerability by
gradually diversifying the export base. Following the EU partnership agreement, the
government is pursuing bilateral trade agreements so as to allow for a geographical
diversification of trade (such agreements have been signed with Egypt, Morocco and
Jordan). Regarding the second element, the authorities plan to increase the country's
foreign exchange reserves. Tunisia will therefore require access to foreign capital to
finance current account deficits that may arise from increased competition and to meet

15

reserve targets. Yet, while Tunisia has reasonable access to international financial
markets, borrowing conditions for emerging markets remain volatile. A large increase in
Tunisia's borrowing requirements could therefore lead not only to an increase in external
indebtedness, but also to a deterioration in the external debt profile by rates and possibly
by maturity, unless privatization is speeded up to generate higher income.

46. The third element of risk is due to the fact that fiscal consolidation could be
hampered by the weight and rigidity of the government wage bill and interest expenses
and also possibly burdened by contingent liabilities. Together, the government wage bill
and interest expenses take up 50% of total revenue, with the wage bill unlikely to decline
in the near term. The government has tried to limit net hiring, but this has been difficult
in the face of pressure for new personnel in the social sectors. A more effective measure
in this regard would need to be through a comprehensive civil service reform.

47. As to contingent liabilities, the 1996 budget had to take on TD969 million (5.2% of
GDP) generated by consumer subsidy policy. In 1998, bad loans of state enterprises,
amounting to about TD800 million (3.5% of GDP), had to be assumed. In future, as
elaborated in the SSR, contingent liabilities could arise from five potential sources: the
banking system, government guarantees, the social security system, insurance funds, and
public enterprises. Regulatory weaknesses that could lead to the occurrence of
contingent liabilities in the future have been ameliorated in recent years, including by
measures agreed under the ECAL II. These steps could be reinforced with the
establishment of one focal point in the Tunisian administration for the early identification
and monitoring of contingent liabilities, as increased competition heightens the risk that
some contingent liabilities may become actual liabilities.

48 The fourth element of risk and vulnerability is due to the fact that the Tunisian
economy is subject to large fluctuations in agricultural production, which in turn depend
heavily on weather conditions. The impact of fluctuations of agricultural production on
overall GDP remains strong, even though the average share of the agricultural sector in
GDP has been declining and the dependence of agriculture on rainfall has eased, in part
owing to increased reliance on irrigation. Drought years in Tunisia also influence the
import bill for cereals in particular. While such a risk clearly exists, temporary increases
in cereal imports have been accommodated easily in the past with the country's financial
reserves, given that cereal imports account, even in drought years, for at most five
percent of imports.

1II. TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND THE BANK'S CAS

A. TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

49. Tunisia's development agenda for the medium term is contained in its 9th
Development Plan covering the period 1997-2001. The main elements of the
Government's program in the 9th Plan are:

* modernizing and gradually opening up the economy to competition;

16

* maintaining macroeconomic stability; and
* strengthening the social agenda and environmental management.

50. The Government has deployed partnership agreement with the EU as an important
reform measure and signal to introduce competition in Tunisia. Having brought financial
imbalances and inflation under control, Tunisia's strategy for sustaining macroeconomic
stability involves steady reduction of fiscal deficits to a level comparable to its principal
trading partner, the EU, and cautious monetary policies to ensure low inflation and a
viable balance of payments. In implementing the liberalization reforms, the government's
overriding concern is to avert major reversals in the country's many achievements to-date
on the social and environmental fronts. Accordingly, the 9 th Plan aspires to higher levels
of employment, improved education attainment rates, financial sustainability of the health
and social security systems, and enhancement of environmental conservation and natural
resource management.

51. After extensive mid-term review of the 9th Plan last year, the objectives of the Plan
were reaffirmed and refined in October 1999 in a major policy announcement by the
President, who outlined the following priorities:

* 

* 

* 

Increasing employment, in particular to cater to a labor supply bulge expected during
2000-04. A National Employment Fund, to be financed by voluntary donations,
privatization proceeds and the government budget, has been established to assist job
seekers with training, work programs and seed capital to set up businesses. To
underpin job growth, a drastic simplification of administrative procedures for
establishing businesses is envisaged, along with an acceleration of the privatization
program and greater encouragement of foreign investment.
* Consolidating education reforms and attainments, especially at the basic level,
preventing drop-out from schools before the age of sixteen, strengthening pre-school
education, and promoting facilities for distance learning.
Intensifying investment in information technology and telecommunications, and
raising investment in scientific and technological research to 1 percent of GDP in five
years (from a currently estimated rate of around 0.5 percent of GDP).
Increasing the competitiveness of the economy to meet the challenges of
globalization while augmenting employment and incomes. This would be pursued
with further economic reforms, stable finances, and increased investment, particularly
in the private sector.
* Continuation of poverty reduction measures, including improved access to basic
services and greater coverage of social security arrangements.
* Upholding the equality of women in all walks of life, preserving the importance of
family, and promoting cultural activities.
* Encouraging regional growth with increased public investments in the regions,
provision of fiscal incentives to private investors there, and extending regional
autonomy in economic affairs.

52. Tunisia's development objectives and priorities are consistent with its situation.
They are also realistic and attainable, given the country's solid track record and its strong
macroeconomic fiundamentals, marked by steady long-term growth of per capita incomes

17

and low inflation. What is at issue principally is the speed and spread of reforms,
especially in freeing up the private sector and in deregulating public monopolies.
Provided the incentives and the business environment are streamlined radically, as the
Presidential program listed above indicates, both the domestic and foreign private sector
would respond to the opportunities for investment and growth in the country.

53. The liberalization and upgrading of service monopolies is critical to the country's
competitive performance in international markets. Tunisia's proximity to Europe is a
major advantage, but high transport costs and outdated communications and information
technology reduce their competitive edge. The private sector can help contribute to the
State's development of trade-related infrastructure, particularly in transport and
telecommunications. Again, with priority accorded to this issue in the Presidential
program, there should be good prospects for renewed efforts to vitalize critical services.
In this regard, it is noteworthy that the government has now officially launched a mise a
niveau program for the services sector, aiming to raise standards to international norms as
Tunisia prepares to open the sector to foreign competition.

B. INPLEMENTATION OF BANK GROUP'S PREVIOUS CAS

54. 

In the last CAS period (FY97-99), the Bank program was designed to support:

* structural reforms that would: strengthen the government's commitment to
competition, create a policy environment that opens up activities to the private sector
in production/provision of goods and services, and enable enterprises to compete on
an equal footing with foreign companies. This element of Bank strategy was
anchored in Tunisia's partnership agreement with the EU and has been implemented
in close working relationship with the EU-;

e 

* human capital development to move Tunisia towards middle income country
standards of education attainment rates, qualified manpower, and financially sound
health and social security systems;
* modernization of services that would improve efficiency in key areas, especially
transportation and banking, and that would improve the delivery of technical and
agricultural support services; and
environmental management and the application of appropriate values for scarce
natural resources.
55. 
In delivering the above program, the last CAS had intended to: (a) shift lending
instruments towards fewer traditional projects and more sector investment loans, and (b)
place greater emphasis on non-lending instruments. The aggregate turnout in terms of
lending amounts and instruments was close to what had been intended, as shown below
in Table 3. An active program of non-lending services was also delivered, including 18
reports, sector notes and workshops covering trade, private sector development, public
expenditures, public administration, education, NGO participation, transport, water and
agriculture. In addition, grant-funded activities (PHD, GEF, IDF and METAP) helped
to prepare projects, carry out pilot projects or complement economic and sector work.

18

And an Information Center was established at the Library of the Law and Economics
University in Tunis.

Table 3: EVOLUTION OF BANK LENDING INSTRUMENTS IN LAST CAS

FY90-96 
Period before 
Last CAS 

Last CAS Period
(FY97-99)
Planned 
Actual

(In Percent of Total Comraiitments)
54 
25 
14
33 
25 
36
13 
50 
50

(In US$ Million at current prices)
1383 
659 
658
198 
220 
219

Traditional Projects 
Policy-based Operations 
Sector Investment Loans 

Loan Commitments 
Total during Period 
Average Annual 

56. As detailed below, the implementation of the last CAS was by and large on track
and satisfactory. Also, OED reviews during the period confirmed satisfactory outcomes
of completed projects. However, while the reform program supported during the last
CAS has been broadly appropriate, there is concern that the pace of adjustment should
have been faster to foster increased private investments. The main achievements and
shortcomings in the four principal elements of the Bank Group program in FY97-99 are
summarized below. Additional information on Bank Group performance is listed in
Annex B9a.

57. Deepening Structural Reforms. The Bank financed three operations (ECAL 1-
FY97, ECAL II-FY99 and an Export Development Project-FY99) in the last CAS period
to support trade policy reforms and to promote privatization, private investment, and
improved competitiveness. These three operations accounted for about 40% of new
lending. ECAL I supported (i) implementation of tariff reductions and changes in the
value-added tax system; (ii) privatization and a legislative agenda for private sector
development; and (iii) transport deregulation. OED review of the operation indicated a
highly satisfactory outcome, though some measures were delayed to build a constituency
for difficult reforms in ports and the company code.

58. 
IFC activities during the last CAS were focused on financial sector development,
and some key industries, such as textiles. In the financial sector, IFC's strategy has been
to create new institutions, and support existing ones to expand their range of services and
encourage them to lend to under-served segments of the economy. 
IFC recently
approved the first Global Depository Receipt (GDR) from Tunisia, for $60 million by
Banque Internationale Arabe de Tunisie, and has become a shareholder of the bank
($2.25 million). In an effort to reach out to SMEs, rFC invested in Tuninvest to set up a
private equity fund worth $25 million. The fund focuses on corporate restructuring and
start-up projects with primarily small and medium sized enterprises.

59. While the reform program supported during last CAS has been appropriate, the low
level of private investments indicate that the pace of adjustment should have been faster.

19

The rapidly changing world scene calls for faster action now to curtail the role of the state
in the economy, boost the environment for private sector development, increase the
confidence of foreign investors, and increase investment in the export sector. Further
reforms along these lines are recommended in the recent PSA.

60. Human Resources Development. The Bank has long supported projects in Tunisia
in the social sectors. Nearly 20% of new commitments in the last CAS period were in the
social sectors. In health, Bank support has provided financing to reform the sector and
improve its efficiency, and technical assistance and international experience to reinforce
the private sector, and strengthen public health organization and management. Major
issues remaining include health finance reform and gearing up the sector to cope with the
epidemiologic and demographic transitions under way in the country. In education, Bank
involvement has been long and wide-ranging. After addressing the needs of primary and
secondary education, Bank support expanded to vocational training and reform at the
tertiary education level. Education has been and remains a key focus of the Bank in
Tunisia. Following a major analytical work on sector issues, discussed in a nationwide
seminar, future priorities will include enhancing quality, reducing drop-out rates and
modernizing the education system in line with new technologies.

61. Modernization of Services. In this area, the last CAS had envisioned efficiency
improvements in key sectors especially transportation, water and sewage, agriculture, and
telecommunications. Almost 30% of new commitments during the CAS period were
targeted for this objective. The strategy in transport has been to reduce the importance of
the public sector in service delivery, foster competition by eliminating public
monopolies, commercialize the railways company, and reduce the sector's fiscal burden
on the government. This strategy is being supported by an ongoing APL and components
under the Export Development Project aimed at reducing transit times in ports and at
modernizing Customs procedures. The results are already evident, as indicated by the
sharp drop in shipping rates (by 40%) following deregulation. Improvements in ports
have, however, been lagging due to protracted discussions with dock workers.

62. The utilities in water and sewerage are performing very well. During the last CAS
period, two new projects were approved: Municipal Development II and Greater Tunis
Sewerage. The Second Municipal Development Project, is assisting municipalities in:
reducing regional disparities, improving efficiency in the management of local
government operations, promoting decentralization, and increasing the autonomy of local
governments. The project will also increase the percentage of urban population with
piped discharge and the percentage of the rural population with access to piped water.
The Greater Tunis Sewerage Project was designed to improve municipal services in
Tunis by promoting efficient re-use for agricultural purposes of effluent from sewage
treatment plants, by reducing urban and coastal pollution, and by introducing new sewage
treatment technology and environmental monitoring. This project has a full-fledged
agricultural component and uses treated wastewater from a treatment plant to be built by
the private sector on a BOT basis. Overall progress in promoting private participation in
infrastructure (PPI) has, however, remained relatively slow compared to other countries.

20

63. Environmental Management and Agriculture. Tunisia leads the MENA region
with regard to environmental protection. The strong institutional setup and legislative
framework have both contributed to this success. Tunisia also has a strong policy for
sustainable development in place. The Government's commitment for environmental
protection is reflected through the substantial increase in the budget allocated to the
sector in the most recent five-year development plan. The Bank Group and Government,
however, recognize that there are still outstanding issues in this area, such as industrial
pollution, over-exploitation of range-land and degradation of marginal lands, and the
need to improve the long term efficiency and sustainability of agriculture and forestry. In
the last CAS period, 10% of lending was devoted to natural resources management and
agriculture.

64. Over the last three years, the emphasis of the Bank in agriculture has followed a
three-pronged approach: (i) elaboration of a long-term strategy to deal with water scarcity
and water management; (ii) rural development in marginal and poor areas, with focus on
environmental protection and participatory approaches; and 
(iii) agricultural
competitiveness, mostly through studies, dialogue and seminars. The Government is
concerned for now at stemming the flow of rural-urban migration, and hence keen on
integrated development of poorer rural areas. It recognizes that in the long run, Tunisia's
major growth potential lies in urban and coastal areas and in those agricultural sub-
sectors possessing comparative advantage to withstand the progressive liberalization of
the agriculture sector in the context of the EU agreement and the country's membership
of the World Trade Organization.

C. PROPOSED COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

65. Tunisia has done extremely well in addressing poverty, in raising living standards,
and in promoting human development (see Box 1, page 6). With the country's strong
progress thus far in this area and in view of the country's emerging challenges, the CAS
envisages taking a broader approach to poverty reduction, namely: focus on vulnerability,
growth and employment issues, followed by refinement and greater coverage of the
social protection system, while addressing poverty pockets through decentralized and
community-based approaches.

66. The country now faces new challenges in integrating its economy to the world
economy and in addressing the needs of a young urbanized population entering the labor
force in greater numbers. The previous CAS sought to back up this new development
phase through: (i) support for policy reform; (ii) continued emphasis on human resources
development; and (iii) addressing longer term issues, such as environment and water
management in particular. Drawing on this experience and on recently completed
analytical works (SSR and PSA), the current CAS seeks to continue and strengthen the
work initiated in the last CAS. Based on discussions with Government, the proposed
Bank assistance program would follow a three-pronged approach, as follows:

Consolidating long-term development through activities in sectors of traditional
Bank involvement, mainly human resources development, natural resources
management, transport, rural development, municipal development;

21

* Supporting economic reforms to enhance competitiveness and 
employment, with safeguards against transitional costs of adjustments;
* New initiatives of catalytic nature to strengthen local institutions, launch new
development niches (e.g., information technology), and mobilize external finance.

increase

Consolidating Long-term Development

67. Tunisia has by and large completed putting in place basic physical infrastructure
for long-term development. Where major physical investments are still needed, the
Govemment has identified alternative sources of official or private financing. 
In
recognition of this situation, and to focus further our approach, our strategy will be to
phase out of traditional investments in areas such as energy, roads, and housing and other
social infrastructure. Instead, we would consolidate our past involvement to strengthen
policy formulation and management in selected sectors, namely education, health, water
resources, and rural and urban development. In these sectors, our involvement would
also stress non-lending services and sector investment loans so as to: (a) incorporate
limited, well-focused, sector policy objectives with modernization investments; and (b)
expand the use of private concessions, particularly for transportation, waste water
treatment, electricity and possibly telecommunications. This proposed approach would
make the most of the Bank's comparative advantage in having spearheaded policy
dialogue in the selected sectors, and in bringing to bear cross-country experiences.

68. 
In human resources development, a program of education sector reforms has been
drawn up under the Education Quality Enhancement Project (FYOO). The program will
focus on improving education quality and support Government efforts to: ensure
universal completion of basic education (Grades I through 9); provide a greater number
of students, from a wider range of backgrounds, with opportunities for post-basic
education; and modernize the sector to improve output quality. Given a well-developed,
long-term strategic vision, particularly for basic education, the need for deeper reflection
on reform at the post-basic levels, and the schedule for preparation of Tunisia's 10th
Development Plan, the operation has been prepared as an Adaptable Program Loan.

69. Bank involvement in the health sector has supported investments, restructuring and
reforms in the past and, most recently, has collaborated closely with the EU, which is
financing a major health insurance policy reform. In addition to the epidemiological and
demographic transitions, the upcoming health insurance reform will force structural
changes in terms of sector management, financing, and service delivery. The focus of the
government--and hence the Bank--in the next few years will be to complete the
development and initiate the implementation of the new health insurance program,
coupled with the requisite restructuring of the different health organizations. The
ongoing health sector project will provide the main platform for dialogue on these issues.

70. 
In the water sector, and generally in environment and natural resources
management, following intensive dialogue during the last CAS on a broad strategy for the
water sector, the first phase of a Water Sector Investment Loan (WSIL) is proposed for
FYOO. The WSIL will support Tunisia's intention of shifting emphasis from supply
(water mobilization) to demand management through financial, pricing, technical, legal,

22

and institutional measures. Given the wide availability of bilateral assistance in the
environment sector, there is little scope for Bank lending operations. Hence our
assistance will be limited to policy dialogue and grant-funded activities with GEF and
METAP resources to maintain environmental focus on: protection of human health from
water and air pollution and soil degradation; prevention of further degradation of
Tunisia's natural, cultural and coastal resources; and integration of the environment into
the specific sectors of waste management, tourism, transport and trade. Notably, the
Bank will continue to support through METAP and the Development Grant Fund, the
establishment of a regional environment assessment center in the Centre International
des Technologies de l'Environnement de Tunis(CITET) to provide training and technical
support in environment assessment to METAP countries.

71. 
In transport, we propose to advance the support already initiated for sector reform
and modernization that has thus far involved liberalization and commercialization of
ports, railway and urban transport. In the CAS period, the support will be advanced with
the second phase of the Transport Reform and Investment Loan (FYOO). The operation
will aim to create an institutional framework conducive to sustainable development of
public transport in major cities. It would involve: (a) regrouping and decentralizing
planning and regulatory functions under new urban transport authorities toward better
management of transport needs, integration of transport and urban development and more
coordinated transport services; (b) streamlining subsidization of urban public transport
toward better coverage of public service obligations and elimination of implicit subsidies
to inefficient bus operations through targeting them better and cost containment; and (c)
allowing for a larger private sector involvement through concession of lines and
subcontracting services by the public bus companies.

72. 
In rural development, priority interventions in the coming years would include: (a)
non-lending services to suggest a feasible pace of agricultural liberalization, which is
envisaged under the agreement with the EU, accompanied with an operation proposed for
FYO1 to modernize agricultural support services, and (b) possible operations in the outer
years to improve living conditions in rural areas, especially the more remote,
disadvantaged locations, through community-based development and with due
consideration to gender issues. A possible priority area in this regard would be to
consolidate efforts undertaken through our North-West Mountainous Development
Project (FY94), located in one of the poorest regions in Tunisia.

73. 
In the longer run, Tunisia's growth poles would appear to be in the urban areas and
along the coast. With nearly two-thirds of the country's population now urbanized and
with unemployment pressures felt in urban peripheries, municipal and urban development
needs to be consolidated in the CAS. This would be pursued with: (a) maintaining
involvement in municipal development projects, (b) reviewing municipal finances and
decentralization, and (c) preparing to expand integrated urban development in low-
income areas.

4 A complete report, Environmental Input to the Tunisia CAS, was prepared by a special mission mounted by the
Environment Department in June 1999. The full report is available on request.

23

Supporting Economic Reforms

74. Following approval in FY99 of the ongoing ECAL II, which addresses the financial
sector, support for enhancing the competitiveness of the Tunisian economy would be
maintained with ECAL III proposed for FYO1 and a proposed ECAL IV for FY03
(policy-based support on a two-year cycle). With reforms of ECAL II under way,
progress is needed next to deepen the financial sector, and boost private sector
development by streamlining the business environment. ECAL III then would underpin
macroeconomic reform and seek to either (i) advance financial sector reforms by:
furthering consolidation and privatization of public sector banks, 
restructuring the
finances of SMEs, and reforming the insurance, housing finance and capital markets; or,
(ii) depending on the readiness of Government, support measures to enhance private
sector development through a comprehensive reform of the incentive regime with a view
to streamlining it to create a level playing field for private investments ( investment code,
tax code, social security legislation and taxation). The operation would also support
increased private sector participation in infrastructure via concessions and further
privatization of state enterprises. An important objective in such an operation would be
to further improve economic governance in the country's financial and private sectors.

75. An important challenge for Tunisia will also be to improve the cost/quality mix of
infrastructure services through private participation. Should the Government wish, this
could be a major area for Bank group involvement. In this area, with contributions from
some of our ongoing operations (Greater Tunis Sewerage-FY97, Water Supply and
Sewerage-FY95, Transport Sector Investment Loan I-FY98), detailed measures have
already been elaborated for increasing competition and/or contestability through
deregulation, privatization and private provision. The next set of proposed operations
would encourage private sector participation in the provision of infrastructure (PPI)
beyond a pilot basis. In addition, we would be prepared to review with Government
prospects for addressing the opening of the telecommunications and information
technology sectors in view of their potential major impact on Tunisia's competitiveness.

76. The IEC intends to pursue institution building in the financial sector through, for
example, the possible creation of a discount house, consumer credit agency and insurance
company. IFC could also support consolidation in the banking sector as the Government
moves forward in its reform program. The development of the IFC portfolio will depend
on the pace of the privatization program and the Corporation's ability to find projects of
interest to which to lend in hard currency. 
In infrastructure, IFC is interested in
supporting the government with advisory work and by mobilizing resources, especially in
power and telecommunications sectors. Looking forward, the IFC and Bank aim to work
together to foster private sector development, especially in promoting private investment
in infrastructure and supporting SMEs. To that end, IFC staff participated in the
preparation of the PSA (FY99-00) and would provide additional downstream assistance
to implement the recommendations of the report. The rationalization and streamlining of
private sector incentives suggested in the PSA are expected to generate greater
opportunities for MIGA guarantees, where appropriate, as well as further IFC operations.

24

77. The Government's development program envisages that employment generation,
labor flexibility, and the quality of the labor force will pose major challenges in the
transition to a more open economy. In Tunisia's situation, these issues have important
bearing also on the country's poverty focus. Accordingly, we would increase our support
in this area, first through sector work and dialogue, and possibly lending thereafter, with
particular attention accorded to the costs of adjustment and gender equity in view of the
likely impact of adjustments on labor-intensive activities, such as textiles, where the
majority of workers are women. Our ongoing program already includes operations
supporting technical upgrading, vocational training and export development, especially
for small and medium firms.

78. Building on the above, we propose preparing a Policy Note on Employment that
would include analyses and reviews of the causes of unemployment, the income group,
gender and location of the unemployed, the duration of unemployment endured, current
labor legislation, and active labor market policies and prospects, including issues of
transition and the impact of liberalization. Interventions in this area could include
policies to: deal with redundancies, encourage firms to invest in on-the-job training,
promote entrepreneurs and deal with specific gender impacts. Based on such work, we
would develop specific IFCfBank interventions to support SMEs and exports and,
possibly, active labor market programs, as well as overall social security policy issues
which could be supported through future operations.

New Initiatives

79. Along this facet, we would undertake operations and activities of catalytic nature to
strengthen local institutions and mobilize external finance. The Export Development
Project, approved in FY99, is one such operation. It focuses on promoting public-private
partnership, providing financial and technical assistance to: improve access of Tunisian
firms to export outlets and buyers; provide more access to pre-shipment export finance,
especially for SMEs and emerging exporters; and facilitate trade by simplifying import
and export-related procedures. Another operation, being appraised for consideration in
FY01, is a Cultural Heritage Project which, with bilateral co-financing, would reinforce
preservation of Tunisia's cultural heritage assets, with links to employment generation for
women, developing tourist attractions, and diversifying the country's tourism products.

80. Other new initiatives would aim to identify issues, options and operations to
underpin Tunisia's quest to modernize its technological base and harmonize its
institutions with those of its global partners. In this connection, we envisage preparation
of a policy note on information technologies, allied with reforms in telecommunications,
to expand the impact of new technologies on the population. Clearly, areas to be
considered include:. (i) distance learning and education; (ii) technological parks and
impact of liberalization on SMIEs; and (iii) "government on line" initiatives. Options and
strategies also need to be considered for external trade in a competitive environment, and
to prepare the country's entrepreneurs and institutions as Tunisia undertakes phased
liberalization of the services sector, this being the next agreed stage of implementation of
the partnership accord with the EU. Another area pertains to strengthening public
administration in aspects bearing upon the business environment, as for example,

25

modernization of Customs and tax administration; training of judges in the context of
reforms of legal and regulatory frameworks; and business registration and reporting
procedures. We are continuing discussions in these new areas and, following our
dialogue and sector work, would be in a position to suggest suitable collaboration and
instruments of assistance in our country program.

IV. BANK GROUP COUNTRY PROGRAM

A. VEHICLES FOR BANK ASSISTANCE

Portfolio Management and Performance

81. Recognized by the Bank as historically one of its best portfolios, Tunisia has
maintained a very strong performance during the past three years. The current portfolio
comprises 20 projects for a total net commitment of US$1,360 million and an average
project age of 3.9 years. Infrastructure, agriculture, and financial and private sector
development each represent 24% of the portfolio, and human development projects 28%.

82. The strong ownership by the country, the excellent quality of the dialogue between
the Government and the Bank and the good administrative capacity of the Tunisian
institutions are the main factors underlying the highly satisfactory performance of the
portfolio. Slow disbursement and occasional project management issues arise, but close
follow-up in the country and by the Bank generally ensures that problems are addressed
promptly. This is reflected in a 100% proactivity ratio in the last three years. A 100%
realism index, together with the good quality at entry and supervision assessments given
by QAG exercises confirm the satisfactory performance of the portfolio. OED
performance reviews of completed projects have tended to demonstrate satisfactory
outcomes and high likelihood of sustainability.

Table 4: PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT INDICATORS

As at Actual Performances 

Indicator 

Indicator 

Disbursement Ratio (%) 

Disbursement Lag (/o) 

% Projects At Risk 
% Problem Projects 
Realism Index 
Proactivity Index 

As at 7/1/98 
Tunisia MENA 
14.2 
19.7 
36.8 
28.7 
0 
19.5 
0 
16.8 
100 
86.4 
100 
80 

| 

| 

15.5 

As at 7/1/99 
Tunisia MENA 
17.2 
29 
4.8 
4.8 
100 
100 

28 
16.2 
15.4 
94.7 

95 

18 
25 
5 

5 

100 
100 

Projected Targets for
Tunisia, FY2000-02

7/1/00 

7/1/01 

7/1/02

18 
20 
5 

5 

100 
100 

18
20
5

5

100
100

83. The maturity of the country-Bank dialogue has enabled the composition of the
portfolio to evolve. New lending has increasingly adopted a sector approach, 
thus
combining progress in the strategic reform and policy agenda with a certain flexibility in

the identification of the specific investments to be financed over the life of the loan. The

Transport Sector APL (FY98) is demonstrating the merits of this instrument, which we
intend to adopt in fiture sector interventions.

26

84. Despite the excellent portfolio status and prospects, the disbursement performance
of investment loans has been weak in recent years. The disbursement ratio improved
from 14% in FY98 to 17% in FY99, but was still below the 18% we had planned. The
annualized ratio for FY00, based on the performance in the first 6 months, is over 19%.
But performance is uneven, with 3 projects showing an annualized disbursement ratio of
12%, while other projects are substantially above that level. A CPPR carried out in
February 2000 determined that, overall, disbursement lags were related frequently to
optimistic assessments of the time required to execute the projects. The portfolio review
recommended that close attention be paid in the future to agreed disbursement projections
presented in PADs, especially during the initial years, and that we continue in particular
to monitor closely the new sector loans.

85. 
In terms of project preparation, the time taken from appraisal to Board and from
Board approval to effectiveness declined each year during the last CAS period, FY97-99.
Moreover, these improvements occurred in conjunction with an average lending cost
decline of about 20 percent.

Table 5: BANK TIME A-ND RESOURCE COSTS OF LENDING TO TUNISIA

Average Time Appraisal to Board (months) 
lAverage Time Board to Effectiveness (months) 
Direct Cost o Lending ($000 per project) 

FY96 FY97 FY98 FY99

17.0 
5.0 
437 

22.8 
8.4 
457 

8.5 
3.9 
283 

5.5
3.5
312

86. No major changes are anticipated in the portfolio management strategy in the
coming years. We will continue to use quality at entry as a main tool, by focusing on
realistic objectives fully owned by the Government. On the supervision side, we will try
to contain costs by promoting increased utilization of qualified local consultants, who are
readily available in Tunisia.

Proposed Program

87. The key priority placed by the Government on Bank assistance is for policy
dialogue on macro-economic and sector issues, and longer term development strategies;
and on our catalytic role in institution building. Resource transfer is considered less
important in view of the bilateral and capital market financing available to Tunisia. As a
result, non-lending services have increasingly become and will continue to be the
instruments of choice to support the implementation of structural reforms. Lending
services will support this "know-how transfer" effort, support continuing dialogue, and
focus on institution-building to reinforce the implementation capacity of new agencies.
Strong emphasis will be placed on:

* policy analysis and strategic sector work, which the Tunisians expect from the Bank;
* dissemination efforts (seminars, round-tables, work-shops). These types of services
were used effectively in the last CAS period. In view of the Tunisians' interest in

27

cross-country experiences in addressing complex problems, well-organized and open
forums and study tours can be extremely useful tools. The World Bank Institute
(WBI) would have a significant role in dissemination work and capacity building, in
addition to its regional networking role, such as through the Mediterranean
Development Forum;
* continued close co-operation between the Bank Group, the EU, and other bilateral
and multilateral donors. Since signature of the partnership agreement between the EU
and Tunisia, co-operation with the EU has increased significantly;
flexibility. Tunisia is a mature borrower with a strong institutional capacity. We
review each year our portfolio, lending and sector work programs, and adapt it
regularly to both changing circumstances and priorities. Thus the priorities identified
should be seen as broad directions, within which we will exercise flexibility as
policies for the le Plan solidify; and
increased dialogue to open up participation of the civil society in the development
process. An IDF grant to support local developmental NGOs is already under
consideration.

* 

* 

88. The base case program of operations and key analytical and advisory activities
(AAA) proposed for FY2000-02 are summarized below.

FY2000

FY2001

FY2002

Table 6: PROPOSED BASE CASE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

Lendin_/Grant Operations 

Analytical &Advisorv Activities

Education Quality Enhancemnexlt ($75 Mn) 
Water Sector Investment I ($100 Mn) 
Transport Sector Investment II ($33 Mn) 

Social & Structural Review (started FY99)
Private Sector Assessment (started FY99)
Update of Social Conditions (started FY99)
Agricultural Competitiveness Study (started FY99)
External Sustainability Study

Cultural Heritage ($30 Mn) 
Agricultural Support Services ($35 Mn) 
ECAL III ($150 Mn) 
GEF - Protection Gulf of Gabes 
GEF - Biodiversity Protection

Tenth Plan Pohcy Notes
Policy Note on Employment
Financial Sector Assessment Program (with IMF)
Policy Note on Information Technology

SME Support ($50 Mn) 
Urban Water Supply ($100 Mn) 
Municipal Development III ($50 Mn) 

Decentralization Study / Municipal Finances
Policy Note on Land Issues
Comprehensive Development Review
Social Protection Strategy Note

FY2003 

(Tentative)
Higher Education or Health Sector
Integrated Rural or Urban Development
ECAL IV

Lending Instruments

89. The lending program proposed for the FY2000-02 period maintains about the same
level of commitments as in previous years, averaging about US$208 million per year, and
would also sustain the change in the mix of instruments begun with the last CAS, with

28

fewer traditional projects and more sector investment loans and adaptable programs
Broad policy based adjustment operations will be less prevalent than in the past, but still
important to implement needed reforms, accounting for about 25% of the program.
Traditional projects would incorporate pilot-type and catalytic operations, and several
projects would also promote decentralization trends and community based actions. We
would, however, wish to emphasize flexibility, especially in the share of policy-based
operations, depending on the speed of reforms and on the possible impact of fluctuations
in the external environment.

90. The delivery of the proposed Bank Group assistance will continue to abide by our
fiduciary provisions. To support the trend towards sector lending, and in view of
Tunisia's strong capacity, we have turned increasingly towards country-wide reviews to
support our assessments. Thus far in Tunisia, no major issues have arisen on
implementation of Bank Group policies on procurement, financial management, the
environment, and social and resettlement procedures.

* Tunisian procurement legislation is generally in line with Bank guidelines and the
standards for handling procurement responsibilities are acceptable. In the few cases
where rules and procedures are not acceptable to the Bank, implementing agencies
have agreed to apply the procedures that we recommend.
* A Country Profile of Financial Accountability (CPFA) prepared in FY2000
confirmed that basically rigorous standards exist and suggested strengthening of the
Government auditors. The CPFA will determine the agenda on financial management
over the next three years. An IDF grant under implementation is already supporting a
priority program for modernizing the Government's auditors, the Inspection Generale
des Finances.
* We have analyzed the environment assessment procedures of the Govemment and
found them generally consistent with the relevant operations policy (OP 4.01) of the
Bank. We will continue to work with the Ministry of the Environment on improving
the content of the environment management plans to harmonize them fully with OP
4.01, thus facilitating Bank endorsement of the environment assessment reports on

specific projects.

* Most recently, in the course of preparing the PSA, we conducted an informal
assessment of legal and judicial issues; this will be followed up with the government
to provide any possible assistance that mighi- be requested.
* Social assessments and resettlement procedures are generally handled adequately,
though some policies need to be refined further to make them fully consistent with
Bank procedures; and
* Public expenditure reviews are also carried out regularly as part of our sector loans.
Social expenditures receive high priority and are generally adequate.

B. LENDING SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

91. 
Tunisia has always demonstrated great stability in its assistance requests for Bank
lending. For the CAS period FY2000-02, a base case program of around $200 million
per year is proposed, in line with past commitments. Together with the ongoing portfolio,

29

this would translate into gross disbursements averaging somewhat below $200 million
per year,. The authorities also emphasize continued policy-based support to maintain
dialogue and momentum in the reform program. The base case would include one such
operation (for $150 million) focusing on private sector development and/or the financial
sector.

92. A low case program could result from two factors: (i) if the pace of structural
reforms slows down, our proposed policy-based operation would be likewise delayed;
and (ii) if the country decides on alternative sources of funding, in view of the large
amounts available to it from concessional sources. A low case program, per se, is highly
unlikely, as Tunisia has demonstrated firm commitment in its reform program in the past,
as well as continued close attention to social balance in its development strategy. Still, in
the unlikely event of key policy reversals (e.g., backtracking on reforms supported by our
Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loans), our lending would be scaled back,
focusing on one or two investment-type operations targeted at the social sectors.

93. Two scenarios could result in a high case program:

* an acceleration of structural reforms. Should the Government decide to accelerate
reforms on a broad front the Bank may want to (i) increase the amount of the policy-
based operation scheduled in the base case; (ii) accelerate the next operation; and/or
(iii) increase the support needed to smooth out the cost of adjustments (e.g., safety
net, active labor programs). In such cases, our program could go up to $300 million
per year, still a reasonable lending level in view of the country's prudent external debt
management and our country commitment levels.

* a temporary tightening of external financial markets or a slow down in export
receipts due to regional uncertainty. Thus far, Tunisia has weathered external shocks
(the Gulf War, instability in neighboring countries, severe droughts, tightening of
financial markets following the East Asia crisis) reasonably well. Regional political
uncertainties, however, combined with Tunisia's rather strong dependence on
tourism receipts and workers' remittances to fill the trade deficit, mean that for the
foreseeable future it would be important for the Bank and other donors to increase
assistance levels in such events. The Bank would coordinate with the Fund to ensure
that an appropriate macroeconomic framework was in place. If significant policy
adjustments were required to restore macroeconomic balance and confidence, a Fund-
supported program would provide the framework for Bank policy lending.

94. A strong acceleration of reforms in key areas would warrant a higher lending level
on a temporary basis to help defray the transitional costs of rapid adjustment, as Tunisia's
external position remains vulnerable (see paragraph 44). Also, the Government and other
partners would expect the Bank to be at the forefront in contributing to the design and
financing of accelerated reforms. More specifically, events such as the following would
trigger a high case lending scenario:

* an acceleration of the implementation of the free trade provisions of the
agreement with the EU;

30

* 

* 

* a substantial increase in privatization measures (proceeds increasing from the
average 0.5% of GDP realized in 1995-98 to between 1% to 2% of GDP);
financial sector reforms beyond those under ECAL II, involving further
liberalization of the sector and privatization, decisive measures to develop the
market for corporate securities, and reforms of the insurance industry and pension
funds;
liberalization and privatization of selected transportation and telecommunication
services, and the opening up of the telecommunications sector to private
operators;
initiation of social security reform and/or civil service reform;
initiation of labor market reforms, and active labor market policies.

* 
* 

C. PARTNERS AND PARTICIPATION

Coordination with Other Donors

95. Tunisia has built up one of the strongest institutional capacity for donor
coordination within the MENA region. The programming of external finance as well as
technical assistance from a variety of donors and creditors is coordinated by a central
ministry, with close links to the country's medium-term financing plan and development
priorities. This facilitates considerably the consultations, exchange and coordination
among the external agencies themselves, and between these agencies and the
Government.

96. Besides the traditional coordination between the Bank Group and the JIMF, since
the negotiations on the EU partnership agreements, our program has been closely
coordinated with the EU, which has provided parallel financing along each of our two
competitiveness adjustment policy loans to-date. ECAL II (FY99) was also co-financed
by the AfDB. We have also developed joint approaches with other donors in almost all
sectors where we are involved. The CAS program matrix (Annex B9b) provides details
of how the major development partners' programs fit into various strategic areas. The
move towards program loans has served as a framework for other financing; for instance,
the EU recently made a sector policy-based loan in health and is considering such lending
in education and transport. Once institutional capacities are strong enough, the Bank
would withdraw from the sector, as is happening with roads and energy, focusing instead
on new areas (e.g., cultural heritage and export development) or on evolving longer term
development needs (rural, urban or human resources development, for instance).

97. The strong institutional capacity of the Government is well recognized by all
external agencies. The EU is spearheading its new sector strategy in Tunisia, and Japan
has made the country one of its few beneficiaries eligible for annual program reviews.
Our program is also closely coordinated with the EIB, the GTZ, KfW, Kuwait Fund, the
UN Agencies and key bilateral donors, among them France, Italy, Japan and Switzerland.
The experiences have been encouraging and have promoted stronger dialogue with the
Government, and the arrangement is being used as a prototype for other countries in
the region.

31

Participatory Process

98. Traditionally our principal interlocutor on the CAS in Tunisia has been the
Government. The government does have long-established mechanisms for coordinated
consultations within the country and with external agencies. Consultations with the
private sector, the NGO community and the academic community have progressively
increased over the last few years, through seminars and round table discussions. Against
this backdrop, the participatory process followed in developing the CAS included:

* discussions with representatives of the trade unions and employers;
* a workshop in Tunis involving selected local NGOs;
* 
focus group discussions concerning the impact and the priorities for reforms. This
exercise was conducted in Tunisia by the Region's social assessment unit in
conjunction with the preparation of the SSR;
* sector-by-sector discussions on medium-term strategies with Tunisian officials in line
agencies as well as central Ministries and agencies.
in-country dissemination activities associated with the SSR, the PSA and the Social
Conditions Update, all among the important building blocks of the proposed CAS;
* discussions with donor and creditor representatives; and
to round off, the customary discussion of the draft CAS document with Government
prior to its finalization and submission to the Board.

* 

* 

V. COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT

A. COUNTRY CREDITWORTHNESS

99. Tunisia's creditworthiness is strong, reflecting a 
long record of prudent
macroeconomic policies and sound debt management. The country enjoys investment
grade ratings by major rating agencies, including Moodys (Baaa3) and Standard and
Poors (BBB-).5 This has allowed Tunisia good access to capital markets. The country
is moderately indebted, with total debt estimated at US$10.8 billion at end-1999 or about
51 percent of GDP. Almost 80 percent of this debt is long term, public and publicly
guaranteed. The share of preferred creditor debt service in total debt service is somewhat
high (42 % in 1999) as past loans of such creditors are being amortized. In the aftermath
of the East Asia crisis, Tunisia refrained from borrowing, but conditions have softened
since then; in July 1999 Tunisia raised 225 million euros at a spread of 280 basis points
over equivalent German bonds.

5 Long-term foreign currency debt ratings. Moody's as of March 27, 2000; and Standard and Poors as of
March 24, 2000.

32

Bank Lending Flows and Exposure

100. The financial impact of the Bank base case lending program on net transfers and
exposure is summarized in Table 7. With Tunisia's improved access to capital markets
and the availability of new grant financing from the EU, resource transfers from the Bank
are becoming less important. Consequently bank exposure has declined steadily since
1995. It is estimated that Bank exposure (debt outstanding) in Tunisia at the end of the
year 2000 would be US$1.3 billion, or 1.1 percent of the total portfolio.

Table 7: WORLD BANK LENDING AND EXPOSURE (BASE CASE)
Actual 
Est. 
Projected

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004

Lending Flows 
Disbursements 
Repayments 
Net Disbursements 
Interest 
Net Transfers 
IBRD Debt Outstanding 
Exposure Ratios 
IBRDDS/PublicDS 
IBRD Debt Service/Exports 
Pref. Cred. DS/Public DS 

138 
203 
-65 
129 
-194 
1717 

23.7 
3.8 
46.2 

202 
187 
15 
115 
-101 
1610 

21.9 
3.3 
47.9 

Risks and Uncertainties

127 
173 

141 
176 

-46 -35 

(In US$ million)
209 
210 
176 
196 
33 
14 
92 
121 
-59 
-107 
1323 
1337 
(Percentages)
16.8 
15.7 
3.0 
3.0 
42.4 
37.5 

190 
205 
-15 
119 
-135 
1322 

19.3 
2.9 
45.2 

192 
185 
203 
199 
-11 
-14 
117 116 
-128 
-130 
1310 
1296 

19.0 
2.6 
44.0 

17.9 
2.4 
43.0 

204
1841
20
115
-95
1316

17.0
2.1
42.01

103 
-148 
1434 

20.9 
3.0 
48.6 

89 
-124 
1458 

20.4 
2.8 
49.4 

101. The risks associated with Tunisia's external environment and fiscal structure, and
the prospects for their mitigation, were described earlier (see paragraphs 44-48). The
Bank's program could be subject to social risk too arising from the regional situation and
that within the country. In the past, regional instability led Tunisian authorities to be very
cautious and gradual in implementing reforms. So far, Tunisia has maintained internal
stability through sound economic management, social progress, and strong security aimed
at containing extremism. The risks from the region appear lower now with improving
situations in neighboring countries.
102. Within the country, the competitive pressures resulting from globalization and
privatization have been accompanied by rising uncertainty about job tenure and changing
wage differentials across workers. Already a source of tensions, such developments
might intensify as Tunisia deepens its partnership with the European Union and becomes
more integrated in the world market. It should be noted, however, that greater integration
is also likely to enhance opportunities, especially for entrepreneurs and higher-skill
workers, which underscores the need to continue developing private enterprise and the
education and training sector emphasized in the proposed Bank program.

33

B. PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION

103. To monitor progress towards achieving the objectives outlined in the CAS, a two-
tier monitoring framework is proposed. The first tier consists of core performance
indicators (outcome indicators) given in Tables 8 below. These indicators, to be refined
with additional data availability, have been designed from available baseline values and
reasonable medium-term 
targets. They cover the following key areas: (i) poverty
reduction efforts; (ii) 
improvements 
in the financial sector, and in the business
environment for the private sector, especially SMEs; (iii) broad-based job growth, and
increased coverage of social protection schemes in a viable manner, (iv) human resource
development initiatives that increase basic education completion rates, and upgrade the
quality of health services; and (v) environmental management which promotes 
the
sustainable use of resources through appropriate pricing.

Area 

Table 8: CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Proposed Monitoring Indicator 

I____________________________________________ 

Values
Baseline Target
7.6 
6.5
48 
60
12.1 
15.4
0.5 
1.0
15.9 
15

45 

50

.

.

Poverty Reduction 
. % of population below national poverty line 
Financial sector and business * 
Share of private sector banks in total bank assets (%) 
environment for the private 
Private investment in % GDP 
sector 
Proceeds from privatization % GDP 1995-98 
Employment and social 
.
Unemployment rate % 
security 
* % of population covered by social insurance schemes 
(pension and health) 
.
Persistence rate c to grade 9, % 
42 
73
.
Infant mortality rate, per thousand live births 
30 
20
.
Access of rural population to safe water % 
80 
90
Environment and sustainable * Average water tariff in % of average cost 
87 
110
use of resources 
* Market share of unleaded gasoline % 
4 
20
to values between 1997 and 1999, except for proceeds from privatization, which is average for 1995 to 1998, and
poverty incidence, which refers to 1995.
Refer to year 2002, except for the persistence rate to grade 9, which refers to 2004.
Both baseline and target values are irrespective of the number of repetitions.

Basic education and health 
services 

aRefer 

I

104. The second tier of indicators comprises intermediate milestones related to the Bank
Group's dialogue and program with the government aimed at bringing about the
development outcomes. The intermediate milestones, also subject to refinements, cover
the same key areas as the core performance indicators, and would be useful for self-
evaluation; an initial set is presented in Table 9 below.

34

Table 9: CAS MONITORING INDICATORS - INTERMEDIATE MILESTONES

AREA 

PRELIMINARY MILESTONES

Poverty Reduction 

Financial sector and business environment 
for the private sector 

Employment and social security 

Basic education and health services 

Environment and sustainable use of 
resources 

.
Start updating poverty analysis based on new census
. Agree on community-based programs in NW region
. Completion of financial sector reforms under ECAL II
and agreement to deepen reforms in areas such as
insurance, capital markets, housing finance, SME credit.
* Streamlined investment incentives for offshore/onshore

enterprises

. Agree with Govermnent on recommendations through
planned Policy Note on Employment
. Agree on social protection strategy to increase targeting
and cost-effectiveness of social protection system
* At least satisfactory rating and sustainability of reforms
under planned Education Quality Enhancement Project
* Agreement with government and EU to initiate
implementation of health insurance reforms
. Begin implementation of demand management of water
resources under the first phase of planned Water Sector
Investment Loan

105. 
In conclusion, Tunisia's development program for the medium term anticipates
continued economic reforms, including close integration with the EU and other external
partners, to spur the growth of output and employment in a stable social setting and
viable 
financial framework. 
The program also places high priority on human
development and continued poverty reduction. These are sound objectives, attainable by
decisive actions to strengthen economic governance, boost private sector incentives, and
increase civil society and community-based participation in the development process. 
It
is proposed that the Bank Group support this process, exercising flexibility in lending
instruments, an increased emphasis on non-lending services, and close collaboration with
all partners to complement the country's development efforts.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Shengman Zhang

Attachments
Washington, D.C.
March 28, 2000

ANNEX A2
Page I of 2

Tunisia at a glance

M. East Lower-
& North middle-
Africa 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Tunisia 

Development diamond'

1998
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions; 
Average annual growth, 1992-98
Population (0) 
Labor force (%) 

9.4 
2,050 
19.2 

285 
2,050 
586 

908 
1,710
1,557

Life expectancy

1.6 
2.9 

2.2 
3.0 

1A1
1.5 

GNP 
per 

I 

Gross
primary
enroliment

, 

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1992-98 

capita 

'*. 

,- 

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line, 
Urban population (% of totalpopulation; 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population; 
Male 

7.6
64 
70 
30 
9 
90 
33 
117 
120 

58 
67 
49 
14 
81 
38 
96 
103 

58
68
38

.. 

Access to safe water

75
14
103 
105 

-Tunisia

Lower-middle-income group

Female 

113 

89 

100 

--- Lower-m

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1978 

1988 

1997 

1998

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$ billtons) 
Gross domestic investmentlGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savingslGDP 
Gross national savingslGDP 
Current account balancelGDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debtVGDP 
Total debt service/exports 

6.0 
30.8 
31.0 
230 

10.1 
20.7 
42.0 
21.1 
21.7 
1.0 
3.7 
67.5 
21.9 

18.9 

20.0

26.7 
43.9 
24.2 
23.4 
-3.3 
2.5 
59.9 
15.3 

27.5 
42.5
24.5
24.1
-3 
2.8 
52.6
17.4

Trade

.. 

-9.2 
1.8 
49.3 
12.4 

Domestic

Domes 

Investment

Present value of debtGDP 
Present value ot debtlexports 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

55.7
114.2

Indebtedness

1978-88 198-98 

1997 

1998 

1998-02

(average annual growth,
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

3.9 
1.1 
3.8 

4.6 
2.7 
4.8 

5.4 
4.4 
10.5 

5.0 
3.8 
39 

5.8 
4.1 
5.0

-

Tunisia
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

15.1 
26.4 
11.1 
58.5 
60.7 
16.3 
38.7 

11.8 
30.6 
16.8 
57.6 
62.3 
16.6 
41.7 

13.3 
28.5 
18.4 
58.1 
62.8 
13.0 
46.4 

12.4 
28.4 
18.21 
59.1 
62.5 
13.0 
45,5

20

20

2 
90 97 9

9o 

-20

-

GDI 

--

GDP

(averageannualgrowth, 

1978-88 1988-98 

1997 

1998 

Growth of exports and Imports (°h)

(average annual growth,
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 

2.7 
3.6 
5.6 
4.4 
4.4 
5.0 
-2.1 

4.4 
4.6 
3.4 
4.7 
4.6 
0.9 
5.5 

2.9 
5.6 
7.1 
6.0 
4.3 
5.0 
5.6 

-1.0 
4.9 
3.8
6.5 sD
5,0 
4.7 
5.5 

'5
15L

o 

93 

94 

95

-*

Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

1.3 
3.8 

4.1 
4.6 

8.9 
6.0 

4.2 
5.4

Exports 

-

-mports

*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

ANNEX A2
Page 2 of 2

Tunisia

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 
(% change) 
Consumer prices 

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998 

1 Inflation (%)

8
0
4- _

.717.2 

3.7 

3.1 

Implicit GDP deflator 

6.5 

7.7 

4.0 

3.6 

Government finance 
(% of GDP, inceltes cu.0ent grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

2

o 

3 .6 
29.0 
4.2 
-2.4

i

.. 
.. 
.. 

28.3 
4.9 
-4.7 

28.7 
3.4 
-3.9 

93 

94 

96 

96 

97 

98

G[P 

deflator 

-C 

CPI

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports 
Fuel 
Agriculture 
Manufactures 

1978 
1,126 
433 
57 
590 

1988 
2,396 
385 
181 
1785 

1997 
5,679 
556 
283 
3,759 

1998 
5,722 
367 
193 
3,804 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)
10oooo
.

8,0000.
6,000

Total imports 

2,162 

3,692 

8,106 

7,872 

000 L 

El F 

i 

B.

Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capitalagoods 

254 
226 
678 

554 
243 
618 

745 
644 
1,860 

655
375 
1,814 

2, 000

0

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98

Export price index (1995=t100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 

.. 

97 

92
95 
97 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

103 
94 

rc Exports 

r Imports
.

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Export of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

1978 
1,848 
2,423 

1988 
4,242 
4,206 

1997 
8,304 
8,771 

1998 
8,479 
9,077 

Current account balance to GDP (Y)

0 

.. 9.5 

~ 

9j1:1

-.

Resource balance 

-575 

36 

-467 

-598 

23 

L 

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-216 
240 

-498 
558 

-903 
754 

-858 
776 

-41

Current account balance 

-551 

96 

-615 

-680 

-7

Ftnancing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

651 
-100 

282 
-378 

951 
-336 

493
187 

-10

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$r millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaV/US$) 

.. 

.. 

1,989 
1.1 

1,854
1.1

0.4 

0.9 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998

(US$ milbions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 1998 debt (USS mill.)

2,941 
189 
67 

6,799 
1,019 
62 

11,321 
1,434 
45 

10,489
1,458 
43 

| 

|

l,11 

At458

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

260 
28 
2 

1,058 
199 
2 

1,413 
265 
3 

1,632 
265 
2

0 43
9

0.3 

1 

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 

F: 2,731 

D: 1,420

28 
170 
335 
91 

124 
209 
37 
110 

95 
104 
587 
355 

82
-136
194
697

Portfolio equity 

0 

0 

0 

0 

E: 3,590

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

67 
35 
13 
22 
16 
5 

241 
173 
112 
61 
89 
-28 

167 
127 
175 

222 
141 
178 
-37 
89
-126

A - 18FD 
8 - IDA 
C-IMF 

E- Bilateral

0 - Other multilateral 

F - Private
0 -Short-term

-48 

__1

103 
-151 

Development Economics 

3/22/00

CAS Annex B2 - Tunisia
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

1997 

18 

2.87 
5.56 
4.46 
5.56 
4.46 
23.66 

1998 

20 
3.06 
0 
0 
0 
0 
14.22 

1999 

2000

21 
3.55 
4.76 
4.66 
4.76 
4.66 
17.2 

20
3.98
5
3.6
5
3.6
18.0

Memorandum Item 
Proi Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
73 
8
2629.2 
419.28
16.4 
0
11.95 
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (iP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

ANNEX B3
Page 1 of 2

Tunisia - Bank Group Program Summary, FY2000-2002
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program, FY2000-20022

Fiscal year Project 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 

(HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (H/MIL)

2000 

2001 

2002 

Education Quality Enhancement 
Water Sector Investment I 
Transport Sector Investment 11 
Sub-total 

Cultural Heritage 
Agricultural Support Services 
ECAL III 

Sub-total 

SME Support 
Urban Water Supply 
Municipal Development III 
Sub-total 

Total, FY 2000-02 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

75.0 
100.0 
33.0 
208.0

30.0 
35.0 
150.0 
215.0

50.0 
100.0 
50.0 
200.0

623.0

H
M
M

M
H
M

M
M
M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. Indicates whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be
high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

ANNEX B3

Page 2 of 2

Tunisia - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-1999

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

Financial Services 
Mining & Minerals 
TEXTILESTextiles 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans
Equity 
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total 

1997 

1998 

1999

3.00 

10.76 

032

100

100

93 

7

100 

100 

100

100 

100 

100

100 

100 

100

IIGA guarantees (US$m) 

64.80 

64.80 

0.00

ANNEX B4

Tunisia - Summary of Non-lending Services

Product 

Recent Completions (direct cost)
Education Sector Strategy 
Trade Strategy 

Underway (direct cost)
Social and Structural Review 

Private Sector Assessment Update 

Update of Social Conditions 
Agricultural Competitiveness Study 
Country Assistance Strategy 

Planned (net of sustaining costs)
SSR Dissemination 
Extemal Sustainability Study 
Tenth Plan Policy Notes 

Policy Note on Employment 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Policy Note on Information Technology 
Decentralization Study/Municipal Finance 
Policy Note on Land Issues 
Comprehensive Development Review 
Social Protection Strategy Note 

Completion 
FY 

Cost 
(US$ Th)

Audience' 

Objectiveb

1999 
1999 

2000 

2000 

2000 
2000 
2000 

2000 
2000 
2001 

2001 
2001 
2001 
2002 
2002 
2002 
2002 

176 Gov't, donors, Bank Knowledge generation
148 Gov't, Bank 
Knowledge generation

236 Gov't, Bank, Public Knowledge generation
dissemination
185 Gov't, Bank, Public Knowledge generation,
dissemination 
problem solving
47 Gov't, Bank 
Knowledge generation
98 Gov't, Bank 
Problem solving
87 Gov't, donors, Bank Knowledge generation

52 Public dissemination Knowledge generation
170 Gov't, Bank 
Problem solving
250 Gov't, Bank 
Knowledge generation,
problem solving
Problem solving
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation

150 Gov't, Bank 
150 Gov't, Bank 
150 Gov't, Bank 
150 Gov't, Bank 
160 Gov't, Bank 
320 Gov't, Bank 
160 Gov't, Bank 

a Government, donors, Bank, or public dissemination.
b Knowledge generation, public debate, or problem-solving.

ANNEX B5

Tunisia - Poverty and Social Development Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Middle East & Lower-middle-
North Africa 
income

1970-75 

1980-85 

1992-97 

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

5.6 
2.1 
49.8 
6.2 

7.3 
3.1 
53.8 
4.9 

9.2 
1.5 
63.3 
2.8 

279.6 
1.8 
58.4 
3.6 

2,282.9
0.9
42.4
2.2

POVERTY

(% of populaton)

National headcount index 

.. 
.. 
.. 

11.2 

7.6

Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 
INCOME
Consumerprice index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

4.6 
19.1 

3.6
13.9

.. 
.. 

53 
54 

108 
108

110 

116

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 

.. 

0.43

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

6.0 
42.0 

..
..

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 

.. 

., 

3.0 

.. 

2.6

Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

5.2 
4.4 

5.8 
3.7 

6.7 
5.4

5.2 

5.1

Total 
Male 

.. 

93 

98 

87 

99

99 

99 

91

Female 
Access to safe water

.. 

87 

96 

83

(% of population)

Total 

49 

89 

90 

.. 

78

Urban 
Rural 

92 
1 7 

98 
79 

100
76

Immunization rate

(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

.. 
.. 

65 
70 

92 
96 

88 
90 

93
93

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 

20 

.. 

9 

14 

17

56 
55 
56 

63 
63 
64 

70 
68 
71 

67 
66 
68 

69
67
71

110 
201 

59 
75 

30 
33 

49 
63 

36
44

Adult (15-59)

Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

276 
249 

227 
224 
1,000 

171 
153 
170

190 
164 

200
142

.. 

1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

ANNEX B6
Page 1 of 2

Tunisia - Key Economic Indicators: Base Case 

Actual 
1996 

Estimate 
1999 

Projected
2001 

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1997 

1998 

2000 

2002

National accounts (% of GDP)

Gross domestic product 

100 

100 

too 

100 

100 o 

to 

too 

too 

100

Netindirecttaxes 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

13 
13 
29 
45 

13 
11 
29 
46 

11 
14 
28 
47 

13 
13 
29 
45 

13 
12 
28 
46 

12 
13 
28 
47 

12 
13 
28 
47 

12 
13 
28 
47 

12
14
28
46

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Govermment investment 
Private investment 
(includes some public enterprises)
Change in stocks 

79 
27 
4 
23 

79 
24 
4 
20 

77 
23 
5 
18 

76 
25 
5 
20 

75 
25 
6 
21 

74 
26 
7 
22 

75 
26 
7 
22 

75 
27 
7 
22 

75
27
7
22

-3 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3

Exports of goods & services 
Imports of goods & services 

45 
48 

45 
49 

42 
44 

44 
46 

43 
45 

42 
45 

42 
45 

41 
45 

42
45

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

21 
20 

21 
20 

23 
22 

24 
23 

25 
24 

26 
26 

25 
25 

25 
25 

25
25

Memorandum items

GDP (US$ miilion at current prices) 
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
Real annual growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

15,626 
1740 

18,029 
1820 

19,587 
2000 

18,900 
2080 

19,951 
2050 

21,146 
-

22,688 
-

24,581 

26,657

3.3 
3.9 

2.2 
2.1 

7.1 
8.2 

5.4 
3.8 

5.0 
4.3 

6.2 
6.2 

5.6 
5.4 

5.7 
5.8 

5.8
5.8

1.6 
1.7 
1.5 

0.8 
1.4 
1.0 

5.6 
2.5 
1.4 

3.8 
2.9 
2.7 

3.3 
3.3 
3.4 

4.5 
4.1 
4.7 

4.1 
4.6 
5.6 

4.2 
4.3 
4.3 

4.3
4.0
3.5

Balance of Payments (millions of US$)

Exports of goods & services 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports of goods & services 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 

6,901 
4,643 
7,571 
6,210 
-670 
735 

7,979 
5,469 
8,811 
7,458 
-832 
772 

8,249 
5,637 
8,553 
7,915 
-304 
822 

8,304 
5,679 
8,771 
8,106 
-467 
754 

8,479 
5,722 
9,077 
7,872 
-598 
776 

8,870 
5,959 
9,484 
8,255 
-614 
933 

9,467 
6,360 
10,254 
8,935 
-787 
856 

10,191 
6,843 
11,123 
9,725 
-932 
886 

11,067
7,451
12,060
10,577
-993
908

Current account balance 
(including official transfers)
Net foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & omnmissions) 
Change in reservesb 
(- denotes increase)

-551 

-731 

-467 

-520 

-598 

-533 

-735 

-861 

-924

442 
578 
253 
325 
95 
-564 

283 
539 
74 
466 
60 
-151 

261 
524 
94 
431 
79 
-397 

355 
540 
104 
436 
-39 
-336 

697 
-174 
-135 
-39 
-112 
187 

411 
396 
226 
170 
11 
-284 

532 
668 
521 
147 
0 
-465 

480 
587 
357 
229 
0 
-206 

515
616
208
408
0
-207

Tunisia - Key Economic Indicators: Base Case 
(Continued)

ANNEX B6
Page 2 of 2

Indicator 

1994 

Actual 
1995 
1996 

Estimate 
1998 

1997 

1999 

Projected
2000 
2001 

2002

-4.3 

-4.6 

-1.6 

-2.5 

-3.0 

-2.9 

-3.5 

-3.8 

-3.7

2.5 
-13.1 
-19.3 
-1.0 

10.2 
-0.6 
18.3 
6.3 

-5.2 
-5.1 
-4.5 
-10.8 

31.7 
26.6 
5.0 
7.1 
1.4 

30.2 
27.2 
3.0 
7.2 
2.9 

30.5 
28.1 
2.4 
7.4 
2.8 

-3.1 
-3.3 
-5.4 
0.5 

28.7 
25.3 
3.4 
7.3 
2.4 

2.0 
-3.1 
2.5 
14.8 

29.0 
24.8 
4.2 
6.9 
0.4 

4.8 
6.1 
4.5 
6.2 

27.7 
24.1 
3.6 
7.3 
2.5 

4.5 
6.4 
4.4 
5.8 

27.7 
23.6 
4.1 
7.3 
3.9 

5.1 
5.8 
4.3 
5.8 

27.7 
23.4 
4.3 
7.3 
3.7 

6.3
5.2
6.2
5.9

27.7
23.5
4.2
7.2
3.6

43.5
9.6
90.5

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 

Real annual growth rates (%)
Merchandise exports 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports 

Public finance (% of GDP)'

Current revenues (incl. grants) 
Current expenditures 
Current surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators

M2/GDP 
Growth of M2(%) 
Private sector credit growth/total credit growth(%) 

43.1 
7.8 
131.0 

42.3 
6.0 
113.1 

43.0 
13.6 
27.4 

45.7 
16.5 
83.3 

44.3 
5.3 
125.9 

43.5 
7.8 
143.7 

43.5 
9.4 
90.5 

43.5 
9.5 
90.5 

Price Indices (1987 = 100)

Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import priceindex 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)d 

120.4 
102.2 
117.8 
97.9 

128.7 
115.4 
111.5 
100.0 

137.0 
126.4 
108.4 
100.7 

145.4 
129.8 
112.0 
100.6 

143.7 
118.5 
121.2 
100.5 

142.9 
117.0 
122.1 
100.5 

145.9 
119.7 
121.8 
100.5 

149.4 
123.2 
121.3 
100.5 

153.0
126.5
121.0
100.5

Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

4.7 
4.4 

6.3 
5.5 

3.8 
4.4 

3.7 
4.0 

3.1 
3.6 

3.0 
3.4 

3.8 
3.6 

3.8 
3.6 

3.7
3.6

a. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
b. Includes use of IMF resources.
c. Refers to Consolidated Central Govemment accounts
d. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

ANNEX B7

Tunisia - Key Exposure Indicators: Base Case

Actual 
1996 

Estimate 
1999 

Projection
2001 

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1997 

1998 

2000 

2002

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

9,609 

10,914 

11,464 

11,321 

10,489 

10,834 

11,490 

12,105 

12,752

Net disbursements (US$m)Y 

448 

753 

692 

603 

(224) 

344 

625 

559 

610

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 
(US$m)Y

1,457 

1,480 

1,466 

1,413 

1,632 

1,717 

2,054 

1,714 

1,714

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

125.5 
61.5 
19.0 
31.8 

123.3 
60.5 
16.7 
28.6 

124.4 
58.5 
15.9 
25.4 

122.8 
59.9 
15.3 
23.1 

112.0 
52.6 
17.4 
24.0 

110.2 
51.2 
17.5 
24.1 

109.4 
50.6 
19.6 
23.8 

107.1 
49.2 
15.2 
22.4 

104.0
47.8
14.0
20.2

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%) 

21.8 
39.3 

23.7 
46.2 

21.9 
47.9 

20.9 
48.6 

20.4 
49.4 

16.8 
42.4 

15.7 
37.5 

19.3 
45.2 

19.0
44.0

IBRD DSIXGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)' 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)' 

3.9 
1715 

3.8 
1717 

3.3 
1610 

3.0 
1434 

2.8 
1458 

3.0 
1323 

3.0 
1337 

2.9 
1322 

2.6
1310

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

52 

50 

47 

45 

43 

41 

39 

37 

35

IFC (US$m) (FY)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equityd 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
3 

0 
11 

0
0 

..

MIGA (FY)
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

65 

65 

65 

65 

0 

.. 

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

ANNEX B8

Page 1 of 2

Status of Bank Group Operations in Tunisia
Operations Portfolio

Closed Projects 

89 

Board

Date 

Fiscal 
Year Active Projects 

1992 
1993 
1994 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1995 
1995 
1995 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1997 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1999 

P005726 
P005725 
P005733 
P005721 
P005748 
P005749 
P005743 
P005720 
P005680 
P005745 
P040208 
P046832 
P005736 
P005731 
P005741 
P050418 
P005746 
P043700 
P053255 
P055814 

HIGHER EDUCATION 
SECOND FORESTRY DEVELO 
DEV.OF MTS NW REGION 
TN-AGRICULTURAL SEC INV 
TN-PRIVATE INVESTMENT CR 
RIJRAL ROADS 
SECONDARY EDUCATION 
TN-RURAL FINANCE 
TN-WATER SUPPLY AND SEW 
2ND EMPL. & TRG. 
TN-INDUSTRY SUPPORT INST 
MUNICIPAL DEV. II 
NATURAL RESOURCE MGM 
TN-GREATER TUNIS SEWERA 
HIGHER EDUC. II 
TN-ASIL2 
TN-HEALTH SECTOR LOAN 
TRANSPORT SECTOR INV 
TN-ECAL II 
TN-EXPORT DEVELOPMENT 

Last PSR 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating b/ 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Disbursements_ 

_

DvlpetIpeetto
Oevesope 
Objectives 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 

Implemenstion 
Progress
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
HS 
S 

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

69.72 
62.36 
25.81 
116.17 
118.8 
48.06 
91.04 
65 
55.83 
52.39 
29.89 
66.87 
22.42 
50.81 
71.15 
36.37 
44.48 
44.47 
135.29 
35 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
3.4 
1.48 
0 
0.23 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

28.24 
34.71 
4.8 
8.5 
4.56 
7.26 
31.7 
31.13 
18.73 
42.78. 
27.42 
31.53 
20.98 
48.82 
69.59 
23.89 
43.06 
33.52 
67.64 
34.65 

32.4 
25.6 
3.93 
9.57 
5.41 
-3.99 
33.27 
31.13 
10.6 
19.71 
15.96 
11.26 
5.54 
11 
6.26 
15.05 
17.41 
23.84 
8.16 
3.65 

11.4
-0.9
1.99
-3.23
3.18

n

0
5.3
0
5.98
C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
b. HS = highly satisfactory, S = satisfactory, U = unsatisfactory, HU = highly unsatisfactory.

Note Disbursement data are updated at the end of the first week of the month.

ANNEX B8

Page 2 of 2

Tunisia
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of 12131199

(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1998/00 
BIAT 
1993 Ideal Sanitaire 
1995 Maghreb IM Bank 
1986/92/98 SITEX 
1973/75 
Sousse-Nord 
1998 Tuninvest 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
0.32 
0 
0 
0 
0.29 
0 
0
0 
1.02 
0 
0 
0 
1.02 
0 
0
0 
0.33 
0 
0 
0 
0.33 
0 
0
0 
0.77 
0 
0 
0 
0.77 
0 
0
0 
0.59 
0 
0 
0 
0.59 
0 
0
0 
4.65 
0 
0 
0 
2.36 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

0 

7.68 

0 

0 

0 

5.36 

0 

0

Tunisia - CAS Program Matrix'
Diagnosis

ANNEX B9a
Page 1 of 19

Developmentl

Areas 

Poverty and Social 
Development 

22.5 

Poverty incidence (% 1995) 
Poverty gap (national poverty 
line) 1995 
Child malnutrition: height for 
age (% under 5 yrs 1995) 
Child mortality gap (yrs, male- 
female 1998) 
% share of income: lowest 10%, 
1990 
% share of income: highest 10%, 
1990 
Children 10-14 in labor force (% 
of age group 1997) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

30.7 

0.0 

0.0 

2.3 

Indicators2
Country Performance 
World Bank Group (WBG)
_ Tunisia I Benchmark4
Policies 
Institutions 
Performance'
Overview. Tunisia has had an impressive record of poverty reduction over the years, owing to the government's and the
public's long-standing commitments to social development. Tunisia is also far ahead of most MENA countries in
promoting women as equal partners in the development process. Progress towards poverty reduction was halted in the first
half of the 1 990s, mainly due to droughts. With the incidence of poverty now around 7%, further progress will depend on
better targeting of anti-poverty interventions and on developing effective social protection to avert any slide-backs.
.6 
mproving access to 
The institutional base 
In the last CAS period, as before then, an
1.61 
.. basic services and social 
and capacity for 
important element of the Bank Group
conditions has been a 
designing and 
cooperation strategy in Tunisia has been
.. priority for public policy 
implementing social 
to promote human capital development to
in Tunisia. Between 
policies are well- 
move Tunisia towards middle income
-2.0 1960 and 1990, the 
developed, including the 
country standards of education attainment
incidence of poverty fell Banque Tunisienne de 
rates, qualified manpower, and financially
from 40% to about 7% 
Solidarit6. Indeed, the 
sound health and social security systems.
of the population. At the 
remarkable progress to 
Nearly a quarter of lending to-date has
same time, the growth 
date would not have 
been devoted to social and human
resource development sectors.
rate of population fell 
been possible otherwise. 
5.3 and life expectancy rose An important area for
markedly; regional 
improvement is the 
disparities were reduced; statistical information 
and improvements were 
available at household 
made in education, 
level to undertake in- 
access to health care and depth assessments of 
basic infrastructure. 
poverty, inequality and 
employment trends. The 
limiting factor here is not
lack of well-managed 
surveys that collect 
relevant and comparable 
information, but rather 
the lack of timely 
exploitation of the data 
by government agencies 
and poor dissemination 
within the community of 
concermed experts both 
ifin Tuniisia and abroad.

Overall, the Bank Group has continuously
backed Tunisia's programs in poverty
reduction over the years. The country's
programs have enabled Tunisia to
distinguish itself among developing
countries and emerging market economies
for its success in sustaining social
achievements even in the process of
implementing severe stabilization and
adjustment measures.

A series of analytical and advisory
activities, including sector reports,
poverty and social assessment, and in-
country seminars and workshops, have
been undertaken to underpin the design
and quality of lending in the social
sectors.

Future efforts call for re- 
focusing anti-poverty 
programs, increasing 
labor market flexibility, 
addressing the social 
dimensions of increased 
competition and 
strengthening social 
protection, 

ANNEX B9a
Page 2 of 19

Areas 

Macro economy 

Development 

l

Per capita GNP ($Atlas method, -
1998) 
Real Per Capita GNP Growth 
(annual %, 1993-98) 

Inflation, GDP deflator (% 1998) 

3.6 

Fiscal Balance/GDP (% 1996) 
Gov't Debt/GDP (% 1996) 
Curr. Acc't Bal./GDP (% 1998) 
PV of External Debt (% of 
Exports 1997) 
Aid (% of GDP 1997) 

-3.1 
55.3 
-3.4 
114.2 

1.0 

Indicators2
Country Performance 
World Bank Group (WBG)
lTunisia Benchmark4
Policies 
Institutions 
Performance3
Overview. Tunisia has pursued prudent macroeconomic policies for over a decade, and is a regional success story
recording sound financial balances, declining debt and inflation, and sustained growth of average per capita income. The
tasks ahead include the need to preserve the stability of Tunisia's external accounts and reestablishing a comfortable level
of reserves; continued fiscal consolidation; and consolidating the disinflation gains achieved over the last CAS period. The
Bank Group, cooperating with other creditors--notably the IMF, the EU and the AfDB--continues to support
macroeconomic policy reforms with adjustment operations and analytical and advisory activities.
05 
200 
The ongoing 5-yr 
Planning instituitions are The WBG has stressed and supported
Development Plan 
well-organized to collect macroeconomic reforms through
(1997-2001) stresses 
information and to 
structural and sector adjustment loans.
liberal policies and 
design and project 
The operations completed to date have
export-led growth, with 
policies. Performance 
been assessed as satisfactory, and the
an average growth rate monitoring and program 
reforms implemented under various
of 6% per year, based on adjustments, however, 
operations are considered likely to be
an increase in total factor are weak, especially at 
sustained.
productivity. 
sector levels.

-0.8 

3.2 

Under coordination of the Ministry of
3.5 Traditionally cautious 
Central monetary 
International Cooperation, the WBG has
monetary stance has cut management institutions conducted macroeconomic policy
inflation and kept it in 
are strong and well- 
dialogue continuously with the Ministry
check. 
coordinated. 
of Economic Development, the Ministry
of Finance and the Central Bank. These
dialogues occur in close consultations
with the IMF and other external partners
and have been underpinned by formal and
informal economic studies. Where the
authorities identified any needs to
strengthen local policy planning and
analysis capabilities, the WBG has
provided support with IDF funds as well
as in-country and regional training
organized by the World Bank Institute.

-4.8 Financial policies are 
Budget preparation and 
67.5 geared towards 
execution bodies are 
.. maintaining internal and well-managed. 
135.4 external stability, in a 
Traditionally micro- 
context of declining 
managed and ex-ante 
1.1 public and external debt 
controls are gradually 
ratios. Wage bill and 
being replaced with 
interest take up half of 
successful efforts of the 
government revenues. 
Cour des Comptes to 
modernize ex-post audit 
and control along
international standards.

Areas 

Education and 
Knowlcdge 

Development
Indicators2
Country Performance 
World Bank Group (WBG)
Tunisia Benchmark4
Policies 
Institutions 
Performance'
Overview. Education has been one the most important areas of progress in Tunisia over the past few decades.
Achievements in education have not only helped reduce poverty, but also created an increasingly educated and productive
workforce. Recently, Tunisia has begun facing the more complex challenges of efficiency and quality to provide the skills
required to accommodate rapid modernization and external opening of the economy and changes in local life styles. The
country has also to address the issue of high drop-out rates, especially in basic education.

ANNEX B9a
Page 3 of 19

Gross primary enrollment rate, 
female (% 1996) 
Gross primary enrollment rate, 
male (% 1996) 
Gross secondary enrollment rate 
(% 1996) 
Youth illiteracy rate, female (% 
1997) 
Public expenditure on education 
(% of GNP 1996) 
Scientists and engineers (per 
million people 1992) 
R&D expenditure (% of GDP 
1995) 

112.6 

120.1 

64.6 

15.2 

6.7 

388.0 

0.3 

27.4 

In the 1990s, schooling 
5.4 has become mandatory 
up to age 16 (or 9 years 
.. of schooling) 

88.9 Primary education has 
To a large extent, the 
The Banik Group has supported the
almost universal 
success of the Tunisian 
priority given by Tunisia to education and
102.6 coverage now, and there 
education system has 
knowledge development over a period of
is very little difference in been made possible by: more than 30 years. Tunisia received the
60.4 enrollment rates between government's clear long- 
first ever World Bank loan for education
boys and girls. 
range vision of its 
in September 1962, and the most recent
objectives and a well- 
loan, Higher Education II, was approved
articulated, 
in March 1998. The evolution of Bank-
comprehensive strategy; 
financed projects, girded by analytical
ownership of new 
studies, reflects the changes in education
concepts throughout the 
strategy of the Bank as well as the
system, through 
development of Tunisian policies in
.. Greatest challenge in 
extensive consultations; 
education and training.
basic education now is 
development of a strong
ensuring all children 
national capacity for 
Around the mid-1980s, despite almost
who enter each cycle 
sector planning, policy 
universal access to primary education, the
complete their schooling analysis and 
education system still suffered from high
satisfactorily, with an 
implementation; and 
dropout and repeater rates and low inter-
adequate minimum level Government willingness cycle transition rates. Placement rates for
of quality and an 
to evaluate policies and 
vocational training graduates were low,
emphasis on excellence 
programs, modify them 
reflecting poor labor market linkages.
for all instead of for the 
as appropriate, and take And academic secondary and higher
few. 
difficult policy decisions education were geared to meeting the
as necessary. 
staffing needs of the public sector, and
budget constraints on higher education
had seriously eroded its quality. In this
situation, the Bank supported
Government's comprehensive reform of
its education, training and employment
promotion policies with a series of four
projects from 1989 to 1994. These
projects were characterized by their sub-
sector coverage and their innovative
approaches.

Higher education in the 
country is a well- 
performing system but, 
with enrollments 
expected to double over 
the next decade, this 
system would be 
strained. To meet fiture 
challenges, the system 
needs: less rigid 

ANNEX B9a
Page 4 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
-Tunisia 1 Benchmark4

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
channeling/assignment
of students; greater
decentralization of
decision-making for
universities; and viable
measures for financing
its expansion, including
increased private
participation..

A program of
partnership between
vocational training
centers and private
industries has recently
been implemented.

Rural Strategy 

Rural population below national 
poverty line (% 1995) 
Rural population density 
(people/sq km arable, 1996) 
Rural population (% of total) 
Electrification rate in rural areas 
(% in 1994) 
Access to potable water in rural 
areas (% in 1998) 

Overview. Rural population has declined over the past 20-25 years, from 55% of total to 35%. A similar trend has
occurred in the working population, with the employed labor force in agriculture declining from 42% of total to 22%. The
contribution of agriculture to GDP, meanwhile, has dropped less rapidly, from 17% to 13%, as past rural strategy
channeled substantial resources to sustaining the role of agriculture, especially to attain food security and to contain the
external trade deficit. The sector now faces major constraints by way of available water and land resources, looming
competition as Tunisia opens up its economy and the attendant social strains during transition. The incidence of poverty in
rural areas is nearly 14%, compared to 4% in urban areas.
13.9 
.. Tunisia has undertaken 
The public sector 
reforms in agriculture 
institutional machinery 
195.8 since 1989. Input 
for the rural sector was 
subsidies have been 
built up over the years to 
... substantially reduced for undertake a vast array of 
fertilizers, animal feed, 
functions. The reforms
seed, chemicals, 
under way this decade 
The Bank has supported agricultural
irrigation, and 
have sought to increase 
reforms also with non-lending sector
mechanized services. 
the involvement of the 
work and the policy dialogue therefrom.
Provision of agricultural private sector (see 
While inuch progress has been achieved
in subsidy and input marketing reforms,
support services have 
preceding column). 
been opened up, with the While extension, 
the dialogue remains active on reforms in
supply of farm inputs, 
veterinary and laboratory food marketing, issues of comparative
collection of produce, 
services are still 
advantage and international
provision of mechanized essentially provided by 
competitiveness, and land titling and
plowing and harvesting, 
the state, services by 
tenure.

About 22% of bank lending to-date has
been devoted to agriculture and rural
areas, and there are at present seven
active operations in the sector, including
in forestry and rural roads.

35 
63.7 

.. 

.. 

46.6 

80 

ANNEX B9a
Page 5 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark' 

3 

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
and fishery port services private extension agents
now all privatized. 
and veterinarians have
Progress has been slower been growing. Most
in liberalizing food 
recently, the importance
marketing, wherein the 
of integrating
state remains involved in management of ground
cereals, olive oil, sugar, 
and surface water
tea, coffee, tobacco and 
resources has been
wine. The lack of 
recognized and is
security of tenure, 
expected to form a key
fragmentation of 
element of a long-term
holdings, and land titling sector strategy.
and registration
problems are long-
standing constraints now
being addressed

cautiously.

Urban Strategy 

Urban population (% of total 
1998) 
Urban population below national 
poverty line (% 1995) 

3.6 

.. 

Overview. Tunisia is among the most urbanized countries in the Middle East and North Africa region. Tunisia's
capabilities in detailed urban planning (amenagement du territoire) has proved an effective instrument for mastering fast
urban growth and avoiding the growth of slums. Urban housing recorded impressive advances in the past, ti1l990. Since
then, the housing situation has become increasingly difficult, with the type of housing produced by the private sector
increasingly unaffordable and/or unattractive to many households. To improve the situation, the strategic areas of housing
finance and urban land market would need to be resolved. Tunisia will also have to face the challenge of growing peri-
urbanization accompanied with increasing peri-urban poverty due to inflows of population from rural areas.
4. 
58.4 Urban policies in Tunisia Tunisia at independence The Bank's long-standing involvement in
are reflected by the 
inherited a highly 
the urban sector has included seven
responsibilities vested in 
centralized and powerful operations committed to-date, and
municipalities, namely: 
national administration 
additional ones under preparation. The
a) local implementation 
and very weak local and 
activities and investments supported thus
of national development 
regional government 
far have included urban planning and
plans and definition of 
units. The municipal 
transport, municipal services, public
five-year municipal 
structure is more than a 
sector institution building and a line of
investment programs, 
century old; its rules and 
credit to the Housing Bank.
and b) managemenit of 
regulations were updated
municipal affairs, 
in 1975, again in 1985 
involving mainitenianice and, more recently, in 
of local roads and public 1991 and 1996. 
ameniities, hotuselhold 
waste collection, road 
system alignment, 

In the context of past projects, numerous
studies have been carried out to refine
urban strategy and implementation; e.g.
improvement of urban planning laws,
rental housing policy, management of
Public sector institutions urban development, town policy strategy,

ANNEX B9a
Page 6 of 19

Areas 

Labor Market 

Male unemployment rate 
(% 1997) 
Female unemployment rate 
(% 1997) 
Female participation rate 
(% of labor force 1998) 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark4

Performance3

World Bank Group (WBG)

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
zoning, sanitation plans, have been built up over 
standardized city legend, housing costs
and management of the 
the past 20 years to 
and prices, housing strategy, plan for
civil registry. In view of 
include a National Real 
development of Greater Tunis, analysis of
the important gap 
Estate Corporation, for 
watersheds, local tax reform, urban
between the role 
home construction, the 
services provision and cost recovery, and
assigned to the 
Urban Rehabilitation and municipal procedures and projects
municipalities and their Renewal Agency to 
manuals.
delivery abilities, the 
renovate urban areas, the
Government, through its Land Development
Municipal Investment 
Agency for site
Program, has focused on development and the
increasing the efficiency Housing Bank. The
of municipalities and 
performance of these
regional councils in 
bodies has been mixed
decision-making, 
and there is a clear need
resource mobilization 
to design incentives and
and allocation, and 
measures for the private
project implementation. 
sector to undertake more
of their functions.
Overview. The institutionalization of labor relations in Tunisia has resulted in few labor disputes, but at the cost of limiting
the ability of private and public firms to restructure. As the economy moves closer to international integration, government
will need to reshape its role in the labor market as a regulator, while at the same time consolidating Tunisia's positive
record in labor relations and workers' conditions.
Formal institutions are 
Bank involvement in the labor market has
A major challenge to 
policy-makers is the fact 
fairly well developed in 
included financing of training and
that unemployment 
Tunisia for all aspects of 
employment projects, dialogue on labor
remains high, especially 
relationships between 
market policies in the context of
for first-job seekers, 
workers and employers. 
adjustment operations and tracking labor
despite a decade of 
Labor market 
market trends in the context of assessing
robust growth and job 
negotiations are governed social conditions.
creation and fairly stable by an extensive set of
participation rates. 
rules contained in the 
It has been suggested that further
Labor Code and in 
involvement in this area needs to focus on
Recent dynamics of the 
various Conventions 
closer monitoring of labor market
labor market reveal also Collectives, which are 
developments, including duration, skill
that: a) job creation has 
negotiated by tripartite 
composition and location of
been faster in urban 
committees, every three 
unemployment; appropriate labor market
areas, b) employment 
years, with the aim of 
interventions, including policies to deal
opportunities have been 
promoting social stability with redundancies in public and private
shifting toward higher 
and avoiding industrial. 
sectors, encourage firms to invest in on-

17.4 

31.2 

15. -. 

.. 

26.9 

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
lTunisia Benchmark' 

ANNEX B9a
Page 7 of 19

Country Performance 
World Bank Group (WBG)
Policies 
Performance3
Institutions 
skills, c) value added per conflicts. They determine the-job training for workers, and promote
worker is rising, and d) 
among other things the 
entrepreneurship; and education reform,
non-salaried jobs are 
level of the wages and 
to improve the responsiveness of the
increasing for men. 
salaries, and their growth 
education system to emerging labor
for the next three years. 
market demands. In-service training for
Prospects for a reduction This policy has succeeded small and medium enterprises, moreover,
of unemployment are 
in recent years in making needs to focus on the demand-side of the
hard because of rapid 
labor disputes very rare, 
training needs of such enterprises.
growth of working age 
and has been an asset in
population and likely 
attracting investments.
increases in female 
However, the
participation rates in the 
institutionalization of
near future. Concerted 
labor relations and the
action is needed to free 
high premium placed on
up and stimulate the 
social stability have
private SME sector, 
hampered flexibility in
which has high potential 
the labor market.
for job growth. 
A new employment fund,
2121, is to be formally
Revision of current 
created in the new budget
regulation of the labor 
law to address labor
market (recruitment and market issues, economic
firing, severance 
liberalization and speed
payment,) is needed to 
up of job creation
increase flexibility.

Areas 

Health and Population 

Development
Indicators2
Country Performance 
World Bank Group (WBG)
Tunisia Benchmark4
Policies 
Institutions 
Performance'
Basic health services are available to almost all the population. The govemtment's financial responsibilities in the provision
of health care services have been reduced through new financial burden sharing arrangements over the past years. In
addition, a health insurance reform, under preparation, will permit private practitioners to be reimbursed. However,
Tunisia's health care, particularly the public sector, faces the challenges of providing more and better quality basic health
care services more equitably. This means improving the equity and efficiency of operations, and concentrating public
resources on the poorest segments of the population.

ANNEX B9a
Page 8 of 19

Child (1-5) mortality rate (per 
1,000 live births 1997) 
Total fertility rate (births per 
woman 1997) 
Maternal mortality ratio (per 
100,000 live births 1994) 
Life expectancy at birth (years 
1997) 
Births attended by skilled health 
staff (% 1993) 

Adult HIV prevalence (% 1997) 

Public expenditure on health (% 
of GDP 1997) 
Population in 2020/Population in 
1998 ratio 
Child malnutrition: weight for 
age (% under 5 yrs 1995) 
Contraceptive prevalence (% of 
eligible women 1995) 

33.0 

2.8 

69.0 

69.5 

85 

.. 

2.6 

132.0 

9.0 

60.0 

47.4 The health care system 
Access to basic health 
covers almost all of the 
care is available to the 
3.7 population and compares population regardless of 
favorably with that of 
income. The state 
.. other middle income 
provides free or 
developing countries. 
subsidized health care to 
66.9 The public sector is the 
the lowest income 
main provider, supplying groups through two 
about 90% of all hospital public schemes. The 
beds and over 60% of 
Assistance Medicale 

.. 

The Bank has supported health and
population programs with investment
operations involving expansion and
improvements of health infrastructure as
well as institution-building. A project
rated highly satisfactory increased the
national contraceptive prevalence rate
and improved the health status of the
population, with particular emphasis on
women and children in rural areas. Bank

.. medical staff. In 1997, 

Gratuite, Type I covers 

involvement has also been aimed at

.. 

.. public sector health care 
about 117,000 families 
supporting Government efforts to reform
expenditures represented classified as needy; and 
the sector and improve its efficiency by
148.7 52% of total health 
the Assistance Medicale 
readjusting financing mechanisms and
spending (compulsory 
Gratuite, Type II (AMG 
improving hospital management. At the
14.5 health insurance funds 
11) which provides health suggestion of Government, Bank
accounted for about one 
care on the basis of a 
intervention now focuses on i) facilitating
third of that) and the 
passbook issued for a 
sector reforms, ii) strengthening of
private sector the other 
small annual fee and 
regional hospitals and medical emergency
48%. New cost recovery payment of reduced fees services, and iii) institutional
measures have recently 
averaging about 20% of 
strengthening in health policy and
been introduced. 
the regular fees for 
planning. To that end, a flexible lending
The private sector is 
outpatient visits. 
instrument, the sector investment and
expanding rapidly: its 
maintenance loan is currently under
bed capacity has doubled 
implementation.
in the last five years and
the outpatient visits are
almost equal in number
to those in the public
sector. Government
ongoing health insurance
reform, which will allow
private practitioners to

ANNEX B9a
Page 9 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark'4 

1 

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
be reimbursed, will also.
have a strong impact.
Government efforts to
readjust financial burden
sharing mechanisms
have enabled a reduction
of the Government
subsidy to the recurrent
budget of its tertiary
hospitals (i.e., 50% of
expenditures) from 69%
in 1991 to 35% in 1998

Public Sector, 
Governance, and Justice 

System 

(ratings are from I =worst to 

6=best) 

ICRG corruption rating, 1998 
ICRG bureaucratic quality 
rating, 1998 
ICRG Law and order rating, 
1998 
Government expenditure (% of 
GDP 1996) 

3.5 
2.7 

5.2 

3.5 
2.7 

Overview: The share of public administration relative to GDP has remained around 15% in the last decade but that of
public enterprises has shrunk, from 29% in 1990 to 22% in 1996. Public sector reforms have aimed to improve service
delivery, but the country has an overly controlling and close-knit style of governance. By and large, the rule of law
prevails, a consultation mechanism on economic issues exists, albeit centrally-orchestrated, and the population values the
all-round stability and prosperity engendered by successive governments. Government is now considering devolution of
administrative responsibilities and the CAS proposes to support this in its operational program.
Much has been done to 
Bank involvement has included dialogue
Past reforms have 
modernize the public 
increased the efficiency 
and support of public enterprise reforms
sector and strengthen its 
of the existing system of 
and the privatization program through
contribution to economic governance, but this 
adjustment operations.
performance. Important 
system relies on
achievements include the 
centralized controls on 
Most recently, public sector management
clarification of the role 
inputs ill-suited to 
issues related to provision of services,
of the state, reduced role 
rapidly evolving and 
enterprise governance and private sector
of public enterprises in 
increasingly complex 
development have been reviewed in the
productive sectors, and a 
circumstances. Tunisia's SSR and the PSA (both slated for
start at separating public 
exemplary policies and 
completion in FY2000).
mandates and business 
programs on economic
activities within their 
and social development 
The Bank also provided grant funding to
operations; improved 
have not been matched 
strengthen the Tunisian Centre d'Etudes
access to public services, 
by progress in opening 
Juridiques el Judiciaires, which carries
through the Ombudsman 
up the civil society 
out essential research and comparative
and related initiatives; a 
because of concerns 
legal analysis as a prelude to the
number of adminiistrative about extremism and its 
'preparation of important draft legislation.
reforms, ranging from 
attendant instability, as 
The grant funding has resulted in gaining
the Cour des Comptes to 
in neighboring countries. Tunisia membership in the Global Legal
civil service pay; and the Hence Tunisia remains a 
Information Network (GLIN) and a

32.6 

4.3 

24.7 

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia [Benchmark4 

ANNEX B9a
Page 10 of 19

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
introduction of elements 
very centrally managed 
of multi-year budgeting, 
economy and society. 
and the integration of 
Still, its achievements in 
capital and recurrent 
social development and 
budgets. 
the emergence of a 
strong middle class 
should allow the country 
to "open up" 
progressively, especially 
as the situation in
neighboring countries

World Bank Group (WBG)
Perfornance
successful launch of "GLIN Tunisia".
The funding also supported preparation of
a "Strategic Action Program for
Legislative Reform" aimed at
strengthening the legal framework for
private sector development. The official
review and approval of the action
program, however, has been slow to
proceed.

Financial System 

Overview: Reforms from the late 1980s have reduced financial repression and also encouraged the development of private
venture capital funds. Still, the financial system remains dominated by the banking system and by a strong government
presence within it. In addition, some interest rate restrictions on deposits remain, and the central bank's priority
refinancing facilities for certain sectors of the economy (e.g. agriculture) influence bank credit allocation. Further reforms
are under way to deepen and develop the sector.

stabilizes. 

.

__ 

.

_

M2 (% of GDP 1998) 
Credit to the private sector (% of 
GDP 1998) 
Real lending interest rate (% 
1998) 
External short-term debt (% of 
forex reserves 1997) 
Non performing loans of the 
banking sector (% in 1997) 

44.3 
50.8 

3.2 

75.4 

31 

51.0 

71.7 Methodical reforms over The financial system is 
The impact of past Bank lending in the
42.7 
the past decade have 
dominated by the 
financial sector was circumscribed by the
involved the 
banking system which, 
policy and institutional distortions.
.. modernization of the 
at present, is made up of: Subsequently, following close dialogue
legal and institutional 
the central bank, 13 
and a comprehensive report by a Tunisian
structure of the financial 
deposit banks (6 
Banking Commission, the World Bank,
system, phase-out of 
government-owned), 8 
with the EU and the AfDB, is now
.. direct credit controls, 
development banks (2 
supporting implementation of the
privatization of the 
government-owned and 
Government's reform and modernization
management of the stock 
6 joint ventures between 
program aimed at: (i) addressing the large
arrears of public enterprises to the
exchange and setting up 
Tunisia and various Arab 
of the legal framework 
states), 8 private leasing 
banking system; (ii) modernizing capital
for new operators such 
companies and I savings markets regulations and payments
as merchant banks, 
institution. 
system; (iii) revamping the banking law
leasing companies and 
and strengthening prudential and
mutual ftnds. 
supervision regulations; and (iv)
consolidating the banking sector.

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia | Benchmark4

ANNEX B9a
Page 11 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3
In addition, the authorities are responding
to the problem of non-performing loans
of the private sector by establishing the
framework for the creation of private loan
recovery agencies. A few such agencies
have been created, but it is still unclear
whether this mechanism will prove
effective

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
Efforts are ongoing to 
Other financial 
restructure the banking 
institutions include: 2 
sector (see last column). merchant banks, 8 
When implemented, 
offshore banks, 2 
these measures could 
factoring companies, 20 
improve significantly the mutual funds, 19 capital 
services provided to 
risk companies, 16 
private businesses; 
insurance companies, 
however, upgrading 
and the stock exchange,
services available to 
brokerage houses, and
private enterprises in 
the central depository for
Tunisia to the level 
securities.
available to competitors
will require more radical Prudential regulation and
liberalization of the 
Central Bank
financial sector, 
supervision of the
including entry of 
banking sector need to
foreign banks. 
be strengthened.

Private Sector 
Environment 

Private investment (% of GDP 
1997); excluding public 
enterprises 
Stock market capitalization (% 
of GDP 1998) 
Euromoney credit rating 1998 

Overview: Much has been done to encourage private investment but the response has been below expectations.
Meanwhile, the external environment is becoming more competitive. The key constraints appear to be Tunisia's complex
and discretionary mix of business incentives, financing mechanisms and promotional schemes that effectively favor
established large firms and enclave (offshore) locations, whereas the major means for further development should involve
a simplified and more neutral business environment to unleash the potential of private small and medium enterprises for
rapid growth of output and employment.
ff.-F 
12.1--- 
16.8 The private sector has 
Important institutional 
An assessment of the private sector
been accorded generous 
improvements in recent 
environment was prepared in 1994
tax breaks and grant 
years have included the 
focusing on measures to make the private
30.6 assistance for investment drafting of a modern 
sector more competitive on world
and export. Regulatory Company Law, passage markets. Key policy and institutional

10.3 

45.7 

37.2

Areas 

-FTunisia 

Development

Indicators2
lBenchmark' 

ANNEX B9a
Page 12 of 19

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
of a leasing law and 
framework has been 
rationalized and there are establishment of a 
low administrative 
regine for companies in 
barriers to entry. The 
financial difficulties, and 
incentives and financing ongoing modernization 
mechanisms, however, 
of Customs and the 
are complex and beyond 
financial sector. Several 
reach of the small and 
institutions, such as 
medium enterprises that 
dominate manufacturing. I'Investissement and 

Agence de Promotion de 

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3
recommendations were made for
improvements in the financial markets,
the institutional investors and social
security, special incentives and the off-
shore sector, foreign direct investment,
education and training, trade facilitation,
privatization, the legal framework and
infrastructure and public utilities. This
assessment has been updated during
FY2000 to gauge progress and remaining

issues.

Bank support has also been provided in
the form of loan operations (Private
Investment, Industrial Support Institution,
and Export Development projects) and
grant financing for a review of trade
policy and strategy.

Commission Superieure 
de l 'Investissement are

involved in investment 
promotion. 

Strengthening the private 
sector environment will 
require: simple, neutral 
incentives framework; 
To improve the 
easy access to finance; 
competitiveness of the 
further regulatory 
private sector, further 
reform; effective public 
reforms need to focus
on: facilitating company
sector support; and 
efficient and sustainable operation and exit;
infrastructure. 
improving enforcement
capacity and judicial
system; establishing and
securing property rights;
strengthening
competition policy and
consumer protection;
and improving contract
law.

Trade and Openness 

Overview: Implementation of the 1995 partnership agreement with the EU--with provisions for establishing a free trade
zone--is on track. Tunisia is also a member of the WTO. Institutions to promote foreign investment are in place; results
have been steady though slow, except in 1998 when privatization of two cement factories helped double FDI inflows. In
the short term, maintaining the privatization momentum built in 1998 will be critical to attracting FDI. In the medium to
long term, trade openness and enterprise restructuring are likely to generate more efficient firms and more appropriate rules
for domestic competition. These in turn will attract FDI and help job creation.

-- - -
-

-- 
- -- - -- 
-
-- 

-

-- 

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- -

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- -

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-

-

-- -

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

- -

-

-- 

-

-- -

-- 

-

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark4 

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

ANNEX B9a
Page 13 of 19

Trade (% of PPP GDP 1997) 
Gross FDI (% of PPP GDP 
1997) 
WTO member 
Import duties (% of imports 
1996) 

25.7 
0.7 

Yes 
10.2 

Bank support in this area has included a
series of studies analyzing the impact of
trade policy reforms and the EU
partnership agreement. Also, Bank
financing has been provided for
adjustment operations (notably SAL and
ECAL I) involving trade policy reforms,
and for investment operations supporting
industry and trade (Private Industry
Support Upgrading Project) and cargo
handling, among other components
(Transport Sector Loan). The
development objectives as well as the
implementation progress of the above-
mentioned completed and ongoing
operations have been assessed
satisfactory.

Internationally, Tunisia 
acceded to the GATT in 
1990, participated in the 
Uruguay Round 
agreement in 1993, and 
became a member of the 
WTO in 1994. The
country is also a member Most recently, the Export Development
of the Maghreb Customs 
Project was approved, providing financial
Union. 
and technical assistance to: a) improve
access to export outlets and buyers; b)
improve access to pre-shipment export
finance, especially for small and medium
enterprises and emerging exporters; and
c) facilitate trade by simplifying import
and export-related procedures.

14.7 

26.1 The importance of trade While the administrative 
0.9 
in Tunisia's economy has machinery of trade 
historically been high 
operations and of trade 
and stable. A trade 
promotion institutions 
liberalization plan 
have been gradually 
launched in 1987 under 
streamlined, much 
the country's Structural 
remains to be done in 
Adjustment Program 
this regard, especially in 
was followed up with the Customs procedures and 
partnership agreement 
facilities. 
with the EU in 1995, 
including provisions for 
a phased establishment 
of a free trade zone. 

Since the mid-1980s, 
Tunisia has successfully 
managed its transition 
from a resource-based to 
a manufactures-based 
export strategy. 
Generous tax incentives 
have been granted to off- Tunisia's agreement with 
shore firms, which 
the EU, the first in the 
export at least 80% of 
MENA region, has set 
production. E-lence, a 
the stage for the 
salient features of this 
country's trade and 
transition has been the 
development agenda
shift from an export base well into the first decade
dominated by oil and 
of the twenty first
related products to one 
century.
dominated by textiles,
clothing and accessories.
The heavy dependence
of Tunisia's exports on
oil and the attendant
exposure to oil price
fluctuations have thus

receded.

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Trunisia Benchmark 

J 

Country Perfornance 
Policies 
Institutions 
Policies are now
required to address the
issues of market and
product concentrations,
and the deteriorating
balance in energy trade.

ANNEX B9a
Page 14 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

Social Protcction 

Public expenditure on social 
security and welfare (% of GDP 
1996) 

Overview: Due to the government's long-standing commitinett to social development, a comprehensive social protection
system has been developed in Tunisia. But the institutions responsible for social achievement need to adapt to a chanlging
economic environment. The social security system suffers from weak contribution-benefit links and high evasion, and
returns on pension reserves are low. There is cross-subsidization among various insurance/assistance programs. The
urgency of reforms is mitigated by available reserves (due to detnographic structure), which gives a window of oppoortunlity
for phasing-in future work in the medium run. Targeting of safety net programs need to be improved and their
administration made more efficient.
.
The system of social 
The social security 
Bank involvement in the social protection
protection in Tunisia is 
system is managed in the area in Tunisia has included analytical
made up of active labor main by the social 
work examining the various elements of
market policies, 
insurance funds: Caisse 
the social protection system and proposals
contiibutive (social 
iiationale de Securite 
for pension reform.
security) and non- 
Sociale for the private
contributive (sociai 
sector, and Caisse 
assistance) schemes, 
Nationale de Retraite et 
The mandatory 
de Prevoyance Sociale 
contributive social 
for the public sector. 
security system covers 
agriculture workers and 
the self-employed as 
well as urban wage- 
eamers. Cash benefits 
are provided against 
insurable social risks 
(retirement, disability 
and survivors' pensions, 
and health care) and 
there is protection 
against non-insurable 
risks (family benefit 
payments). System 
coverage has increased 
substantially in the past 

Based on the analytical work undertaken
thus far our dialogue has suggested the
't'unisian social protection system needs
to address important policy issues that
concern: a) the system's ability to provide
Informal safety nets have adequate but affordable benefits; b) its
developed to provide 
effectiveness in reaching the most needy
social protection to 
groups; c) its impact oni the efficient
informal workers 
functionintg of labor markets; and d) its
contribution to the developtnent of the
financial sector.

To prepare deeper 
reforms of the social
security system, a social
security research center
was created in 1998 under
the Ministry of Social
Affairs. Its main
responsibility is to create
a social security data base
and prepare a more

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia j Benchmark 4

_ 

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
decade, from one million 
fundamental reform of
people (55% of the 
the system (pension and
eligible labor force) in 
health insurance).
1987 to about 2 million
people (81% of eligible
labor force) in 1997.

ANNEX B9a
Page 15 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance 3

Overview. Tunisia is only moderately endowed with water resources. Moreover, these resources are distributed unevenly
by natural conditions within the country. Still, the population's access to safe water and sanitation has been remarkably
well-developed. With almost all water sources now fully developed, the consolidation of past progress will necessitate
careful demand management and a sound institutional framework for integrated management of ground and surface water
resources.
100.0 

Water and Sewerage 

Access to safe water, urban (% 
of population 1994) 
Access to safe water, rural (% of 
population 1994) 
Access to sanitation, urban (% of 
population 1994) 
Access to sanitation, rural (% of 
population 1993) 

80.0 

100.0 

36.4 

63.2 

92.0 

98.2 Tunisia has devoted 
Two institutions--Societe 
substantial resources to 
Nationale d'Exploitation 
the expansion and sound 
et de Distribution des 
management of water 
Eaux (SONEDE) under 
supply and sewerage 
Ministry of Agriculture 
facilities in the country. 
and Office National de 
.. The country has coped 
I'Assainissernent 
well with the major 
(ONAS) under Ministry
constraints in the sector-- 
of Environment--are 
remote location of fresh 
responsible, respectively, 
water sources from the 
for water supply and 
consumption centers and 
sewerage in the urban 
high salinity of many 
areas. There are no
water sources--by 
municipally-owned 
prioritizing its goals. At water utilities. About 
first, priority was given 
80% of agriculture relies 
to urban areas to quickly 
on groundwater pumped 
provide service to a large 
from wells operated by 
number of consumers. 
farmers or user groups. 
The next priority went to The remaining water
agglomerated rural 
used by agriculture is 
population, and then to 
supplied to the farmers 
the scattered rural 
by the regional 
population. 
directorates of the 
Ministry of Agriculture. 
Both the SONEDE and 
ONAS have started 

Policy attention now 
needs to focus more on 

The Bank has had a long-standing
involvement in the water and sewerage
area in Tunisia, making loans for urban
and rural water supply and sewerage
sectors (13 operations) and for irrigation
development and rehabilitation (8
operations).

Past operations were completed
satisfactorily and there are at present
three water supply/sewerage projects
under implementation.

Bank-financed projects in the area have
included a number of technical and
financial studies, including preparation, in
1975, of a water master plan parts of
which were subsequently selected for
financing by the Bank.

A most recent Water Sector Study,
completed in 1999, was financed through
a PHRD grant and Strategic Compact
Funds. The study underscores the
strategic importance of the water sector in
Tunisia now and for the future, especially
in agriculture, which uses around 80% of

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia |Benchmark4 [ 
Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
demand management 
involving the private 
and sufficient cost 
sector in building and in
recovery, especially in 
operating water and
agriculture to ensure 
sewerage works.
greater efficiency in the
use of water resources.

ANNEX B9a
Page 16 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

water.

Environment and 
Culture 

Annual deforestation rate (% of 
forest area 1995) 
Nationally protected areas (% of 
land area 1996) 
Threatened mammal species (% 
of species 1996) 
C02 emissions (metric tons per 
capita 1996) 

0.5 

0.3 

11.0 

Overview. Tunisia leads the MENA region with regard to environmental protection. It has a strong policy and institutional
base for sustainable development in place. Important environmental issues at present include those with strongest links to
economic outcomes (EU partnership and environmental standards, tourism and coastal zone management) and those of
cross-sector nature (industrial pollution and urban waste, fuel pricing, the adoption of less polluting fuels, and the
promotion of renewable energy, and water pricing). Tunisian cultural heritage is valued both for its intrinsic worth and its
potential in promotion of tourism and employment in the country.
0.9 Reconciling economic 
The Tunisian Ministry of The Bank has been involved in the
and social development Environment heads four environment sector through its lending
2.2 with the protection of 
specialized agencies: the program, analytical and advisory work,
natural resources is an 
National Environmental 
and the Mediterranean Technical
important policy goal. 
Protection Agency, the 
Assistance Program (METAP).
The Government's 
Agency for Protection METAP's technical assistance has
3.9 commitment for 
and Planning of Coastal 
focused on Environmental Impact
environmental protection Areas, the National 
Assessment procedures and solid waste
is reflected through the 
Sanitation Board, and 
management.
67% increase in the 
the National Agency for
budget allocated in the 
Renewable Energy. The 
most recent five year 
same Ministry also 
development plan for 
administers programs to 
activities related to 
help meet a range of 
ecology and protection 
environmental 
of the environmeni. 
challeniges: the urban 

In the cultural heritage field, Bank
participation has included grant assistance
that has catalogued local monuments and
sites and, in the process, building local
capability for cataloguing. A PHRD
grant managed by the Tunisian Institui

10.8 

1.8 

and rural sanitation 

National du Patrimoine has helped

Environmental Impact 
program, the "Blue 
prepare a planned Cultural Heritage
Assessment (EIA) is 
I-and" program for 
Project included in the current lending
well developed, with the 
protection of the sea and program.
legal framework clearly 
coastal resources, the
specifying classification National Program for the
of projects and key steps Management of Solid
in the EIA cycle.. 
Wastes, an industrial
Government policy 
pollution program, the
supports development of 
"Yellow Hand" program
cultural physical assets 
for desertification

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark4

Country Performance 
Policies 
Institutions 
with links to economic 
control, the "Green
activities, while 
Hand" program for the
expecting the private 
preservation of
sector to foster folklore, 
biodiversity, and an
music, dance, drama, etc 
environmental awareness
program.

ANNEX B9a
Page 17 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

Transport and 
Telecommunications 

Paved roads (% of total 1996) 
Motor vehicles (per 1,000 people 
1996) 
Railways, goods trans. ton-km / 
PPP$ bill. of GDP 1995 
Telephone mainlines (per 1,000 
people 1997) 
Internet hosts (per 10,000 people 
1998) 

.. 

53.3 

70.1 

0.1 

0.2 

Overview. The ongoing l 9Development Plan (I 997-200I)envisages the largest share of investments taking place in the
transport and communications area. At the same time, transport policy continues in the direction of progressive
liberalization. Official approach to private participation has thus far favored pilot projects in transport.
Telecommunications coverage is relatively low, costs are high and the provision of service remains the pervasive
monopoly of a public sector company.
An important landmark in the Bank-
78.9 
506.2 nrcn 
years, Tunisia The major development 
64.0 
58.6 has concentrated on 
on the institutional front 
Tunisia collaboration in the sector was
deregulating the 
in recent years has been a 
the preparation of the Transport Strategy
transport sector, 
revamped role for the 
Study jointly by Bank staff and Tunisian
privatizing public 
transport ministry, which 
officials. To implement the strategy, a
107.8 transport companies, 
has been oriented away 
long-term sector program was designed
extending transport 
from owning and 
aiming to: a) increase the efficiency and
infrastructure and 
operating facilities and 
quality of transport services; b) reduce the
improving management towards oversight and 
financial burden of the sector on
of such facilities. A 
policy formation. Thus its government budget, notably by increasing
liberalization policy has principal functions now 
private participation and improving the
been undertaken under 
are seen to involve long- 
performance of the remaining public
ECAL I in the maritime 
term planning of 
enterprises. This is being supported with
transport sector. New 
infrastructure, the legal 
a Bank adaptable program loan, the first
roads funds have been 
and regulatory 
phase of which will advance private
established, financed 
framework, and ensuring 
provision of port services, facilitate
with privatization 
smooth and efficient 
foreign investment in trade-related
proceeds. Most 
functioning of the market. 
transport activities, commercialize the
branches of transport 
railway parastatal and increase the use of
are being liberalized; 
less polluting fuels.
the pace has been 
deliberately slow, 
however, in urban and 
inter-urban passenger 
bus transport. 

Previously a purview of 
the Ministry of
Communications, 
In telecommunications, Bank staff have
telecoms is now 
engaged officials in dialogue on the need
nominally the 
for and the likely benefits of policy
responsibility of an 
reforms. Bank dialogue, through
autonomous public 
seminars and staff visits, has sought to
company. Significant 
highlight the likelihood that reforms
benefits would be realized could lower business costs for the private

Telecommunications 
remains a weak link, 

ANNEX B9a
Page 18 of 19

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3
sector, help enhance the provision of
services within the country and facilitate
adherence to agreement with the WTO

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark' 

Country Performance 
Institutions 
if this sector were more 
liberalized and 
competitive. 

P 
with international lines 
relatively expensive, 
high-speed data 
transmission limited as
well as costly, and
controls on mobile
phones and the Internet.
Telecom revenues
show that, for the GDP
level of Tunisia, there
is room for sector
growth and new
services would find a
receptive demand.

Energy 

Electricity consumption (kwh 
per capita 1996) 
Electricity losses (% of output 
1996) 
GDP per unit of energy use 
(1995$/kg oil equiv. 1996) 
Traditional fuel use (% of total 

energy use 1995) 

2.9 

10.6 

Overview: Notable developments in the energy sector have been the gradual exhaustion of crude oil reserves in the main
fields, a recent pick up in gas production since the start of activity of the Miskar gas field in 1996 and a generally robust
annual growth of electricity production. Energy demand is expected to rise in the next decade, driven particularly by
increased economic activity and population growth. In order to reconcile an increase in energy demand with the
improvement of quality of life and protection of the environment, reliance on energy efficiency and renewable energies
will become increasingly important in the years ahead.
674.4 
1162.4 A marked feature of 
Production, transmission Bank involvement in financing the energy
energy policy has been 
and distribution of 
sector in Tunisia occurred largely during
the sale of gas above 
electricity as well as most 
1972-1991, with the last major project,
cost, and the surplus 
of the transmission and 
Gas Infrastructure, closed in 1997.
2.0 used to cross-subsidize 
the distribution of gas in
electricity tariffs, 
Tunisia are under a single, The climatic and economic conditions in
including, but not 
centralized public utility, Tunisia are very favorable for the
limited to, the provision the Societe Tunisienne de 
application of solar water heating
of a "social tariff' for 
I'Electricite' et du Gaz 
systems. The potential for use has been
households that use 
(STEG) under the 
estimated at about one million square
limited quantities of 
Ministry of Industry. 
meters of solar collector area. Given the
electricity. Government STEG has had a strong 
resulting reduction in Carbon Dioxide
intends eventually to 
financial performance for 
(CO2) emissions associated with the
split gas and electricity 
the past few years. 
installation of solar heating systems, the
supply and phase out 
Global Environmental Facility (GEF) has,
the cross-subsidy. Fuel S'l'EG's monopoly for 
since 1995, been financing a project on

12.9 

9.0 

1.2 

prices are not 

subsidized, but the 
relative price of diesel 

electricity generation for 

"Solar Water Hleating Systems in

the grid was abolished in 
Tunisia". This project is managed by the
1996, opening the way to National Agency for Renewable Energy

Areas 

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark4

ANNEX B9a
Page 19 of 19

Country Performance 
World Bank Group (WBG)
Policies 
Institutions 
Performance'
vs. gasoline is low 
concessions to 
and aims at installing about 50,000 m' of
compared with Europe. 
Independent Power 
solar collector areas by the year 2003.
Producers (IPP). The first This will allow a saving in energy use of
planned IPP- the power 
about 6,000 toe, and will reduce an
plant in Rades -will allow estimated 18,000 tons of CO2 emissions
a substantial expansion of per year.
capacity.

Long-term plans are to 
integrate electricity 
network with Europe 
through an undersea 
transmission line to
Italy, thus making the
Tunisian electricity
sector de facto a part of
the European electricity
market.

The diagnoses in matrix B9a and the development priorities identified by Tunisia and the World Bank in Matrix B9b are viewed within a long term perspective.
Against these, the Development Cooperation Programs of Matrix B9b refer only to activities planned for the 3-year CAS period, representing a time-slice of the long
term.
2 Latest available year, typically between 1994 and 1999.
self-evaluation and OED evaluation of completed operations.
4 Averages for lower middle-income or MENA countries, as appropriate and/or available.

3Largely 

Areas

Poverty and 
Social 
Development 

Tunisia - CAS Program Matrix
Program

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 1 of 16

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

* Consolidate 
impressive progress 
to-date 
* Closely target and 
empower remaining 
population in poverty 
* As feasible, reduce 
income inequalities 
* Sustain efficient 
provision of basic 
social services 

* 

* 

Identify programs 
suited to tackling 
pockets of hard-core 
poverty 
Improve efficiency 
and coverage of 
assistance programs 
* Design, for 
consideration by 
country, appropriate 
hard-core poverty 
reduction strategy 
Increase partnership 
with NGOs 

* 

Other Partner Programs

* A variety of
international donor
programs
channeled through
official bodies and
NGOs
* UNDP

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
Progress Indicators
Ongoing 
* Lower poverty 
* Operations with 
incidence below 
close impact on 
7% 
poorer regions or 
* Lower child 
population; e.g. 
malnutrition below 
NW Mountainous 
23% 
Dev. Project, Rural * Raise from 2.3% 
Roads 
share of income of
* Update of Social 
lowest 10%
Conditions. 
* Maintain at 0%
Proposed 
children 10-14 in
Integrated Rural 
labor force
Development
(planned in
FY2003)
* Policy Note on
Employment
(AAA)
* Social Protection
Strategy Note

* 

The diagnoses in matrix B9a and the development priorities identified by Tunisia and the World Bank in Matrix B9b are viewed within a long term perspective.
Against these, the Development Cooperation Programs of Matrix B9b refer only to activities planned for the 3-year CAS period, representing a time-slice of the long

term.

Areas 

Macro economy 

Development Priority 

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

* Sustained growth of 
real GDP 
* Attain average 
investment to 
support GDP growth 
objective 
* Maintain viable 
financial balances 
* Keep inflation under 
control 

* 

* Support country's 
priorities, which are 
well chosen 
Identify with countiy 
key measures to 
maintain domestic 
and external 
financial balances in 
the medium term 

ANNEX B9b
Page 2 of16

Other Partner Programs

* The IMF: regular
Article IV
consultations
* The EU (FAS I)
and the AflDB: co-
financing with the
World Bank of
ongoing adjustment
operations
* The EU: FAS 11
* AfDB: cofinancing
of ECAL 11

Development Cooperation Programs

1

* 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
Progress Indicators
Ongoing 
* GDP growth 
* Supervision of 
averaging 5-6% per 
macro components 
year 
of ECAL 11 
Inflation rate 
* Economic and 
around 3% per year 
social policy 
* Fiscal deficit 
dialogue within the 
trending towards 
framework of SSR 
2% of GDP 
completed during 
FY2000 
Proposed 
* Macro component 
in planned ECAL
III in FY200 1
* External
Sustainability
Study
* Tenth Plan Policy
Notes
* Planned ECAL IV
in FY2003

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
Progress Indicators

Other Partner Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 3 of 16

* Support an increase Ongoing 

* Satisfactory, timely * Agence Francaise

Areas

Education and 
Knowledge 

* Consolidate 

impressive 
achievements to date 
regarding access to 
education 
Adapt skills to the 
future needs of the 
economic sphere, 
especially as regards 
to new technologies 
and scientific 
knowledge 
Increase capacities in 
the sector, with an 
emphasis on 
vocational training 
and higher education 
Increase enrollment 
rates and completion 
rates in basic 
education 
* Develop scientific 
research 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

in completion rates in 
basic education 
Encourage improved 
quality in basic, 
secondary and 
vocational education 
for all students 
Encourage reform in 
higher education to 
meet future increase 
in the number of 
students, address 
current inefficiencies, 
while reducing the 
financial burden for 
the State 
Pursue discussions 
w.ith the authorities 
on WBG support to 
development of new 
technologies and 
scientific research 

* 

* 

* 

Secondary 
Education 
* Higher Education 
* Higher Education 
11 
SSR to be 
completed in FY 
2000 
Proposed 
Education Quality 
Enhancement 
Planned Higher 
education project 
in FY 2003 
.
.
* Dialogue on social 
seto 
a 
o 
upcdate o socal h 
conditions 

* 

* Dissemination 
seminar for the 

de Developpement:
Formation
Professionnelle II
* Belgium
* GTZ: Promotion of
Dual Vocational
Training and
Vocational
Training for Rural
Girls
EU: budget-support
operation under
preparation;
MANFORM
project (vocational
training)
NICEF
* AfDB: Secondary
Education Project

* 

* 

* 

implementation of 
ongoing projects 
* Raise completion 
rates in basic 
education 
Improved 
performance in job 
placement 
* Greater cost 
recovery in higher 
education 
Improvements in 
national 
assessments in 
Arabic, French and 
Mathematics 
Introductionof 
new teaching 
methods 
Improvements in
teacher training
and qualifications
Increased
autonomy for
regional- and
school-level
education leaders

* 

* 

Areas

Rural Strategy 

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs 

ANNEX B9b

Page 4 of 16

Tunisia 

.

* 

Promote sustainable 
growth by tackling 
the issues of water 
management and 
climatic changes 
* Pursue on-going 
strategies on 
irrigation and water 
and soil conservation 
* Reach food self- 
sufficiency 
Improve external 
competitiveness of 
agricultural products 
* Support rural 
development in the 
West through 
irrigation and road 
infrastructure 
* Pursue improvement 
of living standards in 
rural areas 
(electricity, potable 
water) 

* 

Other Partner Programs

World Bank Group 

World Bank Group Programs 
[ Progress Indicators
Instruments 
* Pursue dialogue on 
Ogoin 
* Satisfactory, timely * GTZ: North West
reforms in food 
* Study on 
implementation of 
rural development;
marketing 
Agricultural 
on-going projects 
Promotion of rural
Identify with country 
Competitiveness 
* Lower rural 
institutions
counterparts key 
* ASIL and ASIL 11 
poverty incidence 
* The KfW
measures to improve * Natural resource 
below 14% 
* Agence Fran,aise
international 
management 
de Developpement:
competitiveness of 
* Rural Roads 
Integrated Rural
Development in
agriculture 
* NW Mountainous 
* Support reforms in 
Development. 
Kef region
* The EU: Program
irrigation and water 
Project 
for Integrated
and soil conservation * Rural Finance 
Rural Development
* Pursue dialogue on 
* Second Forestry 
the complex issue of 
Development 
and Natural
Resource
land titling and 
Proposed 
tenure 
* Water Sector 
Management
* Provide support to 
Investment Loan I 
* The OECF
improvement of 
* Agricultural 
* FAO: Food
living standards in 
Support Services 
Security projects;
remote rural areas 
* Comprehensive 
Participatory
Development 
Forestry
Review 
Development
* Planned Integrated
Rural/urban
Development in
FY2003
* Policy Note on
Land Issues

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 5 of 16

Areas

Urban Strategy 

.

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

Investments in social 
housing construction 
and support to 
housing financing for 
poor households 

* 

* 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
Progress Indicators
Ongoin 
Satisfactory, timely 
* Municipal 
implementation of 
Development II 
on-going project 
Proposed 
Lower urban 
* Cultural Heritage 
poverty incidence 
below 3.6% 
project 
* Urban Water 
* More involvement 
Supply 
of private firms in 
* Municipal 
the construction 
Development III 
sector 
* Decentralization 
Study/ Municipal 
Finances 
Policy Note on 
Land Issues 
Planned Integrated
Urban/Rural
Development in
FY2003

* 

* 

Other Partner Programs

* Agence Francaise
de Ddveloppement:
CPSCL credit line;
Tunis South Lake
Area Rehabilitation
project;
Rehabilitation of
populous urban
areas
Italy
U* UNDP: Urban
growth and
sustainable
development in
Tunis

* 

Support the 
authorities in 
designing incentives 
for further private 
sector involvement 
in construction, 
renovation of urban 
areas, site 
development and 
housing finance 
Identify with country 
counterparts key 
measures to address 
the issues of housing 
finance and urban 
land market 
Support the 
authorities in 
municipal 
development through
a review of
municipal finances

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Labor Market 

.

Stimulate the 
creation of new 
employment 
opportunities by 
supporting business 
start-ups 
Support vocational 
training, improve 
quality of education 
to better adapt skills 
to labor market 
demand and improve 

* 

Identify with country Ongoing 
counterparts actions 
* 
2nd Employment 
to promote the 
and Training 
private SME sector 
Industry Support 
Pursue dialogue on 
Institutions 
labor market policies 
PSA and SSR to be 
to promote increased 
flexibility in the 
labor market, 
employment, 
entrepreneurship and 
training 

completed in 
FY2000 
Propose 
* Dissemination 
seminars for the 

* 

* France
* Germany
* United Nations
The EU: Project of
Support to Job
Creation under
preparation

* 

* 

* Lower female 
unemployment rate 
below 17% 
Increase female 
participation rate 
above 31% 
* Lower male 
unemployment
below 15.5%
* Amendment of
labor legislation to
increase flexibility

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 6 of 16

Other Partner Programs

* UNFPA
* The EU: Structural
Adjustment
program covering
health insurance
and
decentralization
under negotiation
* UNICEF

Areas

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

support to on-the-job 
training 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
Progress Indicators
PSA and the SSR 
* Raise 
ficiency of
* Policy Note on 
active labor market
Employment 
policies
(AAA)
Social Protection
Strategy Note

* 

Health and 
Population 

.

* 

Consolidate 
impressive progress 
to date regarding 
universal access to 
health care services 
Further reform the 
health sector to 
improve cost- 
efficiency driven 
provision of health 
care services 
Increase the 
coverage of social 
protection with a 
particular focus on 
improved health 
cares for women and 
children 
Increase the use of 
contraceptives 
* Assess health 
financing schemes 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Support Government Ongoing 
priorities in 
* Health Sector loan 
reforming the health 
* Hospital 
sector, implementing 
management and 
financing 
the health insurance 
reform and 
* Update of social 
strengthening health 
conditions 
policy design and 
SSR to be 
planning 
completed in 
Identify with the 
FY2000 
authorities key 
Proposed 
measures to provide 
* Dialogue on social 
more and better 
sector based on 
quality basic health 
update of social 
care services 
conditions and on 
* Accompany ongoing 
health finance 
efforts to further 
* Planned Health 
reduce the 
Sector project in 
government's 
FY03
financial
responsibilities in the
provision of health
care

* 

* 

* Lower child 
mortality rate 
below 33 per 1000 
live births 
Lower maternal 
mortality ratio 
from 69 per 
100,000 live births 
Lower subsidized 
health care
availability from
about 50% to
around 25% of
population
Enhance efficiency
of public
expenditures on
health

* 

.

Public Sector, 
Governance, 

and Justice 
System 

Pursue privatization 
of state-owned 
enterprises and 
involvement of the 

* 

Identify with the 
authorities key 
measures to further 
improve efficiency 

On 

* 

PSA and SSR to be 
completed in 
FY2000 

* Maintenance of
past IDF-funded
Global Legal
Information

ANNEX B9b
Page 7 of 16

Development Cooperation Programs

Other Partner Programs

* 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
| Progress Indicators
Proposed 
Network
Institutional 
Implementation by
Development 
Government of
Funds 
IDF-funded
* Dissemination 
"Strategic Action
seminars for the 
Program for
PSA and the SSR 
Legislative
Reform"
Improve I.C.R.G.
ratings on:
- Corruption
- Bureaucratic quality
- Law and Order

* 

* 

Areas 

____ 

Development Priority 

.

Tunisia 

.

l

World Bank Group 

private sector in 
services delivery 
through concessions 
* Pursue the reform of 
taxation to increase 
the relative weight of 
direct taxation of 
domestic activity 
* Adapt the judiciary 
framework to the 
needs of an open 
economy, especially 
in the financial sector 
* Encourage 
strengthening of 
associations and 
professional 
organizations for 
increased 
participation of civil 
society in economic 
and social
development

of public 
administration 
* Pursue dialogue on 
privatization and 
concession issues 
and support of public 
enterprises reforms 
and privatization 
* Encourage 
accelerated 
implementation of 
improved legal 
framework for the 
private sector
* Dialogue with the
authorities on how to
increase civil
participation for
sustainability of
Tunisia's
international opening

Financial 
System 

.

Pursue ongoing 
modernization of the 
banking system 
* Support further 
development of 
venture capital funds 
* Adapt the judiciary 
framework to the 
needs of an open 
economy in the 
financial sector 

* Support further 
liberalization of the 
financial system and 
privatization of state- 
owned banks 
* Support ongoing 
efforts on bank 
restructuring, 
institution building, 
modernization of the 
payment system, 

Ongoing 
* Rural Finance 
(extended until 
12/31/00) 
* ECAL II 
* Tuninvest Finance 
Group by IFC 
* Maghreb 
International 
Merchant Bank by 
IFC 

* Timely and 
satisfactory 
implementation of 
ECAL II 
* Reduced time for 
check clearing and 
payments 
* Reduce percentage 
of non-performing 
bank loans
* Reduced cost and

* France
* KfW
* The EU: Support
to Competitiveness
* The AfDB: Sixth
Credit Line to the
National Bank for
Tourism
Development

Development Priority 

-_..Development 

Cooperation Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 8 of 16

Other Partner Programs

Areas 

.

Tunisia 

* Support progressive 
implementation of 
indirect instruments 
of monetary policy 
* Support development 
of the insurance 
sector 
* Pursue external 
financial 
liberalization in view 
of future 
convertibility of the 
dinar 

World Bank Group 

strengthening of 
bank regulation and 
supervision and 
diversification of 
financial services 
* Provide support to 
reforms in insurance, 
housing finance and 
capital markets 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
| 
Progress Indicators
Proposed 
increased volume
* Financial sector 
of credit to small
component in 
and medium
planned ECAL III 
enterprises
* Support to SME
* Framlington
Mediterranean
Growth Fund by
IFC
* Maghreb Invest
Fund by IFC
* Financial Sector
Assessment
Program (jointly

____ __ with IMF)

Private Sector 
Environment 

* 

Improve the 
organization of 
distribution network 
* Rationalize fiscal 
incentives 
* Open access of 
service delivery to 
private firms through 
concessions 
Improve services to 
private firms 
(transport, 
communication, 
finance) 

* 

* 

* 

* Encourage the 
Ongoing 
Increase in number * GTZ: Support to
Government to set up * Export 
of small and 
the Industrial
a simplified and 
Development 
medium enterprises 
Adaptation Office
neutral incentives 
Industry Support 
* Trend rise in 
* The EU: Support to
scheme to support 
Institutions 
foreign direct 
the Privatization
small and medium 
* Private Investment 
investment inflows 
Program; Venture-
enterprises 
* PSA and SSR to be * Trend increase in 
capital for
development 
completed in 
share of private 
privatization;
* Support the 
FY2000 
investment in GDP 
Venture-capital in
implementation of 
Investment in Ideal 
from 12% 
Industry; Support
key measures to 
Sanitaire by IFC 
* Raise stock market 
to
improve access of 
Investment in 
capitalization 
Competitiveness;
private firms to 
SITEX by IFC 
above 10% 
"Euro-Tunisie
efficient services 
Proposed 
Entreprise";
Encourage 
* ECAL III 
Support to
accelerated 
* SME support 
Promotion of
implementation of 
* Dissemination 
External
improved legal and 
seminars for the 
Investments;
judiciary framework 
PSA and the SSR 
* EIB: Global
for the private sector 
* Prospective IFC 
lending to Tunisian

* 

* 

Areas .

Trade and 

Openness 

.

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs

ANNEX B9b

Page 9 of 16

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
| Progress Indicators
investment in Arab 
Tunisian Insurance 
Co. 
Policy Note on 
Information 
Technology 

Promote further 
integration of 
Tunisia in the world 
economy, especially 
through the Free 
Trade Agreement 
with the European 
Union 
* Pursue negotiations 
on other trade 
agreements 
* Pursue trade 
liberalization, 
harmonization of 
tariffs on imports and 
export promotion 
In particular, pursue 
reform of tariff and 
non-tariff barriers on 
agricultural products 

* 

* Dialogue with the 
Government on 
issues of market and 
product 
concentration and 
balance in energy 
trade 
* Encourage 
facilitation of 
customs procedures 
* Support efforts in 
export promotion 
* Maintain dialogue 
with government on 
further steps in trade 
liberalization (e.g. 
liberalization with 
third parties; 
services; agriculture)
* Dialogue on
macroeconomic
aspects of trade and

Ongoing 
* Export 
Development 
* T'ransport Sector 
Investment 
Proposed 
* Transport Sector 
Investment 11 
* ECAL III 
* Planned ECAL IV 
in FY2003 
* Agricultural 
Competitiveness 
Study (started 
FY1999)
* External
Sustainability
Study

* 

* 

Increase ratio of 
Trade/PPP GDP 
above 26% 
Increase ratio of 
Gross FDI/ PPP 
GDP above 0.7% 
* Average import 
duty rates lowered 
along EU 
agreement 
* Progress in 
multilateral 
extension of trade
liberalization

Other Partner Programs

enterprises
* The AfDB:
Competitiveness
Support Program
* UNDP: technical
assistance
* UNIDO and Italy:
Integrated Program
for Promoting
Industrial
Competitiveness

* The EU: Support
to Competitiveness
* UNDP training and
TA under project
titled "Mise a
niveau des
Capacites
nationales pour
gerer le nouveau
systeme
commercial
multilateral"

Areas _

Social 

Protection 

Water and 
Sewerage 

_______ 

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs 

l

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

World Bank Group Programs 
Instruments 
Progress Indicators

Other Partner Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 10 of 16

competitiveness
(exchange rate
management, capital
account
liberalization)

.

* 

Protect the poorest 
against price 
increases but with 
improved 
compensatory 
schemes 
Increase the 
efficiency and 
coverage of social 
protection schemes 
(active labor market 
policies, social 
insurance and 
assistance programs) 

* 

Improve targeting of Ongoing 
assistance programs, * Update of social 
including food 
conditions 
subsidies 
* SSR to be 
* Pursue dialogue to 
completed in 
FY2000 
identify key 
measures with 
Proposed 
country counterparts * Dissemination 
to reform the social 
seminar for the 
protection system 
SSR 
with view to increase * Social Protection 
cost-efficiency, 
Strategy Note 
target safety net 
(AAA) 
programs, and 
contribute to labor
market and financial
development

a Shift to demand 
management in the 
water sector 
* Pursue strategies on 
irrigation and water 
conservation through 
completion of 
ongoing dam 
constructions 
* Focus on water 

* 

Identify with country Ongoing 
counterparts key 
* Greater Tunis 
measures to improve 
Sewerage 
demand-driven 
* Water Supply and 
management and 
Sewerage 
cost recovery, 
Proposed 
especially in 
* Water Sector 
agriculture 
Investment Loan I 
* Support reforms in 
* Urban Water 
irrigation and water 
Supply 

* Complete review 
of social security 
strategy 
* Agree on reforms 
in social security 
system 

* 

* Formulation of 
revised Water 
Code 
Implementation of 
revised tariff policy 
Increase average 
tariff/average cost 
beyond 87% 
* New institutional 
arrangement for 

* 

* GTZ: National
Social
Communicationi for
Families
* Agence Francaise
de Developpement:
training
* CIDA (Canada)
* Caisse de Dep6t et
Placement du
Quebec: pensions
* The EU
* AfDB
* USAID

* Agence Francaise
de D6veloppement:
Sanitation in
populous urban
areas III
* GTZ: Optimal
Management of
Water Resources
* KfW
* EIB: ONAS III /

Areas

Development Priority 

_ 

Development Cooperation Programs 

l

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

World Bank Group Programs 

Other Partner Programs

ANNEX B9b
Page 11 of 16

Instruments 

treatment and 
reutilization in 
agriculture 
Increase access to 
potable water in rural 
areas 

* 

conservation 
* Encourage deepened 
private involvement 
in waste water 
treatment 

* 

Progress Indicators
water 
Improved surface 
water management 
* Groundwater use 
as a percentage of 
recharge 
Increase access of 
rural population to 
safe water from 
current 80% to 
90% 

* 

* 

Medium-sized
towns Sanitation;
Tunis South Lake
Sanitation;
SNCFTII; Hill
Dams
The EU: interest
rate subsidies on
EIB projects;
technical assistance
to Hill Dams
(under preparation)
* OECF: small hill
dams, rural water
supply and
wastewater
treatment projects
*Nordic Investment
Bank
* Arab Fund

Environment 
and Culture

"See detailed Environment Program Matrix at the End"

Development Priority 

Development Cooperation Programs 

l

ANNEX B9b
Page 12 of 16

Areas

._________ _ 

_______ 

Transport 
a 
Telecommunica 
tions 

Tuniisia 

World Bank Group 

* Develop and 
modernize basic 
transport 
infrastructure, with a 
focus on roads and 
agricultural tracks 
Increase coverage of 
the telephone, radio 
and television 
networks 

* 

* Continue to 
accompany 
government's efforts 
in the transport 
sector by supporting 
the creation of an 
appropriate 
institutional 
fiamework for public 
transport 
* Encourage deepened 
private sector 
participation in the 
transport sector 
* Pursue dialogue with 
the authorities to
encourage further
liberalization in the
telecom sector
Pursue discussions
with the authorities
on WBG support to
development of new

* 

technologies

World Bank Group Programs 

Instruments 

| 

Progress Indicators

* 

* Agree on telecom 
liberalization 
Lower costs of 
transport and 
telecommunicationi 
services 
Increase private 
provision of 
infrastructure 

* 

* 

* 

Ongoing 
Transport Sector 
Investment 
Extensive 
treatment of 
transport and 
telecoms sector 
issues and options 
in PSA 
Proped 
Tranisport Sector
Investment 11
Policy Note on
Infonnation
Technologies

* 

* 

Other Partner Programs

* AfDB: State
Classified Road
Development
Project; Railway
Infrastructure
Modernization
Project
* OECF
EIB
* Arab Fund

* 

Development Priority 

| 

Development Cooperation Programs 

l

ANNEX B9b
Page 13 of 16

Areas

Energy 

Tunisia 

World Bank Group 

.

Increase the 
coverage of the 
electrification 
network, especially 
in rural areas 
* Pursue efforts to 
develop solar-water 
heating systems 

* 

* 

Support 
Government's efforts 
in the energy sector. 
with a focus on 
energy efficiency 
and renewable 
energies 
Encourage deepened 
private sector 
participation in the 
power sector

-

-

Other Partner Programs

World Bank Group Programs 
f Progress Indicators 
Instruments 
Ongoing 
* Lower electricity 
France
* GDF-Solar Water 
losses below 10.6% * Germanly
lieating 
of output 
* UK
* ESMAP- TESCOP 
Lower traditional 
Italy
Proposed 
fuel use below 13% * 
EIB
* Assessments of 
of total energy use 
* AfDB: Rural
environment 
Electrification
impact of energy 
Project (Electricity
supply and use 
VI)
system

* 

* 

* 

Development Objectives 
Diagnosis of Problems 

Strategy Actions 

Bank Group Instruments 
NLS 
Lending! Financing 

Othier Donor Instruments 

Progress
Indicators

Environment Program Matrix

MIACROECONOMY 

AND ENVIRONMIENTI

(1) Trade and Environment 

_ 

Improve understand of the 

linkages between trade and 

the environment to assist 
policy makers. 

-MEDPOLICIFS on-going 

the impact of environmental

study on

regulationis on the export

competitiveness of the country.

-ESW on trade and environment 
the context of the EU Free T'rade

in

Agreement. 

_____._._ 

COASTrAI 

ZONE MANAGEMENT 

_.__ 

____ 
.

_ 

_ 

_ 

.______

_

I)cvelopment Objectives / 
Diagnosis of Problems 

-Tourism is a vital economic 
activity. 90% of tourism activities 
arc located along the coast. 
-Enhancc local capacity in 
protecting and managing the coastal 
area. 

Strategy / Actions 

-Improve Al'AL's technical 
expertise in coastal zone 
management. 
-Diversify tourism activities to 
reduce pressure on the coast. 

ANNEX B9b
Page i4 of 16

Other Donor Instruments 

Progress
Indicators

EIB, Franice

-Build up local
cxpertise to deal with
accidental oil spills.

___. 

_

___ 

_ 

_.__ 

Bank Group Instruments 
L 
_ 
ISLS 
Lending / Financing
-Technical Assistance to Al'AI. to 
-GEP grant project "Protection 
identify best practices for 
of Marhie Resources in the Gulf
rehabilitation, maniagemcnt and 
of Gabes.
protection of fragile areas. 
-GEF oni-goinig project "Oil 
-Technical Assistance to assist 
pollution managemenit project 
APAL in adopting anti-erosion 
for the Southwest 
measures appropriate to the Tunisian Mediterranean Sea".
coast.
-Training to APAL's staff to
develop local expertise in assessing
damages caused by econonsie
activities on the coastal zone and
marine resources.
-METAP activity: "Protection of
coastal lagoons"
-METAP on-going feasibility study
for "Creation of a Surveillance
System of the Coastal Zone"
-WB on-going study "Managemenit
and Promotion of Cultural Heritage" 

_._ 

.

NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

(I) Energy 

-Encourage energy conservation and 
use of renewable energy. 
-Improved efficiency of utilization 
-Improve energy use efficiency. 
of fuels 
-Increase diesel price (see Pollution 
-Reduce CO, emission by increasing Management below). 
energy efficiency. 

-Rapid Energy/Environment 
Assessments for priority setting of 
the environment impacts of the 
energy supply and use system 

-iEF grant "Solar Water 
Heating Systems in Tunisia" 

______________ 
_ _ _ _ 

__ __ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
__________ 
____ 
________ 

___ _____ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

-Installation of
50,000m' of solar
collector areas,
savings of 6,000 ton
of oil equivalent and
reduction of It8,000
tons of CO, emissions
by 2003.
- Assessment report
on the priority
investmnents and
policy reformis
related to
environmiiental clean
up for- the eniergy
supply sectors and
environmental
regulatory policy for

e_ ienerg y ssu p ply/use

Strategy / Actions 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donor Instruments 

NLS 

Lending 

/ Financing

KfW, EIB, OECF 

-Achieve integrated water resources 
-"Water Sector Study" will sct the 
-"Water Sector Investment 
management. 
basis for a long term strategy for 
Loan" will focus on demand 
-Achieve better allocation of limited water resources management. At the management (tariff reform, 
water resources in agriculture and 
Round Table discussion in April 99, 
irrigation efficiency, water 
improve the long term sustainability 
it was agreed to include in the 
reuse). Expected to be launched 
of the agricultural sector. 
proposed vision for the water sector: between 2000-2002. The WSIL 
-Reduce water wastage. 
Water Resources Conservation and will include an environmental 
-Increase water prices, especially for Environmental Protection issues 
management plan to address 
irrigation. 
especially for water quality, 
potential adverse impacts as 
pollution reduction and coastal 
well as specific cross-sectoral
zones management. 
studies and training under the
environmental protection and
capacity building component

-National Strategy for water and 
waste water sector.

Development Objectives / 
Diagnosis of Problems 

(2) Water Resources 

-Improve water resource 
management to ensure long term 
water supply availability and 
quality. 

POLLUTION MANAGEMENT

-WB on-going "Natural
Resources management
Project". Enhance natural
resource management and
improve agricultural
productivity through a
participatory approach in 3
different climatic zones.

-WB on going "Transport 
Reform and Investment 
Program". 

KfW -FODEP 
EIB Pollution Abatement for 
Industrial States 
EIB-project on climinating 
discharges of phoshogypsum in 
the Gulf of Gabes 

-Controlling and reducing pollution METAP activity: Tunisia Pollution 
from industries 
Control Program 

(1) Pollution 
-Industrial pollution from public 
sector metallurgical and chemical 
industries 
-Lack of treatment and proper 
disposal of industrial waste. 
-Air pollution from transport and 
industrial sectors. 
-Raise diesel prices relative to 
-Under-pricing of diesel fuel relative gasoline. 
to gasoline. 

-Adoption of less polluting fuels in 
the transport sector. 

ANNEX B9b
Page 15 of16

Progress
Indicators

-% increase in water
prices.
-Better allocation of
water.
-Provision of safe
water for 100 percent
of urban population
and 90 percent for
rural areas.

-Pollution load
assessment report.
-Industrial audits
reports in selected
industries
-Increase market
share of unleaded
gasoline from 4% to
20% in 2002 and 33%
in 2005, decrease lead
content of gasoline
from 0.4g/I to below
0.1 5g/l, and decrease
sulfur content of
diesel fromn 0.4% to
below 0.05% in 2002.
-Relative price of
diesel vs. gasoline.

ANNEX B9b
Page 16 of 16

Development Objectives / 
Diagnosis of Problems 

Strategy / Actions 

Bank Group Instruments 
NLS 
Lendingj/TFinncing 

_ 

Other Donor Instruments 

(2) Solid Waste Management 
-Improve the disposal and 
-Collection of SW is of satisfactory management of municipal solid 
standards with good participation by waste 
the private sector. 
-Need to improve the transfer, 
treatment and disposal of solid 
waste. 

-WB on going: " Municipal 
-METAP activity "Plastic Packaging Development Project 11: 
Waste Collection and Recycling 
Project for Greater Tunis" 

KfW, GTZ 

-METAP activity "Regional Solid
Waste Management Project"

(3) Wastewater 
-Remarkable wastewater services. 
-Lack of storm water sewers. 
-Need to pay attention to the 
treatment and disposal of large 
quantities of sludge. 

-Improve waste water quality for 
irrigation and aquifer recharging 

National Strategy for the water and 
waste-water sector 

-WB on going "Greater Tunis 
-EIB loan "Assainissement, 
Sewerage and Reuse Project" 
Dragage et Remblaiement du 
One component of the project is Lac Sud de ''unis" 
to reuse treated water for 
KfW loan: "Rural water and 
irrigation and for aquifer 
sanitation 
recharging. 
OECF funded water and 
sanitation 

Progress
Idicators

- Establishment of 1-2
sanitary landfills
- Feasibility study for
a public-private
partnership

-Secondary treatment
of 85 percent of
wastewater in urban
areas and re-use of
50 percent of treated
waste water for
irrigation and
industrial purposes.

ANNEX B 10

Tunisia - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
Performancea 

Major issue 

Country 
Prioritc 

Bank 
Priorityc 

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank prioritiesd

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 
Public sector 

Gender 

Good 

Excellent 
Fair 

Good 

Human Development
Education 

Good 

Health, nutrition & popula'n Good 

Social protection 

Good 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural Development 

Fair 

Environment 

Excellent 

Social development 
Finance, Private Sector and
Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy and mining 
Infrastructure 

Good 

Poor 

Poor 

Good 
Fair 

High

Stronger growth- High 
employment-
social protection
nexus
Speed of reforms Moderate Moderate
Modernization & High 
High
decentralization
Maintain the very Low 
strong advances
already made in
gender equity

Low

Quality and 
completion rates
Quality and 
efficiency
Efficiency and 
better targeting 

High 

High 

High

Moderate EU support

Moderate High 

Dialogue
continues

Moderate Moderate

Resource 
management,
living standards
Industrial 
pollution, coastal 
zone management 
Hard core poverty High 

High 

Restructuring/insu High 
rance/mortgage/
SME finance
Incentives and 
competition
Efficiency/ PPI 
Cost/quality mix 

High 

Moderate Bilateral and
GEF & METAP
support

High

High

High

Moderate Moderate
High 
High

bThis 

'Indicated as "excellenf', "good", "fair", or "poor".
refers to principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty"; for education, "female secondary
completion"; for environment, "urban air pollution").
'Priority is indicated as "low", "moderate", or "high".
dGives explanation if priorities do not agree; e.g., another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Tunisia - CAS Review of Environmental Issues

Annex B1 1
Page 1 of 5

Tunisia leads the Middle East North Africa (MENA) region with regard to environmental
protection. The strong institutional setup and legislative framework have both contributed to this
success. The Ministry of Environment and Regional Planning (MEAT) heads four specialized
agencies: the National Environmental Protection Agency (ANPE), the Agency for the Protection
and the Planning of Coastal Areas (APAL), the National Sanitation Board (ONAS), and the
National Agency for Renewable Energy (ANER).

MEAT also administers several special programs to help the Governnent meet a range of
environmental challenges. These programs include the urban and rural sanitation program, the
"Blue Hand" program for the protection of the sea and coastal resources, the PRONAGDES
(National Program for the Management of Solid Wastes), an industrial pollution program, the
"Yellow Hand" program for desertification control, the "Green Hand" program for the
preservation of biodiversity, and a program for education and environmental awareness.

Tunisia also has a strong policy for sustainable development in place. In 1993, a National
Commission for Sustainable Development was created to coordinate among different actors and
reconcile economic and social development with the protection of natural resources. The
Government's commitment for environmental protection is also reflected through the budget
allocated in the most recent five year development plan. Planned investments in activities related
to ecology and environmental protection were increased by 67% in the Ninth Plan in comparison
with the Eight Plan to represent 1.6% of GDP. This is a clear indication of the importance
attached by the Government of Tunisia (GOT) to environmental issues.

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is well developed in Tunisia. The legal framework
clearly specifies the classification of projects and the key steps in the EIA cycle. ANPE
adrninisters the EIA process, while the private consulting sector has the capacity to implement
EIA's. The government is firmly committed to the application and enforcement of EIA
procedures to all projects which have adverse environmental impacts.

The issues with the strongest links to economic outcomes are the following.

Key Issues in Environment and Development

The EU Free Trade Agreement. Mutual phased reductions in tariffs between Tunisia and the EU
will culminate in free trade by the end of 2008. This is expected to provide substantial economic
benefits to Tunisia, but it raises a number of concerns with regard to the environment. In order to
plan the transition to free trade, and to adapt policies as appropriate, the GOT would benefit from
technical studies on (i) EU product quality standards that have environmental dimensions (for
example, standards for pesticide residues on food, or for the recyclability of products or their
packaging), (ii) informal or voluntary requirements for cleaner production processes (such as
ISO 14000), and (iii) forecasts of sectoral growth rates in Tunisia, so that resource requirements
and pollution emissions can be foreseen.

Tourism and Coastal Zone Management. Tourism revenues represent 11% of GDP, and 90% of
these revenues are generated along the coast. Pressures on coastal resources from tourism

Annex Bll

Page 2 of 5

development, population (two thirds of Tunisians live on the coast) and industrial development
(80% of industrial zones are in coastal areas) are intense. Tourism revenues are therefore at risk
from the pressures on the coastal zone. Priority management issues in coastal areas include (i)
controlling beach erosion, (ii) monitoring and managing water quality, and (iii) protecting
sensitive environments that provide environmental services and may also be tourist attractions.

The World Bank Role in the Environment in Tunisia

In terms of Tunisian need for World Bank finance, Tunisia has access to concessionnal financing
for environmental projects from the European Union and bilateral donors. Therefore, the
comparative advantage of the World Bank lies in non-lending services, which take advantage of
the Bank's technical expertise and wide experience, or in providing soft finance in the form of
GEF funds.

Against this backdrop, and on the basis of a CAS environment mission to Tunis in June of 1999,
the following environmental analysis matrix was constructed.

Environmental Analysis Matrix

Annex Bi1
Page 3 of 5

Natural Resource Management 

Energy 

Water Resources 

Coastal Zone 
Management

__________________ 

Pollution Management 

Global Concerns

Pollution 

Solid Waste 

Wastewater 

Trade &

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Environment

Current Total energy use 
issues 
estimated at 7.6 
- local million tons of oil 
- regional equivalent (13% 
- global 
traditional fuel and 
87% commercial 
energy). 

CO 2 emissions 
estimated at 16 million 
metric tons per year. 

"Despite frequent 
droughts, Tunisians are no 
longer thirsty" this 
sentence by the MOA 
reflects the great effort 
made by GOT to provide 
water supply to the 
population. 97% of the 
urban population is 
connected to the water 
supply network (expected 
to reach 99% by 2001). In 
rural areas access to safe 
An indicator of energy water supply is projected 
efficiency is the dollar 
to reach78% by 2001. 
amount of GDP 
generated per kg of 
energy used. This 
indicator is equal to 
$2.9/kg of oil 
equivalent (compared 
to an average of 
$6.3/kg in the EU). 

Limited quantity of water 
supply is an important 
issue and is the focus of 
major attention in Tunisia. 
The GOT is committed to 
make all the necessary 
progress to improve water 
use efficiency. 

Tourism is an 
important 
economic 
activity, with the 
coast being the 
major touristic 
attraction. More 
than 9/10 of 
tourism activities 
are located along 
the coast. 

Industrial pollution is an 
Municipal solid waste 
important issue. Industrial 
generated in Tunisia 
solid waste include about 
is estimated at 2 
7,000Vty of heavy metals, 
million t/y, i.e. 1/2 kg 
3,000t/y of infectious waste of waste per day per 
(mainly from hospitals), 
inhabitant. 
and 8.7 million t/y of non- 
hazardous waste (mainly 
phospho-gypsun and 
sludge). 

Air pollution problems 
The coast 
could be acute in certain 
suffered from 
region. The region of 
important 
Greater Tunis suffers from 
degradation and 
high concentration of lead 
beach erosion. 
from the transport sector. 
Beach erosion 
Dust PMI0 emissions are 
problems are 
particularly high in Gabes. 
And Sulfur emissions are 
especially acute 
in the Jerba Island very high in Sfax. 
and the Gulf of 
Tunis. 

Fuel prices are low 
80% of water resources are 
relative to EU 
used in agriculture 
averages, and the 
(wastage in water use 
relative price of diesel 
estimated at 30%-40%). 
fuel is particularly low. Effort should be made to 
focus on the most 
productive uses of water in 
To reconcille an agriculture. 

To reconcile an 
increase in energy use 
and quality of life, 
Water quality is also at risk 
Tunisia needs to use its because of industrial 
energy more 
pollution; and over- 
efficiently and to 
exploitation of water 
encourage the use of 
resources that leads to
renewable energies. 
saltwater intrusion. Free 
access to private wells also 
pauses risks of 
contamination. 

In urban areas I00% of the Tunisia was the first
population has access to 
country of the
sanitation. 
MENA region to
sign a free trade
ONAS, the agency 
agreement with the
responsible for wastewater EU.
services, had connected
The collection and 
more than 80% of urban 
transport of municipal population and 50% of 
waste are well 
rural population to the 
developed with a 
sewage system in 1999. 
substantial 
participation by the 
55 wastewater treatment 
private sector (in 
plants have already been
1997 more than 43 
built and an additional 20
communities had 
are planned for 2001.
their waste collected About 90% of the
by private 
wastewater collected by
contractors). 
ONAS is treated and more
than 20% of treated
Treatment and proper wastewater is reused.
disposal of hazardous
waste is lacking. 

Understanding the
various links
between trade and
environment has
raised a lot of
interest in Tunisia.

Waste transfer and 
disposal still require 
major improvement. 
There is a growing 
need for sanitary 
landfills.

Increasing service
coverage and striking a
balance between imposing
"socially acceptable"
tariffs and achieving cost-
recovery will be a
challenge for ONAS.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~and 

Tunisia is poorly equipped
with storm water sewers
drainage systems. As a
result, rain often causes
flooding, is slow to drain
in urban centers and can
generate pollution through
infiltration into the soil.

A large quantity of sludge
is generated in the 55
WWTP, and this quantity
is expected to increase
with the construction of 20

____________ 
________________ 
___________ 

____________ 

_.____ 

additional WWTP.

Natural Resource Management 

Energy 

Water Resources 

Coastal Zone 
Management

Pollution Management 

Annex Bl I

Page 4 of 5

Global Concerns

Pollution 

Solid Waste 

Wastewater 

Trade &
Environment

Driving Energy demand 
force, e.g.: 
expected to rise driven 
- population by population growth 
growth and increased 
- poverty economic activities 
- inequality 

Low endowment of water 
resources. 80% of water 
used in agriculture. 

Population growth
and rapid
urbanization.

Rapid and intense Lack of strict industrial 
industrial, 
waste management 
residential and 
programs in the past. 
tourism
development 
Important industrial
along the coast. 
activity. Old vehicle fleet
Building 
and consumption of
infrastructures too polluting fuels.
close to the
seashore.

Impacts of 
macro 
policies 

Impacts of 
Increasing energy 
sectoral prices has provided an 
policies 
incentive for more 
efficient energy use. 

Free access to private wells Policies to limit
for irrigation pauses high 
and control
risk of contamination 
development used
(problem especially acute 
to be lacking in
in coastal areas). 
Tunisia. Since the
creation of APAL
in 1995
development
along the coast is
becoming very
strict and tightly
controlled.

High water subsidy in the 
past contributed to a lack 
of efficient water use 
(water subsidy estimated at 
$94 million in 1994). The 
GOT is committed to 
gradually decrease
subsidies and revise water
tariffs.

A special unit has
been created at the
MEAT to deal with
trade and
environment issues.

The impact of the
FTA with EU on
Tunisia's
environment needs
to be analyzed

Natural Resource Management 

Coastal Zone 
Manlagement

Pollution Management 

Global Concerns

Annex BIl

Page 5 of 5

Wastewater 

Trade &
Enviromnent
WB project "Greater Tunis MEDPOLICIES has
Sewerage and Reuse 
been studying the
Project". This project's 
impact of
aim is to rehabilitate and 
environmental
expand the sewage 
regulations (such as
an increase in water
network and wastewater 
treatment capacities, and to 
and energy price)
reuse treated water for 
on the export
irrigation. 
competitiveness of
the country.

Energy 

Water Resources 

Pollution 

Solid Waste 

PRONAGDES 
program deals with 
all issues related to 
waste management. 

18 landfills and a 
composting plants are 
under preparation. 

A WB "Transport Reform 
and Investment Program" is 
being prepared. The targets 
ofthe program are to 
increase the market share of 
unleaded gasoline, decrease 
the sulfur content of diesel. 
and decrease the lead 
content of gasoline. Ihe 
project also includes the 
creation of air pollution
monitoring capacities in
large cities.

Impacts of GEF project on Solar 
projects and Water Heating System 
will install 50,000 ti2
programs 
of solar collector areas, 
reduce energy use by 
6,000 toe, and reduce 
Co2 emissions by 
18,000 tons by 2003. 

ANER undertakes 
awareness campaign 
with regard to energy 
efficiency. It has also 
initiated multiple 
studies and pilot 
project to test 
renewable energy 
systems in Tunisia. 

"Program d'economie 
d'eau" whereby the 
govermnent subsidizes 
60% of investment in 
inrigation systems that 
minimize water use. 

The results of the "Water 
Sector Study" were 
presented in a Round Table 
in April 99, and should be 
finalized in May 99. This 
will set the basis for a long 
term strategy for water 
management. 

"Blue Hand" 
Program for the 
protection ofthe 
sea atid coastal 
resources. 

APAL is putting 
in place a Coastal 
Observatoryto 
collect and 
analyze 
information on 
the status ofthe 
coast. This will
facilitate the
surveillance,
control and
planning of
coastal areas.

WB project
"Management
and Promotion of
Cultural
Heritage".
GEF project
"Protection of
marine Resources
in the Gulf of
Gabes"

Environment 
/ Resource 
Institutional 
issues_

Better regulation and
coordination of
lanidfills is required.

MAP SECTION

IBRD 24726R

8 

9 

t 

o 

Gull. 01 
Tunis

MEDITERRANEAN 

Bizerte 

SEA 

2 

BIZERTE 

3

-Zi X 
, 

_ 

X 

4z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'A 
Bea ARIANA Q*J

37°

I ENOLJA 0BErN 

u
ENArous 
AROUS 

BEJA 

r"', Jendouba 

,e

Zaghouan 
ZAGHOUAN

'Nbeul

< 

f El Kef 
s 

_ 

°~~~E 
EL KEF 

Siliana 

G u! f cf 

L , 

;;.

36! 

0 

.

\ 

36°

r 

/ 

C\ 

, Sousse
V 
OMonastir
, '- MON`ASTtR
(, 

Kairouan 

0 

rx ' 
\ KASSERINE 

~~KAIROUAN 

'

(' 

KAIRGUAN 

i

I- 

0't~~~~~~-1 

dahdia

use 

rifle~ ~~-- 

MAHDiA

r. < 

> ~Kasserine 

r. 

Sidi Bou 

.i

Zid 
SIDI 

Sfax

S

8OU 

SFAX

r 

l J 

v 

9 

I 

.

Gafsa 

Z I 

°; 

Mishkor

GAFSA F,< 

* a 
( Tozeuro(cid:143) 

P~~~~~~~~~~edo' 

34-

-_ 

a b e s

Chott 

etl-Gbelli 

GABES

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~E 
l

S 

Jerid 

<

M.d--~~~~~~~~W/ 

-'''

-33 ' 

, 

GBELLI 

Tatcouine 

!

\. 

TATAOUINE

TUNISIA 
TUNISIE 

/' 

320

A

SALT LAKES

LACS SALES 

j 

i

GOVERNORATE 
CAPITALES DES 
GOUVERNORATS 

CAPITALS

0 

25 
50 
KIL'OMETERS

75

\ 

GOVERNORATE 
BOUNDARIES 
FRONTIERES DES 
FRONTI~~~~~RES 

i 

31

\ 

.

The boundaries, colors,

DES ~~~~denommnat,ors and any
~~~~~~on 

GO U V ER NOR A Ts 

) 

other informotion shown
/ The Worid Bank Group,
uply, on the port of

NATIONAL CAPITAL 
N A TIO N AL C A PITA L 
CAPITALE DU PAYS 

this map do not

,L 

; 

a\y judgmenton the legal
status of any 
territory,
or any endorsement
or acceptance of such

INTERNATIONAL 
BOUNDARIES 
FRONTIERES 
INTERNATIONALES 

/ 

0 t 0Rboundaries.

APRIL 1 995

