Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 69913-SL

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
FOR THE PERIOD FY10-FY13

July 12, 2012

World Bank
West Africa Department 1
IFC
MIGA
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without the
World Bank‘s authorization.

REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE – FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (as of May31, 2012)
Currency Unit

= Leone

US$1.00 = Le 4,340

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAA
ACC
ACGF
AfDB
AML/CFT
APC
APEIE
ASREP
BB
BECE
BHP
BSL
CAADP
CAP Scan
CAR
CAS
CASA
CASPR
CDTI
CET
CG
CHYAO
CPAR
CPIA
CPR
CSO
CSP

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Anti-Corruption Commission
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund
African Development Bank
Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
All People‘s Congress
Africa Program for Education Impact Evaluation
Agriculture Sector Rehabilitation Project
Bank Budget
Basic Education Certificate Examination
Bumbuna Hydroelectric Project
Bank of Sierra Leone
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program
Management for Development Results Capacity Scan
Commitment at Risk
Country Assistance Strategy
Conflict-Affected States in Africa
Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report
Community-Directed Ivermectin Distribution
Common External Tariff
Consultative Group
Child and Youth in Africa Trust Fund
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Civil Society Organization
Country Strategy Paper

CSR
CWIQ
DfID
DFGG
DP
DPO
DOTS
DTIS
EFA FTI
EGRP
EITI
EMS
ENCISS
EPA
ESMAP
ESW
EU
FCS
FDI
FIAS
FIRST
FIU
FM
FMCG
FSAP
FSF
FY
GDP
GEF
GER
GoSL
GRGC
GRGG
GVWC
HIPC
HRMO
IBRD
ICA
ICAO
IDA
IDP
IDF
IFC
IFMIS
IMF

Country Status Report
Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire
Department for International Development
Demand for Good Governance
Development partner
Development Policy Operation
Directly Observed Treatment Short Course
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
Education for All Fast Track Initiative
Economic Governance Reform Program
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Education Management System
Enhancing Interaction and Interface between Civil Society and the State
to Improve Poor People‘s Lives
Economic Partnership Agreement
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Fragile and Conflict affected Situations
Foreign direct investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening
Financial intelligence unit
Financial management
Fast Moving Consumer Goods
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fragile States Facility
Fiscal Year
Gross domestic product
Global Environment Facility
Gross Enrollment Ratio
Government of Sierra Leone
Governance Reform and Growth Credit
Governance Reform and Growth Grant
Guma Valley Water Company
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Human Resources Management Office
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Investment Climate Assessment
International Civil Aviation Organization
International Development Association
Infrastructure Development Project
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Integrated Financial Management Information System
International Monetary Fund

IPFMRP
IRCBP
JAS
JICA
JSANS
JSS
JSDF
KFW
LC
LG
LGA
MDAs
MDBS
MDG
MDRI
MDTF
MICS
MIGA
MMMR
MMR
MOA
MoFED
MOU
MT
MTEF
NaCSA
NASSIT
NCP
NER
NERICA
NPA
NPPA
NPSE
NSA
NPV
NSAP
O&M
PAD
PAF
PAR
PCR
PEFA
PEP
PER
PETS
PFM

Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project
Institutional Reform and Capacity Building Project
Joint Assistance Strategy
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Joint Staff Advisory Notes
Junior Secondary School
Japan Social Development Fund
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
Local Council
Local Government
Local Government Act
Ministries, departments and agencies
Multi-donor Budget Support
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Mines and Mineral Resources (MMR)
Ministry of Mineral Resources
Memorandum of Agreement
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
Memorandum of Understanding
Metric ton
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
National Commission for Social Action
National Social Security and Insurance Trust
National Commission for Privatization
Net Enrollment Ratio
New Rice for Africa
National Power Authority
National Public Procurement Authority
National Primary School Examination
Non State Actor
Net present value
National Social Action Project
Operation and maintenance
Project Appraisal Document
Progress Assessment Framework
Portfolio at Risk
Primary Completion Rate
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Private Enterprise Partnership for Africa
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Public financial management

PHU
PIU
PPIAF
PPP
PRGF
PRS
PRSP
PSC
PSD
RABI
RCHP
RIMsys
ROSC
SA
SHARP
SIL
SL
SLIEPA
SLIHS
SLPRSP
SLRA
SMC
SSA
SWAp
TA
TB
TEU
TURFS
UNMIL
WAPP
UK
UN
UNDP
UNFPA
UNHCR
UNICEF
UNIPSIL
USAID
VSAT
WAPP
WBG
WBI
WFP
WHO

Public health unit
Project implementation unit
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Public-Private Partnership
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Public Services Commission
Private sector development
Removing Administrative Barriers to Investment Project
Reproductive and Child Health Project
Results integration and management system
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Social Accountability
Sierra Leone HIV/AIDS Response Project
Specific Investment Loan
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone Investment and Export Promotion Agency
Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey
Sierra Leone Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Sierra Leone Roads Authority
School Management Committee
Sub Saharan Africa
Sector-wide approach
Technical assistance
Tuberculosis bacillus
Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit
Territorial Use Rights Fisheries
United Nations Mission in Liberia
West African Power Pool
United Kingdom
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations High Commission for Refugees
United Nations Children‘s Fund
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
United States Agency for International Development
Very Small Aperture Terminal
West Africa Power Pool
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Food Program
World Health Organization

WORLD BANK
Vice President:

Makhtar Diop

Country Director:

Yusupha Crookes

Country Manager:

Vijay Pillai

Task Team Leader (s):

Vijay Pillai and Renée Desclaux

Task Team Members

Sergiy Kulyk, Cyrus Talati, Anders Jensen, Thomas Losse-Mueller,
Mamadou Barry, Christopher Gabelle, Mohamed Sidie Sheriff,
Margaux Hall

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
Vice President:

Thierry Tanoh

Country Director:

Yolande Duhem

Resident Representative :

Mary Agboli

Strategy Unit:

Frank Douamba

Core CAS Team:

Mary Agboli

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
Vice President and Chief Operation Officer

Michel Wormser

Finance and Risk Management:

Conor Healy, Moritz Zander

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close and fruitful collaboration with the Government of
Sierra Leone in the preparation of this Country Assistance Strategy, Progress Report (CASPR). This
CASPR was prepared by members of the World Bank Group‘s Sierra Leone Country Team, including
Vijay Pillai, Sergiy Kulyk, Renée Desclaux, Cyrus Talati, Roberto Panzardi, Susan Hirshberg, John Van
Dyck, Vivek Srivastava, Chris Gabelle, Jens Kristensen, Serdar Yilmaz, Qaiser Khan, Waqar Haider,
Yusuf Foday, Evelyn Awittor, Margaux Hall, Sidie Sheriff, Nikolay Nikolov, Gibril Jalloh, Chris Atim,
Christophe Lemière, Alan Moody, Hardwick Tchale, Bidemi Abioseh Carrol, Charles Annor-Frempong,
John Virdin, Thomas Losse-Mueller, Cari Votava, Michael Jarvis, Moritz Zader, Frank Armand
Douamba, Mary Agboli, Maria Miller, Anders Jensen, Conor Healy under the overall leadership of
Yusupha Crookes.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………………...1

II. Country Context and Recent Developments………………………………………………..............2
III. Progress towards CAS Outcomes and Portfolio Performance

……………. ……….……7

A. Progress against CAS Pillars: Human Development and Inclusive Growth………..………….7
B. Portfolio Performance ……………………………………………………………………….... 9
C. Lessons Learned……………………………………………………………………………….11
IV. Adjustments to the CAS moving forward…………………………………… ……………………11
V. Key Constraints and Risks……………………………………………………….…………….........15

Annex1a :
Annex1b:
Annex 2 :
Annex 3 :
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:
Annex 7:

Annex 8:
Annex 9:
Annex 10:
Annex 11:
Annex 12:
Annex 13:
Annex 14:
Annex 15:

CAS Results Matrix – FY09-12 Progress to date
CAS Results Matrix – FY12-13
Managing the Extractives Boom
Promoting Social Accountability for Development Impact
Progress on Millennium Development Goals
CAS (FY10-FY13): Main Funding Sources
Changes in the Indicative Lending Program for the FY10-13 CAS
Status of Non-Lending Activities
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IDA Base Case lending Program
Sierra Leone‘s Key Economic and Program Indicators
IFC Investment Operations for Sierra Leone
IFC‘s Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
IDA Operations Portfolio and Grants
Donor Partnership
Sierra Leone at-a-glance

MAP of Sierra Leone No. 33478

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This Progress Report assesses the implementation to date and the adjustments to the Joint
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) of the World Bank Group (WBG) and the African
Development Bank (AfDB) for FY 2010-2013. 1 The CAS discussed by the Bank‘s Board on April 6,
2010 was based on the priorities identified in the second Poverty Reduction Strategy, Agenda for Change,
and focused on two pillars: (i) human development; and (ii) promoting inclusive growth. At midterm,
satisfactory progress has been achieved towards meeting the original CAS outcomes and milestones, and
this report proposes adjustments to the CAS in order to align WBG support with significant changes to
the country context.
2.
Two Annual Progress Reports of the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) were prepared by
the Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) in 2010 and 2011. These Progress Reports were prepared
following a joint government/CSO/development partner consultative process, and both reports conclude
that satisfactory progress is being made in addressing priorities under the Agenda for Change. These and
other recent reports have informed this CAS Progress Report. The 2011 Integrated Household Survey
data analysis is currently underway, and the results are expected to be available over the coming months.
The latest available data indicates that during the CAS implementation period progress has been made,
albeit at different levels, on most indicators of growth, poverty, MDGs, fragility, investment climate, and
governance. However, there remain significant challenges and Sierra Leone is still one of the poorest
countries in the world with some of the worst human development indicators.
3.
This CAS Progress Report is being prepared at a significant stage in the country‟s
development. Sierra Leone has enjoyed remarkable peace and stability since the end of the brutal civil
war, ten years ago. The country is now preparing for the third national elections to be held in late 2012,
and if it goes smoothly, Sierra Leone would have achieved the distinction of having run three successful
elections since the end of the conflict. This would be an important milestone in Sierra Leone‘s recovery
from ‗post-conflict‘ status. National stakeholders appreciate the importance of smooth and peaceful
elections, thus ensuring that no reversals take place in the progress that has been made during the past
decade. Another sign of the country‘s recovery is the steady improvement in the CPIA scores – in 2011
with a score of 3.3, Sierra Leone has moved beyond the threshold of Fragile and Conflict Affected States
(FCS)2. At the same time, the country is undergoing a major economic transformation underpinned by
the extractives sector – perhaps the most significant transformation the country is likely to see in a
generation. According to the latest projections, Sierra Leone is likely to record a 36 percent GDP growth
in 20123 – a one-time shift on account of the initiation of iron-ore exports. The extractives-driven boom
comes with its sets of opportunities and challenges, and making the transformation as smooth as possible
will be a priority for the country.
4.
The Progress Report has been prepared as a good segway into the next CAS, which is likely
to be ready by FY14. Sierra Leone is currently initiating the preparation of its third PRS: the ―Agenda
for Prosperity‖, which is expected to be finalized in early 2013. The initial concept note prepared by the
Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) and circulated as a basis for consultations has informed this Progress
Report. The next CAS will be developed once the third PRS has been completed and will follow the Joint
Staff Assessment Note (JSAN).
1

Due to slightly different timeframes of the WBG and AfDB for the CAS, this report is only for the WBG. AfDB is
doing a CAS Completion Report as its CAS is valid only until September 2012. However, the two teams have carried
out joint assessments and have shared the drafts of each other’s reports.
2
Due to the presence of a UN political mission, it is still in the FCS list. The CPIA scores were 3.1 (2008), 3.2 (2009)
and 3.3 (2010).
3
Regional Economic Outlook, Sub-Saharan Africa, IMF, April 2012

1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
5.
At the start of the CAS period, Sierra Leone was recovering from the impact of the global
financial crisis, and has since had mixed macroeconomic performance. Real GDP expanded by 5
percent in 2010 and 6 percent in 2011. The rebound in growth since 2010 has been broad-based, and was
led by the manufacturing, mining, construction and agriculture sectors. The increase in global fuel prices
in 2011 led to an increase in gas prices at the pump, which along with heavy government borrowing from
the Central Bank resulted in inflation, which peaked at 20 percent in early-2011 and then, declined
slightly to 17 percent in late 2011. Fiscal performance has been uneven in 2010 and 2011, and both years
ended with higher than anticipated deficits, borrowing and arrears. The first quarter of 2012 has seen a
clearance of 2011 arrears. While revenue performance has been better than projected, expenditures
mainly driven by capital spending on infrastructure have outstripped revenue collections. Fiscal
consolidation is likely to remain a challenge, not least with looming national elections. The Government
continues to maintain a flexible exchange rate policy to facilitate the adjustment of the economy to
external shocks. Despite the widening trade deficit in 2011, the Leone remained relatively stable,
depreciating by 4.8 percent against the US dollar. The reason was that the higher imports were largely
financed by capital inflows from mining and construction companies. The spurt in imports of machinery
and equipment by the mining companies resulted in a spike in the overall level of imports and an increase
in the current account deficit to 48 percent of GDP in 2011, as compared to 19 percent in 2010.
6.
Mineral exports and prospective discovery of oil and gas are likely to transform the
economic landscape in the short to medium-term although they carry significant downside risks.
Sierra Leone signed two significant mining concession agreements during the CAS period – with London
Mining Plc and African Minerals Limited, and both have started iron-ore exports. The production and
export plans under these concessions show rapid growth between now and 2015-16. Some estimates
indicate that Sierra Leone‘s iron-ore reserves measured at current prices are likely to be worth 40 times its
GDP in 2011. Based on available production plans of mining projects, the acceleration in mineral
depletion is likely to be quite pronounced, rising from 0.6 percent of GDP in 2011 to 14 percent in 2012
and possibly 21 percent in 2015. The uncertainty surrounding these prospective numbers is undoubtedly
high, as it depends on the highly volatile global commodity prices, which impact rents and the volume of
operations. In the oil and gas sector, recent public announcements of discoveries at the Mercury and
Jupiter off-shore wells continue to raise expectations, although the extent of commercial viability still
needs to be confirmed by further testing. The government is also currently evaluating bids received on
the nine new exploration blocks offered in a recent round of bids. These developments in the extractives
sector are very significant, and potentially transformative, and it is important to note that at the time of
preparation of the PRS2 and CAS, the full extent and potential of the extractive reserves were neither
fully realized, nor understood (as a result the CAS has little mention of the extractives sector) and the
sheer rapidity of these developments is noteworthy. These developments also come with significant
downside risks, which are examined later on in the report. Sierra Leone‘s candidacy under the Extractive
Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) has been extended until December 2012. Toward achieving this
goal, the government has completed the staffing and housing of the EITI Secretariat, drafted an EITI Bill,
begun the reconciliation process to produce the Second Report that will cover 2008, 2009, and 2010, and
is in the process of recruiting a validator. A new online Mining Cadastre is expected to improve
transparency regarding mining licences.
7.
Economic diversification takes on added significance in light of the likely extractives boom.
The agriculture sector has shown potential for being the driver of an ‗inclusive growth‘ strategy, with the
government‘s Smallholder Commercialization Program now being implemented across the country. The
prospects of increasing agriculture productivity starting from the current low base e.g. rice average yields
are low at 1 ton/ha, are enormous. Studies show that post-harvest losses in the sector amount to about 40
percent, due to lack of value addition and transportation. The ongoing risks associated with uncertain
2

land tenure systems, always a source of potential conflict, have been recently highlighted in connection
with recent large-scale private investments. This needs to be addressed in order to ensure that the
agriculture sector grows and benefits a large number of the population. The fisheries sector could be
another driver of growth, and the government has started to address the huge challenges of governance
and illegal fishing. During the CAS period, work on the policy, regulatory and institutional environment
in the fisheries sector has been taken forward. With strong government facilitation, other drivers of
growth may emerge, which could also benefit as a result of the extractives boom, if funds are not spent on
the recurrent side. The diversification of economic activities will be key in creating jobs and improving
livelihoods, as mining is unlikely to generate sustainable large-scale employment.
8.
Progress is being made on most Millenium Development Goals (MDGs), but Sierra Leone is
unlikely to meet most of the MDGs by the target date of 2015. The ongoing analysis of the 2011
Integrated Household Survey data will provide the latest poverty data. While it is expected to show a
decline in poverty levels, it is unlikely that the country will meet the MDG target of 40 percent of the
population living below the poverty line by 2015. The latest comparable data is for 2003, i.e. soon after
the conflict, which showed poverty rates of 67 percent. Likewise, as per the latest available data, the
education and health MDGs are unlikely to be achieved. The country appears to be on-track for meeting
the gender equality MDG for primary education and the HIV prevalence rate. Considerable progress is
being made with other MDGs, but as noted earlier, the civil conflict through the 1990s has had a
significant impact on Sierra Leone. Making faster progress towards the MDGs takes on added
importance in order for the extractives boom to result in broad-based growth.
9.
Nonetheless, Sierra Leone has made concerted efforts to address off-track MDGs, especially
on mortality. Further strengthening of delivery systems and citizen accountability will be crucial in
making rapid progress. Strikingly, the country‘s mortality numbers have only recently declined to the
levels, which existed before the onset of the civil war. The maternal mortality rates in 2010 are about the
same as in 1990, as they had spiked by 2000 due to the civil war. Sierra Leone has in fact lost two
decades in making improvements in maternal mortality, as a result of the conflict. Since the start of the
CAS, the country introduced the Free Health Care Initiative (FHCI) for pregnant and lactating mothers
and children under five. While the initial period of FHCI proved to be a ‗shock‘ to the health system, its
implementation seems to have stabilized but is facing capacity and implementation challenges. The
financial sustainability of FHCI, beyond the current support by development partners, needs to be
urgently examined. More recent efforts by GoSL to engage citizens and give them greater authority to
hold health service providers accountable is promising, and could well be critical in achieving significant
progress towards reducing maternal and infant mortality rates in the country. Existing partnerships are
underway on assisting governments to better harness the private sector in order to improve the quality of
health care for the poor.
10.
Decentralized service delivery continues to be a key element in improving basic services in
education, health and water and sanitation, and the time may be ripe for further deepening of the
decentralization process. In many ways, Sierra Leone‘s progress on decentralization could hold useful
lessons for other post-conflict countries, especially in terms of deconcentrating powers by devolving
responsibilities to local authorities, improving service delivery, and strengthening accountability. A
majority of the functions envisaged for devolution under the 2004 Local Government Act (LGA) have
been devolved to Local Councils. The third round of elections of Local Councils, since the LGA are
planned for late-2012, as part of the national elections. Satisfaction levels with quality services provided
by elected councilors are likely to be a key determinant in voter preferences. Recent discussions amongst
stakeholders have highlighted that the aftermath of elections could be a good time to revisit the LGA and
reflect upon lessons from experience, in order to deepen the devolution process. Such a review should
look at devolving authority over line agency staff to Local Councils, and further refine the intergovernmental fiscal transfer arrangements on the basis of a full understanding of local revenue collection
3

and management. The opportunities provided through the decentralization process to actively engage
with citizens and promote social accountability are being taken forward and are expected to continue.
11.
There is a strong recognition in the country of the need to address the challenges of jobs,
especially for youth. According to demographic data, about one-third of Sierra Leone‘s population is in
the 15-35 year age group, of which an estimated 40 to 50 percent are considered unemployed and
underemployed. With prospects of rising national wealth from the extractives sector, youth expectations
are only going to rise, with a risk of social and political alienation if such expectations are not met.
However, the extractives sector is likely to employ only a few thousand people, as the iron-ore projects
currently employ only about 5,000 workers. This generation suffered from the civil war and did not have
education opportunities, so they may not possess the necessary skills needed for the job market. During
the CAS period, the government has prepared a new Employment Policy, set up a dedicated Youth
Ministry and a National Youth Commission, and taken forward targeted youth employment programs.
Nonetheless, the challenge of youth unemployment remains enormous.
12.
Gender equality continues to be a challenge, as well as reducing the unacceptably high rates
of maternal mortality in the country. The FHCI is targeting the latter challenge, although there is a
continuing need for citizen engagement in order to increase accountability and service delivery around the
FHCI. During the CAS period, the government has prepared a National Gender Strategic Plan, but
implementing it requires resources and capacity. The Sexual Offenses Bill has been submitted to
Parliament to address the issue of gender-based violence. In the political sphere, an active lobby is urging
a 30 percent representation of women4 in the upcoming national elections – whether Parliament will enact
the necessary legislation in time for the elections remains uncertain. A recent assessment on the barriers
to economic inclusion of women shows that Sierra Leone compares favorably with many African
countries in ensuring that the laws do not differentiate between men and women in terms of their ability to
work and run a business5. However, customs and traditional practices do not always allow equal
opportunities for women. Further, studies to date on decentralization have found that citizens, and
women in particular, lack the confidence in engaging authorities and demanding better governance. Yet,
gender equity has progressed well with 49 percent of pupils in primary education being girls and 45
percent in secondary education, but this ratio drops at the tertiary level. There remains a critical need to
ensure that Sierra Leone‘s development progress accrues to women as well as men.
13.
Private sector activity has increased significantly with continuing improvements in the
investment climate. The country‘s Doing Business scores have improved significantly during the CAS
period, and in the 2012 Doing Business report, Sierra Leone was ranked among the top ten global
reformers. These improvements would need to be sustained for at least the next five years in order for the
country to become one of the investment destinations in Africa. In recent years, besides the extractives
sector, there have been large private investments in the agriculture and hospitality sectors. Feasibility
studies are also currently underway for private investments in energy, including hydropower,
infrastructure, including a new airport for Freetown, and manufacturing projects, including a possible
steel plant. At this stage, an important priority for the country is to increase its ability to attract quality
investors, and ensure sufficient transparency and competitiveness in selecting them, as well as actively
manage and enforce contractual obligations. If regulatory reforms and infrastructure deficits are
addressed, then the private sector could be a big driver of growth, diversification and job creation.
14.
The infrastructure destroyed during the civil war is currently being rebuilt, while at the
same time infrastructure needs for the likely economic transformation require urgent attention.
Infrastructure remains a binding constraint for growth and transformation – simulation studies indicate
that if the country‘s infrastructure could be improved to the level of the African leader – Mauritius –
4
5

About 19 percent of elected local councilors are currently women (AfDB: Country Gender Profile, 2011)
http://wbl.worldbank.org/data/exploreeconomies/sierra-leone/

4

annual per capita growth rates could be 3.3 percentage points higher than those recorded in recent years.
The total installed energy generation capacity in the country has increased to 90MW since the
commissioning of the Bumbuna dam in late-2009. At the same time, the national distribution network
suffers from high technical and non-technical losses caused by lack of maintenance, overloading and
inadequate metering, billing and revenue collection. Access to electricity is extremely low, at an
estimated 6 percent of the population, while tariffs remains high even by regional standards. The National
Power Agency (NPA) faces endemic structural and operational issues. Improving its technical and
operational performance is a critical step to raising fiscal viability and overall performance of Sierra
Leone‘s power sector. The transport infrastructure has been upgraded during the CAS period, with most
of the district headquarters being connected, and a number of urban roads being constructed and
upgraded. The network of feeder roads has expanded and is starting to show a positive impact on
agricultural production and marketing.
15.
The recent track record on structural reforms has been mixed, and requires renewed
government commitment in implementing the reforms. Strengthening sector-level policy, regulatory
and institutional structures in agriculture, fisheries, energy and water utilities, will be key to improving
the efficiency and performance of different sectors, and thus further improving the prospects of economic
diversification. Such reforms can help deliver improvements in efficiency in order to maintain high
growth rates. Sierra Leone rightly aspires to become a Middle Income Country (MIC), but structural and
regulatory reforms would need to be undertaken for the country to become a MIC. During the CAS period
there have been some important developments in this regard, like the implementation of the concession
agreement for the container terminal at the port which is now being run by a private company. There has
also been progress in the liberalization of the telecommunications gateway, which could unlock the full
potential of this key growth sector. The Parliament has also passed new legislation to unbundle the
electricity sector. The law setting up an independent National Minerals Agency (NMA) has also been
passed, which would now act as a regulator in the mineral sector. Seeing through these and other reforms
should put the economy in a better position to deliver on the ambitious vision of the government.
Independent regulatory oversight is being strengthened in some sectors, which is key in ensuring that
costs and inefficiencies are not passed on to consumers.
16.
Sierra Leone needs significant financial resources for meeting its development needs, and
must look for innovative ways for raising such resources, even before the mining revenues start
materializing. Over the next three to four years, the country would need significant resources for
rehabilitating and upgrading the infrastructure in the country, e.g. upgrading electricity distribution in the
capital of Freetown would require slightly less than $170m. Electricity generation for meeting the needs
of the urban population alone would require another $300m. Additionally, the energy and transportation
needs of the mining sector are substantial, requiring billions of dollars in investment. One way to respond
to this challenge would be to develop infrastructure for multiple users, e.g. shared transportation
arrangement for mineral resources and possibly for multiple uses e.g. ports, which can be used for mineral
exports and other potential economic activities. The government recognizes these challenges, and has
recently embarked on a process of holding a series of ‗Public – Private Sector Roundtables‘ for finding
solutions to some of the binding constraints in achieving the economic transformation.
17.
The end-2012 national elections are critical in ensuring that the country continues on the
path to development and economic transformation. For the first time, Sierra Leone will be holding
four elections, simultaneously at the end of 2012 – Presidential, Parliamentary, Local Council
Chairpersons and Council representatives. The first-ever biometric voter registration process has been
completed and around 2.7 million registered voters are expected to be issued voter registration cards.
These cards should enhance the likelihood of fair and smooth elections. However, sporadic political
violence among supporters of the political parties in recent months has underscored the risks of possible
violence and voter intimidation during the elections, and all stakeholders have a responsibility in ensuring
5

violence-free elections. The political landscape is dominated by two political parties largely drawing
support along regional and ethnic lines. In recent months new legislation has confirmed the exact role of
the National Election Commission. An election basket fund of around $38m with contributions from the
government and development partners is being used to finance the elections.
18.
The governance and anti-corruption agenda continues to experience serious challenges. On
the positive side, according to some of the international benchmarks, there have been some improvements
in the fight against corruption and the overall governance trajectory. In the Transparency International‘s
Corruption Perception Index (CPI), Sierra Leone has moved from a score of 2.2 in 2009 (global rank of
146) to 2.5 in 2011 (global rank of 134). In the latest CPI assessment, it ranks 26 th among 48 African
countries. The 2011 Mo Ibrahim Index ranks Sierra Leone 30th out of 53 countries with a score of
48.2/100. Yet, there remains significant frustration within the population at the slow pace of institutional,
legislative and systemic improvements to tackle corruption. Recent setbacks with some high profile
prosecution cases reinforce the perceptions that some of the elite are not impacted. Although the asset and
income declaration system has undergone some improvements, a comprehensive Politically Exposed
Persons (PEP‘s) list still does not exist, as required by international law. The passage of the Anti Money
Laundering/Combatting the Financing of Terrorism Act was delayed and was only enacted in early 2012.
The need for transparency and accountability, as well as more effective tools and safeguards to fight
corruption is only likely to increase exponentially with the extractives boom, and improvements in
systems and enforcement capacity needs sustained action. The Government will need to put in place a
strong framework for public procurement to ensure value for money and give confidence to investors and
citizens alike. On the positive side, space continues to exist for civil society and non state actors to
openly engage on issues that are of public concern - the World Governance Indicators 2010 (Figure 1)
give Sierra Leone a percentile ranking of 41.7 for Voice and Accountability, which is better than the
average of 33 percentile ranking for SSA – this should be an important element in strengthening the
accountability agenda going forward.

Figure 1: Benchmarking Sierra Leone on Governance Indicators

19.
The CAS period has seen renewed momentum in addressing public sector capacity and
performance challenges. Prior to the conflict, technical and administrative capacity was severely
depleted within government and outside, and the war further exacerbated this situation. Subsequent
government and development partner efforts have not systematically addressed the need for building a
public sector that is meeting present day needs of the country. During the CAS period, there has been a
renewed emphasis and a more coherent approach between key stakeholders to start addressing
systematically the issue of efficiency, capacity, and effectiveness of the public sector, and its ability to
6

attract and retain quality professionals. The Cabinet approved a ‗Multi-Year Pay Reform Strategy‘ in
2011, and a ‗Program for Improving Public Sector Productivity through Management and Pay Reforms‘
in 2012. These are important developments in taking forward the public sector reform agenda, but
implementation will be crucial and will require continued commitment at all levels of government and the
ability to address some difficult reforms.
20.
The sub-region has enjoyed relative peace and stability during the CAS period, raising
hopes of enhanced regional cooperation6. Neighboring Guinea and Liberia have had recent elections,
and are also experiencing varying degrees of extractive sector booms. Sierra Leone enjoys peaceful
relations with its neighbors, and has been an active member of sub-regional groups such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union. Opportunities for regional
cooperation are enormous, and are only starting to be realized, for example through new power pool
agreements. Road connectivity with neighboring countries has also been upgraded. There is unexploited
potential for economic diversification and developing regional transportation infrastructure, i.e. railways
and ports, around the mining growth corridors among these neighboring countries.
III. PROGRESS TOWARDS CAS OUTCOMES AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
A. Progress against CAS Pillars: Human Development and Inclusive Growth
21.
Progress against CAS objectives is satisfactory at this stage, with approximately 85 percent
of indicators achieved or on track to be achieved, and only 5 percent of indicators unlikely to be
achieved until the end of June 2013. Progress is equally promising for the two pillars of human
development and inclusive growth. Lack of data is an issue as 10 percent of the indicators do not have
updated progress values, especially for Pillar 2. This is due to weak sectoral monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) systems as identified by the « Managing for Development Results Cpacity Scan » (CAP Scan)
fielded in Oct 2010 and facilitated by the Bank. Constraints persist in project-related monitoring
arrangements and implementation. The achievement of CAS milestones lags behind, as slightly over 50
percent have been achieved, which could be attributed to a lack of alignment between indicators and
milestones7 during the design of the CAS. Of the cross-cutting indicators on gender and governance,
which are a sub-set of the overall set of indicators, more than 80 percent have been achieved or are on
track to be achieved, which is noteworthy. World Bank TA support to Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL) has
been targeted at specific areas, including in the analysis of the Integrated Household Living Conditions
Survey. Going forward, discussions would be carried out on providing more coordinated support for
SSL.

6

During the CAS period, Cote d’Ivoire and Mali have witnessed conflict, but the impact on Sierra Leone seems to
have been limited so far.
7
The milestones are to be reviewed at CAS mid-point, and are not included in the forward-looking Results Matrix
(Annex 1b).

7

Table1: Summary of achievements on CAS indicators and milestones (excluding AfDB)
INDICATORS – TOTAL 39
PILLAR 1
Education
Health
Water
Social risk
Decentralization
PILLAR 2
Agriculture
Private sector
Energy
Transport

Achieved
2

On track

MILESTONES – TOTAL 38

Not on track

No data

Achieved
2

4
2
2
2

1

1
3
2
2
16 (41%)

4
3

3

2
2
5

1

1
2
17 (44%)

1
1

2 (5%)

4 (10%)

1
6
2
2
20 (53%)

Not achieved
4
1
2

No data

1

2

3
1
3
16 (41%)

1

2(5%)

22.
The WBG country program has strengthened the focus on the delivery of results. The
introduction of Performance Based Financing in the health sector has enhanced incentives for service
providers, and has started showing improvements in the level and quality of services provided by clinics
(Reproductive and Child Health Project Phase 2). Addressing the value chain in the agriculture sector is
demonstrating a positive impact on the livelihoods of farmers being supported all along the value chain
(Rural & Private Sector Development Project). There is also greater attention to selectivity in the Bank‘s
program with recent exits from urban and water sectors. There has also been a strategic use of Technical
Assistance (TA) in helping with the production of vital statistical data from the household living
conditions survey, and for it to inform the preparation of the PRS3. The Bank will also help strengthen
the results focus in the PRS3, specifically through the preparation of the Results Framework for PRS3.
23.
IFC, together with the Department for International Development (DfID) completed the
implementation of the “Removing Administrative Barriers to Investment” (RABI) program during
the CAS period. The three year investment climate program focused on improving the business climate
as measured by ―Doing Business‖, enhancing the image of Sierra Leone as a destination for productive
investment and developing institutions that support private sector development. Furthermore, building on
its partnership with other partners, IFC, DfID, the Soros Economic Development Fund and Germany‘s
Gesellshaft für Internationale Zusammenheit have supported the annual Business Plan Competition
(Business Bomba). In addition IFC continues to coordinate the PSD Donor Coordination Group. The
group meets regularly to ensure alignment among partners, as well as with GoSL priorities. The funding
for most of IFC‘s advisory activities in Sierra Leone is from the Conflict Affected States Initiative
(CASA) which is a multi-donor facility with funding from The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Ireland
and the United Kingdom. IFC and the Bank are currently coordinating efforts to address the needs of the
energy sector.
24.
During the first two years of the CAS period, other parts of the World Bank Group have
contributed significantly to the CAS outcomes. MIGA issued guarantees to four projects with a total
investment volume of US$7.8 million. MIGA covered investors from Switzerland, Denmark and
Mauritius and investments were made to a mobile payment and banking services provider, a transport and
logistics firm, a vehicle importer, and a liquefied petroleum gas distributor. All guarantees were
underwritten under MIGA‘s Small Investment Program. Going forward, MIGA will continue to maintain
an active pipeline and will seek to support further and catalyze foreign investment that promotes
8

employment and growth. The World Bank Institute (WBI) has undertaken innovative work in the areas
of access to information by supporting the Access to Information Bill, which has just been resubmitted to
Parliament after it had lapsed, strengthening Parliamentary engagement, especially capacity of the Public
Accounts Committee, and supporting reforms in procurement and contract monitoring by CSOs,
especially in the roads sector. WBI will launch a Leadership for Results Program in support of the new
Pay and Performance Project.
25.
The World Bank Group has deepened its partnership with other development partners, and
has become the largest donor in Sierra Leone. As per MoFED figures, during the CAS period the
World Bank has been the single largest development partner in Sierra Leone, with a share of 22 percent of
total aid disbursements (see Annex 14). The World Bank, AfDB, DFID and the European Union carry
out joint assessments for budget support and coordinate the dialogue with GoSL under the Multi-Donor
Budget Support (MDBS) framework. The Bank, as the lead partner in the energy sector, has initiated a
sector coordination group with the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources. The Bank actively
facilitated the formation of a Development Partner Governance and Accountability Working Group to
discuss strategic and technical issues in governance among partners and then, directly with GoSL
counterpart institutions. The Bank manages co-financed activities in the areas of PFM, decentralization
and extractive industries. Partnership with the UN has deepened and joint analytical work is being
considered, as well as using UN systems for implementing some elements of Bank-supported programs.
The Bank and the UN also co-chair the Development Partners Coordination Committee and quarterly
meetings are chaired by the Minister of Finance and Economic Development. The dialogue with non
state actors has been enhanced through a specific focus on the extractives sector, governance and
transparency.
B. Portfolio Performance
26.
The Sierra Leone portfolio is performing well and has achieved consistently above-average
disbursement rates. During the CAS period, it has made striking progress in addressing „problem
projects‟. The Sierra Leone Portfolio is currently comprised of 17 large active investment operations
with net commitments reaching US$350 million. In addition, IDA has provided US$51 million as budget
support during FY10-12. The World Bank extends its support through various instruments ranging from
budget support, investment lending, technical assistance and knowledge products. As of the end of March
2012, the undisbursed balance under the portfolio was US$99.4 million. The portfolio is currently sound
with no overage project and low commitments at risk. Four projects including the Bumbuna Environment
and Social Sector Investment Loan, GEF Biodiversity, Wetlands Conservation and the Education Fast
Track Initiative (EFA/FTI) Projects show marginally satisfactory ratings. In terms of Development
Objectives (DO) and Implementation Performance (IP), about 76 percent of the projects are rated
satisfactory including one operation being highly satisfactory and 24 percent of the projects are currently
rated as marginally satisfactory, with only one operation rated unsatisfactory. Going into the CAS, about
50 percent of the projects in the country portfolio were ‗problem projects‘ (60 percent of the amount was
under ‗problem project‘ category), and this figure has been sharply reduced to 0 percent in FY12 (Annex
8). Sierra Leone‘s better than average performance in the Africa Region can be attributed to several
factors including sound project design and Monitoring and Evaluation /Results Frameworks, satisfactory
PMU performance, effective and efficient supervision and implementation support by task teams, and
effective working relationships with Government counterparts. The Bank‘s Country Office now includes
a team of staff covering most sectors, who can help the country program move to true ‗implementation
support‘.
27.
Most of the projects in the portfolio face risks related to the Country Environment. Long
term risks have been identified under the Rural and Private Sector Development Project due to
outstanding issues in clarifying implementation arrangements. These are expected nonetheless to be
9

resolved soon. Other risks under the portfolio include effectiveness delays, as under the Extractive
Industries Technical Assistance Project and the Youth Employment Support Project. Issues related to
legal covenants are being addressed under the Bumbuna Environment and Social Sector Project, as well
as under the Financial Sector Support Technical Assistance Operation. Project management and fiduciary
issues are currently being tackled under the EFA/FTI Education Program. Finally, the Financial Sector
Support Project was declared effective on July 20, 2011 and disbursements are expected to start, soon. A
recent review of financial management arrangements under Community Driven Development type
projects did not raise any significant fiduciary concerns.
28.
The Trust Fund Portfolio in Sierra Leone is relatively large with 36 active Recipient
Executed Trust Funds (TFs), 27 of which are Multi-Donor Trust Funds (TfS). Several recent TFs
have helped leverage the small IDA national allocation and promote CAS objectives. In FY11, the Bank
was able to leverage the national IDA allocation by three times through Regional IDA allocations and
Trust Funds. More recent TFs have been selected strategically to fit into country program priorities, and a
continued close scrutiny of new TFs has helped limit supply-driven initiatives. Total commitments under
the Trust Fund Portfolio currently stand at approximately US$96 million with about US$37million
disbursed to date. While a number of these Trust Funds are associated with an active IDA operation,
others have been approved as stand-alone Trust Funds in support of Technical Assistance and Institutional
Reforms, Governance, as well as development activities in the Social Sectors, including provision of
Safety Nets and Reproductive Health, the Extractive Industries, Education, Energy and Infrastructure.
29.
During the CAS period major adjustments have been made to implementation
arrangements following a Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) in 2011 and a miniCPPR in early 2012. Significant actions have been taken following the CPPR to strengthen the
effectiveness and impact of the Bank‘s program. Among the noteworthy actions already taken: (i)
Bank budget support was moved as of 2012 to the first quarter of the GoSL financial year to enhance
predictability (budget support during the past five years had been disbursed at the end of GoSL fiscal
year); (ii) the IPFMRP project implementation was mainstreamed at the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development to limit stand alone Project Implementation Units; (iii) a sharper focus was
placed on results and accountability through initiatives such as Result-Based Financing in health and
review of social accountability in the country program; (iv) the focus on innovation was strengthened
such as through the ongoing mapping of facilities providing basic services to strengthen planning and
accountability; and (v) regular training sessions by Bank staff of procurement staff in project
implementation agencies. These actions have substantially enhanced the results-focus of the Bank‘s work
in Sierra Leone. The next CPPR is planned for early 2013, and it is expected to inform the preparation of
the next CAS.
30.
IFC continues to support Sierra Leone‟s efforts to improve the business environment and
the country was named as one of the global top reformers in Doing Business 2012. IFC supported the
Credit Reference Act and the development of a private credit bureau in Sierra Leone. During the CAS
period, IFC in collaboration with the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) developed the leasing framework,
which enables BSL to supervise leasing companies. Business Edge (―BE‖) and the SME Toolkit were
launched on March 03, 2010 and implementation of Business Edge is in full gear. Four consulting firms
have been chosen as Business Edge franchisees and IFC supported ―Business Bomba‖, a countrywide
Business Plan Competition. In addition, IFC has provided lines of up to US$1 million each to the Sierra
Leone Commercial Bank and Rokel Commercial Bank under the Global Trade Finance Program (GTFP),
both of which are state-owned banks. Nonetheless, both banks have been repeatedly noncompliant with
IFC‘s financial covenants and the trade lines to both SLCB and RCB were frozen in November 2009.
EcoBank SL also received approval for an IFC GTFP trade line of up to US$2 million in available trade
support, which will help foster external trade. IFC is also considering a US$5 million line of credit to
Union Trust Bank to enhance support to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in Sierra Leone.
10

31.
In recognition of the capital constraints of SMEs, IFC developed an initiative (IFC
Ventures) to provide risk capital and advisory services to small businesses in challenging countries.
Sierra Leone is one of the four beneficiaries of IFC ventures with an initial investment of US$13.5
million. The long-term goal of the SME Ventures Program is to help revive the private sector, which was
seriously destroyed by more than 10 years of civil war. In the manufacturing sector, IFC committed a
US$110 million equity investment in Heidelberg Cement to modernize and increase the capacity of the
company's operations in 7 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, including Sierra Leone. IFC‘s Asset
Management Company (AMC) also supported this transaction with a US$35 million equity investment.
In 2011, IFC concluded a $2.8 million loan to Vitafoam Nigeria to expand its operations to Sierra Leone.
The Vitafoam Sierra Leone Limited project involves US$6.3 million new foam production and a related
products plant in Freetown for local sales in Sierra Leone and for exports to Liberia and Guinea.
C.

Lessons Learned

32.
A number of lessons have emerged from the CAS implementation, some of which may have
wider resonance for other post-conflict countries. First, during the CAS period, Sierra Leone would
be making a transition out of the FCS category – it has moved out of the category of countries receiving
exceptional allocations but still has low CPIA score. Experiences in successfully moving countries out
of the FCS group are still limited, so for the international community Sierra Leone could be an interesting
case study to focus attention and learn lessons. Second, this is the first Joint Country Assistance Strategy
for the WBG and AfDB in Sierra Leone. It has provided opportunities for the two institutions to work
together and develop synergies – but deriving optimal benefits of such joint strategies requires
governments to effectively lead donor coordination processes at the sector level, and also requires
sufficient forward planning in order to allow joint missions (the MDBS and education sectors are
undertaking joint assessments). Third, Sierra Leone will continue to require the full menu of support
instruments available to the Bank – financing quality knowledge products and convening power. In
sectors, like health, where the Bank is increasingly combining them, the nature of the dialogue with the
government has changed qualitatively. Fourth, low institutional capacity in government and fiduciary
risks are continuing concerns with portfolio management. This can often shape the full nature of our
dialogue, unless efforts are made at several ends to move the agenda forward e.g. ongoing work with the
Auditor General‘s Office and with the National Public Procurement Agency (NPPA) to address some of
the underlying systemic issues is now a key area of Bank attention, and the ACC is supported through an
IDF Capacity Building Grant to improve the quality of system and process reviews and the monitoring
and compliance responsibilities of both the ACC and the respective MDAs. Finally, the challenge of
collective action (i.e. different agencies pulling together in delivering on an agenda) both within
government and within sector teams in donor institutions does require continuing facilitation and use of
‗soft skills‘ – e.g. as WBI‘s Leadership for Results‘ efforts in order to facilitate collective action in the
area of public sector reforms could hold useful lessons. Sierra Leone will require such ‗soft‘ initiatives in
order for a smooth economic transformation.
IV. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS MOVING FORWARD
33.
The CAS objectives and priorities remain fully relevant, but two important adjustments are
being proposed in light of the significant changes in the country context and key lessons learned, so
far. The CAS priorities were fully aligned to the Agenda for Change (PRS2) priorities, and both pillars –
human development and promoting inclusive growth remain priority development challenges for the
country. So the Bank would continue to support these pillars during the remaining CAS period. The
Agenda for Change is for the period 2007–2012, and the government has currently initiated work on the
successor PRS3, which is expected to be finalized in early 2013. An initial concept note for PRS3
recognizes that PRS3 does not just represent an incremental change in light of the changes in the country
context, principally the new developments in the extractives sector. The outline of PRS3 places emphasis
on: managing the resource boom; economic diversification and jobs; improving competitiveness; human
11

development; social protection; and governance and transparency. In light of the changes in the country
context and as a segway into the next CAS, the Progress Report proposes to make some important
adjustments for the remainder of the CAS period.
34.
The first adjustment is about adding a third pillar to the CAS on “Managing the extractives
boom”. This would align the CAS more fundamentally to the opportunities and risks of the extractives
boom and also to the early vision set out in the draft PRS3 – the Bank would thus be ‗ahead of the curve‘
in making an important contribution towards smooth transformation, and this would enhance the overall
Bank impact in Sierra Leone. Some of these changes have already started happening in the Bank
program. The growth in the extractives sector described more fully in Annex 2 provides a once-in-ageneration opportunity for Sierra Leone to aspire to Middle Income Country status, but at the same time it
comes with significant downside risks relating to the ‗resource curse‘ given that the country‘s recent
tragic history of conflict has had some links with the minerals sector. The Progress Report proposes that
smooth economic transformation and managing the risks will require addressing five priority areas.
Figure 2 provides a framework for looking at the economic transformation. The specific activities being
supported by the Bank during the remainder of the CAS period are described below. This support would
be provided through targeted instruments: IDA and Trust Fund resources, restructuring of ongoing
projects to address emerging challenges, provision of high-impact knowledge products, and enhanced
policy engagement between stakeholders. Selectivity in the program is being strengthened by using this
framework to understand the relevance and strategic importance of existing and new Bank operations.
i.
Strengthening the regulatory and institutional capacity in the extractives sector: in recognition of
changes taking place in the extractives sector, the Bank program has scaled-up its engagement with the
extractives sector. An IDA Additional Financing and a co-financing with DFID were undertaken in FY12
which are now helping GoSL to strengthen the regulatory and institutional capacity within government to
manage the sector effectively. In addition, the Bank is providing experts to strengthen the capacity in
government to negotiate mining licenses. The budget support program is also starting to focus on the
policy areas in the extractives sector. Together, these constitute important elements of the Bank support
during the remainder of the CAS period.
ii.
Economic diversification through private sector development and establishment of ‗growth
poles‘: The appreciation of the real exchange rate which could result from the impending extractives
sector boom would render many tradeable sectors uncompetitive unless special efforts are made to
strengthen productivity, promote economic diversification especially in sectors less vulnerable to trade
competition and to strengthen significantly and expand the pool of skilled labor. The significant
resources which this will require could well be sourced from the windfall revenues associated with the
extractives boom. Sectors like agriculture, tourism and fisheries may offer some possibilities for
economic diversification and therefore broader based growth, but this will be critically dependent on
maintaining and deepening competitiveness and increasing productivity. During the remainder of the
CAS period, the Bank will support the government with knowledge products which could help identify
opportunities for economic diversification and making full use of ‗corridor development‘ and ‗growth
poles‘ (see Figure 3). Through updating the Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS), another
analytical product will be to look at specific issues of competitiveness in some of the potential growth
sectors. This could inform future government plans and also identify private sector opportunities.
iii.
Infrastructure for the extractives sector: The growth and expansion plans of the iron-ore
companies require timely provision of reliable energy and transportation infrastructure (to get the ore to
the port and adequate port facilities to export). The practice of balkanizing infrastructure planning and
provisions may not be in the best long-term interest of the country, particularly given the potentially large
number of mining licenses and operators. Through Bank support the government has started a process of
‗Public-Private Sector Roundtables‘ to address some binding constraints for private sector development
with the first focusing on infrastructure. There would also be an opportunity to strengthen regional
12

infrastructure linkages with Guinea and Liberia for iron-ore production. The Bank will also be providing
‗just in time‘ advice to the government to look at options for having multiple-use and multiple-user
infrastructure and innovative options for financing such infrastructure. The government would need to
continue to lead the process of infrastructure development from the perspective of the broader needs of
the country.

Figure 2: What is involved in successful economic transformation

iv.
Revenue management and governance: Transparency will be key for Sierra Leone to avoid the
risks of the ‗resource curse‘. The Bank will continue to support the EITI process with enhanced provision
for CSO engagement, and support through measures like disseminating the Citizens Budget, and contract
monitoring initiatives. The Bank will be providing TA on strengthening the Public Investment
Management capacity, and to help the government generate options for managing the fiscal space.
v.

Effective use of revenues to deliver results: Especially in the human development sector,
13

the Bank will be providing TA and undertaking knowledge work to help the government prepare strong
credible sector plans and expenditure frameworks in anticipation of rising domestic revenues.
Specifically, this would be focused on health financing issues and opportunities for scaling-up safety nets,
including addressing youth employment from prospective revenues. In addition, knowledge work in the
education sector would help the government prepare skilled workers for the emerging job market.
.
Figure 3: A „Growth Pole‟ Development Strategy for Sierra Leone

New iron ore & bauxite
projects
Oil Exploration
Diamond Mining (mostly
artisanal)
Gold Mining (mostly
artisanal)
New agribusiness
projects

NOTES:
 A ‘growth pole’ is a geographic
location where productive economic
activities are rapidly expanding fueled
by a combination of economies of
scale, economies of agglomeration,
and backward/forward linkages.
 Potential ‘growth poles’ could be
around the north / west where the
iron ore and agricultural projects are
located, and in the south around
commercial mining, agribusiness and
potential hydrocarbon resources.

35.
The second adjustment is about putting emphasis on building capacity for improved
governance and service delivery within government and within civil society – in other words
emphasizing both the „supply‟ and „demand‟ side of good governance. Ten years after the end of
conflict, it is important to address the severe deficits in public sector capacity and performance. Rising
revenues will further stretch the already limited capacity of the public sector. Following a recent request
from GoSL, the Bank has started engaging in the area of public sector reforms – an area not identified as
a priority for the Bank under the CAS. But given the pressing needs in this sector, the Bank has prepared
an innovative results-based operation, the ―Pay and Performance Project‖ (see text box). This operation
is likely to be central in helping the government deliver on its reform agenda. This project would work in
close synergy with other sector operations of the Bank so that the reforms being taken forward at the
central level start demonstrating impact at the level of individual Ministries and Agencies of the
government. At another level, a recent review of social accountability / Demand for Good Governance
(DFGG) work in the Bank‘s program in Sierra Leone has identified opportunities for the Bank to support
the government‘s growing commitment to engage citizens as partners in monitoring development. Annex
14

3 spells out these opportunities in detail, but Bank support in strengthening social accountability will now
focus on promoting accountability in the ‗policy space‘, reinforcing citizens accountability to improve
health sector outcomes, and improving coherence and knowledge-sharing on DFGG across Bank
operations. For example, in the health sector, Sierra Leone still lags behind in meeting the MDGs,
accountability gaps with the FHCI have been documented, and the government has shown a keen interest
in engaging citizens to improve service delivery. This sector may present a key opportunity for
strengthened DFGG engagement.
Box: The Pay and Performance Project: The Bank Responding Strategically and Innovatively
IDA has initiated its involvement in public service reform in Sierra Leone with
and Performance Project. The Project supports and is fully aligned with the
program ―Improving Productivity through Management and Pay Reforms‖ and
reform areas in the government‘s program: (i) Pay Reform; (ii) Recruitment
Performance Management and Accountability.

the US$17 million Pay
Government‘s flagship
it focuses on the three
and Staffing; and (iii)

The Project uses a results-based approach that rewards the achievement of an agreed set of key milestones
and results through the use of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). The objective of the pay reform
sub-component is to improve external competitiveness and internal equity to enable the public service to
attract and retain qualified professionals. The objective of the recruitment and staffing sub-component is
to increase the very low numbers in middle and senior level positions. Between 800-1000 critical
positions in the ―missing middle‖ will be filled via open, competitive and merit-based procedures. The
objective of the performance management and accountability sub-component is to improve government
productivity, increase citizens‘ trust in government and institutionalize transparency and accountability. A
flexible Technical Assistance component complements the results-based approach by financing selected
interventions (strategic communications program and social accountability measures).
This operation is an excellent example of how the Bank has strategically and innovatively responded to
government request for support. A strong public sector is key to smooth economic transformation, and
the Bank has built upon global experiences with public sector operations in preparing this project.
36.
These adjustments would bring the CAS in closer alignment with the Bank‟s new Africa
Strategy. The proposed adjustments to the CAS lay emphasis on three priorities in the Africa Strategy
‗Africa‘s Future and World Bank‘s Role in It‘ – competitiveness and employment; vulnerability and
resilience; and governance and public sector capacity. The forward-looking results matrix in Annex 1A
covers FY13 and includes only indicators for the WBG, that is the World Bank and IFC. AfDB is not
included. To the results matrix, the following changes have been made: Primary Gross Enrollment Rate
(PGER) has been replaced with Primary Completion Rate (PCR) as PGER data are unreliable and with
significant overestimation of enrolment numbers. PCR is a better measure of efficiency and quality. Spot
checks for teacher attendance twice a term for each school in all districts by 2013 has been dropped as it
is not related to the WBG program. Since there is no law in place on the free health care initiative
enforcement, the related indicator has been replaced by an indicator on social accountability monitoring.
The indicator from the energy sector has been dropped due to unavailability of data and so has the
indicator for the transport sector related trunk roads in good and fair condition. In the cash-for-work
programs, targets have been increased substantially. The indicator on procurement contracts under
decentralization has been dropped given the concerns over reliability of the data and the indicators on
Local Councils and service output targets have been slightly reworded. Under decentralization, an
indicator on social accountability has been added to strengthen that aspect in the results matrix. An
indicator on public disclosure of fishing licenses and revenues has been added to fisheries, and an
indicator on collection rates to energy. Further, a third pillar has been added to the forward-looking matrix
15

regarding the new direction of the CAS to align to and support the sustainable management of natural
resources, especially in mining. Four indicators have been added in this regard.

V. KEY CONSTRAINTS AND RISKS
37.
The risks identified in the CAS remain relevant, but there has been some improvement in
some of the risks and Bank-supported mitigation measures are being implemented. The six risks
included in the CAS were: (i) weak governance and accountability structures; (ii) limited capacity to
deliver services and manage public resources; (iii) youth employment and social instability; (iv) economic
shocks; (v) regional volatility, including international drug trafficking; and (vi) climate change and
disaster risks. As noted earlier, during the CAS period the renewed emphasis on social accountability and
promoting transparency would continue to be key in managing the weak governance and accountability
structures, enforcement of systems, rules and procedures. The Bank is now helping GoSL address more
frontally the capacity and effectiveness of the public sector, through strategic responses under various
projects e.g. in fisheries, decentralization, and public sector reforms. The Youth Employment Support
Project was prepared and delivered during the CAS period as a response to the challenge of youth
unemployment, and the ongoing analytical work on review of safety net systems will be informing the
government‘s plans in the PRS3. The Bank increased the size of its budget support in response to the
exogenous fuel and food price shock, and mobilized advice for government on short-term coping systems
for the country. The sub-region is now more peaceful and scope for cooperation has widened, although
recent developments in the Liberia – Cote d‘Ivoire border underscore the fragility of peace in the subregion. Nonetheless, these risks still remain valid for the remainder of the CAS period, and the Bank
along with other partners would be helping the government manage them.
38.
An additional risk which is being identified at this stage of CAS implementation is about
avoiding the „resource curse‟ as a result of the extractives boom. This is likely to be the most
significant development challenge for the country in the foreseeable future. Economic development in
Sierra Leone could be affected by the dynamics of mineral sector growth. Political lobbying and rivalries
as well as social exclusion around extractives may also increase the risk of conflict. While infrastructure
remains a binding constraint for growth, the mineral sector is likely to divert human capital,
entrepreneurial and investment resources from other sectors and lead to spatial disparities and regional
tensions. Effective collection of all revenues due to the state and allocation and distribution of
government spending will need to be optimal across sectors to achieve economic efficiency and inclusive
growth. Before the receipt of large windfall revenues, monitoring of licenses and contracts, projects and
operations will be necessary elements of a broader governance strategy to deal with the new challenges.
The proposed adjustments to the CAS by adding a third pillar on ‗managing the extractives boom‘ should
help the country manage this risk, especially anticipatory spending and pressures on the wage bill. The
Bank and partners will undertake further ‗fragility risk‘ assessments as a result of the resources boom, and
this is expected to inform the preparation of the next CAS.

16

CAS Progress Report - Annexes

17

Annex 1(a) : CAS Progress Report Results Matrix - July, 1 2009 to May 31, 2012
JAS Objective 1: Human Development
Selected PRSP II
objectives &
indicators25

Key Issues from PRSP JAS Outcomes &
Indicators

JAS
Milestones

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments

1. Increased access to
and completion of
primary schooling
especially for girls and
out of school children

Lack of sufficient and
adequate inputs at school
level; poor internal
efficiency of the system
and weak management of
information and delivery
systems.

Construction
of 318
classrooms in
primary and
secondary
schools by
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
285
classrooms
under
construction.

On-going Projects/TFs:

Low human resource
capacity at all levels,
shortage of teaching and
learning material, high
pupil ratios in schools,
poor accountability, low
primary school
completion rates and high
repetition and drop-out
rates.

1. Improved capacity to
effectively and efficiently
deliver education
1.1 Primary gross enrollment
rate increased from 104 % in
2007 to 106 % in 2013. (WB)
Achieved. 1068
Governance/Gender
1.4 Enrollment for girls at JSS
increased from 40.9% in 2008
to 43.9% in 2013. (WB)
Achieved. 45%
1.5 Spot checks for teacher
attendance twice a term for
each school in all districts by
2013 (WB) No data9

850,000 sets of
learning
materials
distributed to
primary
schools by
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
TLM not 100
%
distributed.

FY09 EFA-FTI Catalytic
Fund. (TF) (WB)
FY02 Rehabilitation of basic
and non-formal education
and vocational training
project (education III)
(AfDB)
AAA:
Public Expenditure Review
(WB)
Partners:
AfDB, DfID, EU, UNDP,
UNICEF, Irish Aid

Fee free
campaigns
conducted by
all LCs by
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
14 LCs10
Teacher
payroll and
salary
verification
exercise
completed and
maintained by
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
Verification
exercise ongoing.

8

GER is likely to be overestimated and in the forward-looking matrix replaced by Primary Completion Rate (PCR).
Spot checks not part of the WB program and MoE program.
10
Indicator dropped from WB program and now funded by UNICEF.
9

18

2. Improve the health
status of population
and quality of health
services

Limited financial and
geographical access to
health facilities.
Inadequate access to free
health care for vulnerable
population, limited
availability of high impact
interventions and shortage
of drugs, equipment and
supplies
Shortage of critical health
professionals, inadequate
support/ supervision at all
levels and weak personnel
management
Weak coordination among
programs and donors

2. Improved access to basic
health services
2.1 Children receiving Penta-3
vaccination before 12 months
of age increased from 54.8 %
in 2008 to 85 % in 2013.
(WB) On track. 82.9%
2.2 Children under 5 who slept
the previous night under an
insecticide treated net
increased from 26% in 2008 to
80% by 2013. (WB) On
track. 73%
Governance/Gender
2.4 Deliveries conducted in
health facility increased from
42% in 2008 to 70% in 2013.
(AfDB/WB) On track. 54 %
2.5 Enforcement of law for
free access to health care for
lactating mothers and children
by 2013. (WB/AfDB) On
track.

3. Developed
framework for
management and
supply of safe water
and sanitation

Lack of water policy as
well as organized legal,
regulatory & institutional
frameworks
Deficiency in both urban
and rural water supply
Limited functional water
supply infrastructure.

3. Increased household
access to safe drinking water
and sanitation
3.1 People with access to
water increased from 64,000
in 2009 to 115,000 in 2013 in
targeted areas. (AfDB/WB)
Achieved. 192,000
3.2 People with access to
improved sanitation increased
from 25,000 in 2009 to 35,000
by 2013. (AfDB/WB)
Achieved. 110,000
Governance/Gender
3.3 Commercial and technical

19

Clinics having
all essential
drugs available
(10 drugs)
increase from
32 % to 90 %
in 2011. (WB)
Achieved.
Restocking in
Jan 2012.
Number of
health
facilities
providing
basic
emergency
obstetric care
increase from
0 to 45 in
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
42 PHUs.

Information
campaign on
free access to
health care by
2011.
(WB/AfDB)
Achieved.
Nationwide
campaign
conducted in
April 2010.
Volume of
water supplied
to Freetown,
increased from
95,340 m3/day
to 120,000
m3/day by
2011. (WB)
No data
630 improved
community
water points
constructed or
rehabilitated
by 2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
400

Ongoing Projects/TFs:
FY06 Strengthening District
Health Services (AfDB)
FY 08 Reproductive and
Child Health TF (IDA)
Pipeline Projects:
FY 10 Phase II of
Reproductive and Child
Health TF (WB)
Support to Manu River
HIV/Aids Project (regional)
(AfDB)
AAA:
Health Sector Review,
Public Expenditure Review
(WB)
Partners:
DfID, EU, Irish Aid,
UNFPA, UNICEF, USAID,
WHO

Ongoing Projects/TFs:
FY07 Freetown water
supply rehab. (TF) (WB)
FY10 Water Supply and
Sanitation (AfDB)
Pipeline Projects:
FY11 Rural Water Supply
and Sanitation (AfDB)
AAA:
Public Expenditure Review
(WB)
Partners: China, DfID,
UNICEF

losses reduced from 60% in
2007 to 38% in 2013
(Freetown). (WB) On track.
50 %

4. To reduce the
incidence and
consequences of
extreme poverty

High unemployment and
underemployment,
particularly among the
young.
Acute skill deficiency
among the ―lost
generation‖ who grew up
without education during
the war.

4. Improved capacity to
manage social risks
4.1 Cash for work programs
create 2.5 million person days
of employment in target areas
by 2013 with increased
sustainability (of which 1
million women) from 0 in
2008 (AfDB/WB) Achieved.
2,707,000 person-days
Governance/Gender
4.2 Number of women days
employment created through
cash for work program
increased from 0 in 2008 to
250,000 in 2013 in target
areas. (WB) Achieved.
645,000 women-days

5. Ensure sustainable
human development
through the
decentralized
provision of improved
social services.
Improve and expand
sound public financial
management

Local Councils
empowered with
responsibilities, revenue
authority and financial
support and encouraged to
become transparent,
accountable and capable
institutions demonstrating
inclusive leadership at the
local level.
Budget resources are now
concentrated in central
government agencies and
allocated to localities on
an ad-hoc basis not
reflecting relative service

House
connections
with metering
in Freetown
and Guma
Valley by
increase from
4,800 in 2007
to 11,100 in
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
7,500
NaCSA to
conduct
sensitization
program in
targeted areas
to ensure 75
percent of
households are
aware of
program by
2011.
(AfDB/WB)
Achieved. 90
%

5.1 Number of councils with
integrated development plans
and budgets increased from 0
in 2009 to 19 by 2013. (WB)
Achieved. 19 LCs

NaCSA to
establish
program to
monitor
participation
of women in
cash for work
scheme by
2011. (WB)
Achieved.
NaCSA has a
system for
monitoring
the
participation
of women in
place.
Training to all
LC s and
relevant
MDAs in core
functions by
2011 (WB)
Not achieved.
Capacitydevelopment
fund underutilized

5.2 Number of councils
receiving timely transfers from
crisis response facility
increased from 0 in 2009 to 19

Domestic
revenues
transferred to
local councils

5. Improve predictability,
expenditure control and
transparency in
decentralization and public
resource management

20

Ongoing projects/TFs:
FY03 National Social
Action Project. (WB)
Pipeline:
Youth Employment and
Skills (with CRW)
AAA:
PER; cash for work
evaluation; gender
assessment (WB)
Partners:
UNICEF, WFP

On-going Projects/TFs:
FY03 National Social
Action Project Additional
Financing (WB)
FY04 Social Action Support
Project (AfDB)
FY09 Integrated Public
Financial Management
Project. (WB, co-financed
by DfID, EC))
FY11 Economic Governance
Reform Program (EGRP I)
(AfDB)
FY07 Institutional Support
Project (AfDB)

needs with widespread
social exclusion at the
community level.
Resources must be
allocated consistent with
PRSP priorities, with
fiscal discipline and
probity in the use of
public resources. This
requires:


A robust
MTEF/MEFF and
better revenue
forecasting for a
credible budget;



Improved and
effective expenditure
controls;



Suitable amendment
to the legal and
regulatory
framework;

by 2013. Achieved. 19 –
from the Consolidated
Revenue Fund.
6.1 Variance in expenditure
for the 20 largest budget heads
declines from 13.5% in 2008
to <7% in 2013. (WB) Not on
track. 29.9 %
6.2 Percentage of procurement
contract in compliance with
GoSL procurement legislation
and regulations increased from
49% in 2008 to 95% in 2013.
(AfDB/WB) On track. 91.3
%
Governance/Gender
5.3 Number of councils
meeting at least 75% of the
service output targets specified
in local council policy MOUs
by 2013 (WB) On track. 7
LCs.
6.3 Process for the public
oversight of PFM to be in
place by 2013. (WB) On
track. Under
implementation.

annually
increased from
22% in 2008
to 25% in
2011.(WB)
Achieved. 41
%
Percentage of
budgeted
expenditures
executed
online through
IFMS rolled
out ministries
increased from
62% in 2008
to 80% in
2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
65 %
85% of MDAs
have dedicated
procurement
officers by
2011.
(AfDB/WB)
Achieved.
97.4 %
Decentralizatio
n Secretariat
and MDAs to
perform spotchecks on LCs
meeting
service-output
targets for all
LC by 2011.
(WB)
Achieved. 19
LCs.
Forum for
oversight of
PFM by civil
society to be
established by
2011. (WB)
Achieved.
Joint Forum
MOFED,
NSA
All 6
documents
required under
PEFA 10
published

21

Pipeline Projects:
FY10 Decentralized
Services Delivery I and II
(WB)
FY10, FY11 & FY12
Development policy lending
(WB)
Economic Governance
Reform Program (EGRP II)
(AfDB)
AAA:
FY10 Public Expenditure
Review (WB)
FY11 Country Procurement
Assessment Review (WB)
Partners:
DfID, EU, IMF, UNDP,
UNHCR

through the SL
Gazette and on
the MoFED
website by
2011.
(AfDB/WB)
Achieved. All
six documents
published and
on website

JAS Objective 2: Promoting Inclusive Growth
Selected PRSP
II
objectives &
indicators27
6. Enhanced
productivity in
agriculture and
fisheries
sufficiency in
rice from 70 % in
2007 to 90% by
2013

Key Issues from PRSP

JAS Outcomes &
Indicators

JAS Milestones

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments

Inadequate rural financial
services, limited irrigation
facilities, weak rural
infrastructure, weak
extension services, and heavy
reliance on rain-fed
agriculture.

6. Improved efficiency and
transparency of
agriculture and fisheries.

10% increase cultivated
land for cassava, palm
oil, rice, cocoa & maize
value chains by 2013
(WB) No data

On-going
Projects/TFs:
FY07 Rural & Priv.
Sector Dev. Project
(WB)
FY05 Agriculture
Sector Rehabilitation
Project (AfDB)
FY05 NERICA Rice
Dissemination Project
(AfDB)

export sales of
cocoa, coffee and
ginger from
US$7.2.mil in
2008 to US$9.5
mil in 2013

Framework
established for
maintaining
sustainable fish
stocks.

Inadequate surveillance
system in fisheries to ensure
revenue generation and lack
of land-based fisheries
infrastructure

6.1 50% of target
beneficiaries for selected
value chains increase
production by 20%
(AfDB/WB) On track.
Cassava 10 mt/ha (2008) to
16.1 mt/ha. Rice 0.81
mt/ha (2008) to 0.88 mt/ha.

Development of seed,
fertilizer and pesticide
laws, and regulations by
2011. (WB) Not
achieved. Procurement
of consultants in
progress

Governance/Gender
6.3 FBOs registered with
the Ministry of Agriculture
established in all districts by
2013. (WB) On track. 73
FBOs established.

Harmonization of
policies and regulations
governing formulation
and regularization of
farmer based groups by
2011. (WB) Not
achieved. Procurement
of consultants in
progress

Fisheries:
6.5 Territorial Use Rights
Fisheries (TURFS) legally
established for coastal
fisheries increased from
none in 2008 to 4 by 2013.
(WB) On track. One
TURF established.

Small scale fishing
vessels that are
registered increase from
0% in 2009 to 50% in
2011. (WB) Not
achieved. Database
under construction.

6.7 Meet EU phyto-sanitary
standard for fish exports by
2013 (AfDB/WB) On
track.

A satellite-based fishing
vessel monitoring system
is in place and
functioning by 2011.
(WB) Achieved.

22

Pipeline Projects:
FY10 GEF Biodiversity
Conservation Project
(IDA)
FY 12 Regional
Agriculture Project
(IDA)
AAA:
Country Economic
Memorandum
Partners:
EU, FAO, GTZ, IFAD,
JICA, KfW, WFP
Ongoing Projects/TFs:
FY01 Artisanal
Fisheries Development
Project (AfDB)
FY10 Regional
Fisheries Project
Partners:
USAID DfID EU AfDB
UNDP FAO

Governance

7. Improve
Standing of
Sierra Leone as
Investment
Destination +
job creation

High cost of bank credit,
limited rural financial
intermediation,
underdeveloped capital
market, and constraints in
investment climate
Limited capacity of private
sector to provide employment
facilities for youth, especially
in urban areas

6.8 Fishing vessels observed
committing a serious
infraction reduced from
88% in 2009 to 66% by
2013. (WB) Achieved. 8%.
7. Improved investment
climate
7.1 Reduction in time taken
to register a business from
26 days in 2007 to 10 days
by 2013 (IFC/WB). On
track. 12 days (Jan2011)

7.2 Reduction in time of
export transactions from 31
days in 2007 to 22 days by
2013. On track. 24 days
(Sept 2011)

7.3 Number of bank
accounts increased to
300,000 in 2013 from
160,000 in 2005 (WB)
Achieved. 513,000
accounts

7.4 Volume and market
penetration of leasing
equipment financed
increased from US$6.8 mil
in 2009 to US$35 million in
2013 (IFC). On track
(based on projections – no
data for 2011).
Governance/Gender
7.5 Achieve EITI validation
standards by 2013.
(AfDB/WB) Achieved.
First EITI report issued in
2010
7.6 AML/CFT regime
strengthened by amendment
of AML law and
establishment of FIU at BSL
by 2013. (WB) Achieved.

23

Establish one-stop shop
for business registration
by 2011.
(IFC/WB ) Achieved.
Established in 2009
Implement automated
system for customs data
by 2011. (IFC/WB)
Achieved. ASYCUDA
implemented in 2010
Credit Reference Bureau
Legislation presented to
Parliament by 2011.
(WB)
GoSL to develop leasing
regulation by 2011 (IFC,
WB) Achieved. Credit
Reference Bureau
Legislation was
presented to
Parliament on 7th
March 2011, and
signed by the President
on 20th April 2011.
Government of Sierra
Leone introduces a
revised SME tax regime
based on a review of
taxation policy.
(WB/IFC) Achieved.
The Regulations were
developed and
consequently issued by
the BOSL
Reconciliation
conducted & first EITI
report published by 2011
(AfDB/WB). Achieved.
Draft AML/CFT law to
be prepared by 2011.
(WB) Achieved.

On-going
Projects/TFs:
FY09 Removing the
Administrative Barriers
to Investment (Phase 2)
TF (WB)
FY09 TA to identify
investor/operator for
Cape Sierra Hotel.
(IFC)
FY10 Financial Sector
TA (WB)
FY10 Youth
Employment and Skills
(WB)
FY09 Support to EITI
Implementation. (TF)
WB)
FY10 Mining Sector
TA Project. (WB)
FY12 Regional Mining
Governance (EITI++)
(WB)
FY11 Capacity building
for the Bank of Sierra
Leone on monitoring
compliance of trade
finance facility (IFC)
AAA:
EITI++ scoping
Partners:
GTZ DfID UNDP
UNCDF

8. Broaden
electricity
supply
throughout the
country
generation and
distribution
capacity from
21MW in 2008
to 56 MW in
2013

Low energy supplies
Low capacity of transmission
and distribution of electricity
infrastructure
High cost of power
generation relative to
available budgetary resources

8. Improved access to
sustainable electricity
infrastructure services
Energy:
8.1 Households in Freetown
with access to electricity
increased from 20,000 in
2009 to 40,000 by 2013.
(AfDB/WB) Achieved.
40,000
8.2 Average annual
interruption frequency in
Freetown from 1,200 in
2009 to 600 in 2013. (WB)
No data
8.3 Number of towns with
reliable electricity supply
increased from 0 to 12 by
2013 (AfDB) Not on track.
Only Freetown and BoKenema.
Governance/Gender
8.4 Regulatory framework
for independent power
production established by
2013 Achieved. Electricity
Act approved by
Parliament in 2011.

Emergency Power
Generation at 10.8 GW/h
per month until
Bumbuna hydropower
comes on line by 2011.
(WB) Achieved.

Electricity collection rate
increased from 50% in
2009 to 85% by 2011.
(WB) Not achieved.
Collection rate at 76%.

Installed generating and
transmission capacity
increased by 50MW by
2010 (AfDB). Achieved.
Installed generation
capacity at 82.5 MW.
Draft laws for Public
Private Partnership and
regulators presented to
Parliament by 2011.
(WB) Achieved.

On-going
Projects/TFs:
FY05 Power and Water
Project (WB)
FY05 Bumbuna
Hydroelectric Project
(WB)
FY08 Bumbuna
Hydroelectric Project
Add Fin (AfDB)
FY09 Bumbuna
Supplementary Loan
(AfDB)
FY07 Institutional
Support Project (AfDB)
Pipeline:
FY10 Addax bioenergy project (AfDB)
FY11 Infrastructure
(Energy) (WB/MDTF)
AAA:
FY10 Public Private
Partnership Framework
for energy and other
sectors
FY10 Political
Economy Study with
focus on Transport and
Energy. (WB)
FY12 Country
Economic
Memorandum. (WB)
Partners:
China, DfID, EU, JICA

9. Develop the
national
transportation
network
2000km of feeder
roads by 2013
Freetown ports
and airport

Development of road
network.
Inadequate and poorly
maintained rural and feeder
roads
Inefficient port and airport

9. Maintain and extend
key transport
infrastructure
9.1 All weather trunk roads
in good and fair condition
increased from 50% in 2009
to 60 % in 2013.
(AfDB/WB) No data.
9.3 1,400km of feeder roads
rehabilitated by 2013
(AfDB/WB) On track. 712
km completed.
9.4 Port container handling
performance is improved
from 8 TEUs/hr in 2007 to

24

Contracts entered into by
2011 for rehabilitation of
100km (WB) + 200 km
(AfDB) of all weather
trunk roads. Achieved
WB 100 km.
900 km (WB) & 500km
(AfDB) of rural roads
rehabilitated by 2011.
Not achieved. WB 462
km
Freetown port
rehabilitated and
container stacking area
extended by 2011. (WB)
Not achieved. Late

On-going
Projects/TFs:
FY06 IDP Transport
Project (WB)
FY07 Rural & Private
Sector Development
Project
Pipeline:
FY12 Mototoka-Sefadu
Road (AfDB)
FY10 Lungi-Port Loko
Upgrading (AfDB)
AAA:
FY10 Political
Economy Study with
focus on Transport and

12 TEUs/hr by 2013. (WB)
On track. 8-10 TEUs/hour.

commencement of
work.

9.5 Lungi Airport to remain
as international airport
according to ICAO safety
regulations (WB) Achieved.

Resurface of runway and
installation of new
navigation facilities
completed at Lungi
Airport by 2011. (WB)
Not achieved.
Activities (runway,
NAVAIDS) under way

Governance/Gender
9.6 Independent road fund
established by 2013. (WB)
Achieved. Road fund
established

25

Independent road fund
bill passed to Parliament
by 2011. (WB)
Achieved. Road fund
bill passed.

Energy. (WB)
FY10 Freetown Ring
Road Study (AfDB)
FY12 Country
Economic
Memorandum. (WB)
Partners:
EU, GTZ, Islamic
Development Bank,
Kuwait Fund

Annex 1(b) : CAS Progress Report Results Matrix – June 1, 2012 to June 30, 2013
JAS Objective 1: Human Development
Selected PRSP II
objectives & indicators25
1. Increased access to and
completion of primary
schooling especially for girls
and out of school children

Key Issues from PRSP

JAS Outcomes &
Indicators

World Bank Group

Lack of sufficient and
adequate inputs at school level;
poor internal efficiency of the
system and weak management
of information and delivery
systems.

1. Improved capacity to
effectively and efficiently
deliver education

On-going Projects/TFs:

Low human resource capacity
at all levels, shortage of
teaching and learning material,
high pupil ratios in schools,
poor accountability, low
primary school completion
rates and high repetition and
drop-out rates.

2. Improve the health status
of population and quality of
health services

Limited financial and
geographical access to health
facilities.
Inadequate access to free
health care for vulnerable
population, limited availability
of high impact interventions
and shortage of drugs,
equipment and supplies
Shortage of critical health
professionals, inadequate
support/ supervision at all
levels and weak personnel
management
Weak coordination among
programs and donors

1.1 Primary Completion Rate
from 67% in 2010/2011 to
70%

Governance/Gender
1.2 Enrollment for girls at JSS
increased from 40.9% in 2008
to 43.9% in 2013. (WB)

2. Improved access to basic
health services
2.1 Children receiving Penta-3
vaccination before 12 months
of age increased from 54.8 %
in 2008 to 85 % in 2013. (WB)
2.2 Children under 5 who slept
the previous night under an
insecticide treated net
increased from 26% in 2008 to
80% by 2013. (WB)

FY09 EFA-FTI Catalytic
Fund. (TF)
FY08 Chyao-Africa-Support to
Education of war affected
children in the Northern
Province
AAA:
FY12 Higher and Tertiary
Education Note
Updating the Education Sector
Plan Constraints to Service
Delivery
Partners:
AfDB, DfID, EU, UNDP,
UNICEF, Irish Aid
Ongoing Projects/TFs:
FY 10 Reproductive and Child
Health phase II

AAA:
FY11 Public Expenditure
Review
FY12 Constraints to Service
Delivery
Partners:

Governance/Gender
2.3 Deliveries conducted in
health facility increased from
42% in 2008 to 70% in 2013.
(AfDB/WB)
2.4 Framework for
community-based
accountability committees for
each public health clinic
established (WB)

26

DfID, EU, Irish Aid, UNFPA,
UNICEF, USAID, WHO

3. Developed framework for
management and supply of
safe water and sanitation

Lack of water policy as well as
organized legal, regulatory &
institutional frameworks
Deficiency in both urban and
rural water supply
Limited functional water
supply infrastructure.

3. Increased household
access to safe drinking water
and sanitation

Ongoing Projects/TFs:
FY12 Decentralized Service
Delivery Project phase II

3.1 People with access to water
increased from 64,000 in 2009
to 115,000 in 2013 in targeted
areas. (AfDB/WB)

FY10 GRGC-3

3.2 People with access to
improved sanitation increased
from 25,000 in 2009 to 35,000
by 2013. (AfDB/WB)
Governance/Gender

4. To reduce the incidence
and consequences of extreme
poverty

High unemployment and
underemployment, particularly
among the young.
Acute skill deficiency among
the ―lost generation‖ who
grew up without education
during the war.

3.3 Commercial and technical
losses reduced from 60% in
2007 to 38% in 2013
(Freetown). (WB)
4. Improved capacity to
manage social risks
4.1 Cash for work programs
create 4 million person days of
employment in target areas by
2013 with increased
sustainability (of which 1
million women) from 0 in
2008 (AfDB/WB)
Governance/Gender
4.2 Number of women days
employment created through
cash for work program
increased from 0 in 2008 to 1.2
million in target areas. (WB)

AAA:
FY12 Public Expenditure
Review for Water and
Sanitation
FY12 Public Expenditure
Review
Partners: China, DfID,
UNICEF

Ongoing projects/TFs:
FY10Youth Employment and
Skills
FY12 Development policy
lending
FY09 Integrated Public
Financial Management Project
FY 10 Rapid Response Growth
Poles : Community-Based
Livelihood and Food Support
Program
FY10 Empowering Vulnerable
Youth for Self-Reliance in
Kono District and Western
Area

AAA:
FY12 Public Expenditure
Review
FY12 Social Protection
Assessment

5. Ensure sustainable human
development through the
decentralized provision of
improved social services.
Improve and expand sound
public financial management

Local Councils empowered
with responsibilities, revenue
authority and financial support
and encouraged to become
transparent, accountable and
capable institutions
demonstrating inclusive
leadership at the local level.
Budget resources are now
concentrated in central
government agencies and

5. Improve predictability,
expenditure control and
transparency in
decentralization and public
resource management
5.1 Number of councils with
integrated development plans
and budgets increased from 0
in 2009 to 19 by 2013. (WB)

27

Partners:
UNICEF, WFP
On-going Projects/TFs:
FY09 Integrated Public
Financial Management Project.
(WB)
FY10 Decentralized Services
Delivery I
FY12 Decentralized Services
Delivery phase II
FY12 Development policy

allocated to localities on an adhoc basis not reflecting relative
service needs with widespread
social exclusion at the
community level.
Resources must be allocated
consistent with PRSP
priorities, with fiscal discipline
and probity in the use of public
resources. This requires:

5.2 Number of councils
receiving timely transfers from
crisis response facility
increased from 0 in 2009 to 19
by 2013. (WB)

lending

5.3 Variance in expenditure for
the 20 largest budget heads
declines from 13.5% in 2008
to <7% in 2013. (WB)

FY10 Institutional Capacity
Building for Combating
Corruption in Sierra Leone



Governance/Gender
5.4 Number of councils
meeting at least 75% of the
service output targets specified
in local council policy MOUs
by 2013 (WB)

A robust MTEF/MEFF
and better revenue
forecasting for a credible
budget;



Improved and effective
expenditure controls;



Suitable amendment to the
legal and regulatory
framework;

FY11 Strengthening Internal
Audit at the Bank of Sierra
Leone

AAA:
FY12Public Expenditure
Review
Partners:
DfID, EU, IMF, UNDP,
UNHCR

5.5 Process for the public
oversight of PFM to be in
place by 2013. (WB)
5.6 Ward Committees holding
public meetings and reporting
to Local Councils as part of
annual development planning
and execution cycle increases
to 80%

JAS Objective 2: Promoting Inclusive Growth
Selected PRSP II
objectives & indicators27
6. Enhanced productivity in
agriculture and fisheries
in rice from 70 % in 2007 to
90% by 2013

Key Issues from PRSP

JAS Outcomes &
Indicators

World Bank Group
Instruments

Inadequate rural financial
services, limited irrigation
facilities, weak rural
infrastructure, weak extension
services, and heavy reliance on
rain-fed agriculture.

6. Improved efficiency and
transparency of agriculture
and fisheries.

On-going Projects/TFs:

cocoa, coffee and ginger from
US$7.2.mil in 2008 to US$9.5
mil in 2013

Agriculture:
6.1 50% of target beneficiaries
for selected value chains (list)
increase production by 20%
(AfDB/WB)
Governance/Gender
6.2 FBOs registered with the
Ministry of Agriculture
established in all districts by
2013. (WB)

Framework established for
maintaining sustainable fish
stocks.

Inadequate surveillance system
in fisheries to ensure revenue
generation and lack of land-

Fisheries:
6.3 Territorial Use Rights
Fisheries (TURFS) legally

28

FY07 Rural & Priv. Sector
Dev. Project
FY10 GEF Biodiversity
Conservation Project
FY11 GEF Wetlands
Conservation Project
FY 12 West Africa Agriculture
Productivity Project
AAA:

Partners:
EU, FAO, GTZ, IFAD, JICA,
KfW, WFP
Ongoing Projects/TFs:
FY10 West Africa Regional
Fisheries Project

based fisheries infrastructure

established for coastal fisheries
increased from none in 2008 to
4 by 2013. (WB)

Partners:
USAID DfID EU AfDB
UNDP FAO

6.4 Meet EU phyto-sanitary
standard for fish exports by
2013 (AfDB/WB)
Governance
6.5 Fishing vessels observed
committing a serious infraction
reduced from 88% in 2009 to
66% by 2013. (WB)
6.6 Public disclosure of all
fishing licenses and revenues
by Ministry of Fisheries and
Marine Resources (WB)

7. Improve Standing of
Sierra Leone as Investment
Destination + job creation

High cost of bank credit,
limited rural financial
intermediation,
underdeveloped capital market,
and constraints in investment
climate
Limited capacity of private
sector to provide employment
facilities for youth, especially
in urban areas

7. Improved investment
climate
7.1 Reduction in time taken to
register a business from 26
days in 2007 to 10 days by
2013 (IFC/WB).
7.2 Reduction in time of export
transactions from 31 days in
2007 to 22 days by 2013.
7.3 Number of bank accounts
increased to 300,000 in 2013
from 160,000 in 2005 (WB)
7.4 Volume and market
penetration of leasing
equipment financed increased
from US$6.8 mil in 2009 to
US$35 million in 2013 (IFC).
Governance/Gender
7.5 Achieve EITI validation
standards by 2013.
(AfDB/WB)
7.6 AML/CFT regime
strengthened by amendment of
AML law and establishment of
FIU at BSL by 2013. (WB)

On-going Projects/TFs:

FY11 Financial Sector Support
Project
FY10 Youth Employment and
Skills
FY10 Mineral Sector TA

FY12 Extractive Industries
Technical Advisory Project
FY11 Capacity building for the
Bank of Sierra Leone on
monitoring compliance of
trade finance facility (IFC)
FY09 Integrated Financial
Public Financial Management
Project
FY11 West Africa Regional
Communications Infrastructure
Project
AAA:
FY12 Policy Note : Revenue
AdministrationFY12 Policy
Note : Road Map to Prepare
for Petroleum
Partners:
GTZ DfID UNDP UNCDF

29

8. Broaden electricity supply
throughout the country
distribution capacity from
21MW in 2008 to 56 MW in
2013

Low energy supplies
Low capacity of transmission
and distribution of electricity
infrastructure
High cost of power generation
relative to available budgetary
resources

8. Improved access to
sustainable electricity
infrastructure services
Energy:
8.1 Households in Freetown
with access to electricity
increased from 20,000 in 2009
to 40,000 by 2013.
(AfDB/WB)

8.2 Average collection rates
increased from 76% to 80%
(WB)

9. Develop the national
transportation network
feeder roads by 2013

Development of road network.
Inadequate and poorly
maintained rural and feeder
roads
Inefficient port and airport

and airport

Governance/Gender
8.3 Regulatory framework for
independent power production
established by 2013 (WB)
9. Maintain and extend key
transport infrastructure

On-going Projects/TFs:

FY05 Bumbuna Hydroelectric
Project
FY11 Infrastructure (Energy)
AAA:
FY12 Policy Note ; Revenue
Administration
FY11 Public Expenditure
Review
FY12 Country Economic
Memorandum
Partners:
China, DfID, EU, JICA

On-going Projects/TFs:
FY06 IDP Transport Project

9.1 1,400km of feeder roads
rehabilitated by 2013
(AfDB/WB)
9.2 Port container handling
performance is improved from
8 TEUs/hr in 2007 to 12
TEUs/hr by 2013. (WB)
9.3 Lungi Airport to remain as
international airport according
to ICAO safety regulations
(WB)

FY07 Rural & Private Sector
Development Project

AAA:
FY12 Pro-poor Transport
Sector Strategy
FY12 Country Economic
Memorandum.

Governance/Gender
9.4 Independent road fund
established by 2013. (WB)

Partners:
EU, GTZ, Islamic
Development Bank, Kuwait
Fund

Key Issues from PRSP

JAS Outcomes &
Indicators

World Bank Group
Instruments

Making greater use of natural
resource potential – minerals,
agriculture, oil and gas. As a
country, Sierra Leone has a
track record of misusing
mineral resources; Anxious to
avoid the ‗curse‘ past; the rife

10.1 Key regulations related to
mining submitted to Cabinet
after extensive consultations:
E&S regulations, Precious
Minerals Trading Act,
Resettlement Regulations,
Health and Safety Regulations
(WB)

On-going Projects/TFs:

JAS Objective 3: Extractive Boom
Selected PRSP II
objectives & indicators 11
Economic Development, Trade
and Finance - macroeconomic
management

11

FY10 Mineral Sector Technical
Assistance

FY12 Artisinal Mining
Community Development and
Sustainable Livelihoods

PRSP objectives and constraints are taken from October 2011 Concept Note on ‗AGENDA FOR

PROSPERITY/ENHANCED AGENDA FOR CHANGE, 2013-2017‘

30

and corruption that minerals,
oil and gas has had in other
countries. Given prospects and
volumes, Sierra Leone will be
assuming a very serious
responsibility. Wide ranging
advisory services would be
compelling on how to better
manage the different
subsectors – technical, legal,
fiscal, governance frameworks.

10.2 Establishment of
National Minerals Agency
(WB)

Governance/Gender :
10.3 Prioritized vacancies for
critical staffing requirements
identified within the Ministry
of Mines and Minerals
Resources (MMR) completed
and job descriptions and
recruitment plans approved by
HRMO/PSC and recruitment
underway (WB)
1.4 DFGG Strategy for Sierra
Leone completed, with priority
social accountability
instruments and approaches
laid out (WB)

31

FY12 Extractive Industries
Technical Assistance Project
FY11 Artisinal Mining
Community Development and
Sustainable Livelihoods
Project
Good Governance Partnership
Facility
AAA:
FY12 Public Expenditure
Reviews
FY12 Policy Note: Road Map
to prepare for Petroleum
FY12 Good Governance
Initiative
Partners:

Annex 2: Post-Conflict Meets Resource-Rich:
Strategic Priorities for Economic Management in the Era of “Iron Ore Economics”
1.
A rapidly changing economic environment requires a new strategic focus for economic development in Sierra
Leone, particularly as it applies to financial and private sector development, extractive sector management and the
economic policy and institutional agenda. The impending boom in the mineral sector has far-reaching implications for the
country‘s development trajectory. Since the end of the civil war Sierra Leone has followed a gradual post-conflict
recovery with two successive peaceful election cycles and averaged GDP growth of 6 percent. Now the economy is
poised to experience a major transformation: The development of two large iron ore mining projects will lead to large
one-off surge in real GDP and a significant surge in exports in 2012 and beyond12. Due to generous tax concessions,
government revenue will increase only moderately in 2012 but more substantially from 2013 onwards. While mining
activity alone will be a game-changer for Sierra Leone, oil reserves in commercial quantities may be verified in the course
of the year.
2.

These developments in the mineral sector confront Sierra Leone with significant opportunities and risks:


On the upside, mining can become a growth motor, spur private investment and provide the government with the
resources it needs to implement its ambitious development agenda. It provides opportunities for scaling-up
public-private partnerships for infrastructure development as well as small and medium enterprise development
linked to mining operations and targeted spatial economic development strategies around new growth poles.



On the downside, Sierra Leone has to confront the ‗resource curse‘ that has challenged many resource rich
African countries. In the past, Sierra Leone has failed to address these issues and the results have been poor
development outcomes, high inequality and devastating conflict. The impact of the unprecedented growth shock
puts significant demands on the Government to maintain macro economic stability, ensure good value for money
in government expenditures, strengthen transparency and promote good governance. Beyond the significant
governance issues associated with managing resource revenues, the dynamics of mineral sector growth could
throw economic development off balance. The mineral sector is likely to divert human capital, entrepreneurial and
investment resources from other sectors and could thereby undermine development strategies in other potential
growth sectors such as agriculture, light manufacturing, tourism as well as commerce and services. Commodity
price volatility, foreign currency inflows and a changing structure of the balance-of-payments will challenge
macro economic management and financial sector capacity. Social exclusion around extractives could increase
the risk of instability, conflict and a disruption of revenue flows.

Strengthening institutions and governance
3.
Institutional capacity needs to be built to ensure that benefits of the mineral sector are put to use to develop the
rest of the economy and achieve inclusive growth in line with agreed priorities. The institutional development agenda is
necessarily exhaustive and encompasses traditional public sector priorities like public financial management and
governance as well as specific institutional capacity required to manage resource revenues and increase economic
management capacity. Four key areas can be identified:
Firstly, building and improving public financial management capacity remains a key priority as does public sector reform
more broadly. Further efforts in strengthening public financial management are required to strengthen the ability to
manage public finances on a consistent basis and in-line with budgets approved by the legislature. Apart from deepening
financial discipline this requires developing the skills and systems to ensure that the allocation and distribution of
government spending is optimal across sectors, in order to achieve economic efficiency as well as effective collection of
all revenues due to the state – openness and dialogue with citizens is essential in this regard. It also requires establishing a
strong framework for public procurement to ensure value for money, and give confidence to investors and citizens alike.
The public sector reform process to strengthen public sector effectiveness and improve its ability to deliver services must
12

IMF projects a surge in GDP by 35% in 2012 and a fourfold increase in exports. Standard Chartered Bank is projecting 30% GDP
growth in 2012. Estimates are driven by assumptions on iron prices and, more importantly, mining output in the initial phase of
operation which is introducing some uncertainty around actual figures.

32

be broadened and deepened. A more effective public service will also mean more effective revenue collection, more
effective monitoring of operations for health, safety and other regulatory requirements. As initiatives in these areas are
already in place, Government needs to maintain the drive and pressure to develop the broad institutional agenda to ensure
a strong and consistent measure of governance is embodied in them that will serve the public interest and stand the test of
time.
Secondly, governance issues are pertinent and have proven to be even more challenging for countries to address in these
situations. Pressures to increase government spending, including public sector wages, will rise as will competition within
society for access to resources. Licensing and contract award would attract undue attention and may become politicized
due to the rent-seeking opportunities they present, and conflicts of interest would abound. Groups on whose land the
resources being exploited were discovered will demand that their rights under law be respected, the environmental and
social costs of mining be minimized and benefits shared equitably within impacted populations. All this leads to intense
political lobbying and competition and could increase the risks of conflict. Increasing conflict stresses are already evident
in combustible mining communities and will require careful management. Citizens and communities will be most
concerned about the environmental impacts and social disruption, distribution of revenues and in the outcomes through
policies, programs and local level projects/development. Drawing on the experience of other countries a strong
governance regime underpinned by a practice of accountability and transparency at all stages, an absolute avoidance of
conflicts of interest and the direct involvement of all stakeholders, especially community groups in every aspect —
especially monitoring of licenses and contracts; monitoring of the projects and operations; collection and distribution of
revenues; and the selection and implementation of projects — are necessary elements of a broader governance strategy to
deal with new challenges. The key strategic priorities in this area are:


Licensing and contract negotiations. Strengthen the process for awarding licenses and contracts by providing a
strategic framework for integrating extractive industry development projects in the context of national planning
initiatives. Establish an open and transparent process that utilizes international expertise in negotiations, which
includes respected CSOs and development partners. Ensure that the integrity of the process is beyond reproach and
that local communities have a say in it and are informed about developments that affect and change their lives.



Revenue Management and associated accountability mechanisms. Extensive public consultations with the
population at large and political parties regarding the process of revenue management and the associated
accountability mechanisms are needed to provide a robust accountability framework. This should also include
independent and regular public reporting on the accountability mechanisms and results. Progress in revenue
collection needs to be consolidated by reinforcing the monitoring function, particularly with respect to financial and
technical audit of mining operations establishing mechanisms to undertake audits of mining firms by external auditors
with respect to profit declarations and legal compensation and community development obligations. EITI validation
and passing of the Sierra Leone EITI Bill will be important steps in improving extractive industry governance.



Control Corruption. The impending extractives boom increases the risks of more corruption, since important
systems are not yet in place to prevent, detect or deter it or the related money laundering. Tools and mechanisms for
prevention and detection need to be embedded in a variety of laws, including the financial sector regulatory system.
Also, licensing procedures in existing sectors (not only natural resources) are very poor, and these create risks that
critical licenses may be conferred on those involved in criminal activities. Importantly, the impending extractives
boom requires the Anti Corruption Commission to become more effective in its work in detecting and prosecuting
instances of corruption, but firstly leading (with the Audit Service of Sierra Leone) the installation of sound
transparent processes and accountable systems. If integrity issues do not become a very high priority very soon, the
existing levels of corruption could increase at a rate commensurate with the extractives boom.

Thirdly, an institutional framework for macroeconomic management needs to be put in place ideally before receipt of
large windfall revenues in the coming years. Such a framework might include mechanisms like a sovereign wealth fund to
absorb excess mineral revenues, other hedging mechanisms to reduce revenue volatility, front-loaded borrowing to
smooth government spending, utilities reforms, and specific strategies for currency reserves management. Taken
together, the objective should be to establish a strong foundation for macro stabilization. A key strategic question for
financial sector management is how foreign currency deposits can be leveraged more to facilitate local currency funding
33

for the private sector, while balancing the risks of currency mismatches on bank balance sheets and dollarization of the
economy.
4.
The timely establishment of a professionally managed sovereign wealth fund that would absorb large funding
inflows from extractive industries and could compensate for the limited absorptive capacity of the Sierra Leone economy
would be a key instrument to enhance economic management capacity. Especially, it could help mitigate some of the
potential Dutch Disease effects of extractive industry based development. This will require: (a) definition of the funding
strategy (for example, state equity returns, advance payments or excess mining revenues); (b) the investment profile and
allocation priority (taking the form, for example, of a national infrastructure development fund, future generation fund,
and stabilization fund); (c) the fiduciary arrangements, governance structure, and bylaws of the sovereign wealth fund;
and (d) the respective legal and regulatory framework.
5.
In addition, the authorities should develop a robust pipeline of public investment plans and social interventions to
be financed on the basis of stable and consistent transfers of mining revenues to the budget. This will require establishing
an improved institutional framework for public investment management and revenue management in order to avoid some
of the problems which occurred in 2010 and 2011. It will also need to take account of institutional capacity and the ability
for oversight and management of public investment projects.
Fourthly, gaps in the regulatory and monitoring frameworks for the extractive sector need to be addressed. Establishing
and operationalizing the National Minerals Authority and upgrading the Petroleum Directorate's capacity to manage the
extractives sector will both assist. Work will also be required to ensure that the recently enacted Mines and Minerals Act
and its regulations are faithfully implemented and monitored to prevent these important reforms from existing only ―on
paper‖. Particular emphasis also needs to be placed on monitoring the implementation of extractive industry agreements.
Sierra Leone is making progress with respect to improving and strengthening the award of licenses and contracts,
regulation and monitoring of operations and revenue collection. Yet this progress needs to be accelerated as the pace of
mining development is guided by the vagaries of the market and the private sector.
Private and financial sector development
The emerging mining industry and its ancillary infrastructure offer the opportunity to be leveraged as ‗growth poles‘ for
private sector development. The impact of these developments is substantial and includes local economic development
opportunities in non-mining economic activities around the mine catchment areas and transport hubs, SME forward and
backward linkages with mine operations as well as the provision of infrastructure leveraging the mining developments
(see Figure 3 in main body of this report). Government should develop specific, spatially focused strategies around the
new growth poles, especially in the Bumbuna – Makeni – Freetown corridor which combines key power, mining and
agro-business assets, and perhaps in the south around the large-scale mining and hydrocarbon reserves, once confirmed.
6.
In this context, public-private partnerships (PPPs) for infrastructure development will be a key policy instrument
for deepening private sector investment. A key priority will be to strengthen the institutional framework and capacity in
the Government to identify, close and manage PPP infrastructure projects. Sierra Leone has a huge infrastructure deficit
even by African standards. Recognizing the severe constraints of poorly developed infrastructure for the economy,
Government has made the issue a policy priority. An ambitious acceleration in infrastructure investments has, however,
stretched public finances considerably in recent years. There is scope for leveraging private sector investment into
infrastructure PPPs and close the funding gap. In particular, mining-related investments in infrastructure provide
significant potential to be leveraged into shared public infrastructure and improve the operating environment for other
industries.
7.
While mining developments offer significant potential, current private sector development strategies need to be
developed further to actively address the need to invest in economic diversification and balance the structural pressures
from the mining industry in terms of demands on skills, entrepreneurship, infrastructure and financing. A key lesson from
countries that have experienced similar resource booms is that economic diversification strategies need to be made an
early priority. Sierra Leone has significant growth potentials in non-mining sectors, especially agriculture, fisheries,
tourism, light manufacturing, commerce and services that need to remain in the focus of policy and private sector
strategies.
34

8.
Financial sector development priorities will evolve around the ability of the domestic financial sector to
intermediate capital inflows, manage the associated risks and foster private sector growth. The ability of the domestic
banking sector to meet the demand for funding from new entrepreneurs or existing businesses that seek to expand their
operations as part of the supply chain of the new mining operations will be crucial in ensuring broad based growth.
Demand for financial services will increase as domestic SMEs leverage the opportunities resulting from mining
developments and income levels of households increase. Banks need to invest in their ability to structure loan
transactions and identify viable borrowers in the new value chains. Demand for transaction and payment services will
increase and development of the national payment system is crucial.
9.
The focus on strengthening the regulatory framework and building capacity for banking supervision needs to be
maintained and complemented through investments in the risk management capacity of the commercial banks and other
financial institutions. Rapid credit growth as a result of a growth shock is prone to result in a build-up of credit risks.
Furthermore, the high concentration of economic activity related to mining will introduce considerable systemic risk that
needs to be monitored as part of the financial stability oversight functions of the Bank of Sierra Leone.

10.
Sierra Leone has the opportunity to learn from the mistakes of other countries that have experienced a similar
natural resource-driven boom and invest in governance, institutional development and economic diversification strategies
from the start. Sierra Leone needs to invest both in the country‘s ability to reap the opportunities as well as the capacity to
mitigate the challenges and risks.

35

ANNEX 3: PROMOTING SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT
I.

Introduction

1.
Sierra Leone has made significant progress in consolidating peace and promoting human and economic
development in the decade since the end of its civil war. Yet according to global indicators, governance and corruption
remain notable challenges in securing lasting development.13 Traditionally, efforts to improve governance and minimize
corruption have focused primarily on the ―supply-side‖ – including supporting the modernization of the state with
capacity building programs in decentralization and public financial management. Yet, there is growing recognition that in
order to achieve lasting development in Sierra Leone, citizens must be involved in the process, forging a ―new social
contract for development.‖14 In a speech commemorating 50 years of Sierra Leone‘s independence, President Ernest Bai
Koroma challenged all Sierra Leoneans to be monitors and contributors to government‘s work under a newly envisioned
citizen-state partnership.15 This partnership places civic participation and demand for good governance (DFGG) at the
center of development and governance planning and is especially important for Sierra Leone in light of the natural
resources-fuelled growth that is expected in the coming years.
Social Accountability (SA) and Demand for Good Governance (DFGG) refer to the extent and capability of citizens to
hold the state accountable and make it responsive to their needs.16 DFGG identifies the aspirations and involvement of
citizens as paramount to the governance agenda, empowering them in order to increase accountability and improve
essential service delivery.17
II.

DFGG and the Joint Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)

2.
The Joint Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) identifies good governance as a cross-cutting theme in promoting
Sierra Leone‘s development, pointing to the role of poor governance in fueling the country‘s 11-year civil war.18 The
CAS frames governance broadly, but doesn‘t distinguish in detail between supply-side and demand-side approaches. The
CAS states that ―all operations will, where possible and relevant, help to build the demand for good governance by
promoting transparency, participation, and accountability and supporting capacity development of civil society and the
media.‖19 Notably, the CAS offers no conceptual framework or recommendations to guide the design and implementation
of robust demand-side measures in Sierra Leone. Since adopting the CAS, experience in Sierra Leone has highlighted the
increasing relevance of DFGG to the country‘s development agenda. This Annex provides a framework for greater
investment in DFGG in Sierra Leone and lays the ground for using experiences with DFGG to inform the preparation of
the next CAS starting in FY14. Significantly, the Annex responds to the need for a country-specific DFGG strategy to
further guide operational and analytical activities and policy engagement for the Bank in Sierra Leone.
III.

13

DFGG in Sierra Leone: The Experience to Date

See WBI Worldwide Governance Indicators, Sierra Leone (2010); Mo-Ibrahim Foundation Governance Indicators,
Sierra Leone (2010).
14
See World Bank President Robert Zoellick, Peterson Institute Speech, April 2011. See also World Bank Working
Group on DFGG in Africa, Empowering Citizens to Hold their Governments Accountable: An AFR Strategy to Support
Demand for Good Governance (Final Version, April 2011) [hereinafter AFR Strategy] (outlining a regional DFGG
strategy which, together with the GAC-2 DFGG strategy, forms the foundation of this Annex).
15
See Sierra Leone Government State House, Statement by His Excellency the President, Dr Ernest Bai Koroma at the
Launch of Transparency Sierra Leone Portal (Jan. 26, 2012), available at
http://news.sl/drwebsite/publish/printer_200519577.shtml.
16
GAC-2 Companion Piece: Strengthening the World Bank‘s Engagement on Demand for Good Governance [hereinafter
GAC-2 DFGG], at 27.
17
See id.
18
See Joint Assistance Strategy for Sierra Leone (2010), at 1, 24-28.
19
See id. at 37. The JCAS notes civil society‘s critical role in drafting the Freedom of Information Bill, and the need to
publish development project information. See id. at 26. It also stresses improving service delivery and conducting a
political economy analysis of the DFGG environment. See id. at 37, 52.
36

3.
In developing a country-specific DFGG strategy, it is important to consider the political economy and broader
environment for citizen-state interactions. The 2004 World Development Report identified three key aspects of the
accountability relationship between citizens, policy makers and service providers: citizen voice with respect to influence
over policy makers, citizen power with respect to influence over service providers, and the compact between policy
makers and service providers.20
4.
There remains a need to better understand how Sierra Leone fares in promoting citizen voice, citizen power, and
in having an effective compact. There is also an ongoing need to map the context for DFGG, understand how powerful
groups promote or restrict citizens‘ efforts in this space, and assemble evidence showing how development partners can
facilitate the citizen-state accountability relationship.21 Based on available global governance data, Sierra Leone performs
relatively well in the areas of citizens‘ voice and empowerment, although the country has significant room for
improvement in government effectiveness, rule of law, and anti-corruption, all of which may undermine the viability of
relationships between citizens, policy makers, and service providers.22 A growing body of empirical data has also
suggested that the decentralization process in Sierra Leone has emboldened citizens‘ voice vis-à-vis local government
authorities, especially where communities are disconnected from transport, telecommunications, markets, or contact with
the state.23 Yet it is important to assess why Sierra Leone performs well in some areas such as citizen voice and
empowerment and not in others, as well as to consider how best to boost civil society‘s and government‘s capacity to
prompt and respond to, respectively, citizens‘ demands for improved governance.
5.
Notably, from the supply-side, the Government of Sierra Leone has increasingly emphasized and created space for
DFGG, making the time ripe for strengthened development partner engagement in this space. In 2009, Government and
Non State Actors (NSA) agreed on a NSA Component in the Integrated Public Financial Management Project, thereby
laying the groundwork for NSAs and Civil Society to become informed and engage directly on PFM issues. This
supported the creation of the CSO-led Budget Advocacy network, and in turn provided a forum for civil society to
comment and engage in the budget debate process. The latest effort in this regard was the launch in May 2012 of the
country‘s first citizen-version of the public budget, drafted by a formative coalition of civil society organizations
interested in promoting public financial management. Among other significant opportunities, the Freedom of Information
Bill has been resubmitted to Parliament in May 2012, and Sierra Leone is currently undertaking the reconciliation process
under the Extractives Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI), with a validation deadline scheduled for December 2012.
The country is also preparing its PRS3, which provides another opportunity for strengthening the SA / DFGG agenda at
the policy / strategy level. Yet another issue to ponder over is how can Sierra Leone make quick and dramatic
improvements in human development, including meeting key MDGs, and does SA / DFGG offer an opportunity in this
regard.

20

See AFR Strategy, at 8-9.
See id. at 14.
22
See WBI Worldwide Governance Indicators, Sierra Leone (2010); Mo-Ibrahim Foundation Governance Indicators,
Sierra Leone (2010).
23
See The World Bank, Decentralization, Democracy, and Development: Recent Experience from Sierra Leone (Yongmei
Zhou ed. 2009), at 25.
37
21

6.
Outside the portfolio of Bank financed projects, the Bank has also engaged with other DFGG initiatives in Sierra
Leone such as the capacity enhancement of youth organizations on Right to Information (RTI), the Global Youth AntiCorruption (GYAC) initiative, supporting the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank (PNoWB), the Contract Watch
initiative, among others.
7.
Against this promising backdrop, in 2011 the Bank conducted an internal assessment of the Bank‘s current social
accountability engagement in Sierra Leone. The review analyzed the Bank‘s portfolio across a range of DFGG measures,
including: information-sharing, citizen consultation and participation, third-party monitoring by CSOs, and grievance
mechanisms.24 A broad outline of these measures follows:








Information-sharing: Citizens‘ and civil society‘s ability to demand better governance depends on their access to
actionable information. The effectiveness of DFGG requires disclosure of information, explanation of the
information, and dissemination of the information. Information and communications technology can facilitate
effective aggregation and dissemination of actionable information.
Consultation and participation: While information-sharing is a critical component of DFGG, citizens and civil
society need mechanisms through which to provide feedback to the state. Consultation and participation allow
citizens to influence public decisions and service delivery, although it remains challenging to identify which
mechanisms – whether citizen scorecards, community oversight committees, or otherwise – best channel this
―feedback‖ or its ―uptake‖ into Government decisions and policy making.
Third-party monitoring: DFGG also calls for the media and other civil society actors to monitor and oversee
government activities. Such monitoring can help detect and manage risks. These civil society actors aggregate
and disseminate relevant information to enable citizens to discuss government performance and opportunities for
strengthened action.
Grievance mechanisms: In some instances, citizen consultation/participation and third-party monitoring create
pressure, but government fails to respond in the desired manner. Effective grievance mechanisms channel
concerns and provide citizens a voice in development. They can mitigate risks and conflict before they become
serious or costly.25

8.
The review revealed that the Bank is supporting some innovative work on DFGG, but the overall effort is largely
focused on project-level approaches to DFGG, with a focus on information-sharing and community
consultation/participation, but with limited grievance mechanisms, third-party monitoring, and sustainable policy uptake
mechanisms. More importantly, there is scope for tightening the link between use of SA / DFGG and development results.
The review recommended that:
During the preparation process, projects undertake better prior analysis of accountability constraints and the demandside measures to alleviate them; Projects better engage and avoid duplication with other accountability structures
that already exist in Sierra Leone – especially during implementation;
 Relatedly, the Bank consider facilitating citizen participation and DFGG beyond a project‘s life cycle;
 The Bank sharpen the coherence in its overall approach to DFGG in the Sierra Leone program, and engage with
government further on how DFGG can help accelerate achievement of development results.
 The Bank gather stronger evidence to demonstrate the effectiveness of DFGG work, including mixed-methods
approaches that can help explain why certain DFGG interventions are effective (or ineffective) in a particular
context.26
IV.

Towards a Country-Specific DFGG Strategy

9.
Framed by the priorities and limitations outlined in the Africa Regional DFGG Strategy, as well as the findings
from the 2011 portfolio review, there is a need to develop a country-specific DFGG strategy for Sierra Leone. The Africa
24

See GAC-2 DFGG, at 36 (outlining these four categories). The review categories loosely tracked these four categories.
Notably, in order to be effectual and credible, grievance mechanisms must have a supply-side response from the
government and those who act on its behalf.
26
See GAC-2 DFGG, at 13.
38
25

DFGG Strategy recommends five areas of strategic influence for the region: (i) understanding the socio-political context
for DFGG; (ii) accountability for service delivery; (iii) enabling environment for DFGG; (iv) strengthening natural
resource management; and (v) supporting media in promoting good governance.27
10.
The Sierra Leone DFGG strategy framework proposed here builds upon existing successes, focuses on select and
promising entry points for engagement, and leverages the Bank‘s comparative advantages as a convener, financier, and
knowledge institution to deliver development impact.28 In implementing a country-level DFGG strategy, the Bank should
engage in more internal dialogue and robust discussions with the government, civil society and other development
partners to ensure that its work complements and enhances the needs identified and efforts underway. In this regard, the
Bank will work to forge relevant partnerships. The Bank should also consider how to boost the capacity of civil society to
place demands on government, and of government to respond to those demands, encouraging partnerships between the
two where possible.
11.
With these principles in mind, three potential key priority areas for DFGG work in Sierra Leone during the
remainder of the CAS period are: (i) promoting a strong policy and enabling environment for DFGG, (ii) reinforcing
accountability to improve health care delivery and health outcomes, and (iii) promoting the synergy and cross-learning on
DFGG issues across the country portfolio.
i.

Promoting a strong policy and enabling environment for DFGG.

12.
The Bank would play a stronger role in working with government and other stakeholders in promoting an
enabling environment for citizen engagement and accountability of service providers to citizens. This would help focus
the Bank efforts much more on using the ‗policy and planning space‘ to strengthen SA / DFGG as a way of promoting
transparency and governance in Sierra Leone. In supporting the broader enabling environment, the Bank would work to
identify and then address context-specific constraints to effective DFGG, such as lack of awareness of entitlements,
restricted social capital and group mobilization, and citizen concerns about the efficacy or impartiality of feedback or
grievance systems. Specifically, the Bank‘s would have different dimensions: (i) engaging with the PRS3 and sector
strategy / policy discussions in order to also ensure that SA / DFGG issues get sufficient attention in these documents; (ii)
working with stakeholders to create opportunities for using open information exchange and communication between
citizens, policy makers, and service providers in Sierra Leone. This could involve looking at ways to facilitate
implementation of the Right to Information Bill, once it is approved by Parliament and ratified into law, and using ICT
and mapping to provide the same quality information to both local level decision-makers and citizens (and thus addressing
the problem of potential ‗information asymmetry‘ in making planning decisions at the local level). It could also entail
strengthened engagement with and capacity-building within media sources; (iii) continue to strengthen the use of the
budget as an important tool for promoting accountability, e.g. through quality use of Citizens Budget and supporting the
government to continue disclosing revenues from the extractives sector; and (iv) make the Bank itself more accountable
by use of initiatives like External Implementation Status Report (EISR), which aim to complement the Bank‘s Access to
Information policy, and to get third party / beneficiary feedback on implementation of Bank-supported projects.

ii.

Reinforcing Citizen Accountability to Improve Health Care Delivery and Health Outcomes.

13.
Although Sierra Leone has made progress in promoting human development since the end of the civil war, the
country still lags far behind in achieving certain Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly in the health
sector. The country remains near the bottom of the Human Development Index with very high maternal and under-five
mortality rates. As Sierra Leone undergoes a rapid economic transformation driven by the extractives sector, the sociopolitical and economic imperative to ensure that there is faster progress on the MDGs is only likely to increase. The
government‘s bold Free Health Care Initiative (FHCI) aims to improve the country‘s health statistics, and health care
delivery more broadly. However, the government and civil society have observed gaps in monitoring and accountability
(improper use fees, absent nurses, missing drugs, etc.) that undermine service delivery. As this Annex has suggested, the
Bank needs to focus on select, promising points of engagement with DFGG, and the health sector poses one such
27
28

See id. at 14-16.
See AFR Strategy.
39

promising entry point. There are identified gaps in monitoring and accountability in the health sector, and citizens (who
are closest to the point of service delivery) may be best equipped to document these and press for change. Further, the
Government has indicated a keen interest in both advancing health outcomes (via the FHCI, among other efforts) and,
notably, in using DFGG to improve health service delivery. Hence, it is recommended that the Bank support the
Government and civil society in their endeavors by focusing its efforts around using DFGG to improve health care
delivery. This emphasis is consistent with the Africa Regional DFGG Strategy and the CAS, both of which emphasize the
importance of SA / DFGG for strengthening service delivery. Experience elsewhere has shown that parallel efforts to
strengthen the delivery systems (‗supply-side‘) and the accountability systems (‗demand-side‘) are likely to improve the
prospects of achieving more sustainable development impact. Yet, the true benefits of SA / DFGG in helping achieve
development results in the health sector in Sierra Leone must still be validated, and, hence, rigorous and mixed-methods
evaluation will be an important component of the Bank‘s activities in this space. The revised CAS Results Framework
captures the intended outcomes of this consolidated DFGG effort in the health sector in the country.

iii.

Promoting Cross-learning and Synergy on DFGG across country portfolio.

14.
As noted above, the review of ongoing of DFGG efforts in Bank-supported programs in Sierra Leone has
confirmed that SA / DFGG is being actively pursued in many projects in the portfolio. Going forward, the cross-learning
and synergy between these efforts would be promoted in a number of ways. Firstly, the following framework would be
used as a guide to help identify opportunities for DFGG to contribute to specific sector / project outcomes or address
binding constraints to good governance and enhanced service delivery in ongoing and new projects. Secondly, the Bank
will maintain the focus on high-impact DFGG initiatives and avoid undue proliferation of efforts and ensure optimal use
of limited government capacity. Thirdly, put greater attention on ‗closing the feedback loop‘ i.e. stronger grievance
redressal systems and helping ensure that citizens can use the ‗empowerment‘ provided through DFGG initiatives in
helping improve service delivery and accountability of providers. Next, continue and strengthen the use of established
tools to support DFGG in improving service delivery, such as surveys carried out for several years, including CLoPAS,
PETS and INPSS. And finally, consider opportunities to enhance synergies on a regional basis with other countries
confronting similar development challenges and opportunities for DFGG engagement in areas including increased access
to information, budget transparency, and extractives.
Strategic country-level approach to DFGG
Identify binding constraints in a particular sector or development area.

Consider whether empowering citizens/civil society may help alleviate that binding constraint. Is there evidence that
citizens‘ involvement makes a difference? Do citizens/civil society have the capacity and willingness to work in this space,
and, if not, is support available to assist them in so doing? Does government have the capacity and willingness to respond,
and, if not, is support available to assist it in so doing?

If empowering citizens/civil society may make a difference, consider which DFGG measures in particular are best targeted
to the local context and to the particular need. Are grievances or discord foreseeable? Are there existing accountability
structures that can be bolstered?

15.
The next opportunity to review the state of play with the overall DFGG effort of the Bank in Sierra Leone would
be during the preparation of the next CAS. At that time, the Bank should identify key sectors for future Bank DFGG
40

engagement in order to enhance project performance and/or minimize risks, using a strategic approach such as the one
outlined above. In addition, the Bank should execute further adjustments and refinements to the country DFGG strategy.

Developing an integrated approach to DFGG in the health sector
DFGG
Measure

Binding Constraint and Potential DFGG Solution

Promoting
informationsharing and
community
consultation
and
participation

Since the government of Sierra Leone passed a free health care initiative (FHCI) in 2010,
civil society organizations (CSOs) have scrutinized the accountability of service delivery
providers and pointed to gaps in monitoring that lead, inter alia, to leakage of drugs,
improper fees for health services, and missing health staff.29

Government and CSOs have pointed to DFGG as a potentially powerful tool to empower
citizens to aggregate information about gaps in services and monitor and participate in
improving health service delivery. The government Decentralization Secretariat, with
World Bank DSDP financing, is implementing two DFGG interventions around health
clinics in four districts, beginning in May 2012:
1. Seeking to improve accountability in health delivery by convening discussions in
communities around a clinic scorecard and drafting a compact between
communities and clinic staff wherein both commit to improving health delivery.
2. Linking bottom-up feedback from users with top-down, formal state recognition
through a non-financial award to the top improving clinics and their staff.
The interventions will be implemented over approximately 8 months using a randomizedcontrolled trial. Qualitative research by the World Bank Justice for the Poor program
will also seek to understand why and how these measures work.

Grievance
mechanisms

Government and CSOs have noted certain accountability gaps, such as drug leakage or
poor management, that reflect breakdowns in state structures. Information-sharing or
community consultation/ participation may not suffice in these cases; to obtain a remedy,
communities may need help navigating administrative or other accountability channels.

Legal empowerment practitioners are exploring their role in addressing such systemic
breakdowns that create problems felt by an entire community. Small-scale pilot activities
are taking place in two districts to investigate role of legal empowerment (paralegals) and
DFGG (community-based health oversight committees) in improving paths for citizen
grievances around health delivery. The findings will inform the broader portfolio of
Bank-financed approaches to accountability for service delivery in Sierra Leone.

29

See Amnesty International, At a Crossroads: Sierra Leone‘s Free Health Care Policy (2011).

41

Annex 4 – Progress on Millennium Development Goals
Millennium Development Goals
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Employment to population ratio, 15+, total (%)

64

64

63

65

65

Employment to population ratio, ages 15-24, total (%)

39

38

39

42

42

GDP per person employed (constant 1990 PPP $)

..

..

..

..

..

Income share held by lowest 20%

..

..

..

6

..

Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)

25

..

25

28

21

Poverty gap at $1.25 a day (PPP) (%)

45

..

..

20

..

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP) (% of population)

63

..

..

53

..

Vulnerable employment, total (% of total employment)

..

..

..

92

..

Literacy rate, youth female (% of females ages 15-24)

..

..

..

37

48

Literacy rate, youth male (% of males ages 15-24)

..

..

..

60

68

Persistence to last grade of primary, total (% of cohort)

..

..

..

..

..

Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)

..

..

..

..

74

Total enrollment, primary (% net)

..

..

..

..

..

Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (%)

..

6

9

15

13

Ratio of female to male primary enrollment (%)

66

..

67

..

93

Ratio of female to male secondary enrollment (%)

49

..

68

..

..

Ratio of female to male tertiary enrollment (%)

..

..

78

..

..

Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of total nonagricultural
employment)

..

..

..

23.2

..

Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)

..

..

37

71

82

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)

162

159

142

128

114

Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000 live births)

276

271

233

202

174

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality

Goal 5: Improve maternal health

42

Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19)

..

151

146

144

120

Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

..

..

42

43

42

Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

3

..

4

5

8

Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

1,300

1,400

1,300

1,100

970

Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%)

..

..

68

81

87

Unmet need for contraception (% of married women ages 15-49)

..

..

..

..

28

Children with fever receiving antimalarial drugs (% of children under age 5 with fever)

..

..

61

52

30

Condom use, population ages 15-24, female (% of females ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

5

Condom use, population ages 15-24, male (% of males ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

18

Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)

207

279

377

509

682

Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

1.5

Prevalence of HIV, male (% ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

0.6

Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49)

0.1

0.2

0.9

1.5

1.6

Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

8

18

24

26

32

CO2 emissions (kg per PPP $ of GDP)

0

0

0

0

0

CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)

0

0

0

0

0

Forest area (% of land area)

43.5

..

40.8

39.4

38.1

Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)

11

11

11

12

13

Improved water source (% of population with access)

38

42

46

51

55

Marine protected areas (% of territorial waters)

0

0

0

0

0

Net ODA received per capita (current US$)

15

54

44

66

81

Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports, excluding workers' remittances)

10

62

46

9

4

Internet users (per 100 people)

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people)

0

0

0

14

34

Telephone lines (per 100 people)

0

0

0

1

0

Fertility rate, total (births per woman)

6

6

6

5

5

200

200

150

230

340

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development

Other
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)

43

GNI, Atlas method (current US$) (billions)

0.8

0.8

0.6

1.2

2.0

Gross capital formation (% of GDP)

10.0

5.6

6.9

17.0

15.8

Life expectancy at birth, total (years)

39

37

40

44

47

Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)

..

..

..

35

41

Population, total (billions)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Trade (% of GDP)

46.2

45.1

57.4

60.1

46.6

Source: World Development Indicators

44

Annex 5: Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries FY10 – FY13
FY
FY10

CAS Plans

Planned
amount (US$m)

Current Status

Approval
Date

Approved Amount
(US$m)



GRG3 Development policy lending

10

Closed

11/24/2009

10



Decentralized Service Delivery Program I

20

Active

10/15/2009

20



Mining TA

4

Active

12/3/2009

4



Financial Sector TA: Capacity Building
and Regulatory Reform

2

Active

4/7/2011

4



Youth Employment and Skills (including
IDA Crisis Response Window)

20

Active

6/30/2010

20



GRG3 supplemental financing (IDA Crisis
Response Window)

4

Active

6/11/2010

7

Fisheries

5

Active

6/28/2011

8 (national IDA) + 20m
in regional IDA & TF

Closed

??

10

-

-

Regional


65
FY11



DPO1 – Development Policy Operation

7



Infrastructure I (Energy/Transport)

15



Mining Additional Financing

??

4 (IDA) + 4 (TF)



Rural & Private Sector Development

??

20

Regional


West Africa Communications



West Africa Agriculture

25
4

22 (IDA + TF)

45

26

FY12



DPO2 – Development Policy Operation

7

-

-

24



Decentralized Service Delivery Program II

13

Active

12/20/2011

26 (IDA) + 5 (TF)



Pay & Performance Project
2

Regional




17

Regional Mining Sector TA Initiative
(incl. EITI++)

4

-

-

Regional Agriculture
26

FY13



DPO3 Development Policy Operation

7

-

-



Infrastructure II (TBD)

15

-

-



Energy Access Program (Phase 1, MDTFfunded)

20

Under Preparation



Energy Access Program (Phase II, IDA
funded)

25

Under Preparation

67
Total FY10 -13

184

46

-

Annex 6 - Sierra Leone - Active Trust Funds
( Figures in thousands of USD )
Grant
Trust Fund #

Trust Fund Name

Net Grant
Amount

Funds Disb.
to Date

Progra
m
Source

Avail.
Balance

Closing

Donor Name

Grant Sign
Date

End Disb.
Date

Exec. By

Date
TF010099

Sierra Leone - Safety Net
Support

300.00

170.53

86.31

RSR

9/30/2012

Multiple
Donors

7/1/2011

1/30/2013

Bank

TF010224

Sierra Leone Reproductive
and Child Health Project
Phase II (RCHP2) (FY12 SPN
Budget)

112.00

84.76

27.24

ACGF

6/29/2012

Multiple
Donors

7/14/2011

10/29/2012

Bank

TF010349

Sierra Leone Reproductive
and Child Health Project
Phase II (RCHP2) (FY12
Supervision Staff Time)

50.00

49.99

0.01

ACGF

6/29/2012

Multiple
Donors

8/1/2011

10/29/2012

Bank

TF010655

Additional Financing for the
West Africa Regional
Fisheries Program (Phase I) Sierra Leone Project

8,000.00

0.00

8,000.00

ACGF

10/30/2013

Multiple
Donors

10/17/2011

4/30/2014

Recipient

TF010710

Technical Assistance for
Tariff Analysis and Integrated
Resource Planning Project

750.00

0.00

750.00

SLIN

5/15/2013

Multiple
Donors

11/15/2011

11/15/2013

Recipient

TF010801

Sierra Leone Higher and
Tertiary Education Sector
Note

100.56

62.70

37.31

NPEF

10/31/2012

Norway Ministry of
Foreign
Affairs

10/5/2011

2/28/2013

Bank

TF011013

Evaluating Social
Accountability and Legal
Empowerment for Health
Services in Nigeria and Sierra
Leone

250.00

15.49

80.61

TFESS
D

8/1/2014

Multiple
Donors

10/28/2011

12/1/2014

Bank

193.00

44.57

111.76

FTIE

8/31/2012

11/7/2011

12/31/2012

Bank

TF011070
Sierra Leone - Updating the

Multiple

47

Education Sector Plan

TF011615

Sierra Leone - Pro-growth
pro-poor Transport Sector
Strategy (PGPTS)

Donors

113.00

0.00

0.00

SSATP

10/31/2012

Multiple
Donors

1/18/2012

2/28/2013

Bank

2/14/2012

12/30/2016

Recipient

TF011786

Sierra Leone Extractive
Industries Technical
Assistance Project

1,682.20

116.52

1,568.51

AFRS
D

6/30/2016

United
Kingdom Department
for
International
Development
(DFID)

TF012220

Sierra Leone: Financial
Assessments for the Districts
of Tonkolili, Koinadugu, and
Bombali

75.00

0.00

58.10

PPIAF

12/31/2012

Multiple
Donors

4/12/2012

4/30/2013

Bank

TF012393

Beyond Broadband Access:
Opportunities in Innovation
and Content Development
using ICT for Improving Basic
Services

250.00

0.00

250.00

INFOD

6/30/2013

KoreaMinistry of
Finance &
Economy

4/2/2012

10/30/2013

Bank

TF050485

HIPC - IDA - Sierra Leone

229,859.98

31,008.08

0.00

HIPC

12/31/2030

IBRD 1818 H
Street, NW

7/9/2008

12/31/2030

Recipient

TF050687

HIPC - AFDB - Sierra Leone

57,094.93

57,094.93

116.05

HIPC

12/31/2030

Multiple
Donors

7/9/2008

12/31/2030

Recipient

6/30/2014

Netherlands Ministry of
Infrastructure
and the
Environment

4/11/2011

12/30/2014

Recipient

3/4/2008

12/31/2012

Recipient

9/15/2008

3/31/2013

Recipient

TF056937

Sierra Leone Bum Buna
Hydro

TF091155

Chyao-Africa - Support to
Education of War affected
Children in the Northern
Province of Sierra Leone

469.92

TF092755

Sierra Leone Education for all
Fast Track Catalytic Giant

13,900.00

0.00

0.00

CARB
ON

469.92

0.00

ICHYA
O

6/30/2012

Italy - Ministry
of Foreign
Affairs

11,397.30

2,502.70

EFAFT
I

9/30/2012

Multiple
Donors

0.00

48

TF093688

Strengthening Capacity of
Directorate Office of Diaspora
Affairs for developing
Capacity Development in
Public Sector

453.26

278.85

174.41

IDF

2/28/2012

IBRD 1818 H
Street, NW

3/25/2009

8/31/2012

Recipient

TF093966

DRF Sierra Leone Preparation

950.00

0.00

950.00

DRF

12/31/2011

IBRD 1818 H
Street, NW

4/24/2009

6/30/2012

Recipient

TF095389

Sierra Leone Integrated Public
Financial Management Project

12,882.47

7,745.81

1,017.23

AFRQ
K

7/31/2013

Multiple
Donors

10/19/2009

1/31/2014

Recipient

TF095497

SL-Empowering Vulnerable
Youth for Self-Reliance in
Kono District and Western
Area

0.32

ICHYA
O

6/30/2012

Italy - Ministry
of Foreign
Affairs

11/1/2009

10/30/2012

Bank

TF095498

SL-Empowering Vulnerable
Youth for Self-Reliance in
Kono District and Western
Area

382.24

141.89

240.34

ICHYA
O

6/30/2012

Italy - Ministry
of Foreign
Affairs

11/27/2009

12/31/2012

Recipient

TF095748

Sierra Leone Integrated Public
Financial Management
Reform Program (IPFMRP)

1,038.93

599.00

439.93

AFRQ
K

7/31/2013

Multiple
Donors

11/20/2009

11/30/2013

Bank

TF096085

IDF : Institutional Capacity
Building for Combating
Corruption in Sierra Leone

499.83

191.67

308.16

IDF

3/16/2013

IBRD 1818 H
Street, NW

3/16/2010

9/16/2013

Recipient

TF096537

Sierra Leone Biodiversity
Conservation Project

5,000.00

1,066.08

3,933.92

GEFIA

12/1/2014

Multiple
Donors

5/27/2010

6/1/2015

Recipient

TF096812

Financing of the 2nd Phase of
the Reproductive and Child
Health Project in Sierra Leone

20,000.00

11,265.40

8,734.60

ACGF

10/31/2013

Multiple
Donors

8/12/2010

4/30/2014

Recipient

TF097505

W1 - Sierra Leone Good
Governance Initiative Integrating Governance
Principles into New Joint
Country Assistance Str ategy
(JAS) for FY10-13

1,400.00

397.80

67.24

GPF

4/30/2013

Multiple
Donors

7/1/2010

8/31/2013

Bank

17.76

17.45

49

TF097566

Round 1: Sierra Leone Rapid
Response Growth Poles:
Community-Based Livelihood
and Food Support - Bank
Supervision

TF097914

Round 1: Sierra Leone - Rapid
Response Growth Poles:
Community-Based Livelihood
and Food Support Program

TF097943

Round 28: Sierra Leone
Artisinal Mining Community
Development and Sustainable
Livelihoods (Bank Executed)

137.50

77.03

60.47

JSDF

9/14/2012

Japan Ministry of
Finance

TF098212

Sierra Leone - EFA FTI
Catalytic Fund Supervision
Grant

230.46

166.60

63.86

EFAFT
I

9/30/2012

Multiple
Donors

10/28/2010

1/31/2013

Bank

TF098734

Sierra Leone HRBF K&L
Grant

124.70

119.90

1.06

HRBF

12/31/2011

Donors

1/14/2011

4/30/2012

Bank

TF098957

Wetlands Conservation
Project

1,800.00

300.00

1,500.00

GEFIA

6/30/2015

Donors

6/1/2011

12/31/2015

Recipient

TF099032

Sierra Leone Infrastructure
Development Fund: Bank
Staff and Consultant Costs for
Program Management and TF
Administration

38.95

34.80

4.15

SLIN

12/31/2015

Multiple
Donors

2/7/2011

4/30/2016

Bank

TF099111

Round 28: Sierra Leone
Artisinal Mining Community
Development and Sustainable
Livelihoods

2,750.09

387.79

2,362.30

JSDF

7/28/2015

Japan Ministry of
Finance

7/28/2011

1/28/2016

Recipient

TF099118

Sierra Leone: #10067
Strengthening Internal Audit
at the Bank of Sierra Leone

115.70

69.86

15.90

FIRST

9/1/2012

Multiple
Donors

2/22/2011

1/1/2013

Bank

171.00

2,813.32

143.39

917.03

27.61

JSDF

1,896.28

JSDF

50

12/1/2014

Japan Ministry of
Finance

12/1/2010

4/1/2015

Bank

12/1/2014

Japan Ministry of
Finance

12/1/2010

6/1/2015

Recipient

8/26/2010

1/14/2013

Bank

TF099425

AFTEG- DFID Multi-Donor
Trust Fund for Sierra Leone
Infrastructure Development
Fund: Energy/Infrastructure
Specialist (Based in Sierra
Leone)

TF099510

Sierra Leone Project under the
First Phase of the West Africa
Agricultural Productivity
Program ( WAAPP)

10,000.00

0.00

10,000.00

TF099536

Sierra Leone: Supervision of
Grant

50.00

46.39

TF099537

Sierra Leone Extractive
Industries Technical Advisory
Facility Project

750.00

200.00

TF099629

Sierra Leone - Pro-growth
Pro-poor Transport Sector
Strategy (PGPTS)

187.53

32.69

0.00

TF099676

AFTEG-MDTF for Sierra
Leone Infrastructure Dvpt
Fund: Funds for Identification
and Preparation of the First
Project Su pported by the
Fund

250.00

157.23

48.90

Total

400.00

309.81

376,925.64 125,937.47

12/31/2015

Multiple
Donors

2/10/2011

4/30/2016

Bank

PHRD

6/30/2016

Japan Ministry of
Finance

6/1/2011

12/31/2016

Recipient

3.61

ETAF

8/30/2012

Donors

4/6/2011

12/30/2012

Bank

550.00

ETAF

6/30/2012

Multiple
Donors

7/6/2011

12/30/2012

Recipient

SSATP

3/31/2013

Islamic
Development
Bank (IDB)

4/27/2011

4/30/2013

Bank

SLIN

12/31/2015

Multiple
Donors

5/2/2011

4/30/2016

Bank

90.19

SLIN

46,530.87

51

Annex 7 - Summary of Non-lending Services - Sierra Leone

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Public Expenditure Review

FY11

304

Government, donors, Bank

Knowledge generation, problem-solving

Public Expenditure Review for Water and Sanitation

FY12

Government, donors, Bank

Knowledge generation, problem-solving

Product

Recent completions

Underway
TA & Policy Note: Revenue Administration

FY12

50

Government, Bank

Knowledge generation, problem-solving

TA & Policy Note: Road Map to Prepare for Petroleum

FY12

45

Government, Bank

Knowledge generation, problem-solving

Social Protection Assessment

FY13

154

Government, Donor, Bank and

Knowledge generation, public debate

public dissemination
Higher and Tertiary Education

FY13

120

Government, donors, Bank

Knowledge generation, problem-solving

Good Governance Initiative

FY13

1400

Government, Bank and

Knowledge generation, public debate

public dissemination
Constraints to Service Delivery

FY13

100

Government, Bank and

Knowledge generation, public debate

Transport Strategy Update

FY13

240

Government, Bank

Knowledge generation, public debate

FY13

235

Government, donors, Bank, and

Knowledge generation, problem-solving, and

public dissemination

public debate

Planned
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study Update

TA & Policy Note: Public Investment Management

FY13

60

Government, Bank

Knowledge generation, problem-solving.

TA & Policy Note: Poverty Profile, 2011

FY13

60

Government, donors, Bank and

Knowledge generation, public debate

52

public dissemination
Education Sector Plan Update

FY13

443

Government, donors, Bank and
public dissemination

Knowledge generation, public debate

Improve Governance through ICT

FY13

250

Government, donors, Bank and
public dissemination

Knowledge generation, public debate

Education Sector Plan Development

FY13

250

Government, donors, Bank and
public dissemination

Knowledge generation, public debate

53

Annex 8 - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
5/10/2012

Indicator

2009

2010

2011

2012

Number of Projects Under Implementation a

8

9

10

12

Average Implementation Period (years) b

4.2

2.4

2.4

2.9

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c

50.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c

60.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d

50.0

22.2

10.0

0.0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d

60.4

25.6

11.6

0.0

Disbursement Ratio (%) e

20.9

34.4

44.0

22.5

Memorandum Item

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

Proj Eval by OED by Number

30

4

Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)

617.0

69.7

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number

43.3

25.0

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

40.0

24.9

Portfolio Assessment

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

54

Annex 9 - IDA Program Summary

5/10/2012
Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal
year

Proj ID

US$(M)

2012

SL-Public
Sector Pay &
Performance
(FY12)

17.0

Result

17.0

Sierra
Leone:Energy
Access Project IDA

25.0

Result

25.0

2013

Overall Result

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation
b Risks
(H/M/L)

H
M

H
M

42.0

55

Annex 10 - Sierra Leone Key Economic & Program Indicators - Changes from Last CAS
Forecast in Last CAS

Economy (CY)

Actual

Current CAS Forecast

2009

2010

2011

2012

2010

2011

2009

2010

2011

2012

4.0

4.7

5.5

6.0

5.3

6.0

3.2

5.3

6.0

32.5

Exports (US$)

33.8

2.3

-1.0

33.8

2.3

348.4

Imports (US$)

60.7

105.3

-2.6

60.7

105.3

-9.3

Growth rates (%)
GDP

Inflation (%) 1

9.5

8.8

7.5

6.5

17.8

18.5

9.2

17.8

18.5

11.5

-9.4

-8.7

-7.5

-7.2

-19.4

-48.2

-6.5

-19.4

-48.2

-13.6

-4.4

-4.2

-5.0

-4.4

-5.2

-4.6

-2.5

-5.2

-4.6

-1.5

1.6

2.4

1.9

1.6

2.4

2.3

National accounts (%
GDP)
Current account
balance
Gross investment

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financing

56

a/

International reserves

2.1

2.4

4.1

2.1

2.4

2.6

FY__c

FY__c

FY__d

FY__b

FY__b

FY__b

(as months of imports)
Program (Bank’s FY)

FY__a

FY__b

FY__b

FY__b

Lending ($ million)
Gross disbursements
($ million)
1

Period average.

a/ Percent of non-iron ore GDP. The fiscal balance on the same basis would be -1.9
percent.

57

Annex 11 - IFC Investment Operations for Sierra Leone
2009

2010

2011

2012*

IFC and Participants

7.16

1.05

2.85

IFC's Own Accounts
only

7.16

1.05

2.85

FINANCE &
INSURANCE

100

100

Original Commitments (US$m)

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts
only

PLASTICS &
RUBBER
Total

100
100

100

100

100

0

100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Guarantee
Loan

100

Total

100

* Data as of May 01,2012

58

100

0

100

Annex 12 – IFC‟s Committed and Oustanding Portfolio
Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/
RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/R
M

Partici
pant

2012

Vitafoam

2.85

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2.85

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total Portfolio:

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

59

Annex 13
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 5/23/2012

Closed Projects

43

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

116.99
0.00
331.74
32.03
448.73
32.03

Total Undisbursed (Active)

96.76

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

96.76

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P121514
P086801
P113757
P094307
P115836
P078389
P099357
P108069
P096105
P121052
P119355
P121056

Financial Sector Support TA
S Project
SL-Bumbuna Env. and Social
MSSIL (FY05)
SL-Decentr. Serv. Del. Program
S (FY10)
SL-GEF Biodiversity Conservation
MS
Project
SL-GEF Wetlands Conservation
S
(FY11)
SL-IDP Transp (FY06)
S
SL-Mineral Sector TechnicalSAssistance
SL-Public Financial Management
S
TAL (FY09
SL-Rural Dev & Priv Sec Dev
S SIL
SL-Youth Employment Support
S
(FY10)
SL:Decentralized Service Delivery
#
Prog 2
SL:GRGC-3 Suppl.Credit (Crisis
#
Window)
West Africa Agric. Prod.
Program (WAAPP-1C)
3A-West Africa Fisheries
Phase 1
3A-West Africa Fisheries
GEF (FISH)
31: West Africa Reg.
Ccomm Infrast. Prog.

P122065
P106063
P108941
P116273
Overall Result

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
MS
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
#
#

2011
2005
2010
2010
2011
2006
2010
2009
2007
2010
2012
2010

S

2012

83.8

MS

2010

97.3

MS

2010

10

S

2011

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

4
22
20
5
1.8
55
8
4
50
20
26

Cancel.

Undisb.

3.561594
7.522187
0.348689
3.933918
1.5
13.51465
5.339579
2.674543
23.73583
14.27326
25.79198

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.2923077
-2.628939
0.2286256
2.3089179

-2.62894

-0.606357 9.380485
0.5183787
1.5982537
2.554173 2.444173
1.6607959

7

7

60

56.6
456.7

6.8

102.1962 5.6261567 9.195719

Annex 13 (cont.) - Regional Projects
CMUs

Effective

Closing

Comm
Amt

Total
Disb

Total
Undisb
Bal

Benin, Niger,
Gambia, Sierra
Leone, Togo, Liberia

AFCW1,
AFCW3,
AFCF1,
AFCF2

8/1/2011

6/30/2016

83.8

2.5

81.7

VIRDIN

Cape Verde, Liberia,
Senegal, Sierra
Leone

AFCW1,
AFCF1

4/19/2010

12/31/2017

97.3

7.3

89.7

VIRDIN

Cape Verde, Liberia,
Sierra Leone, SubRegional Fisheries
Commission

AFCRI,
AFCW1,
AFCF1

4/19/2010

12/15/2014

10

0.8

9.2

P108941

3A-West
Africa
Fisheries GEF
(FISH)

AMPAH

Liberia, Sierra Leone

AFCW1

4/29/2011

09/30/2015

56.6

35.4

21.6

P116273

31:West Africa
Reg. Comm.
Infrast. Progr

Project
ID

Project Name

TTL

TOURE

P122065

West Africa
Agric Prod
Progrm
(WAAPP-1C)

P106063

3A-West
Africa
Fisheries Phase 1

Countries /
Institutions

61

Annex 14 – Donor Partnership in Sierra Leone
1. According to the latest figures from the Ministry of Finance & Economic Development
(MoFED), Sierra Leone received about $351.87 million in development partner (DP) support in
2011. About 76% percent of this came from five development partners – the World Bank, DFID,
the EC, the UN system and the United States. There do seem to be fluctuations in the aid flows
from various DPs. World Bank support represented about 22% of the total aid volume in 2011.
Budget support, project support and Technical Assistance remain the main channels of support
from DPs. There is a significant amount of aid resources flowing through off-budget channels, an
area, which will require further attention. It is difficult to estimate future aid flows into Sierra
Leone, but major increases are unlikely to happen given the current global economic context.
The nature and levels of bilateral support from the BRIC countries, especially China, have
increased in recent years. During the IDA16 period, there has been an increase in World Bank
support based on continued improvements in the CPIA scores. Nonetheless, as stated in the main
text of the report, the increase in private flows is likely to be an increasingly important source of
financing towards the growth and development needs of the country.
Development Assistance to Sierra Leone 2010-2011
Disbursed (million US$)
Donor Agency
2010
2011
African Development Bank (AfDB)

24.22

Department for International Development (DFID)

85.18

67.54

European Commission (EC)

80.40

60.16

United States

21.62

World Bank (WB)

91.73

77.31

United Nations (UN)

54.91

39.66

Aid flows (Top five Aid Agencies)

336.44

266.29

Total Aid flows (All Aid Agencies)

394.01

351.87

Source: Development Assistance Database, GoSL

2. Aid coordination efforts present a mixed picture. The Multi Donor Budget Support (MDBS)
group is working quite coherently and holds a joint and structured dialogue with the government.
The Group conducts a joint annual Performance Assessment Framework (PAF) under its
Agreement, which provides the basis for agreed fiscal, policy and institutional actions
underpinning budget support. The MDBS process is now increasingly being led by MoFED,
although there is scope for strengthening coordination within government on budget support
issues, principally between MoFED and other parts of government, which have a role to play in
meeting the PAF indicators. As stated in the CAS Progress Report, the likely economic
transformation in the country would require the MDBS and IMF programs to be increasingly
aligned to the new policy and reflect the institutional challenges faced by Sierra Leone. Beyond
budget support, the UN system is well-coordinated with a joint UN Vision supporting
government efforts. The coordination between the UN and IFIs is also a strong point of DP
coordination efforts in the country. Given the relatively small number of DPs in the country,
62

harmonization and alignment efforts have been relatively less demanding to date, in terms of
process, but there is considerable scope for strengthening DP coordination efforts in order to
strengthen the delivery of development results. Coordination efforts at the sector level present a
mixed picture, with health and education being relatively good examples of sector-level
coordination. In the health sector, a Compact was signed recently between the government and
DPs, which is the first such sector-level effort in Sierra Leone. In the education sector, there is an
ongoing dialogue between the government and DPs and an annual joint review of progress and
priorities in the sector. These practices in the health and education sectors might hold some
interesting lessons for other sectors, and going forward MoFED may wish to consider replicating
them in other sectors.
3. The Development Partners Committee (DEPAC) has held meetings on a quarterly basis,
including an annual meeting chaired by His Excellency, the President of Sierra Leone. These
meetings provide a valuable opportunity to discuss high-level development priorities and agree on
priority actions to be taken jointly by the government and donors. The DEPAC also provides a
good opportunity for non-traditional DPs to participate in wider aid coordination efforts. Going
forward, there will be scope to strengthen linkages between DEPAC and sector-level groups, so
that DEPAC provides sector groups with an opportunity to share best practices. Government and
DP efforts are currently being coordinated for the preparation of PRS3. Experiences from other
countries suggest that there may be scope for PRS3 preparation to be less demanding in terms of
process and coordination, while rebalancing efforts to focus on substantive policy choices and
options facing the country.
4. Sierra Leone is committed to the implementation of the Principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness. This commitment has led to the country‘s participation in a number of OECD
DAC surveys including the 2011 joint Paris Declaration and Fragile States Principles Survey. The
2011 joint survey revealed that Government ownership of the Agenda for Change is strong and
that there is a rising level of donor confidence as Sierra Leone develops. The country is one of
only a few developing countries to have a set of coherent and well thought-out policy documents
addressing the complex inter-relationships between political, security and development
imperatives. Alignment has increased significantly especially by the MDBS partners and the UN
agencies. A more strategic and sustained approach is needed to strengthen parliament‘s capacities
to assume its constitutional role and fulfill civil society‘s desire to engage in more sustained
political dialogue with government. Harmonization is slowly improving but coordination at
decentralized levels needs to improve. Sustaining decentralization and devolution in Sierra Leone
will be important peace building and state building activities, in the years ahead. Fully
empowering the GoSL to manage its revenue and to account for it to both donors and to the
citizens of Sierra Leone is an essential step that must be taken.
Aside from the formal
mechanisms, well-established informal networks have emerged which continue to facilitate
coordination and information-sharing. Management for results is slowly improving but remains
weak at project level and the gap between planning and implementation remains wide.
Procurement systems still remain a challenge and disparities created by salary top-ups and
parallel implementation units (PIUs) complicate civil service reform. Preventing conflict in Sierra

63

Leone will require dealing with traditional regional rivalries and focusing on youth
unemployment.
5. Sierra Leone is a pilot country for the G7+ Group on Fragile States and Situations. Initial
discussions are taking place between government and partners about what being a pilot country
will really involve. This presents another opportunity for Sierra Leone to strengthen its efforts on
aid coordination and aid effectiveness. One opportunity for implementing the G7+ New Deal
may be for the government and partners to consider signing a Compact, after the preparation of
PRS3 in 2013, which could form the basis for strengthening further aid effectiveness and delivery
of results. This may also be an opportunity to consider a better division of labor between DPs, as
a way of strengthening selectivity and avoiding the problem of some sectors having a large
number of DPs, while others have too few. The government may wish to consider useful lessons
that may be learned from other African countries regarding a sharper division of labor amongst
DPs.

64

65

66

IBRD 33478

SIERRA LEONE
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

DISTRICT CAPITALS

RAILROADS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

13°W

12°W

11°W

GUINEA

To
Ouré-Kaba

10°N

10°N
To
Faranah

To
Kindia

Falaba

R

Yonibana
Yonibana

KONO
Yengema
Y
engema

T O N K O L I L I Masingbi

Songo

Sefadu

NjaiamaSewafe
Gandorhun

Yele
Y
ele

Moyamba

Sherbro

Sherbro
Island

Momaligi
Matru

Bonthe

To
Kolahun

Buedu

Pendembu

Lago

Bo

wa
Se

oa

KAILAHUN

KENEMA

BO

Mano

Jon
g

Shenge

Panguma

Dambara

M O YA
YA M B A
Sembehun

Kailahun

8°N

Daru

Kenema

Blama
Kribundu

Mo
a

Rotifunk

Koindu

M

Mongeri

W
aterloo
Waterloo

Turtle
Islands

TTefeya
efeya

Matotoka

Masiaka

8°N

Kayima

Magburaka

Lunsar

Pepel

9°N

Pamp
ana

Binkolo

Makeni

m
Lo

Alikalia

Bumbuna

l
oke

Kurubonla

a

Batkanu

PORT LOKO

Kamaron

Bagbe

Bintimani
(1948 m)

Port Loko
Port

Yawri
Bay

GUINEA

i

Pendembu

Gbinti

Mange

Banana
Islands

S el

BOMBALI

Litt
le S
car
cies

9°N

Bendugu

ri H
ills

Madina
Junction

Kambia

WESTERN
AREA F.R.
F.R.

Kabala

KOINADUGU

Kamakwie

KAMBIA

FREETOWN

a

Fadugu

To
Forecariah

Lungi

ar

Go

a

W

ts.

Grea
t Sc
arc
ies

W

ra

M

go
Mon

Yana
Y
ana

s.
Mt

Sumbuya

Joru

LIB E R I A

Potoru

B O N TKH E
ittam

Pujehun

PUJEHUN

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Lake
Mabesi
Lake
Mape

7°N

0

0

Sulima

20

40

20

Zimmi
o
an
M

Fairo

SIERRA
LEONE
To
Monrovia

60 Kilometers

40

50 Miles

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

12°W

11°W
NOVEMBER 2004

