Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 66919-SC

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES
FY 2012 - 2015
February 22, 2012

Indian Ocean Country Department
IFC
Africa Region
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed
outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be
made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy on Access to Information.

REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Seychelles Rupee (SR)
US$1 = SR 12.40 (November 2011)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
AFD
AfDB
AIDS
ASP
BOEMRE
CEDAW
CIS
CPI
CPIA
CPS
CSO
DBS
DeMPA
DFGG
DPO
EIA
EE/CP
EEZ
EFF
EI-TAF
EITI
ESW
EU
FDI
FIAS
FSAP
FY
GDP
GFDRR
GNI
GOP
GOS
GPF
HFC
HIV
IBRD
ICT

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Agence Française de Développement
African Development Bank
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
Agency for Social Protection
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management,
Regulation and Enforcement
Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
Credit Information System
Consumer Price Index
Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment
Country Partnership Strategy
Civil society organization
Development Bank of Seychelles
Debt Management Performance
Assessment
Demand for Good Governance
Development Policy Operation
Environmental Impact Assessment
Energy Efficient and Clean Production
Exclusive Economic Zone
Extended Fund Facility
Extractive Industries Technical
Advisory Facility
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross domestic product
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
and Recovery
Gross national income
Gainful Occupational Permit
Government of Seychelles
Governance Partnership Facility
Housing Finance Company
Human immunodeficiency virus
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Information and communication
technologies

IDF
IFC
IMF
IOC
IPP
IPSAS
ISN
LUNGOS
MDG
MIGA
MTEF
MTDS
MTNDS
NEC
NGMT
PBB
PEFA
PEMD
PER
PFM
PPA
PPP
PSIA
PUC
REF
RTA
SACMEQ

SADC
SME
SOE
SSB
SCCI
STATCAP
SWIO
UNFPA
UNDP
USD
WGI

Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Indian Ocean Commission
Independent Power Producers
International Public Sector Accounting
Standards (IPSAS)
Interim Strategy Note
Liaison Unit of Non Government
Organization
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Medium Term Debt Strategy
Medium-Term National Development
Strategy
National Economic Council
National Gender Management Team
Performance Based Budgeting
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Public Enterprise Monitoring Division
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Purchasing Power Agreement
Public-private partnership
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
Public Utility Company
Resource Efficiency
Reimbursable Technical Assistance
Southern and Eastern Africa
Consortium for Monitoring Educational
Quality
Southern African Development
Corporation
Small and Medium Enterprise
State Owned Enterprise
Seychelles Savings Bank
Seychelles Chamber of Commerce and
Industry
Statistical Capacity Building
South West Indian Ocean
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Development Program
United State Dollar
World Governance Indicator

IBRD
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader
IFC
Executive Vice President
Vice President, Sub-Saharan Africa,
LAC & Western Europe
Director Eastern and Southern Africa
Task Team Leader

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Haleh Bridi
Sawkut Rojid
Lars Thunell
Thierry Tanoh
Jean Philippe Prosper
Kailash Sharma Ramnauth

This CPS was produced with contributions from Alain D’Hoore (Lead Economist, AFTP1), Kathrin A. Plangemann
(Lead Public Sector Specialist, AFTPR), Patrick Kabuya (Senior Financial Management Specialist, AFTFM), Netsanet
Workie (Senior Health Economist, AFTHE), Stephen Mugendi Mukaindo (Counsel, LEGAF), Xavier Vincent (Senior
Fisheries Specialist, AFTEN), Jingjie Chu (Natural Resource Economist, AFTEN), Julie Dana (Senior Financial
Officer, BDM), Khoudijah Maudarbocus Boodhoo (Private Sector Development Specialist, AFTFE), Fadila Caillaud
(Economist, AFTED), Richard Cunningham (Senior Gas Specialist, SEGOM), Will Wiseman (Senior Economist,
AFTSP), Kailash Sharma Ramnauth (Senior Investment Officer, IFC), Conor Healy (Senior Risk Management Officer,
MIGA), Anne-Lucie Lefebvre (Senior Public Sector Specialist, AFTPR) and other members of the Bank Group-wide
Seychelles Country Team. Helpful guidance and advice was provided by Jacques Morisset (Lead Economist, AFTP2),
Marco Antonio Hernandez (Economist, AFTP1), and Rafael Munoz (Senior Economist, AFTP1).

Table of Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................................................................................... i
I
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................. 1
II
COUNTRY CONTEXT .................................................................................................................... 2
Social Context ...................................................................................................................................... 3
Political Developments ........................................................................................................................ 5
Public Sector Governance ................................................................................................................... 5
Economic Developments ...................................................................................................................... 6
III
GOVERNMENT STRATEGY AND PROGRAMS ....................................................................... 9
IV
THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM AND THE DONOR COMMUNITY .................................. 14
V
WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ........................................................................... 17
A Lessons from ISN ....................................................................................................................... 17
B A Strategic Approach ................................................................................................................ 18

Competitiveness and Employment Pillar .......................................................... 19
Vulnerability and Resilience Pillar ................................................................... 23
The Governance and Public Sector Capacity Foundation ................................ 25
C

CPS Implementation .................................................................................................................. 28

Partnership ........................................................................................................ 28
Knowledge program.......................................................................................... 29
Finance .............................................................................................................. 31
VI
RISK AND MITIGATION ............................................................................................................. 33
VII MONITORING AND EVALUATION .......................................................................................... 34
VIII CONCLUDING REMARKS .......................................................................................................... 34

Annexes
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:

Results Framework FY12-15
Donor Engagement Matrix by Sector
Proposed Analytical Work by FY
Areas covered by the DPO Programmatic Series

35
36
37
38

CPS Annex A2:
CPS Annex B6:
CPS Annex B8:
CPS Annex B9:

Country At a Glance
Key Economic Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio

39
41
42
43

Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:

Gender Parity at decision making levels
Selected Economic Indicators, Seychelles, 2007-12
Areas of support under the ISN period

5
9
17

Box
Box 1

Seychelles Trust Fund Projects

14

Foreword

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) has been prepared together with the Government
of the Republic of Seychelles. This strategy document has been produced at a time when
the Government was drafting the Medium Term National Development Strategy (MTNDS)
for Seychelles. Country-wide consultations took place between November 2011 and
January 2012. Besides the authorities, other stakeholders consulted were the private sector
organizations, Members of the National Assembly, and the civil society organizations. The
Government of Seychelles and World Bank have agreed that a CPS mid-term review will
take place in the first quarter of FY14.

i

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
This proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) outlines the strategic direction
for the World Bank’s program for Seychelles for FY12-15. This strategy builds upon the
FY10-11 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) which laid out a work program to develop the analytical
underpinnings for a full CPS for the World Bank Group (WBG). Since the ISN was successful, it
is fitting that CPS is naturally the next level of engagement by the WBG. Drawing on this work,
this strategy aligns with the draft Seychelles Medium-Term National Development Strategy
2013-2017 (MTNDS), which based on a participatory approach, sets out the vision and goals for
the country. The core aim of the MTNDS is to reduce Seychelles vulnerability and to provide the
basis for long term sustainable development. This strategy reassesses Strategy 2017 which was
launched in 2007. Strategy 2017 has been only partly implemented as the economic environment
of Seychelles and that globally have changed, and Seychelles needs to adapt to the new world
environment and thrive in it.
2.
External economic conditions call for accelerated reforms. In light of the uncertainties
in the global economic environment, and especially developments in Europe to which Seychelles
remains vulnerable given the weight of tourism in its economy and the still predominant share of
European tourists, the Government of Seychelles has decided to accelerate structural reforms
designed to improve public sector effectiveness, enhance competitiveness and reform its
extensive social protection programs to better cushion the poor and vulnerable people.
3.
The Government’s commitment to reform is proven by its track record of the last
three years. Through strong ownership of the reform agenda at the highest level, and leveraging
on support from the IMF and other bilateral and multilateral partners, the Government has made
commendable progress towards achieving macro-economic stability, emerged from a period of
debt distress to debt sustainability with improved credit-worthiness, and successfully weathered
the shocks of the 2008-09 global financial crisis. In 2010 and 2011, the Seychelles registered
primary surpluses of 4.5 percent. While the reform momentum is maintained, the Government
created the National Economic Council (NEC) chaired by the President, with members from the
public and private sector, which has as core function to advise Government on the best economic
policy for sustainable national growth and development.
4.
Macroeconomic performance is satisfactory and outlook broadly positive but
contingent on external economic environment. The Seychelles economy rebounded
remarkably well. It grew at 6.7 percent in 2010 and revised estimates show that real GDP growth
rate for 2011 is at 5 percent. This achievement was underpinned by improved macroeconomic
policies that emphasized strong fiscal consolidation and prudent monetary policies. However, for
enduring results, the reform momentum must be maintained and binding constraints to growth
streamlined. The economic outlook for the medium term is broadly positive, although Seychelles
remains vulnerable to external shocks. Real GDP forecast for 2012 has been revised downward
to 4 percent from 4.7 percent forecasted in June 2011, reflecting the anticipated impact of the
unfolding sovereign debt and banking crisis in Europe. Given the importance of the tourism
sector in the economy, prospects for that sector will remain central to the Seychelles’ mediumterm economic prospects. This said, the Seychelles require a stronger growth path, in order to
consolidate its progress on debt and fiscal sustainability. Linked to that is the core aim of the
MTNDS, that is reduce vulnerability and enhance sustainable development. Inflation increased
from near zero in 2010 to about 5 percent in 2011, on account of higher international food and
oil prices, but is expected to decline to about 3.5 percent for 2012
i

5.
The reform program supported in this strategy is organized in two pillars and one
foundation: competitiveness and employment, vulnerability and resilience, and governance and
public sector capacity. These pillars have two key objectives in mind: reduce vulnerability and
build long term sustainability. Analytical underpinnings for the reform program will be provided
both by existing and programmed analytical work. Existing analytical work that has shaped
Government’s on-going reform agenda includes Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs), a Strategy
for Strengthening Budget Management, a Public Financial Management Performance report, a
review of Administrative Barriers to Private Sector Development and Business Environment in
the Seychelles, and the Review of the Policy Regulatory and Administrative Environment.
6.
The World Bank Group’s support to Seychelles will be implemented using the three
core instruments: partnerships, knowledge and finance. Partnership with key stakeholders (the
Governments, the Seychelles Chamber of Commerce and other members of the private sector,
the University of Seychelles, the civil society represented by Liaison Unit of Non-Governmental
Organizations (LUNGOS), and other development actors like AfDB, EU, UNDP, and IFC will
play a primary role in coordinating the implementation of the strategy. Building partnerships will
become even more critical in supporting Seychelles in case oil extraction is found to be
commercially viable. The Bank Group’s strategy is to partner with Seychelles in the
implementation of the reform program in areas for which it has a comparative advantage, and
deepen cooperation with a wider range of partners at the regional and global levels. The Bank
Group will therefore focus on a subset of Seychelles’ development challenges, and will reinforce
other partners’ engagement to support the Government’s priority reforms in other ways.
7.
The IFC and MIGA engagement might be expanded during the course of the
strategy period. The IFC will complement the WBG’s engagement with Seychelles by
continuing to explore demand and expand their investment primarily focused on financial sector
(SMEs), capital market development, tourism and fisheries related projects and infrastructure
development that will create employment opportunities. There are possibilities for both IFC and
MIGA to explore possibilities for technical assistance in the creation of Public-Private
Partnerships (PPPs) for infrastructure projects. Although MIGA does not have any project in
Seychelles, it stands ready to join IFC’s initiatives.
8.
The Bank will generate analytical work to underpin the reform program, as well as
to help identify areas of weaknesses and binding constraints to sustainability beyond the
medium term agenda. The reform program supported under the ISN FY10-11 was based on
critical ESWs developed by the Bank and other partners. Those analytical pieces were focused
on the critical needs of the on-going short-term reform agenda. While the Bank will continue to
produce focused knowledge work to support evidence-based policy changes in the medium term
reform program, based on the request from the Government, the Bank will also undertake ESWs
to generate discussions and debates, and build consensus, on longer term sustainability
constraints. This specific request from the Government is based on the fact that the country has
limited local capacity for analytical work, and it recognizes the Bank’s role as a strategic advisor
and honest broker.
9.
The main instrument to support implementation of reforms is a three-year
programmatic series of Development Policy Operations (DPO). This programmatic series
will consolidate and reinforce reforms achieved during the previous years, while shaping the way
to a sustainability path. The areas of the programmatic DPO series is embedded in the strategic
approach highlighted in this strategy for Seychelles. In the competitiveness and employment
ii

pillar, this series will support improving the business environment. The main policy reform
centers on the private sector to become the source of economic growth. In the vulnerability and
resilience pillar, this series will support improving efficiency of selected state owned enterprises
(SOEs), enhance the social protection system, and consolidate fiscal discipline (budget
management and efficiency in health spending). In the governance and public sector capacity
foundation, this series will support the establishment of institutions to prepare for the
development of the country’s petroleum resources, and improve transparency and accountability
in the fisheries sector. Based on lessons learned from past DPOs, the Bank will support a
selective and targeted program while maintaining high emphasis on design and implementation.
The Bank will also make use of trust funded operations and reimbursable technical assistance to
complement the DPO in supporting the reform agenda.
10.
This CPS is being prepared at a time when the Government awaits the finding of
evidence of commercially viable oil reserves from the on-going exploration. Initial
exploration data acquired in the Seychelles marine EEZ and results from drilling in the East
Africa region have been encouraging. However, at this stage, there are no clear indications that
oil or gas production would be economically viable or of when, if it was, exploitation may begin.
If exploration activities are successful, the economic impact for the country would be dramatic,
with Government revenue generated from a single development project potentially ranging from
$500 million to $2 billion annually over a period of 10-15 years. The country is preparing for a
bidding process to further allocate exploration licenses in 2012 in order to increase the level of
foreign investment in exploration operations. The Bank will monitor closely the evolution of
exploration activity and, if warranted by results, will deepen the Bank’s engagement in
strengthening the Seychelles’ regulatory and revenue management capacity in this area. Given
the risk associated with such a development the Government is also very conscious of its impact
of the environment. In parallel, the Government is in the process of commissioning a study to
evaluate the benefits over the economic and ecological costs.
11.
The main risks to implementing the CPS derive from national macroeconomic
factors, institutional capacity, societal resistance and changes in climatic conditions.
Macroeconomic stability is vulnerable to exogenous shocks such as volatile commodity prices,
threats of piracy, and economic shocks like the Euro Zone crisis. To mitigate risks associated
with external shocks, the Bank will support reforms to improve public finance management, in
particular enhance the allocative efficiency of expenditure and accelerate medium-term
expenditure planning. In case of need, the Bank will also scale up its financial support to the
country. Capacity is an issue at all levels of the public sector in Seychelles, which must contend
with a serious lack of technical expertise in some areas and limited human resources owing to its
small size. To mitigate this risk, the Bank will provide technical assistance and strengthen
implementation capacity in areas with skills gap. The Bank also selected to be involved in a
limited number of policy areas to ensure that the authorities are not overstretched in the
implementation process. The reform program may be delayed, especially since the new round of
reforms calls for significant ownership and drive needed from a range of ministries and agencies,
unlike the first-generation reforms, driven mainly by the Ministry of Finance. Erosion of political
support (especially for reforming state-owned enterprises) and social dissatisfaction with the
reforms’ potential short-term impacts on social groups may also slow critical reforms. The Bank
will use change management mechanisms, including communications strategy to address
societal concerns. The Bank will also support in improving the social protection programs to
ensure that the poor and vulnerable are well targeted. In the implementation process of sensitive
iii

reforms (including changes in utility tariff structure and housing finance), the Bank will adopt
slow process built on consultations and consensus. Seychelles remains vulnerable to several
natural hazards including floods, rising sea levels, landslides, and tsunamis, and these pose
serious risks to the country. These risks should be mitigated by the strong commitment,
leadership, and ownership of the Government in implementing the current reform program. The
Government has also committed itself to improving social safety net programs properly targeted
on the poor and vulnerable. To mitigate risks to disaster and climate change, the Bank will
support in the development of a master plan for disaster risk management which will be build on
the assessments of geological risks, and provide technical expertise to develop risk financing
tools. Finally, the Government has a strong record of comprehensive communication and
consultation to gauge public willingness to pursue the reforms.

iv

Seychelles Country Partnership Strategy FY12-15
I

INTRODUCTION

12.
The Republic of Seychelles is a service-based, highly concentrated, middle-income
economy. Seychelles has an estimated population of 88,311 (2010) and comprises 115 tropical
islands spread over 45,166 hectares in the Indian Ocean.1 The population inhabits 10 of the
islands, with around 90 percent concentrated on the largest island, Mahé. The country is blessed
with natural beauty of unique appeal, an asset that has drawn and will continue to draw a
growing number of tourists. With a GNI per capita of US$ 9,420 (2009), Seychelles is classified
as a high middle income country.
13.
Given its small size and insularity, Seychelles faces a number of development
challenges. The limited land, capital, and human resources restrict its ability to benefit from
economies of scale in production and economic diversification. Seychelles has a high
dependence on external markets because of its small domestic market, high vulnerability to
external factors, and has limited institutional capacity. Tourism and fisheries (fishing and fish
processing) are the economy’s two major pillars. Seychelles enjoys an exclusive economic zone
of almost 1.4 million square kilometers in one of the world’s major tuna fishing grounds.
Tourism accounts for 25 percent of GDP, 25 percent of employment, and 70 percent of foreign
exchange earnings. Tuna fishing and processing combined accounted for more than 30 percent of
GDP in 2005 and still account for close to 5 percent of GDP, about 7 percent of jobs, and around
35 percent of export goods, despite impacts of piracy, environmental factors and increased
regional competition between fishing ports and processing plants. Limited backward linkages to
the rest of the domestic economy from both sectors, however, implies that the potential for
spillover effects remains untapped. The small manufacturing sector (8 percent of GDP) includes
the tuna cannery, small food and beverage enterprises, and a modest construction sector that
provides 5 percent of GDP. The artisanal fisheries and agricultural sectors are small, accounting
for less than 3 percent of GDP combined, but of great socio-economic significance as illustrated
by the piracy impact on the livelihood of fishing communities and on the availability and price of
fish for the consumers. With a concentration index of 0.5, Seychelles exports remain highly
undiversified compared to those of comparator small island economies.
14.
Following a sharp policy turnaround initiated in 2008, the macroeconomic situation
has improved. The risk of debt default is reduced and economic outlook is positive. The
Seychelles grew by 6.7 percent and 5 percent (revised estimates) in 2010 and 2011, registered a
primary surplus of 4.5 percent, a further decline in public debt to GDP ratio to 78.5 percent, but
increased inflation from near zero in 2010 to about 5 percent in 2011, on account of higher
international food and oil prices. Despite global economic uncertainties, real GDP growth is
projected to be around 4 percent in 2012. This said, the Seychelles require a stronger growth
path, in order to consolidate its progress on debt and fiscal sustainability. Linked to that, the core
aim of the MTNDS is to reduce Seychelles vulnerability and to provide the basis for long term
sustainable development.
15.
The authorities are highly committed to addressing the critical development
challenges to growth and sustainability. In light of the uncertainties in the global economic
1

Beaches are not included in the calculation of land area.

1

environment, and especially developments in Europe to which Seychelles remains vulnerable
given the weight of tourism in its economy and the still predominant share of European tourists,
the Government of Seychelles has decided to accelerate structural reforms designed to improve
public sector effectiveness and to harness private sector growth and create wealth and
employment, while at the same time reform the social protection programs to better cushion the
poor and vulnerable people. The reform program supported in this strategy is organized in two
pillars and one foundation: competitiveness and employment, vulnerability and resilience, and
governance and public sector capacity, respectively. These pillars and foundation have the
Government’s two key objectives in mind: reduce vulnerability and build long term economic
sustainability, and social stability.
16.
Consistent with the new Africa Strategy, the World Bank Group’s support to
Seychelles will be implemented using the three core instruments: partnerships, knowledge
and finance. The Bank will be the leading partner for reforms in those areas, in which it has
comparative advantages, and generate and disseminate analytical work in key strategic areas to
guide reforms. The main lending instrument supporting the reform agenda will be a
programmatic series of Development Policy Operation (DPO), but also grants from trust funds
and reimbursable technical assistance (RTAs).
17.
This CPS is being prepared at a time when the Government awaits the finding of
evidence of commercially viable petroleum reserves. Only a small portion of its large marine
exclusive economic zone has been evaluated through drilling. Recent exploration activity has
been sparse and largely confined to the acquisition of seismic data in the confines of two
petroleum license areas. However, recent discoveries in the marine shelf area between the
Seychelles, Tanzania and Mozambique have heightened petroleum industry interest in the East
Africa offshore region and several prominent exploration and production companies have
enquired about licensing opportunities in recent months. In response, the Government is
preparing for a bidding process to further allocate exploration licenses in 2012 in order to
increase the level of foreign investment in petroleum exploration operations. Given the
possibility of environmental risk associated with such a development, although potential for oil
exploration is only offshore, the Government is very conscious of its impact of the environment.
Thus the Government is in the process of commissioning a comprehensive Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) study to evaluate the benefits over the economic and ecological costs.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation & Enforcement (BOEMRE) of the U.S.
Department of Interior is also engaged in this area and has plans to continue a program of
technical assistance with the Seychelles authorities.
II

COUNTRY CONTEXT

18.
Seychelles has come a long way since the 2008 crisis, but a number of weaknesses
and challenges remain to be addressed. Seychelles has a high per capita income, high standard
of living, and high levels of human development and better governance indicators than many
comparator countries. It has also been strongly pursuing reforms under the Bank and IMF
programs and has managed to secure generous debt relief, which together with fiscal
consolidation has led to a much better macro and debt picture than a few years ago. Nevertheless
Seychelles has a number of weaknesses that remain to be addressed, in addition to the challenge
of its small size, remoteness, and vulnerability to shocks. A bad track record with debt
management and poor public finance management led to a default in 2008 and public debt
2

figures are still relatively high. After the debt crisis reserves have recovered somewhat but
remain low, particularly given Seychelles vulnerability to external shocks. Below, in more
details the following are elaborated: social context, political developments, public sector
governance and economic developments.

Social Context
19.
The Seychelles has better social indicators than comparator small countries. It has
already achieved most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), especially for education,
health, poverty eradication, and the environment. Gross enrollment in primary and secondary
education is high (above 100 percent). Education is free to the secondary level and subsidized at
the tertiary level. Additionally, the state provides free access to healthcare—the Seychelles has
better indicators of health outcomes (such as life expectancy and child mortality rates) than many
other small island states. For instance, the country’s life expectancy at birth is 73 years, equal to
that of Mauritius. The maternal health MDG is largely achieved. Infant mortality was at 14 per
1,000 live births in 2010. For many years the Seychelles has recorded zero maternal mortality2;
births attended by skilled health staff hovers between 99 and 100 percent; and proportion of
women receiving prenatal care has consistently been over 99 percent.
20.
Although Seychelles has remarkably achieved most of the health MDGs, challenges
remain. In the last three years, the Government has introduced a number of changes in the health
sector as part of the overall economic reform program. Some of the major reforms were: (a)
organizational restructuring with the Health Service Agency being absorbed and the functions
merged to the Ministry of Health core functions, (b) staff downsizing through an early voluntary
departure schemes, and (c) outsourcing of ancillary services. However, there exist no evidence
that these reforms have resulted in cost saving, efficiency gains or quality improvement. Key
challenges in the health sector include: (1) low coverage of some important services, (2) the
burden of disease in Seychelles has shifted to non-communicable diseases, injuries, and mental
health problems, (3) a noticeably inefficient sector, particularly in the size, organization and
management of health infrastructure3, (4) long term fiscal sustainability challenges, and (5) high
turnover rate of medical practitioners. Contraceptive use remains low4, teen pregnancy is a big
problem5, and HIV and AIDS continue to rise. Non-communicable diseases, injuries, and mental
health have been the main causes of death in recent years. Over the years, Seychelles has
developed a robust network of health facilities. However, bed occupancy rate is low6. The
constitution grants free access to primary care services, but in practice all services are provided
free of charge, creating additional fiscal pressure. The health sector recurrent budget allocation
has more than doubled in the last five years7. Cost of health care provision will certainly
continue to rise, particularly because of: (a) the increase in the demand for expensive tertiary
care treatment, including overseas treatment, from the high burden of non-communicable
diseases; (b) the population structure, which shows an upward movement from a younger to an
2

Since 2000 a total of four maternal deaths are registered, one maternal death in each year for 2002, 2004, 2005 and
2008
3
World Bank, Seychelles Public Expenditure Review, June 2009.
4
Less than 50 percent
5
32 percent of all first pregnancies occurring among the 15-19 age groups. Although medical abortions are possible
through a medical board for very specific reasons many women still opt for illegal abortions
6
50 percent on Mahé and even much less in Praslin and Ladigue
7
In 2011 the health sector budget was over SR400 million including allocation for capital investment. It is the
second highest item in the overall Government budget.

3

older population; and (c) being small island state, Seychelles has low economies of scale
particularly for capital investment – unit cost of service provision will remain high. Sustaining
the current health financing arrangement will present a major fiscal challenge in the medium to
long term. At present over 50 percent of the medical officers (GPs), consultants and other
specialists are provided through the bilateral cooperation program with high turnover that
presents operational challenges in continuity of services and maintaining standard of care.
21.
Despite having achieved universal education, there are critical issues in that sector
as well. Learning outcomes have been disappointing, and skill gaps are increasingly visible as
Seychelles further modernizes its economy. Learning achievement in mathematics, as measured
by the SACMEQ III assessment, showed that Seychelles’s students had a mean mathematics
score well below the level reached in Mauritius.8 In learning achievements in mathematics and
reading, boys significantly underperform girls. This said, reasons for the low performance of
primary schools include a shortage of qualified teachers and inadequate teacher training.
Notwithstanding efforts to develop technical and vocational training institutions, the low
percentage of professionals with technical training has led to a skill gap in some sectors,
including tourism and construction, filled by a large number of expatriate workers. The recently
created University of Seychelles will produce its first graduates in 2012 and will help to reduce
the skills shortage. The authorities are cognizant of the importance of a skilled population for
stimulating national growth and employment, and have recently implemented several policy and
institutional changes, enacting a Higher Education Bill, giving greater management autonomy to
schools, and taking other steps. In the medium term, the Ministry of Education will be working
towards a renewed Education Strategic Plan, aligned with the MTNDS.
Gender equality prevails in school enrollment and other areas. There is little or no
difference between net primary/secondary enrollment rates for male and female children; the
Gender Parity Index was close to 1 in 2008 (World Development Indicators).9 To mitigate the
impact of girls drop outs from school due to the teenage pregnancy issue, the Government has
introduced a legislation permitting girls to return to school and continue their studies after
delivery. Seychelles society is in fact largely matriarchal, and women enjoy the same legal,
political, economic, and social rights as men. There is no officially sanctioned discrimination in
employment, women are well represented in business, and inheritance laws do not discriminate
against women. The participation of women in decision making processes is quite good and
improving (table 1). In Seychelles, rape, spousal rape, and domestic abuse are criminal offenses
punishable by a maximum 20 years' imprisonment. The law prohibits sexual harassment.
Seychelles ratified the SADC Gender and Development Protocol, the newest gender human
rights treaty for the sub-region, setting legally binding targets for 2015. Seychelles has a Gender
Secretariat which has as main objective to facilitate gender mainstreaming in all policies,
programs and activities of the Government, private sector and civil society10. A National Gender
Management Team (NGMT) was put in place in 2009 as a platform to bring together several
gender related institutions to finalize a national gender policy and plan of action. Although
constitutional guarantees for equality before the law exist, the Seychelles CEDAW state party
report (2011) reveals that the judiciary is largely gender blind and there are no sex disaggregated
22.

8

See Southern and Eastern Africa Consortium for Monitoring Educational Quality (SACMEQ) Third Assessment
(2007). .
9
Although as noted boys underperform girls in learning achievement, as shown by SACMEQ data.
10
This Secretariat is funded through the budget and grants from UN Population Fund (UNFPA)

4

data available to effectively assess the situation. In this context, the EU is providing support to
address these constraints under its 10th EDF for Seychelles. The Government is committed to
promote greater attention to gender issues throughout the Program activities and place the matter
at the centre of its development. With the financial support of the Government, the Gender
Commission (civil society gender organization) is implementing a capacity building program to
empower Seychellois women and youth for concrete actions gearing towards full productive
employment. Through the project it is aimed to train some 200 people, helping them to enter the
world of work in a prepared manner.
Table 1: Gender parity at decision making levels
Posts
2008
Cabinet of Ministers
2/8 (25%)
Principal Secretaries
8/19 (42.1%)
Parliamentarians
8/34 (23.5%)
District Administrators
15/25 (60%)
Ambassadors
1/7 (14.3%)
Judges
0/8 (0%)
Magistrates
2/3 (66.7%)
Source: Seychelles Gender Secretariat

2009
2/8 (25%)
8/16 (50%)
8/34 (23.5%)
13/25 (52%)
1/7 (14.3%)
0/8 (0%)
2/4 (50%)

2010
2/8 (25%)
8/16 (50%)
8/34 (23.5%)
13/25 (52%)
1/7 (14.3%)
0/8 (0%)
2/4 (50%)

Political Developments
23.
The Seychelles enjoys a stable political system. It is a relatively young democracy,
independent since 1976. A year after independence, a coup d’état established a one-party
socialist state. In December 1991, President René of the Seychelles People’s Progressive Front
announced a shift to multiparty pluralism. The first multiparty presidential election was held in
1993, after the adoption of a new constitution. Seven presidential elections have been held since
then. In the last election (May 2011), the incumbent president (James Michel) was reelected for
another five-year term with a comfortable majority (55 percent of votes). With this new mandate,
the President has renewed Seychelles’ commitment to continuing the basic direction of structural
reforms, consolidating the economy, boosting productivity, and encouraging innovation, while
giving special attention to the social sector (particularly to improving health services and
maintaining the continuity and sustainability of the housing program). Parliamentary election
was held end September 2011 and resulted in the ruling party winning almost all seats (one seat
went to the opposition). The main opposition party boycotted this election; principally on
arguments of electoral reforms are needed and pressing. A new opposing team stood for the
elections got 10.8 percent of the valid votes and one seat in Parliament. Discussions on electoral
reforms have accelerated between the electoral Commissioner and all the political parties. New
Parliamentary election may take place once the Electoral Commissioner concludes its report and
the recommendations implemented. However, it is unclear when this might happen, and is not
foreseen to take place before FY14, a time at which the CPS will be reviewed. At this stage,
changes in the direction of overall economic policy are not foreseen. The pace of implementation
of bold economic reforms may slow down in case if a new election is precipitated.

Public Sector Governance
24.
The Seychelles has made significant progress in public sector governance, yet
requires further strengthening to leverage and reap the benefits of recent reforms. Since
2008, Government has implemented a series of reforms to address public sector governance
issues, including (i) modernizing the public sector with an improved alignment of institutions
5

with their policy/service delivery mandates; (ii) rolling back the role of Government in
commercial activities by reducing the large number of parastatals, improving their management,
and introducing a new wage bill together with the private sector; and (iii) redefining the
accountability structure between arms of Government responsible for service delivery.
25.
Public sector management reform efforts have focused on public financial
management, human resource management and public enterprise management. In public
financial management, the Government has approved a public finance law, developed a revised
financial instruction and an accounting manual. Human resource management reforms include
the downsizing of the number of public servants to 7,500 from 10,000; the review of service and
retention schemes and adjustments to the salary structure, the removal of non-core public service
functions to be absorbed by private firms; and restructuring of and capacity-strengthening for
public sector institutions. Regarding public enterprises, the Government approved a detailed
work plan for the public enterprise monitoring division, which has been created to strengthen the
governance of public enterprises, while managing the public sector wage bill. To accelerate
reforms, a more strategic approach to public sector governance is needed, including a solid
analysis of the most compelling public sector governance opportunities and challenges, from
both the supply- and the demand-side, with a view to spur growth. On this basis, a public sector
governance strategy needs to be designed, focusing on the selection of feasible, actionable crosscutting reforms in high impact areas and addressing the underlying incentive framework and
support new forms of capacity-strengthening.
26.
The reforms undertaken by Government have been reflected quite positively in a
number of governance indicators. For example, of 212 countries surveyed in 2011 for the
World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), Seychelles ranked above the 50th
percentile for most dimensions of governance, including political stability, Government
effectiveness, and control of corruption. The WGI for regulatory quality remains quite low,
however, about the 25th percentile, although it is improving. In the 2011 Corruption Perception
Index (CPI), Seychelles ranked 50th among 178 countries, down from 49th in 2010. Seychelles
ranks 4th in the Mo Ibrahim Governance indicators among 53 sub-Saharan African countries in
2011, down from the 2nd position that it maintained from 2008 to 2010. The performance in
public management remains low, with a score of 52.5 and a ranking of 35. The Seychelles’ score
on Reporters without Borders’ World Press Freedom Index improved from 16.00 in 2009 to 18.0
in 2010, placing it 65th out of 178.

Economic Developments
27.
The Seychelles’ post-independence state-led development model, proved financially
unsustainable, and by 2008, had to confront a debt crisis. Under the early economic model,
the public sector owned most of the corporations and productive resources and was heavily
involved in economic activities, funded by borrowing. The state’s welfare system was extensive,
offering virtually free education and healthcare to all, free transport for students and the elderly,
and a munificent social protection system, albeit with elements of discretion and political
interference. The catalyst for the debt crisis was provided by the global shocks in 2007-08, as
commodity prices increased rapidly, leading to depleted stocks of foreign exchange and the
public debt reached an unsustainably high level of 140 percent of GDP. As a result Standard and
Poor’s downgraded Seychelles credit rating from B to “selective default” in July 2008.

6

28.
The crisis reached a high point in 2008, as a result of rising energy and food prices.
The external deficit widened further to 20.3 percent of GDP. Foreign exchange shortages became
the norm, a number of state-owned enterprises operated well below efficiency, and foreign
exchange reserves fell to less than one month of imports. The country’s repayment capacity
worsened further in late 2008, as the global economic crisis hit the tourism sector. In this
context, GDP growth dropped sharply from 9.7 percent of GDP in 2007 to –1.3 percent in 2008.
Unable to honor a coupon payment, the authorities sought the support of the IMF to initiate debt
restructuring discussions with the Paris Club under the 2003 Evian approach to debt relief and
other official and private creditors, and launch a comprehensive reform program, also with
support of other multilateral partners. Alongside comprehensive restructuring of the public debt,
the Government quickly moved to liberalize the exchange rate in November 2008, abandoning
an overvalued fixed dollar exchange rate and foreign exchange controls. The economic reform
program also focused on significant and sustained tightening of fiscal policy backed by a
reduction in public employment, reform of the monetary policy framework, and a reduction of
the state’s role in the economy to boost private sector development. In the event, prudent
monetary policy managed to stabilize inflation to single digits already by the end of the first
quarter of 2009, a level at which it has since remained.11
29.
Fiscal performance in 2010 and 2011 were strong, exceeding expected targets.
Driven by exceptionally high foreign direct investment (FDI) and renewed tourism, the
Seychelles economy rebounded strongly already by late 2009. Revenues exceeded original
projections by 18 percent, and the primary surplus exceeded the budgeted balance by
2 percentage points of GDP, to reach 9.4 percent of GDP. The income tax base was broadened in
2010 with the introduction of a Personal Income Tax, which replaces social security
contributions and removes special, sector-specific tax treatments. The fiscal space created
allowed the Government to create a stabilization fund by the end of 2010 intended to dampen the
effects of any sudden future increase in key commodity prices. The civil service has been right
sized and the wage grid modernized to enhance transparency and predictability of the wage bill,
to remove the system of extensive allowances, and to foster efficiency gains. As a result, the
wage bill fell to 6 percent of GDP in 2010 from 10.3 percent in 2007. Fiscal prudence continued
in 2011. Primary balance as a percentage of GDP reached 4.5 percent. Due to over-performance
of Excise and Business Tax, revenue collections were 5 percent higher than forecasted.
30.
The economic outlook for the medium term is broadly positive, although Seychelles
remains vulnerable to external shocks. Real GDP forecast for 2012 has been revised
downward to 4 percent from 4.7 percent forecasted in June 2011, reflecting the anticipated
impact of the unfolding sovereign debt and banking crisis in Europe. Given the importance of the
tourism sector in the economy, prospects for that sector will remain central to the Seychelles’
medium-term economic prospects. Although overall tourist arrivals are expected to increase in
2012, arrivals from Europe are likely to contract by about 4 percent. Despite a 1 percent increase
in tourist arrivals in January 2012, arrivals from Europe decreased by 6% compared to the same
period in 2011. The same trend is observed for the first week of February. Although it is too
early to conclude the exact causes of this decreased in arrivals, discussions with the authorities
and private sector tend to indicate that this may be partly due to disruption caused by

11

Inflation shot to 60 percent immediately after the foreign exchange liberalization in 2008.

7

discontinued activities by Air Seychelles and partly due to the uncertainties in Europe12. An
analysis of arrivals by country of residence shows significant decreases in visitors from the main
European markets – a reduction of 32 percent from France, reduction of 38 percent from UK and
Italy, all of which are the main market for Seychelles tourism industry. This presents a clear risk
to Seychelles’ public finances. The country is actively promoting its tourist sites in diversified
markets, mainly in Asia, and increasing its tourist accommodation facilities (for example, the
average number of beds increased by 9 percent between 2008 and 2010). Having said this, it is
important to note that the Seychelles is becoming better placed worldwide and could benefit
from the expected growth in global tourism.13 However, being a small open island, the
Seychelles remains sensitive to other external factors such as threats of piracy which affects
competitiveness by increasing production costs, though higher freight charges and insurance
premiums14, and impacts of changes in climatic conditions which may affect the fishing sector
considerably and well as impact on the tourism sector.
31.
Additional depreciation of the Seychelles rupee may render debt servicing difficult.
While the floating exchange rate regime will help cushion external shocks, the recent changes in
the Euro Dollar parity have been a major cause of concern in Seychelles. The Seychelles rupee
depreciated to SR 14.3 to a US dollar by end January 2012 from SR 12.7 to a US dollar in
November 2011. Continued depreciation is likely to put additional pressure on the import bill
and debt servicing. For the authorities to achieve the objective of bringing public debt below 50
percent of GDP by 2018, the fiscal consolidation path should be maintained, if not strengthened.
The authorities realize that the country is not enjoying the same set of circumstances as during
the 2008 financial crisis when the country attained major debt relief, and therefore the fiscal
space to cushion the potential effects of the European crisis is limited. In this context, the
Government has decided to intensify and accelerate reforms with a focus on spending more
efficiently to increase resilience. To ease fiscal pressure, the authorities decided to downsize the
loss-making national airline. To maintain the fiscal sustainability path, other major short to
medium term structural reforms in the public sector will include increase in utility tariffs to cost
recovery rates, restructuring state-owned housing finance company, public finance management
reforms and improved financial governance.
32.
Medium-term policies will be geared to sustain progress on improvement in macroeconomic indicators. The fiscal policy will pursue a full return to debt sustainability aiming at
reducing debt to GDP ratio to 50 percent by 2018. Progress in debt restructuring and
improvements in debt management led to a more sustainable debt level. IMF’s debt sustainability
analysis projects a long-run path toward sustainability, provided the Seychelles maintains sound
policies and severe external shocks do not throw its debt off path.15 The current account deficit is
expected to decline in the medium term, in line with FDI. Balance of payments estimates for
12

At this stage the team does not have data on tourist earnings for January 2012 and forward bookings for the first
quarter.
13
According to a World Trade Organization forecast, international tourist arrivals are projected to increase by some
4-5 percent in 2011 and by an average of around 4.1 percent annually until 2020, with all regions, except Europe and
the Americas, growing faster than 5 percent annually.
14
To fight piracy, the Government allocated US$3 million (0.7 percent of the national budget) in 2011, an increase
of 16 percent over 2010. In view of the increasing piracy risk assessed in April 2011 for the Indian Ocean region,
shipping lines increased the Piracy Surcharge on Indian Ocean services. For example, one company increased it
from € 67 per twenty-foot equivalent unit (TEU) to € 105/TEU.
15
Published in January 2011.

8

2011 show a current account deficit to 22.3 percent of GDP compared to 9.8 percent of GDP in
2009, reflecting an expansion in imports in line with the recovery of the domestic economy,
which was stronger than the smaller uptick in export earnings, and significant growth in FDI
boosting imports. FDI inflows increased from a deficit of 9.8 percent of GDP in 2009 and 22.7
percent in 2010. Going forward, the balance of payments though comfortably financed through
FDI remains vulnerable to rising import costs and potential declines in tourist arrivals. The rate
of inflation is estimated to be around 5 percent for 2011 on account of rising international prices
for food and energy, but is expected to decline to about 3.5 percent for 2012. Monetary policy
should remain cautious and keep inflation under control. Seychelles faces a persistent liquidity
overhang and accumulated excess reserves by domestic financial institutions, reflecting in part
higher than anticipated domestic debt servicing over 2009-10
Table 2: Selected Economic Indicators, Seychelles, 2007-12
Indicator

2007

2008

Real GDP growth (%)

9.6

-1.3

2009

2010

2011

0.7

6.2

5.0

2012
(forecast)
4.0

Percentage of GDP
Current account deficit
Revenue (excl. grants)
Expenditures
Overall balance (incl. grants)
Primary balance

-20.9
32
40.9
-8.7
-2

-20.3
31.5
38.3
-3.2
3.7

-9.8
33.1
32.0
5.2
14.3

-22.3
31.5
32.8
2.5
8.7

-22.3
37.5
39.5
1.5
4.5

-20.9
36.6
37.8
2.0
4.8

Public debt

129.8

131.1

124.1

83.0

18.5

16.9

Source: National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, IMF, and Seychelles Central Bank

III

GOVERNMENT STRATEGY AND PROGRAMS

33.
Since 2008 the Government has undertaken major structural reforms to secure
macroeconomic stability and create conditions for sustainable, private sector-led growth.
The primary reforms involved a complete shift to a liberalized foreign exchange regime (with the
Central Bank intervening only to smooth out volatility), a significant tightening of the role and
size of the state through sales of state assets and down-sizing of the state workforce, and public
debt restructuring.
34.
The Government of Seychelles is currently drafting its new medium-term national
development strategy (MTNDS). The core aim of the MTNDS is to reduce Seychelles
vulnerability and to provide the basis for long term sustainable development. The overarching
goal of Seychelles fiscal policy aims first to put public finances on a sustainable path, while
creating the fiscal space to raise public investment and support targeted social safety nets. The
five main goals of the MTNDS are: (i) to address development planning for vital infrastructure
and utility needs; (ii) to develop a strong human resource base by improving basic education and
productivity; (iii) to improve economic infrastructure through modernized ICT infrastructure
(including greater connectivity and bandwidth); (iv) to improve food security and the business
and investment environment by creating a transparent, predictable trading system and
diversifying the economy (by developing the services sector); and (v) to further develop national
statistics to improve evidence-based policy making.
35.
The Government is aware of the challenges and is committed to bold reforms. There
is broad acceptance within Seychelles of the need to speed structural reforms that will support
private sector development and to redefine the role of the Government to ensure that Seychelles
9

reaps long-lasting benefits from the reforms of the past three years. The reform program tries to
strike a balance between measures necessary for sustainable growth and measures to improve the
welfare of the poor and families in lower income brackets. It aims at further improving public
sector efficiency, creating a more business friendly environment, and improving resilience.
36.
In the last two years, several measures have been implemented to improve public
sector efficiency. These include improving public finance management by increasing discipline
in expenditure, strengthening revenue collection, and raise the efficiency and transparency of
public finance. The Government’s objective is to stabilize tax revenue to a lower level, consistent
with its strategy to reduce the weight of Government in the economy, and intends to improve
operational efficiency of state owned enterprises. Efficiency gains while reducing fiscal pressure
may also provide opportunities for re-allocation of resources to better uses. The Government also
intends to conduct a strategic assessment of public entities to address duplication in the delivery
of essential public services, and in case needed, divest from nonstrategic entities that do not
serve policy purposes. The Government intends to further improve PFM and transparency by
introducing policy/program-based budgeting (PBB) embedded in an improved Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF). This will help in improving fiscal planning and accountability,
and promote good governance in the public sector. The Government intends to address existing
PFM weaknesses, especially those set out in PEFA 2011 that relate to weaknesses in multiannual budgeting planning and classification; execution of capital projects; accounting, recording
and reporting; and Parliament oversight. To undertake more meaningful reforms, the authorities
will focus on deepening and broadening outcome focused reforms to particularly (i)
institutionalize the fiscal discipline, improve development of policy and performance oriented
budget by strengthening planning at sector level, making the budget strategy paper more policy
focused, and link capital to recurrent budget, (ii) further improve budget execution and reporting
processes by improving effectiveness of capital commitment control and improving quality of
financial statements, and (iii) strengthen institutions by legislating the roles of the Internal Audit
Division and the National Audit Committee and strengthen the Financial and Public Accounts
Committee.
37.
There remain significant gaps in the availability and management of public
infrastructure. The Seychelles’ water supply capacity is unsustainable in the long term. About
40 percent of the water supply is estimated to be lost due to pipe leakages. In the last two years,
due to exceptionally long dry periods. Water was rationed for about five months each year (June
to October) and, depending on the available water volume, is delivered by tankers in certain
areas. The Government intends to invest massively in this sector to address the challenges16.
Annual increases in demand of 6.5 percent are adding to the pressure on the limited water
supply. As regards power, the high fuel content of energy costs is a source of efficiency and
financial problems. Ninety percent of the primary energy supply comes from imported fuel,
which accounts for 23 percent of total merchandise imports. Fuel price variations are not always
passed on to the consumer, causing the Public Utility Company to depend on subsidies from the
state. The Government intends to revise the utility tariffs upwards to the market determined cost
recovery rates and introduce systems of indexation and adjustments. As regards to
telecommunications, mobile penetration is high, but costs are high and bandwidth capacity
remains limited, hampering the development of electronic transactions and services (such as e16

Agreements have already been reached for financial assistance with AfDB and EIB, based on the water sector
master plan

10

payments) that facilitate business. The development of this infrastructure is a vital step for
Seychelles as it moves to deepen its financial services and other service sectors. Strengthening
the legal and institutional environment for the telecommunications sector and supporting
regional investment projects could reduce telecommunications costs and enhance ICT capacity.
The submarine cable that is being laid will connect Seychelles more efficiently to the global
telecommunications network through Dar-es-Salaam and enable it to move away from the
current restrictive satellite-based technology.
38.
The Government is keen on improving its social protection system. The current
system of welfare assistance absorbs considerable staff resources, program monitoring is
rudimentary and requirements beneficiaries to seek employment are not strictly enforced. The
assistance could benefit from efforts to strengthen evidenced-based policy making. The
authorities plan to introduce activation measures for beneficiaries of welfare assistance to reduce
welfare dependency and work disincentives. Clear and measurable performance indicators are
needed for all programs and corporate functions. The authorities also plan to upgrade to enhance
program efficiency and support better monitoring and evaluation. The objective would be to
develop an MIS that provides more user friendly access to the range of modules required by a
cash transfer system (e.g., application, targeting, enrollment, verification, payment, compliance,
recertification, household changes, appeals, referrals). The Government also aims to streamline
and tighten disability benefits, and reduce incentives to remain disabled. The objective is to
ensure that most of the beneficiaries of disability benefits remain employed or return to work as
soon as possible. For children with disabilities, the Government wants to ensure educational
inclusion to enable their labor force participation in adulthood. In view of the recent impact of
piracy on local fishers, given that they are not going too far at sea for catch and some of them
have relocate fishing activities to areas that are less productive and are turning over-exploited
due to the activity concentration, the Government intends to introduce an emergency assistance
scheme. The Government also intends to professionalize, give responsibility and make
accountable the fishers in the sector management and the social welfare system. Government
also intends to tackle the fiscal risks that Seychelles Pension Fund poses. The fund is partially
funded, defined benefit system offering approximately a 50 percent replacement rate which is
clearly not sustainable and accumulating significant uncovered liabilities that would require
Government transfers in the near future. Government also plans to address the very high
administrative expenses that the fund incurs - 20 percent of contributions.

39.
The Government places special attention on the youth to better prepare them for
the labor market. As such, an Apprenticeship Scheme is in place to develop young people with
required skills and qualifications to join the labor market. Apprentices are placed in organization
where they receive on the job training for specific period during which they attend the
polytechnic or any institution center or any institution center for the theoretical input of one day
per week and three to four weeks full time during school holidays. A strict monitoring system is
maintained by the organization centre of skills Development and the Polytechnic. A Youth
Training Scheme is also in place. This scheme aims at training unskilled young school leavers,
mainly girls. Trainings under this scheme are district based, aimed at youth who are identified as
having the potential and are interested in acquiring skills in sewing/craft work and others related
activities in view to start their own business. Also students studying at polytechnic schools are
entitled to bursaries, contingent on household’s income. Finally an on-the-job training scheme
(called Refund Fiscal Incentive) is in place whereby the Government and the employer share the
11

wage bill on a 40/60 percent basis. Arrangement is made by the authorities to place a candidate
in a workplace for a definite period time, not exceeding one year.
40.
Emphasis on education, besides skills development, remains the highest priority of
the Government. To meet the human resources requirements of the economy, Seychelles
promotes vocational, managerial and service skills, and since 2008, Early Childhood
Development (ECD) and tertiary education have been much emphasized. The National
Education and Training Strategy Committee 2008 (NETSC) made recommendations to
“transform” the education and training system. Several of the recommendations have been
successfully implemented, but due to capacity constraints and lack of planning culture as well as
mobility of leadership, some of the recommendations remain to be implemented. A number of
reforms are being implemented in the education sector with the support of UNESCO and the EU.
The authorities’ aim to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in the Educational Planning, Policy
and Management Processes, set up an Education Information Management System (EMIS),
develop a medium to long term education sector strategy, and put further emphasis on
development from early childhood, while at the same time addressing challenges in the education
sector mentioned in the section ‘social context’ of this document.
41.
Fiscal risk management strategies will be put in place, given high and increasing
vulnerability to exogenous shocks. Rising commodity prices, especially food and fuel, carry
high risks for Seychelles, which almost entirely depends on imports of these products. This
exposure is exacerbated by natural risks, as well as threats of piracy. In particular, weather
variability strongly impacts tuna catches and the near-term economic contribution of the tuna
industry. Because shocks affect households as well as, directly or indirectly, fiscal accounts, the
Government wants to improve fiscal risk assessment in the face of different types of risk. To
insure against short-term price upswings, market-based approaches (such as hedging) will be
considered for some commodities. The Government also plans to develop a Master Plan for
Disaster Risk Management which will integrate all the existing contingency plans and build on
the planned geological risk assessment at the national level, and planned community
preparedness plans, to strengthen its capacity to respond to adverse natural events in a fiscally
sustainable manner. Seychelles could enhance its ability to cope with increased climatic
variability through mechanisms like early warning systems and better coordination with other
agencies, such as metrological center. Social safety nets could be tied to early warning systems
and scaled up when needed.
42.
The centerpiece of the effort to improve competitiveness is to make the regulatory
framework more transparent and less burdensome. The Seychelles is ranked at 103 out of
183 countries in the Doing Business 2012 indicators, up from 109 in 2011. A range of
administrative procedures will be revised. A review of procedures for issuing Gainful
Occupational Permits (GOP) should streamline approval for foreign workers by setting out
transparent guidelines and criteria; customs clearance procedures will be improved through the
introduction of risk management and post-clearance audit procedures; procedures for registering
a business will also be streamlined, and a new bankruptcy regime will ease the exit of
unsustainable businesses. A credit information bureau will be created to improve credit
information. Reforms in the judiciary will be undertaken and particularly specialized commercial
court will be set up and court rules and procedure reviewed to shorten the lengthy process for
resolving disputes in commercial cases.

12

43.
A vibrant private sector relies on a developed and transparent financial market. To
further develop the financial system, the Government intends to establish a Credit Information
System (CIS), set up a commercial court, establish Seychelles Stock Exchange, further develop
mortgage finance, strengthen the insurance regulatory framework, and improve the infrastructure
to introduce Electronic Clearing House and Electronic Funds Transfer and Real Time Gross
Settlement system. The introduction of the CIS will help in creating a more efficient risk-pricing
mechanism for financial products, and the establishment of the court is expected to reduce the
significant backlog of commercial cases due to capacity constraints and speed up resolutions of
financial disputes. Both the CIS and the Commercial Court complement the Government’s
efforts in improving the overall business climate. With the objective of reducing the role of the
state in commercial activities and facilitate financial sector development, the Government
intends to redefine the role of the Housing Finance Corporation (HFC) such that commercial
banks will be called upon to play a prominent role in housing finance and mortgage products.
Regulations of new financial products (leasing, hire purchase, Islamic banking) will be
introduced that should help deepen capital markets, and the efficiency of the insurance sector
will be improved.
44.
Further improvements in the public sector would benefit from addressing some
underlying governance challenges. Given the weak opposition in parliament, and weaknesses
in the judiciary to hold the state accountable, there is a need to strengthen checks and balances to
fully leverage the potential of on-going and planned reforms. Beyond reforms on PFM, human
resource management and state-owned enterprises, there is a need to strengthen an integrated
strategy and package of reforms on the supply-and demand-side. On the supply-side, the
Government intends to further strengthen the justice sector by improving management systems,
such as e-justice systems, linked to the overall e-Government systems to enable the justice sector
to fulfill its oversight mandate. The Government’s commitment to fighting corruption and
building a more independent judiciary has been publicly iterated, and the Government is
committed to the design and implementation of a strategy and concrete policy measures. On the
demand side of governance, civil society is broad and diverse and contributes to design and
implementation of Government programs. Government intends to further deepen its partnership
with civil society so that the latter can play an enhanced role in promoting accountability and
transparency. Civil society, including the media benefit from freedom of expression, although
citizen would benefit from being further involved in the formulation of public policy, and
independent observers of the presidential and parliamentary elections have provided
recommendations for improvements in looser control of private media. The Government intends
to study further the recommendations and take necessary actions.
45.
In case further exploration confirms viable oil extraction and the Government
decides to start production, it has expressed commitment to good governance and
transparency. The Government has expressed intention to adopt a best practice petroleum
revenue management law which will set a high standard for control on petroleum revenues and
which will focus on creating mechanisms to promote transparency in the management of oil
revenue. The Government has also indicated its willingness to increase transparency and
accountability by implementing the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) process.
The Government also recognizes the need to establish strong institutions, with the necessary
capacity to ensure that the petroleum sector is successfully managed. As there is neither a fully
functional petroleum regulatory authority, nor a fully developed system of regulations that would
apply to petroleum operations, this will require a significant program of capacity building
13

assistance. To mitigate the risk of Dutch disease and unstable budgetary pattern and economic
performance, the Government is considering the eventual establishment of a petroleum wealth
fund. However, the nature of the fund and how to integrate it with the overall fiscal policy and
institutional framework is still at an early stage of discussion. Since Seychelles is largely a
tourism-based economy, the authorities are concerned with the potential impact that oil
production may have on the environment, and would have in place legislations in relation to
environmental assessments associated with oil related activities so as to maintain high
international standards of environmental practices.
IV

THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM AND THE DONOR COMMUNITY

46.
The last Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for Seychelles covered FY10-11. The ISN
defined the Bank’s reengagement and partnership with the Republic of Seychelles after a 17-year
hiatus and aimed to generate a robust policy dialogue. The ISN focused on three key objectives:
(i) supporting the economic stabilization program; (ii) removing constraints to private sector
development; and (iii) addressing the challenge of climate change and natural disaster risk
management. The ISN set out the planned lending and non-lending activities and its intended
results for FY10-11. The ISN was successfully implemented with the support of the Bank.
47.
The ISN objectives were supported with a mix of demand-driven advisory activities,
analytical work, and financing. Bank operations included grants, lending, and fee-based
advisory services. The lending program included two DPOs amounting to US$18 million. The
first DPO aimed at helping Seychelles establish a stable and sustainable fiscal stance through
fiscal adjustment underpinned by public administration and civil service reform and a reduction
of the state’s role in commercial activities. The operation also supported establishment of a
targeted social safety net. The second DPO supported reforms to improve public sector
effectiveness and the business environment. The Bank provided financing of about US$4.5
million through four Trust Fund grants. Two of the four projects remain active (see Box 1).
Box 1: Seychelles Trust Fund Projects
National Disaster Preparedness and Response Project (P111474) [Grant amount: US$ 900,000]. This project to
build capacity for disaster preparedness and response in Seychelles involves several components: capacity building,
early warning systems, emergency planning, and national and community disaster preparedness. The project closed
on November 30, 2011. Disbursement by the closing date was US$ 430,481.
Transport Infrastructure Project (P106471) [Grant amount: US$ 1,960,000]. This project financed the repair of
one of three artisanal fishing quays damaged by the December 2004 tsunami with a view to helping boat-owners,
fishers, and traders to improve livelihoods constrained by the tsunami. It also improved the sanitary conditions and
marketability of fisheries products. The project closed on June 30, 2011.
Public Administration Reform and Fiscal Impact Capacity Building Project (P112358) [Grant amount: US$
425,800]. This project enhances the capacity of the Government of Seychelles to effectively manage the
implementation of the Public Sector Reform Program. The closing date for the project is September 25, 2013.
Disbursement as at November 10, 2011 was nil. Contract to a supplier who will deliver all project activities has
been negotiated and is in the process of being finalized.
Building Statistical Capacity Project (P116997) [Grant amount: US$ 376,200]. This project aims to improve the
organizational structure of the National Statistics Bureau and build its capacity to develop and produce new
economic data series as part of the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics. The project consists of three
parts: addressing deficiencies in key macroeconomic data, improving social statistics, and strengthening institutional
capacity. The closing date for the project is November 30, 2012. Disbursement as at November 10, 2011 was
200,000.
Source: World Bank documents

14

48.
Provision for technical assistance in areas identified by the Government has been
provided under a Reimbursable Agreement for Advisory Services framework. This
framework is still active. Assistance fell under three broad areas: social protection, public
enterprise, and health financing. In social protection, the Bank supported Government efforts to
improve efficiency in service delivery and advises on policy options with respect to enhancing
the targeting system. In health financing, the Bank was involved in building capacity for
National Health Accounts and will support the Government in revising and costing its medium
term health strategy. In the public enterprise area, the Bank supported drafting of the Board
Appointment and Remuneration Policies and will support a capacity building exercise to
improve monitoring and evaluation by public enterprises (PEs) and the Public Enterprise
Management Division (PEMD).
49.
IFC reengaged with the Republic of Seychelles in 2010. In 2010, IFC made a
commitment for a US$20 million senior loan in a hotel project. Due to issues associated with the
lease of the land IFC disbursement did not taken place. IFC and the Government of Seychelles
(GoS) were engaged in discussions related to the privatization model to be adopted for two
majority-owned Government banks, Seychelles Savings Bank (SSB) and Nouvobanq. In both
cases, IFC advised on a three -steps approach: (i) divesting a substantial minority to clients and
private institutional investors (ii) inviting a strategic partner to acquire a majority stake (iii) issue
new shares to shore up capital base, where strategic partner will retain majority stake. In the case
of SSB, a substantial minority has been sold to the clients of the bank and the public but progress
has been halted. In the case of Nouvobanq, GoS informed IFC that it will need to re-think the
approach for introducing a strategic partner. The In November 2011, GoS and IFC have signed
an Energy Efficient and Clean Production (EE/CP) Service Agreement. Under this agreement,
IFC will undertake to carry out a study to recommend the renewable energy technology best
suited both in terms of technical and financial viability for households, SMEs and unincorporated
business entities. IFC will also have discussions with commercial banks to find and propose the
appropriate lending mechanism to encourage them to lend to households, small and medium
enterprises (SMEs), and unincorporated businesses to invest in EE/CP goods, appliances, and
equipment. Banks will also be offered technical advisory support to adopt the methodology and
process best suited for the targeted borrowers. IFC is also supporting the Central Bank in
reviewing the new leasing legislation which is currently under preparation. IFC’s engagement in
Seychelles also aims to bring about capital market reforms and promote private sector
development by improving the country’s investment climate by simplifying administrative
processes, reducing the cost of doing business, and further attracting FDI. IFC's Advisory
Services and the Bank are jointly working with the Government to address critical components
of the Doing Business Surveys. Currently the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA) has no active projects in Seychelles.
The Bank’s program has been coordinated closely with the IMF since 2008. A Joint
Management Action Plan ensures complementarity in Bank and IMF activities. The IMF has
supported the authorities’ efforts to fundamentally reform the economy and address severe
internal and external macroeconomic imbalances, initially with a Stand-By Arrangement for 200
percent of quota approved on November 14, 2008. That arrangement was followed by a threeyear program under the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) for 225 percent of quota (about US$31
million), approved on December 18, 2009. Building on the success of the Stand-By
Arrangement, the EFF-supported program aims at consolidating macroeconomic stability and
addressing deep-rooted structural imbalances over the medium term, by strengthening public
50.

15

financial management, institutionalizing higher governance standards, rationalizing the public
sector, reforming taxation, bolstering the financial system, and improving the business
environment. The fourth review of the program was completed in January 2012, and the program
remained on track. The EFF program will come to an end in December 2012. The Government
has expressed interest in maintaining a close relationship with the Fund post EFF expiry,
probably through a precautionary arrangement, but formal discussions has not yet started
between the authorities and the Fund. The Bank and IMF teams have maintained a close
cooperation throughout.
51.
Seychelles’ multilateral and bilateral donors provide support to a wide range of areas
(see Annex 2). Together with the Bank Group, the African Development Bank (AfDB), the
European Union (EU), and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) are the most active
multilateral partners in Seychelles. The first formal donor coordination meeting lead by the
Government was held in October 2011 when the Government presented to all donors the MTNDS.
The donor community tries, to the extent possible, to meet at least twice a year in Seychelles
during the Fund’s EFF review missions. This provides the opportunity to coordinate activities of
the various donors. The EU and UNDP covers Seychelles from the Office based in Mauritius and
the Bank’s office in Mauritius facilitate further dialogues among these institutions. Multilateral
institutions have played a key role in supporting Seychelles’ reforms since the 2008 crisis, with
programs in the areas of economic policy, fiscal reform, public finance management, institutional
development, social protection, and infrastructure development. Going forward, the AfDB will
support Seychelles to enhance the environment for private sector activity and investment, as well
as to improve the competitiveness of the country through investment lending programs
(submarine cable, water supply and sanitation, mariculture development, line of credit for SMEs,
institutional support project), and non-lending technical assistance (infrastructure action plan, PPP
framework, human resource development strategy and statistical capacity program). The UNDP’s
medium term engagement is anchored in the on-going macro- economic reform program and will
help develop and strengthen national capacities of institutions and individuals in the public sector
and civil society to promote good governance, environmental protection, energy efficiency, water
resources management, climate change adaptation and poverty alleviation. The European Union
is providing support to Seychelles on regional integration, trade facilitation, and corporate
governance and to mitigate the risks of piracy attacks, in the context of its regional program.
Specific to Seychelles, the EU has an education budget support operation to help in the
preparation and the implementation of the Education Medium Term Strategy (with a focus on
both basic and post-basic education up to the secondary level) in order to improve the alignment
between the country's training and manpower needs in an evolving national, regional and
international environment. Bilateral cooperation with Abu Dhabi, China, Kuwait, France, and
India has led to advances in various areas, including the fight against piracy, efforts to combat
HIV/AIDS and drug abuse, improvements in health, building institutional capacity, assisting the
fisheries sector, and supporting improvements in critical infrastructure such as schools, hospitals,
the airport, and road networks. The United States Department of Interior’s Bureau of Ocean
Energy Management, Regulation & Enforcement (BOEMRE) has also engaged and plans to
continue a program of technical assistance to Seychelles authorities, particularly with respect to
their environmental and petroleum operation monitoring responsibilities.

16

V

WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A

Lessons from ISN

52.
The Bank’s engagement as outlined in the FY10-11 ISN was fully relevant in
supporting the country’s program of reforms in the last two years. The engagement during
the ISN period has been successful. The main instrument for Bank’s engagement was two stand
alone single tranche DPOs. Both the DPOs have been rated satisfactory in their completion
reports. The areas of reforms supported by these operations are highlighted in table 3 below. The
medium term second generation reform agenda for the Government is clear. Building on the
reforms already implemented, the Government’s agenda going forward further deepens and
broadens areas of reforms.
53.
Engagement during the ISN provides important lessons that have informed the
preparation of the proposed strategy. These include the need to ensure: (i) alignment with
Government priorities; (ii) strong coordination with development partners; (iii) appropriate
timing and flexibility; and (iv) a realistic assessment of implementation capacity.
Table 3: Areas of support under ISN Period
Areas of support
common to both
DPLs
Public
Financial
Management

Areas of support under DPL1

Areas of support under DPL2

The adoption of the standard Government
Finance Statistics (GFS) classification for
preparing and monitoring budget performance

Public
Administration and
Civil Service

Reducing excess staff, including the voluntary
departure and early retirement schemes and the
contracting out of non-core Government
functions
The restructuring of the Seychelles Marketing
Board into 16 commercial units and the
subsequent privatization of eight units and the
liquidation six non-viable units;

The preparation of the Budget Strategy and
Outlook Paper for the year 2011 which
provided a medium-term budget framework
consistent with the macroeconomic forecasts
Contracting out process been expanded to
cover all budget dependent institutions and
non-core public functions

Public Enterprise

Social Protection

Business
Environment

The elimination of all subsidies to the
Seychelles Trading Corporation, and a sharp
decline overall in subsidies to public
enterprises
The introduction of a new means-tested social
welfare policy and the establishment of the
Social Welfare Agency
---------

The establishment of the Public Enterprise
Monitoring Division (PEMD), and staffing
this division to oversee the implementation
of the Public Enterprise Act;
The restructuring of L’Union Estate to lease
the commercial activities to private
operators
-----

Approval of a revised Investment Bill to
provide the framework for the promotion,
regulation and protection of investors and
investments;
Enactment of the Licensing Act, 2010 to set
out transparent procedures for the issuance
and renewal of all licenses

Source: World Bank Documents

54.
Alignment of the Bank’s assistance to the Government’s medium-term priorities
proved effective. The Government was clear in the direction, objectives and priorities of its
medium-term reform program, which was guided by upstream policy dialogue with the IMF,
Bank, and other development partners, and underpinned by analytical works. Leadership and
17

political commitment have been critical factors in the successful implementation of reforms.
Momentum of reform remained strong during the ISN period. Learning from this lesson, the
proposed CPS is aligned to the Medium Term National Development Strategy of the country,
which sets clear direction on the objectives of the Government in the medium term.
55.
Knowledge products and technical assistance to guide the reform agenda proved
crucial. Given limited capacity on the Government’s side to undertake economic and sector
work (ESW), the IMF, Bank, and other development partners supported the Government through
analytical inputs that helped define and sequence the reform agenda. The Bank’s ESW was
considered to be of high quality and has informed policy changes. Some of the economic and
sector studies were produced jointly by the Government and development partners, which helped
build capacity within ministries and agencies for critical analysis, for benchmarking in relation to
practices in other countries, and for defining their own weaknesses. The Government sees
enormous value addition in building local capacity to undertake ESW on its own, going forward.
Reforms have been the most successful in areas of continuous engagement, and thorough TA and
ESWs by partners – for example in budget management where the PEFA rating improved from a
D to an A. During the implementation of the program outlined in this CPS, the Bank will
emphasize on capacity building, knowledge sharing (S-S cooperation and peer leaning events),
technical assistance to close skills gap, and joint production and dissemination of AAAs.
56.
Donor coordination and flexibility reduce administrative costs to the Government.
Donor coordination helped harmonize policy dialogue and support to the Government, and
proved essential to avoid duplication of assistance. The Bank’s flexible approach has also added
to the considerable progress made. It is expected that donor coordination will be further
strengthened in this new strategy to ensure continued success. The Bank will explore
possibilities for joint analytical works. The Bank and the AfDB has agreed to try and conduct the
Mid-term review of their respective CPS together. This strategy has been produced in close
collaboration with the IMF, and these two institutions will continue to work closely to support
the Seychelles.
57.
Close supervision and knowledge of Bank rules helps to smooth implementation.
After the Bank’s extended period of disengagement from Seychelles, knowledge of Bank
procedures was limited to the authorities, which combined with the limited local capacity, at first
constrained the pace of implementation. Capacity at all levels is an issue in the country, and the
Bank should realistically assess implementation capacity to be effective. The Bank plans to make
use of its missions in the country to conduct seminars which may build capacity to better
understand and implement Bank’s FM and procurement rules.

B

A Strategic Approach

58.
Seychelles has demonstrated that it is committed to addressing the challenges it now
faces. The authorities, at the highest level, are dedicated to implement the second-generation
reforms needed to attain a sustainable high-growth path and increase the welfare of the country’s
population. To make this possible and building on the momentum of reforms undertaken to date,
the Government wants to create an environment of solid institutions and a supportive regulatory
framework for business, with the support of the Fund, the Bank and other multilateral
development partners. Yet, going forward, some reforms, especially those towards improving
efficiency in public enterprises should be expected to be politically sensitive and test the
Government’s resolve. Moreover, while the first phase of reforms, focused on exiting from
18

imbalances and imparting a new strategic direction, was driven mostly by the Ministry of
Finance, there is now a need to broaden ownership to the Government at large.
59.
The Government highly values the support it has received from the Bank during the
ISN period, and has requested continued support for moving forward. Over the past three
years of engagement, the Bank has built a very good relationship with the Government, both at
the technical and policy-making level. As Seychelles embarks on bolder reforms in critical areas
in which the Bank has a comparative advantage as a knowledge institution, the Government has
requested the Bank’s continued assistance. Building on this strong relationship, the Bank’s
strategic approach will be structured around the two pillars and foundation of its Africa Strategy,
a strategic approach that resonates particularly well at the current juncture of economic direction
in the Seychelles—the two pillars being (i) Competitiveness and Employment, and (ii)
Vulnerability and Resilience—and the one foundation being Governance and Public Sector
Capacity.
60.
The Bank’s engagement is selective and complements other partner’s support. The
Bank’s strategic approach takes into account the Government’s medium term reform program
and the areas of engagement by other partners. As such, the number of areas that the Bank covers
is limited. In areas where other donors are taking the lead, the Bank will step in as a partner as
and when required. In areas where the Bank has comparative advantages, it will take the lead in
assisting the Government to implement the reforms. The same selectivity filter has been used in
deciding about Bank-led AAAs. In what follows, the areas of engagement are highlighted in
some more details. The complementarities between Bank’s engagement and other partners’
engagement are also pointed out.
Competitiveness and Employment Pillar

61.
The investment climate needs to be strengthened to harness private sector growth.
The private sector has led economic growth in Seychelles. It employs 70 percent of the labor
force. The two strategic sectors are tourism and fisheries, which accounted for about 20 percent
of GDP in 2004, now account for 30 percent of GDP and employ 32 percent of the labor force.
Even so, a number of factors constrain private sector growth and limit its potential to generate
employment, create wealth, and reduce poverty. To ensure sustainable private sector led growth,
the (i) infrastructure bottlenecks, (ii) still poor business environment and (iii) inadequate
domestic human resources and limited technical skills need to be addressed in an accelerated
manner:
62.
Bottlenecks in infrastructure remain critical constraints for the country. In the ICT
sector, the AfDB is supporting the Government to improve its infrastructure with the objective of
reducing telecommunication costs and increase bandwidth capacity. The Government is
currently laying a submarine cable to connect to the world cheaper and quicker. In the utilities
sector, crucial policy measures and institutional reforms are needed to address inefficiencies.
These include improved utility management, greater cost recovery, and better asset management.
In the water sector, the Government has developed a water sector development plan and the
AfDB and the EIB are supporting the Government to implement this development plan. The
Government is also discussing with other bilateral partners to support in this area. The Bank’s
program would emphasize sustainable energy and fiscal sustainability in utilities. The Bank will
take the lead in supporting the Government’s reform program in the energy sector. In this area,
the Government’s objective is to introduce energy efficiency and develop renewable sources of
19

energy. The Seychelles Energy Commission has prepared an Energy Bill which has already been
approved by Cabinet (to be enacted in 2012). This Commission is working with UNDP to
develop a legal framework to encourage private sector investment in Independent Power
Productions (IPPs) and auto-producers. The development of sustainable/renewable energy
sources would not only protect the environment but also reduce the import bill and fiscal
vulnerability. The IFC is supporting the country to implement sustainable and cost-effective
Resources Efficiency (REF) measures, including Energy Efficiency (EE), Renewable Energy
(RE) and Cleaner Production (CP) by promoting the adoption of EE/CP to residential goods,
appliances, and equipment. By the end of the CPS period, at least one follow-on project will
have benefited from the EE/CP project, and assessments for viable REF technologies will have
been completed for 5 technologies. To support this work, the IFC will undertake a study on
constraints to growth and development of the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy in the
residential sector of Seychelles. To help the Government to implement cost recovery rates for
utilities in order to ensure long-term sustainability of the utility company and reduce fiscal
pressure on the national budget, the Bank will support in the development of a tariff study. This
study will provide a few options to the authorities on tariff levels and structure, as well as
welfare impact on the poor and vulnerable of the different options. The Bank will also support
the Government in the implementation of the option decided by the Government. Along the same
line, the Bank will also support in designing and implementing appropriate indexation and costadjustment mechanisms and related tools to allow transparent future tariff adjustments. It is
expected that governance will be strengthened and independence of the utility company attained
and interference of the state in setting up tariffs will be substantially reduced. The Seychelles
does not yet have a strategy for the energy sector. The Bank will provide assistance to develop an
energy sector strategy, based on feasible alternatives of renewable energy, implementation costs
and the required investments, and an action plan for implementation. Given the high external
debt for Seychelles, the margin for huge public investment in renewable energy is limited and the
authorities would support investment by private producers. The Bank will support the
Government in the development of tools and capacity to evaluate purchasing power agreements
(PPAs) of independent power producers (IPPs). The Government intends to explore potential for
diversification in the tourism industry. Tourism from Africa and Asia remains limited and could
be diversified towards emerging markets, particularly those with larger growth prospects, such as
Russia, India, and China. Wider air access and the creation of a larger common aviation area
with neighboring countries may be helpful in achieving this goal. At the request of the
Government, the Bank, as part of its ESW on regional air access policy, will prepare policy note
specifically on Seychelles. In light of the long term outlook of the tourism industry and the
potential for Seychelles, the uncertainties in Europe, and the recent decisions of the Government
(i.e. the cancellation of all long-haul routes for Air Seychelles, and the co-management
agreement with Etihad Airways) this note will focus on the possible strategic role for Air
Seychelles. The Bank will be responsive to the client by providing more such just--in-time
demand driven support during the CPS period.
63.
An improved financial, regulatory and institutional environment is needed to boost
private sector growth. Cumbersome regulations and red tape discourage the emergence of a
vibrant and diversified private sector. A range of reforms need to be pursued to make the
regulatory environment more transparent and less burdensome. The IFC Advisory Services and
the Bank will work closely to support the Government in its objective of improving business
regulatory environment and improving access to justice for the business and private sectors and
20

speeding up hearings for commercial cases. In this context, the Bank has initiated a technical
assistance program on improving the business environment. Procedures for registration of
business will be simplified and streamlined, and an online single point of entry for registration
that combines business registration, and registration for taxes and as an employer at the Revenue
Commission will be set up. The goal is to register companies within a day. In the judiciary, a
commercial division under the Supreme Court will be set up, and court rules and procedures will
be reviewed to shorten process for resolving disputes in commercial cases (this is also part of the
governance agenda of the Bank’s support, see below). The goal of the authorities in the medium
term is to reduce substantially the number of backlog commercial cases, as well as reduce the
time line for processing new cases. This technical assistance of the Bank will also support the
Government to adapt labor regulations to the rapidly changing economic landscape by reviewing
regulations on redundancy and severance pay (these regulations generate considerable
administrative costs and uncertainty for employers about the ability to lay off workers when
necessary and force compensation payments even to employees who terminate contracts of their
own free will). Besides the business environment, the authorities want to create an enabling
financing environment to expand support to SMEs. In this context, the AfDB will be supporting
the Government by providing a line of credit for SMEs development. There are plans for the EIB
to provide technical assistance to help the Development Bank of Seychelles (DBS) improve its
risk-management framework to sustain the government decision to refocus its lending activities
to SMEs. The authorities will further develop the financial/capital market. The objectives are to
increase competition among financial institutions and to facilitate private sector development. In
this context, the authorities have initiated several measures and actions. A credit information
bureau to enhance assessments of creditworthiness will be launched and the Seychelles Stock
Exchange will be established in 2012. The Bank will support to further develop the mortgage
market and broaden sustainable access to housing finance. The Bank will help the authorities to
design and implement a smart subsidy strategy which will be based on three building blocks: a
demand-side subsidy, a financing package that combines the subsidy with market-priced loans,
and home ownership savings scheme. The goal is to increase the relative share of real estate
mortgage through banks compared to the state-owned Housing Finance Company (HFC)
lending. This is in line with the Government’s aim of reducing the role of the state in commercial
activities and helps strengthen the institutional framework necessary for the private sector to
function. The Bank through the FIRST Initiative will provide technical assistance in this area.
Through the FIRST Initiative, the Bank is also providing technical assistance to support the
Government in improving the regulatory framework in the insurance sector, and strengthen
supervision to encourage a sound and efficient insurance sector that promotes policyholder
confidence. The outcomes of this technical assistance will be an upgraded regulatory framework,
particularly focusing on the regulation of financial aspects through an effective solvency regime
that is sensitive to insurer risk profiles, and in-house insurance supervision capacity at the
Central bank of Seychelles. The IMF will continue to take the lead in provision of assistance to
the Central Bank of Seychelles and in financial stability issues (covering foreign exchange
market, monetary markets, financial supervision), and the Bank will take charge in providing
assistance on the development of financial markets (real estate, pension, insurance, stock
exchange, and legal issues among others). In this context, the Bank will undertake analytical
work on the development of financial market.
64.
Human resource and capacity development will both improve public sector service
delivery as well support private sector development and entrepreneurship. With a tiny
21

population Seychelles faces the problem of manpower. It also faces skills shortages in some areas
and the gap is filled with recruitment of expatriates. Around 20 percent of the labor force is made up
of expatriates (only around 4 percent in the public sector). The WHO is supporting the
Government to address some of the challenges with respect to quality of health highlighted
earlier. In the education sector, the EU is providing support to Seychelles to help in the
preparation and the implementation of the Education Medium Term Strategy (with a focus on
both basic and post-basic education up to the secondary level) in order to improve the alignment
between the country's training and manpower needs in an evolving national, regional and
international environment. While the EU is taking the lead in the education sector, the Bank will
complement by supporting the authorities in the ECD area. Seychelles will be one of the
participating countries in the Bank’s SABER-Early Childhood Development (ECD) initiative
which will help to develop measures to improve ECD policy in the country. The AfDB is
supporting the development of priority skills to enable a private sector-driven economy and for
an effective delivery of public services. The AfDB support will be informed by a Human
resource development strategy that it will undertake. The Bank, through its assistance in the area
of social protection, will provide support to the Government in introducing activation measures
for beneficiaries of welfare assistance to reduce welfare dependency and work disincentives and
introduce activation measures related to school attendance to address the problem of drop-outs at
secondary school level.

65.
Bank’s engagement will have a particular focus on gender. The Bank’s engagement in
supporting the authorities in introducing activation measures will have a particular focus on
design of programs for single mothers. Participation in community services (flexi-time) as
opposed to finding full time jobs may be more suitable for this category of beneficiaries. Along
the same line, the introduction of co-responsibilities in the education sector may help address the
relatively high rate of boys drop outs from secondary schools. The Bank team is discussing
several approaches with the authorities to ensure effectiveness based on the potential causes of
these drop outs. Incentives structure (benefit termination/ reduction in case of non-compliance,
or a system of top-up bonuses upon graduation) may be part of the solution while a more feasible
option seems to consist in involving the social services for referrals and monitoring and this will
also provide opportunities for a more integrated case management approach. Although much
improved in the last years, capacity at the National Bureau of Statistics can be further
strengthened, and the Bank is playing a leading role in this. As part of the engagement of the
Bank with the statistics office is to support in improving the design of survey questionnaires to
capture disaggregated data needed for policy making, as well as to improve the collection of sex
disaggregated data for effective assessments by gender. In particular, the Bank has already
started providing support to improve the Household Budget Survey questionnaire to capture the
different types of incomes (including disaggregated welfare schemes) and expenditures
(disaggregation on health and education) to undertake deeper gender-based analysis. The Bank
team will also build capacity at the statistics office to undertake such analysis which will help in
evidence-based policy making. Enterprise surveys are conducted in an ad hoc basis and not
always by the statistics office which results in almost non-existent data on enterprises including
gender aspects of small and medium enterprises. The Bank will provide support to design
enterprise survey questionnaires (one small and medium firm, and one for large firms) which
will also be useful to capture gender aspects of enterprises. As mentioned below (in the section
vulnerability and resilience pillar) the Bank will support the authorities to professionalize the
fishing sector. Given that Seychelles has a large number of women artisanal fishers,
22

professionalizing this sector will empower and give more responsibility to these fishermen.
Currently there is a lack of basic data like number of fisherman (gender-disaggregated), catch
and income in this sector. The Bank’s support in the area of Early Childhood Development is
another key area where gender issues will be important. There are increasing discussions in
Seychelles about productivity of employees and the firms and the competitiveness challenges
that the country faces. However, this discussion is far from being supported by evidence as
analytical work in this area is limited. To close this gap, and support the Government in this
debate, the Bank will undertake an ESW on earnings and productivity with a gender
disaggregated focus. The gender angle gives an interesting entry point to look at the external
efficiency of the education system and the structure of the labor market.
Vulnerability and Resilience Pillar

66.
Seychelles’ economic structure and geographic location make it vulnerable to
specific economic and climatic shocks. As noted above, macroeconomic vulnerability arises
from four key factors: the high concentration of economic activity on tourism and fisheries; its
high import dependency, especially for commodities such as fuel; exposure to disaster and
climate change; and, more recently, the development of piracy in its area of the Indian Ocean. To
the extent that several shocks are exogenous, and vulnerability can only be mitigated somewhat
or over the long term, an immediate focus should be on avoiding that macroeconomic policy
responses magnify other shocks. Tsunamis and rising sea levels represent important fiscal
contingent liabilities. These liabilities can be explicit (for example, public property is damaged)
as well as implicit (the public, especially the poor, may expect some compensation from the
Government after a natural disaster). To reduce vulnerability and build resilience to absorb the
impact of exogenous shocks, the authorities should (i) strengthen PFM and improving allocative
efficiency of expenditure, (ii) strengthen the social safety net system as an instrument to respond
to shocks and (iii) strengthen institution and capacity for disaster risk management. Point (i) is
clearly a governance issue as well and will be dealt with in the Governance section. The section
on governance elaborates further Bank’s engagement in this area.
67.
Improved mitigation measures are needed to absorb the impact of disasters and
climate change. Only limited possibilities exist to insure against such shocks. The authorities
intend to put in place better mitigating measures and improve institutional capacity to sensitize
and monitor implementation of risk management measures. With the financial support provided
through the GEF, the UNDP is supporting the Government to increase capacity for effective
environmental management to address national and global environmental issues. The Bank’s role
will be to assist financially and technically when shocks occur and, more important, to support
policy and capacity development for crisis prevention and preparedness. The Bank will support
Seychelles in developing a Master Plan for Disaster Risk Management, to be implemented across
various sectors and by all stakeholders at various levels (from national to community). The
starting point for the master plan will be to conduct a National Risk Assessment which will
include a Geological Risk Assessment and other hazards. This master plan will integrate all the
existing contingency plans and strategy to give an umbrella roadmap17. This will strengthen the
Government’s capacity to respond to an adverse natural event, evaluate the impact of disaster
while protecting fiscal stability through risk-financing tools, such as risk sharing, risk pooling,
17

To provide assistance in this area, the Bank will seek the support of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery (GFDRR) Trust Fund

23

contingent financing, and catastrophe-related bonds and insurance. The Bank will also support in
the development of a community preparedness plan to ensure the effectiveness of all the
equipment purchased. Additionally, considering the weak capacity in disaster impact assessment,
the Bank will support training on the disaster impact assessment so the country will generate a
quick economic loss evaluation results when disaster happens, which will provide strong base for
assistance. When the capacity increased, more regional risk sharing financing tools will be
explored.
68.
Seychelles is exposed to increasing piracy activities. Piracy is a serious threat to the
economy as well as security, adding to the vulnerability of the country. Seychelles received
assistance from a number of partner countries to help combat the threat of piracy in the Indian
Ocean. Pirates operating in the Indian Ocean have contributed to income losses from economic
activities such as maritime tourism, fisheries, and trade within and outside Seychelles and have
added to the costs of freight and insurance. Traders and fishing operators (both domestic and
foreign) have incorporated practices to address piracy risks, and activity in these sectors is
picking up to pre-2008 levels. Government has included a contingency appropriation in the 2012
budget which will activate in the case of unforeseen expenses related to budget risks associated
with piracy, natural disasters, and further sharp increases in international food and fuel prices.
Seychelles is receiving assistance from a number of partner countries to help combat the threat of
piracy in the Indian Ocean. The EU, through the Indian Ocean Commission18 (IOC) is providing
assistance to enhance capacity on several fronts, including the development and implementation
of joint legislative frameworks, enhancing regional capacity to address economic impacts,
creation of effective systems of information sharing on maritime safety and security, and
establishment of a network for exchange of information and coordination. There exists currently
a knowledge gap concerning the economic costs of piracy to the international and national
communities. At present economic analysis has been constrained by fragmented and unreliable
data and has therefore failed to contribute to effective policy dialogue at a time when the piracy
industry is booming and anti-piracy measures failing. The Bank will undertake a regional ESW
which aims at measuring the cost of piracy off the coast of Somalia and in doing so look at the
mechanisms through which world trade in general and local economies in particular cope with
this phenomenon. And this study will look at the effects of piracy on local economies of two
countries, namely Kenya and Seychelles.
69.
Climate change, disasters and piracy impacts primarily the fishing industry.
Promoting better regional integration for fisheries management and development, and supporting
the growth of a sustainable and profitable local fishing industry will help improving resilience in
this sector. Proactive management of the regional tuna fisheries, including judicious
arrangements with other South West Indian Ocean (SWIO) riparian states and tuna industry
operators, is imperative for insuring that the benefits of utilizing the tuna resource is sustainable
and shared equitably, to benefit the regional coastal economies and the various stakeholders. In
this context, the Bank will support regional cooperation in the fisheries management and
development of the SWIO riparian states and targeted capacity building and investments in
Seychelles. At the national level, the Bank will support the authorities to improve the sector’s
monitoring and analysis capacity to ensure adequate information for policy design and
implementation. The Bank will also support the country in the implementation of comanagement mechanisms. Sector co-management will include the preparation of a joint public18

The members of IOC are Mauritius, Seychelles, Reunion Island, Comoros and Madagascar

24

private led prioritized process to remove critical constraints to profitable and sustainable fisheries
business development and to identify the complementary public and private investments; the
process will result in strategic investment to maintain the port attractiveness and industry
competitiveness while reducing its ecological footprint. The Bank will support the authorities to
explore synergy between the tourism sector and the fisheries sector to promote the national
maritime culture and heritage, and the marine environmental assets.
70.
Exogenous shocks, while presents serious fiscal risks may have serious impacts on
the poor. These shocks may substantially affect the purchasing power of low-income households
and immediately reducing living standards. The Bank will support the authorities to improve the
social protection system to respond to these shocks and cushion the poor more effectively. Along
these lines the Bank will assist the authorities in the establishment of effective, well-targeted
social protection system which offers powerful protection for groups that are most vulnerable to
the effects of macroeconomic and some idiosyncratic shocks. Such a system can strengthen
resiliency and help to smooth consumption following shocks. As mentioned above, piracy is
affecting the business of local fishers. These fishermen are constrained in the distance that they
could go at sea for catch and some of them have relocate fishing activities to areas that are less
productive and are turning over-exploited due to the activity concentration. The Bank will
support the Government in designing and implementing an emergency assistance scheme, as part
of its assistance in the area of social protection, to compensate (partly may be) the fisherman
whose catch is affected due to piracy acts. The Bank will also support the Government to
professionalize this sector. The objective is to give responsibility and make accountable the
fishers in the sector management and the social welfare system. The Bank’s support in this area
is through a social protection technical assistance project. As the country is moving into second
generations of reforms, the Bank will undertake a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA).
The PSIA will be accompanied by public dialogue and discussions to help mitigate social and
political resistance to reforms. The PSIA will be conducted together with the political economy
analysis which will be part of the Governance for Growth AAA as outlined in the governance
section below. Policy/focus areas of the PSIA might include social protection system reform,
housing finance reforms and utility tariff change reforms.
The Governance and Public Sector Capacity Foundation

71.
The Bank would approach governance and public sector capacity from both the
demand and supply side. On the demand side, the Bank would work towards improving social
accountability by strengthening citizens’ voices and access to information. The program will
support initiatives by civil society organizations (CSOs) to enhance Government transparency
and accountability. A political economy analysis will help to better understand governance
constraints, help to identify which reforms are likely to have most political traction and which
may get blocked, and help deepen Bank’s engagement for greater development effectiveness.
Strategic support and tools will be informed by the proposed public sector governance analytical
work (see supply-side governance section).
72.
Supply-side governance measures would focus on strengthening public sector
institutions and systems to improve the environment in which good governance and
capacity development are nurtured. On the basis of a careful assessment on strengthening
public sector strategy and implementation, support would focus on four main areas, PFM,
including statistics, human resource management, anti-corruption and justice. First, regarding
25

PFM, further improvements in the allocation and execution of public expenditures, including the
preparation of budget programs and evaluation of Government programs, are needed. The PEFA
2011 identifies some weaknesses in managing public finances, particularly improving multiannual budgeting planning and classification; execution of capital projects; accounting, recording
and reporting; and Parliament oversight. Public debt is high and demands for social spending are
increasing. A key area for Bank engagement would be to support the development of fiscal
planning and monitoring capacities. The Bank will support in deepening and broadening
outcome focused reforms to particularly (i) institutionalize the fiscal discipline, improve
development of policy and performance oriented budget, (ii) further improve budget execution
and reporting processes, and (iii) strengthen institutions19. The institutional design for capital
spending needs to be strengthened to ensure that investment programs are based on national
priorities and implemented cost-effectively. In this context, the Bank will conduct a Public
Expenditure Review (PER) focusing on capital expenditure and also provide assistance to the
Government on the public sector investment program that it wants to put in place. As part of
building the public expenditure management system, the Bank will support to establish the
BOOST tool – a tool which permits improving public sector spending efficiency. The Bank and
the IMF will support the authorities in the development of the policy and performance oriented
budget (linking capital and recurrent budget, implementation of program based budgeting, etc.).
By the end of the CPS period, the objective is to support the Government to fully include
recurrent costs of capital projects into the recurrent budget and to implement, as pilot cases, PBB
into two sector ministries. The Bank will help the authorities to achieve greater efficiency in
public health expenditure by explore sustainable health financing policy options and improving
the management of service delivery. Proposed strategic support will be informed by a health
sector note. This analytical piece will provide a comprehensive review and analysis of health
sector performance and efficiency in the organization and delivery of services looking into the
supply side determinants (i.e. human resources for health, supply chain management, governance
and expenditure management, infrastructure and ICT), demand side determinants (household
resources, health seeking behavior and risk factors, and community factors), and quality of
service delivery. The Bank will also support the authorities on pension reforms with the
objective to improve sustainability of the system. The contribution rate (and therefore unfunded
liabilities) to the Seychelles Pension Fund is low and the Government’s objective is to increase it
to a total of 5 percent by 2014. Old age pensions managed by the SSF (now ASP) are not meanstested and universal. This also has fiscal sustainability implications as the population of
Seychelles is ageing. In fact a re-thinking of the mode of operation in the public sector from
efficiency and sustainability perspectives will be important for long term fiscal sustainability.
While the country has made enormous progress in right sizing the public service, outsourcing
non-core activities, divest in some public enterprise which do not serve policy purposes, yet
more progress is needed. Education and health services at all levels are almost free, old age
pensions and some assistance are not means tested, universal subsidies still exist, and transport is
free for students and pensioners. At the request of the Government, the Bank will produce a
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) to identify key sector-specific policy reforms to attain
long term fiscal sustainability. While Seychelles reduced its debt substantially following the
restructuring program with the Paris Club, yet it needs consolidate progress on debt sustainability
and in the context the Bank will support the country in improving its debt institutional
19

Empower the Public Enterprise Monitoring Division, legislate the roles of the Internal Audit Division and
National Audit Committee and strengthen the Financial and Public Accounts Committee

26

framework and build institutional capacity in this area. The Bank will assist the authorities with a
debt management assessment and a medium term debt strategy (DeMPA/MTDS).
73.
Since initial exploration data acquired in the Seychelles marine EEZ have been
encouraging, the authorities wants to put in place governance structure for this sector
upfront. In this context the Bank would provide technical assistance to create the institutional
framework that needs to be in place to support oil production and make sure that the appropriate
benefits accrue to the country. The Bank will support the Government to establish an
Independent Regulatory Authority (IRA) for this sector, support in the revision of petroleum
legislation and supplementary regulations, and support in the adherence to the extractive industry
transparency (EITI) validation program. The Bank will monitor closely the evolution of
exploration activity and, if warranted by results, will deepen the Bank’s engagement in
strengthening the Seychelles’ regulatory and revenue management capacity in this area. In such
circumstances, the existing Reimbursable Advisory Services framework would continue to be
useful, since it would allow the mobilization of support from Bank staff.
74.
Reliable and timely statistics is essential for evidence base policy making. On this
front, on the basis of the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics, the Bank, through
the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building, provides technical assistance to the National
Bureau of Statistics to improve capacity to compile national account statistics and tourism
statistics. The Bank would continue to support the development of national statistics to improve
planning and monitoring and evaluation, by tapping Multi-Donor Trust Funds20, and encourage
the use of statistical information to foster greater accountability between Government and its
citizens. The Government will field a new Household Budget Survey in the second quarter of
2012. In this context, the Bank will provide technical assistance to the statistics office to improve
the survey instrument to ensure that more disaggregated and essential data are collected which
will be useful to inform future policy decisions, based on evidence21. One of the key areas where
collection, analysis and disclosure of key information are needed, to improve governance, is the
fisheries sector. The Bank will assist the authorities and build capacity to collect and disclose
fishing licenses and agreements, and regularly disseminate key aquaculture and fisheries
statistics, including catch and effort per fishing vessel category, and aquaculture production per
species.
75.
As part of the efforts to greater public sector performance to enhance growth, the
Bank will support several on-going reforms in human resource management, anticorruption and justice. To lay the analytical foundation to accompany governance reforms in
the Seychelles and to advise Government in the selection, design, implementation and
sequencing of reforms, an ESW on Governance for Growth will be undertaken to take stock of
public sector Government reforms, explore public sector reform options, and help design a
public sector strategy to support the selected core areas of reforms in line with Government
demands. This analytical piece will also include work on the demand side. It will consist of a
Demand-for-Good-Governance (DFGG) Assessment that will take stock of demand-side
governance, identify complementarities with supply-side governance and select possible entry20 For example the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (STATCAP), and Statistics for Results Facility –
Catalytic Fund.
21
Broadly the following changes will be made: in the income module, the source of income section will be
elaborated to include income from welfare assistance, pensions, disability benefits etc. In the expenditure module,
health expenditure will be disaggregated, and utilities expenditure will be disaggregated.

27

points for targeted support, including the consideration of political economy considerations. It
will help to lay the basis in designing and implementing activities across sectors to support civil
society for greater development effectiveness. The ESW would be closely tailored to specific
Government requests and provide sequential, just-in time support to client needs. As part of a
broader focus on strategic planning and management, support to human resource management
will be continued. This will include support to improved human resource management systems
for hiring, managing and monitoring staff, a greater performance-orientation in the public sector
and the incorporation of a greater service-culture, including measures to enhance transparency
and accountability in the civil service. These efforts will be undertaken as part of the broader
Government efforts in strengthening results-management and M&E while promoting governance
and anti-corruption, and will be closely supplemented by the relevant demand-side governance
areas mentioned above. They will also be closely coordinated with efforts on public enterprises.
The Bank will also respond to client demands supporting the legal and judicial sector to
strengthen governance and improve investment climate (the investment climate component is
dealt more extensively in the competitiveness and employment pillar). Strengthening governance
will be achieved by strengthening accountability, improving access to justice for citizens, and
making use of ICT facilities and technology in the judicial sector. The judiciary’s capacity is
constrained by the backlog of cases and the lack of an adequate case management system
integrated across the key justice institutions. The Judiciary in 2010 adopted a Strategic Plan in
which its immediate priorities are to strengthen its capacity and improve operational efficiency
by streamlining court processes; up-grading infrastructure and addressing case backlog through
the introduction of an innovative case management system. Key priorities include strengthening
both civil and commercial courts with a judicial strengthening program and the need for an ejustice system to effectively manage and monitor cases, for which design and implementation the
authorities have requested strong support. With regard to case management system, with the
support of the British High Commission the Computerised Case Administration System for
Seychelles CCASS will be launched in 2012. This represents a significant milestone in towards
modernising and automating case processing. To better support the judicial sector, the Bank will
undertake a Rapid Judicial Sector Assessment. The Bank will endeavor to work with the
Judiciary and other stakeholders in the legal and judicial sector to provide this support and to
anchor reforms in the broader anti-corruption efforts by Government.

C

CPS Implementation

76.
This strategy will be implemented using the traditional instruments of the World Bank
Group: (i) partnerships with stakeholders; (ii) knowledge generation to inform policy changes;
and (iii) finance.
Partnership

77.
The Bank’s engagement will strengthen partnerships with national, regional, and
global players. The public and private sectors share a good relationship and quite often interact
on policy matters. The civil society umbrella organization—the Liaison Unit of NonGovernmental Organizations (LUNGOS)—also interacts with Government to promote its views
in policy formulation. In its engagement, the Bank will support stronger dialogue between the
public and private sector. The private sector conveyed its wish for greater dialogue with the state
on issues, regulations, and decisions that may affect its operations. A durable relationship
between these two partners, based on transparency, credibility, and trust, can positively influence
28

firms’ productivity through more efficient policies and institutions, improved quality and
relevance of Government expenditure, and reduced policy uncertainty. The private sector,
through the Seychelles Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SCCI), is open to further
participation in discussions with the Government (formal and informal) to help increase the
effectiveness of Government support for private sector activities.
78.
In the past three years, the Bank has generated a few knowledge products in
consultation with stakeholders, but dissemination could be expanded. Going forward, the
Bank will engage with civil society, the private sector, academia, donors, and the media to
leverage policy changes, and it will organize the dissemination of knowledge products jointly
with stakeholders. Knowledge products will be generated in partnership with the Government to
ensure ownership and leadership for reforms, as well as build capacity to undertake policy
relevant research. Consultation with stakeholders will continue, and the possibility for joint work
with other donors will be explored. The Bank will mobilize resources from trust funds to support
CSOs in designing and implementing activities to enhance Government transparency and
accountability.
79.
The Bank’s engagement will reinforce other donors’ interventions in line with
Government priorities. A relatively small number of donors and development partners are
engaged in Seychelles. As discussed, after a long hiatus, the Bank and AfDB reengaged with
Seychelles in 2008 to support the Government’s comprehensive reform program with the
assistance of the IMF. Such donor coordination, which has helped to harmonize policy dialogue
in the past three years, will be maintained and if possible strengthened. While the Bank will
mobilize partners to deepen and accelerate support to Seychelles, the Bank’s engagement will be
based on greater selectivity: Bank resources will be channeled to areas in which the Bank has a
comparative advantage and will support areas in which other donors are leading. The Bank and
the AfDB will jointly conduct mid-term review for their respective strategies in the first quarter
of 2014 to better harmonize their engagement. Annex 2 presents a matrix of donor engagements
by sector.
Knowledge program

80.
The Bank’s support for reforms in Seychelles in the past few years was largely
informed by analytical work. Because the reform program was intended mainly to consolidate
macroeconomic stability and address deep-rooted structural imbalances, analytical work
concentrated on governance, particularly expenditure management in social sectors and publicly
owned enterprises. This work helped to identify areas for support under the two DPOs delivered
to the Government.
81.
Going forward, knowledge will be generated to further assist Seychelles in
governance and public capacity building as well as the two pillars of the Bank’s strategic
approach. Although Seychelles reduced its debt and its economy grew at a higher than expected
rate in 2010, it needs a strong growth path to consolidate progress on debt sustainability, build
resilience and prepare for long term fiscal sustainability. It is crucial to speed the pace of
structural reforms that aim at developing the private sector, redefining the role of the
Government, and improving economic resilience to shocks. To guide such reforms, strong
knowledge is needed in key strategic areas.
82.
The Bank will ensure that results of analytical work will contribute to the public
debate on major policy issues. This effort will pursue broader dissemination through a variety
29

of media and platforms, including the local press, university, and organized debates with civil
society, the private sector, donor partners, and other stakeholders. The University of Seychelles
was established only recently (2008), and the Bank expects that partnering with the university
will help to develop a policy research culture among academics. Based on demand from the
authorities, the Bank will develop a seminar series to be delivered by VC or by staffs on mission
to improve knowledge of the staffs of the Ministry of Finance in some key areas: PFM, budget
management, accounting standards, auditing, M&E, and others22. Greater participation of the
Seychelles in South-South (S-S) knowledge sharing and peer- learning events will be explored.
For example, the Parliamentary Network will invite the Speaker of the National Assembly to
participate in the private sector development conference in March 2012. The South-South
Knowledge Exchange Program of the World Bank Institute will be explored for S-S cooperation
in the judicial sector. To assist in reforms in the competitiveness and employment pillar,
analytical pieces will need to be developed and technical assistance provided to inform policy
makers on further regulatory and institutional barriers to business, more knowledge is required to
understand the financial market so as to support the Government to deepen and broaden this
market to facilitate business operations and become another pillar for the economy, assistance
will be provided to develop the energy sector, better understanding is needed on earnings and
productivity gaps, more knowledge is needed to understand the evolution of the tourism industry
for the region to devise strategies for open skies by national authorities from a regional
perspective, and assistance will be provided to develop the right structure and levels of utility
tariffs. In light of these, the Bank plans to undertake five ESWs and three technical assistance
projects in the CPS period: a development of financial market and a regional study on air access
policies, a gender-disaggregated analysis on earnings and productivity gaps, a study on
constraints to growth of the EE and RE, a tariff study, a TA on improving business environment,
a TA to strengthen the housing mortgage market, a TA to develop the energy sector strategy,
and a TA to strengthen the insurance regulatory framework and supervision. As part of the
Bank’s SABER-Early Childhood Development (ECD) initiative, Seychelles will be one of the
participating countries. This will help design effective measures in the area of early childhood
development for the country. To improve resilience to shocks and pave the way for long term
growth and sustainability, establishing backward linkages from the tourism industry to domestic
industry is essential, as well as diversification between sectors, but also within established
sectors, better understanding of the economic costs of piracy is needed for informed policy
decisions, understanding of the effects of policy changes on different segments of the population
is required to better target the poor and vulnerable, and the Government also needs to have in
place contingency plans to mitigate specific risks. In this context, the Bank will undertake a
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) of recent and on-going reforms; support the
development of a Master Plan for Disaster Risk Management (including geological risk
assessment), a study on the economic impact of piracy, and a social protection TA. On the
governance and public sector capacity foundation, the Bank’s analytical work will focus on
improving institutional capacity and governance with respect to capital expenditure and
subsidies, good governance and accountability, strengthen debt management capacity, prepare
for oil sector management, re-thinking of the mode of operation in social sectors from an
efficiency perspective will be important, for example improve efficiency and sustainability of
health service provision, and building capacity at the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). In this
22

The first such seminar will take place in March 2012 during the DPO identification mission. The topic for
discussion will be risk management tools/ instruments of the Bank and its application in different countries.

30

context, the Bank will produce a Country Economic Memorandum identifying key sectorspecific policy reforms to attain long term fiscal sustainability, provide assistance to produce a
health sector status report, undertake a public expenditure review (PER) focusing on capital
expenditures and subsidies, a Medium Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) and a Debt Management
Performance Assessment (DeMPA), an ESW on Governance for growth which would combine
assessments and analysis on demand and supply side of governance and help design a public
sector reform strategy, a TA to support dialogue with Government on oil sector governance and
revenue management, and a statistical capacity building assistance to support improving the
household survey (including assistance to improve collection of gender-differentiated data),
build capacity for undertaking distributional incidence analysis for long-term sustainability. In
the legal and judicial sector, the Bank will support a rapid judicial sector assessment which will
provide the basis for Bank interventions in the sector. Annex 3 lists the proposed analytical work
under this CPS. Besides the planned AAAs, the Bank will also respond to demand driven just-intime requests to the Government to support the reform agenda.
Finance

The Bank will use its financing instrument to support policy and institutional
changes that will influence development. A programmatic series of three Development Policy
Operations (DPOs) will be the main financing instrument and will assist in policy reforms
informed by analytical works. This series will support second-generation of reforms that are
natural continuation of support that the Bank provided through two stand alone DPOs in 2009
and 2010 which had as objectives to (i) establish a stable macroeconomic environment, (ii)
establish a sustainable fiscal framework, (iii) to improve public sector effectiveness and (iv)
improve the business environment. This programmatic series will consolidate and reinforce
reforms achieved during the previous years, while shaping the way to a sustainability path. The
indicative IBRD lending program of $21 million for the FY12-FY15 CPS period is expected to
finance a programmatic series of three DPOs of US$ 7 million each. This lending program is
indicative, and actual lending levels would continue to depend on country performance, IBRD's
lending capacity, demand by other borrowers, and general economic developments.
83.

84.
The areas of the programmatic DPO series is embedded in the strategic approach
highlighted in this strategy. In the competitiveness and employment pillar, this series will
support improving the business environment. In the vulnerability and resilience pillar, this series
will support enhancing the social protection system, and strengthen institutions to respond to
natural events. In the governance and public sector capacity foundation, this series will support
the establishment of institutions to prepare for the development of the country’s petroleum
resources, and improve transparency in the fisheries sector, and improve public finance (incl.
health sector efficiency, and SOEs).
85.
Improved business environment will be achieved through expediting business
registration, easing business exit, and facilitating settlement of commercial disputes, among
others. The Bank will support the introduction of a bankruptcy system to (i) save viable
businesses that can continue contributing to the economy and (ii) support unviable businesses to
exit the market so that resources can be efficiently redistributed. The Bank will support
establishment of simpler procedures to attract investment and enhance the development of a
competitive market economy. The Bank will assist in the setting up of a specialized commercial

31

court and the development of its rules of procedure as well as developing the technical
specifications of a pilot case management system.
86.
Improving expenditure efficiency will build the economy’s resilience to shocks. The
Bank will support policies and actions to reduce subsidy allocation to state owned enterprises
and limiting the role of the state in commercial activities. As such, amongst others, the Bank will
assist the Public Utility Company (PUC) in determining and charging market tariff for utilities to
cover full cost, support Government to assess purchase power agreements, support the Housing
Finance Company (HFC) in designing and implementing a market based social housing finance
strategy which would include a system of ‘smart subsidies’. To enhance the social protection
system, the Bank will support in merging the two agencies for welfare assistance into one, build
a robust MIS system, establish appeals mechanisms, to introduce assessment based on
functioning capacity for disability benefits, introducing activation measures, improve the
targeting system, address the problem of sustainability of the Seychelles Pension Fund and assist
in designing a piracy-related emergency scheme for fishermen.
87.
Strengthening institutions, building capacity and enhancing transparency and
accountability will help improve governance. The Bank will help review and update of the
legal, regulatory and model contract framework applicable to the petroleum sector, build
capacity to evaluation and negotiation of licensing round proposals, establish an independent
petroleum regulatory authority, and assist in the EITI validation program. The Bank will also
help improve transparency and accountability in the fisheries sector by disclosing fishing
agreements, licenses information (number and type of licenses issued, duration and fees paid)
and other key sector statistics such as fleet composition, activity (fishing days - or “effort” - and
catches) and subsidies. Such approach will support setting up civil society and stakeholders’
participation in the debate on sound policy design. To improve PFM, the Bank will support in
strengthen planning at the sector level, linking capital and recurrent budgets, review non-tax
revenue policies, processes and forecasting, improve quality of financial statements and legislate
the roles of the Internal Audit Division and the National Audit Committee. To improve
efficiency in the health system, the Bank will help undertake an elaborated health sector status
(HR, Infrastructure, supply chain management, quality of service delivery) to inform policy
choices, bring efficiency gains by revisiting and re-enforcing the referral system and task
shifting, explore health financing options and develop sustainable health financing strategy. This
will be supported by the analytical underpinning of the Governance for Growth ESW.
88.
Knowledge products and provision of technical assistance will be financed by the
Bank, by partnering with other donors, by leveraging trust funds, or under the fee-based
framework. Trust funds will be used to address climate change challenges, build capacity in
development, analysis and dissemination of statistics, support to improve the financial and
accounting sectors, and support to in improving governance. The Bank will support in improving
disaster management by tapping on the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR), support capacity building by tapping into the Statistical Capacity Building Program
(STATCAP) and the Institutional Development Fund (IDF), support to improve housing finance,
insurance regulatory framework, and accountancy profession through the FIRST Initiative,
support for the evaluation and negotiation of licensing rounds by tapping into the Extractive
Industries Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF) program, and support for improving public
sector governance by tapping into the Governance Partnership Facility (GPF). Since the Bank
response to the Government’s request is constrained due to limited Administrative Budget (BB)
32

and limited possibilities of grants from trust funds, to expedite implementation of reforms, the
authorities have requested fee-based support in three broad areas: social protection, public
finance management and public sector efficiency. This will provide the Government with
specialized technical assistance and advisory services (policy choices and implementation
options) to meet the inevitable skills gaps that exist in the country to advance the comprehensive
economic reform program. The Bank will also use flexible and innovative financing alternatives
to provide possible solutions against vulnerability, such as commodity price hedging, and debt
management. Financial assistance will be assessed in the context of the country’s
macroeconomic situation, including debt dynamics and the international economic context,
which would be key factors in the determination of the financing gap. The IFC and the Bank will
jointly leverage on the WBG engagement to support the authorities to bring in strategic partners
on board in the reform program of SOEs. MIGA will explore opportunities to offer its insurance
coverage to potential clients seeking political risk insurance in line with Government’s endeavor
to attract more Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs).
VI

RISK AND MITIGATION

89.
The success of this strategy may be hampered because of the foreseeable risks mentioned
below. Risk mitigating measures are also discussed.
Macroeconomic stability is vulnerable to exogenous shock. Volatility in commodity
prices associated with the slow global economic recovery and threats of piracy could exert
pressure on fiscal balance and debt sustainability and affect the Government’s ability to continue
its reforms. To mitigate these risks, reforms need to be accelerated for medium-term expenditure
planning. While Bank’s financial support may scale up to respond to external shocks, the country
should also collaborate with other institutions such as the IMF and AfDB in the face of such
shocks. The risk management strategy that the Government plans to adopt would also contain
contingency plans to mitigate specific risks.
90.

Capacity constraints are an issue at all levels of the public sector. During the ISN, the
lack of expertise in some technical areas limited implementation of some Bank operations. The
first-generation reforms related to restructuring the economy for macroeconomic stability were
led by the Ministry of Finance, which has higher capacity than other ministries. Secondgeneration reforms must be owned and driven by other ministries and agencies, however, where
a lack of technical capacity or human resource could delay implementation of the reform
program. To mitigate this risk, the Bank will provide technical assistance and strengthen
implementation capacity, AfDB will support the Government in developing a Human Resource
Strategy and a statistical capacity building program, and UNDP will assist in developing a
capacity development plan and provide technical assistance to build capacity. The risks related to
limited capacity will also be mitigated by: (i) sustaining reforms that will generate stronger
capacity in PFM and governance; (ii) concentrating on a limited number of policy areas; and (iii)
agreeing on critical technical assistance required to overcome weaknesses identified in Bank
institutional capacity assessments.

91.

92.
Political and social resistance to reforms may arise. Reforms of state-owned enterprises
may pose moderate to substantial political risks, and other reforms could be stymied by their
potential impact, including on the poor. For example, it might be difficult to further increase
utility tariffs given that from May 2009, utility tariffs have increased 7 times. The political
33

commitment to charge cost-recovery rate exist, but implementation might be difficult. During the
process of the tariff study, consultation needs to build consensus among the various stakeholders.
However, possibility of resistance from the general public cannot be understated. Implementing
the new housing finance policy is also politically sensitive. Here too consensus building on this
highly politically and socially sensitive area is very important, and a slow process built on
consensus and taking into repayment capacity in the immediate to short term. To mitigate these
risks, the Government will continue its strong and successful communication about its reform
program. Specific reforms will be advanced through public consultation and awareness programs
to gather public opinion and gauge public willingness to reform. The Government is improving
its social safety net programs to ensure that they reach the poor and vulnerable. The Bank will
use change management mechanisms, including communications strategy to manage this risk.
93.
Seychelles is exposed to climatic changes. Seychelles remains vulnerable to several
natural hazards including floods, rising sea levels, landslides, and tsunamis, and these pose
serious risks to the country. To mitigate these risks the Bank will support the country in the
development of a Master plan for Disaster Risk Management which will be build on the
assessments of geological risks and other hazards, provide technical expertise to develop risk
financing tools, and support in the setting up of an emergency assistance scheme for fishermen,
the most vulnerable sector to climate change risks.
VII

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

94.
The results framework presented in Annex 1 of this CPS will be used as a
monitoring tool both by the Government of Seychelles and the Bank. Since the Bank’s
engagement is flexible and will adapt to priority needs on an annual basis, it is also possible that
the Bank will contribute to outcomes that are not reflected in the results framework. A mid-term
review of the CPS will be undertaken during the first quarter of 2014 to evaluate the performance
of the CPS and shape the agenda until 2015. In addition to the results framework, the CPS
program will be monitored and evaluated through the planned programmatic DPO, which will
also include a results matrix covering specific outcomes in the different areas of support
envisaged in the DPO.
VIII

CONCLUDING REMARKS

95.
The design of the CPS is based on the understanding that Government ownership of
the reform program is strong and that it is committed to drive reforms just as it has in the
last three years. The CPS is timely, as the president was reelected in 2011 for another five-year
term, and the strategy reflects the Government’s program. The country is also updating its longterm strategic framework, and development of the CPS benefited from a draft version of that
strategy. The CPS is designed to be flexible and allow the Government and the Bank to adjust
the program to the country’s changing medium-term needs and priorities. The overall reform
agenda also fits well with the Bank’s strategy for Africa. Although sector ministries will have to
play an important role as the reform agenda expands from macroeconomic structural reform to
more wide-ranging reforms, the Ministry of Finance will play the coordinating role and ensure
that the reform program is implemented as planned.

34

Annex 1: Results Framework FY12-15
Medium Term Objectives

Main Constraints to Achieving Medium
Term Objectives

Possible Strategy Outcomes

Milestones / Process Indicators

Strategic Objective: Reduce vulnerability and provide the basis for long term hable development
Government overall indicator: Economic growth at 5 percent on average per annum
Introduce energy efficiency and develop
renewable sources of energy

The business environment will be improved,
and procedures to register business
streamlined
Competition in the banking system
increased and capital products developed
Disaster risk mitigation strategy and
capacity in place
Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
the social protection system

Policy and performance oriented budget
developed

Improve efficiency in health expenditure

Put in place governance and transparent
framework and structures for the oil sector

Improved statistical capacity
Improving access to justice for the business
and private sectors and speeding up
hearings for commercial cases

Pillar 1: Competitiveness and Employment
Power generation is currently provided only Number of assessments for viable REF
by diesel and fuel and energy efficient
technologies completed increased to 5 by 2015
consumption is almost nil
from 0 in 2011;
Market based utility rates applied by 2014
compared to ad hoc subsidized rates in 2011
Cumbersome and lengthy procedures to
Number of days to register business falls from 39
register business
in 2011 to 1 in 2015
The HFC performs multi tasks, inefficiently
Transparent and smart subsidies for housing
and the private sector mortgage market
finance introduced by 2014
under-developed
Pillar 2: Vulnerability and Resilience
High exposure to changes climatic
Country risk profile established by 2015
conditions and lack of geological risk
assessment
Welfare assistance program not effectively
Multiple agencies providing welfare assistance
targeted and pension system not sustainable
merged into a single Agency for Social Protection
by 2012 and a single robust MIS system in place
by 2013;
Increasing the pension contribution rate to a 5
percent by 2014 from 3 percent in 2011
Foundation: Governance and Public Sector Capacity
Capital and recurrent budgets are
Full inclusion of recurrent costs of capital into the
disconnected, and budgeting not link to
recurrent budget by 2015 compared to no
sector strategies which are indeed missing
linkages in 2011
for many ministries
Weak management of health service
Government expenditure on health as a share of
delivery and current health financing
total health expenditure falls from 87 percent
arrangement presents fiscal challenges
(2009 baseline) to 80 percent by 2015.
Legal and regulatory framework for the
Petroleum Regulatory Authority is established
petroleum sector is underdeveloped and a
and petroleum legislations revised by 2014;
fully functional petroleum regulatory
authority is not in place;
Capacity at the statistic bureau is limited
Quarterly National Accounts is released to the
public by 2014;
No bankruptcy regime in place, and manual
All backlog commercial cases registered by
system for case registration
December 2011 are processed by December
2015.

35

Study on constraints to growth and development of
the EE & RE in the residential sector launched;
Tariff study, including a component of indexation
and adjustments launched
An online system for registration of companies is
set up
Cabinet decision to reduce the role of the public
sector in the mortgage market

Development of a Master Plan for Disaster Risk
Management
Introduction risk assessments and automatic crosschecks and verification with other databases;

Actuarial study on Seychelles Pension Fund
completed
Cabinet decision to link capital and recurrent
budgets

Development of sustainable health financing
strategy
Policy decision for the creation of a petroleum
regulatory authority;

Capacity at the NBS is strengthened
Commercial Division at the Supreme court
established and operational by 2013

Annex 2: Donor Engagement Matrix by Sector
AfD
B

BADEA

EC

IMF

OFID

China

UNDP

WHO

DOI

WB

Competitiveness and Employment Pillar
Environment

X

Tourism

X

X

X

Water and sanitation

X

ICT

X

Transport infrastructure

X

Private sector/financial sectors

X

X

X

X

X

X

Health Quality

X
X

Education

X

X

X

X

X

Energy

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Vulnerability and Resilience Pillar
Climate change and disaster management
Piracy

X

Social protection
Health system infrastructure and
management

X

X

X

X

Governance and Public Sector Capacity Foundation
Public sector capacity building & M&E

X

Public sector governance

X

Judicial and legal reform

X

Statistics

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

Macroeconomic framework
X
X
X
Note: BADEA = Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa; OFID = OPEC Fund for International Development; EC = European Commission, DOI =
US Department of Interior.

36

Annex 3: Proposed Analytical Work by FY

FY12
FY13
Competitiveness and Employment Pillar
Study on Constraints to Growth of the EE&RE (IFC ‐ RTA)
Tariff Study (RTA)
TA Energy sector strategy (RTA)
Regional Access Policy ESW
Business Environment TA
Housing Finance/ Mortgage TA (FIRST)
Insurance Sector Regulatory Framework TA (FIRST)
Financail Market ESW
SABER‐ECD Initiative
Earnings and Productivity: Gender Focus ESW
Vulnerabiltiy and Resilience Pillar
Social Protection TA
TA Master Plan for DRM (GFDRR)
Economic Cost of Piracy ESW
PSIA
Governance and Public Sector Capacity Foundation
Public Expenditure Review ‐ Capex & Subsidies
Health Sector Report (RTA)
CEM: Long Term Fiscal Sustainability
DeMPA/ MTDS
Oil Sector Governance and Revenue Management TA (EI TAF)
Statistical Capacity Building TA (STATCAP)
Rapid Judicial Sector Assessment
Governance for Growth (GPF/GAC)

FY14

FY15

Note: In the parentheses are mentioned the Trust Funds that will be tapped into to mobilize funding for the analytical works, besides the seed funding
that will be provided from Bank’s Budget. RTA refers to Reimbursable Technical Assistance

37

Annex 4: Areas covered by the DPO programmatic series

Pillars and Foundation
Competitiveness and
Employment Pillar

FY10

FY11
Improve the business environment

FY12 - FY15 (DPO Programmatic)
Improving the business environment;

Vulnerability and
Resilience Pillar

Establish a stable
macroeconomic environment;
Establish a sustainable fiscal
framework

Improve public sector effectiveness

Enhancing the social protection system;
Strengthen institutions to respond to natural
events;

Establishment of institutions to prepare for
the oil development;
Improve transparency and accountability in
the fisheries sector;
Improve public finance (incl. health sector
efficiency, and SOEs);

Governance and Public
Sector Capacity
Foundation

38

CPS Annex A2: Country at a Glance

Seychelles at a glance
S e yc he lle s

S ubS a ha ra n
A f ric a

Uppe rm iddle inc o m e

0.09
8,480
0.75

840
1,126
946

1,002
7,495
7,508

1.0
..

2.5
2.9

0.9
1.7

..
55
73
11
..
..
92
131
131
130

..
37
52
81
25
60
62
100
105
95

..
75
71
19
..
95
93
111
111
110

P O V E R T Y a nd S O C IA L
2009
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)

2/25/11

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

A v e ra ge a nnua l gro wt h, 2 0 0 3 - 0 9
P o pulatio n (%)
Labo r fo rce (%)

GNI
per
capita

M o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e ( la t e s t ye a r a v a ila ble , 2 0 0 3 - 0 9 )
P o verty (% o f po pulatio n belo w natio nal po verty line)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
Literacy (% o f po pulatio n age 15+)
Gro ss primary enro llment (% o f scho o l-age po pulatio n)
M ale
Female

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

Seychelles
Upper-middle-income group

KE Y E C O N O M IC R A T IO S a nd LO N G - T E R M T R E N D S
19 9 9

2008

2009

GDP (US$ billio ns)

19 8 9
0.31

0.62

0.93

0.76

Gro ss capital fo rmatio n/GDP
Expo rts o f go o ds and services/GDP
Gro ss do mestic savings/GDP
Gro ss natio nal savings/GDP

27.1
65.1
29.8
..

43.3
67.7
25.6
22.2

25.4
117.8
6.0
1.4

24.2
119.3
15.9
9.2

Current acco unt balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
To tal debt/GDP
To tal debt service/expo rts
P resent value o f debt/GDP
P resent value o f debt/expo rts

0.6
3.2
52.1
11.4
..
..

-19.8
1.6
40.4
6.2
..
..

-25.4
4.3
161.8
7.8
..
..

-18.6
2.4
212.5
4.7
222.6
128.6

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
19 8 9 - 9 9 19 9 9 - 0 9
(average annual gro wth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Expo rts o f go o ds and services

4.5
3.0
4.4

1.6
0.7
10.9

2008

2009

2 0 0 9 - 13

-7.6
-8.7
10.8

..
..
..

2008

2009

-0.9
-3.1
31.0

Seychelles
Upper-middle-income group

S T R UC T UR E o f t he E C O N O M Y
19 8 9
(% o f GDP )
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

4.2
15.6
8.3
80.1

19 9 9
3.1
27.1
15.1
69.8

2.1
20.2
12.0
67.7

2.0
19.7
11.8
45.3

Growth of capital and GDP (%)
200
100
0
04

05

06

07

08

09

-100

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Impo rts o f go o ds and services

37.3
32.9
62.5

47.4
26.9
85.3

80.7
13.3
137.2

71.9
12.2
127.6

19 8 9 - 9 9 19 9 9 - 0 9

2008

2009

(average annual gro wth)
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

-0.5
11.7
8.4
2.8

1.2
3.5
-0.9
1.1

6.0
-2.5
6.8
5.7

5.0
-2.5
6.3
-155.6

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n
Impo rts o f go o ds and services

11.2
2.3
14.4
10.9

9.9
-1.0
4.5
11.3

0.7
-10.4
-7.3
15.4

-131.7
0.1
4.2
1.7

GCF

GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
60
40
20
0
-20

04

05

06

Exports

07

08

Imports

No te: 2009 data are preliminary estimates.
This table was pro duced fro m the Develo pment Eco no mics LDB database.
* The diamo nds sho w fo ur key indicato rs in the co untry (in bo ld) co mpared with its inco me-gro up average. If data are missing, the diamo nd will
be inco mplete.

39

09

Seychelles
P R IC E S a nd G O V E R N M E N T F IN A N C E
19 8 9
D o m e s t ic pric e s
(% change)
Co nsumer prices
Implicit GDP deflato r

19 9 9

2008

2009

Inflation (%)
40

1.6
2.5

6.3
2.1

9.5
28.5

3.8
28.6

30
20
10

G o v e rnm e nt f ina nc e
(% o f GDP , includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

0
04

-10

48.1
7.4
..

45.3
2.8
-8.5

32.0
1.3
-2.0

30.2
1.7
-1.6

19 9 9

2008

2009

05

06

07

08

GDP deflator

09

CPI

TRADE
19 8 9
(US$ millio ns)
To tal expo rts (fo b)
Fish (fresh and fro zen)
n.a.
M anufactures
To tal impo rts (cif)
Fo o d
Fuel and energy
Capital go o ds

15
2
1
9
165
30
30
45

146
5
0
102
434
81
43
193

601
6
0
231
528
135
190
75

667
7
0
253
567
138
210
88

Expo rt price index (2000=100)
Impo rt price index (2000=100)
Terms o f trade (2000=100)

65
106
61

106
107
99

245
109
225

253
108
235

19 9 9

2008

2009

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
800
600
400
200
0
03

04

05

06

Exports

07

08

09

Imports

B A LA N C E o f P A Y M E N T S
19 8 9

Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millio ns)
Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Reso urce balance

201
193
8

422
524
-102

1,171
1,364
-193

1,306
1,397
-91

Net inco me
Net current transfers

-15
..

-25
4

-103
..

-109
..

Current acco unt balance

2

-124

-235

-142

-30

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

2
-4

125
-1

288
-53

202
-61

-40

..
5.6

30
5.3

131
9.5

191
13.6

M emo :
Reserves including go ld (US$ millio ns)
Co nversio n rate (DEC, lo cal/US$ )

E X T E R N A L D E B T a nd R E S O UR C E F LO WS
19 8 9
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
161
IB RD
5
IDA
0

19 9 9

2008

2009

252
4
0

1,498
0
0

1,624
0
0

To tal debt service
IB RD
IDA

23
1
0

27
1
0

92
0
0

63
0
0

Co mpo sitio n o f net reso urce flo ws
Official grants
Official credito rs
P rivate credito rs
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

7
7
-7
22
0

7
1
22
55
0

8
-10
42
241
0

21
11
-15
249
0

0
1
1
0
0
0

0
1
1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

9
0
0
0
0
0

Wo rld B ank pro gram
Co mmitments
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Net flo ws
Interest payments
Net transfers

40

10
0
03

04

05

06

07

08

09

-10
-20

Composition of 2009 debt (US$ mill.)

C: 19

D: 50
E: 159

F: 434
G: 962

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

CPS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

Source: IMF, September 2011

41

CPS Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1/20/2012

Closed Projects

5

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

0.00
17.68
2.69
17.68
2.69

No Applicable Data Found.

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal Year

42

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

CPS Annex B9: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Seychelles
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 12/31/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2010

Universal hotels
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Loan

Equity

20

0

0

20

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

43

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

50°E

SEY C HELLES

52°E

54°E

56°E

Bird I.
Denis I.
4°S

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

4°S

NATIONAL CAPITAL

INNER
(GRANITIC)
ISLANDS

MAIN ROADS

African Banks

For Detail,
See Inset Below

48°E

AMIRANTE
GROUP

St. Joseph Atoll
Étoile I.

I N D I A N

(
8°S

O
Aldabra
Atoll

10°S

U

T

E

C

R

A

O

Platte I.

Alphonse I.
S. François I.

Coetivy I.

54°E

8°S

56°E

SEYCHELLES
Inner (Granitic)
Islands

Aride I.

4°15'S

Curieuse I.
West Sister I.

East Sister I.

Félécite
I.

Grand' Anse

Marie
Anne I.

Praslin I.

North I.

Providence I.
St. Pierre I.

Cosmolédo Is.

FARQUHAR
GROUP

La Digue I.

INDIAN

Silhouette I.

Bancs Providence

Astove I.

10°S

50

100

VICTORIA

Mahé I.
Anse Royale

4°45'S

0

50

100
52°E

150 Miles

0

0

55°15'E

55°30'E

10 Kilometers

5

55°45'E

5

10 Miles

IBRD 33477

MARCH 2005

Takamaka

50°E

Frigate I.
L'Îlot I.

Cascade

Conception I.
Thérèse I.

150 Kilometers

Recif I.

De Quincy Village

Anse Boileau
0

OCEAN
Mamelle I.

Belle Ombre

Farquhar
Atoll

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

48°E

6°S

I S L A N D
S

N E )
I
L
ALPHONSE
GROUP

Desroches I.

Marie Louise I.

Desnoeufs I.

O C E A N

R

ALDABRA
GROUP

Assomption I.

Poivre
Atoll

Boudeuse I.

SEYCHELLES

6°S

VICTORIA

