Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of the
World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 67876-KZ

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
FOR THE PERIOD FY12-FY17
March 30, 2012

Central Asia Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does
not imply a presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board
consideration and the updated document will be made publicly available in accordance
with the Bank‘s Policy on Access to Information.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of March 5, 2012)
US$1 = 147.93 KZT
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
(January 1 to December 31)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB

Advisory and Analytical Services
Asian Development Bank
AML/CFTAnti-Money Laundering and Combating
Financing of Terrorism
BEEPS Business Environment and Enterprise
Performance Survey
BTA
Bank Turan Alem
CAREC Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation
CPA
Competition Protection Agency
CPI
Consumer Price Index
CPIA
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
CPPR
Country Portfolio Performance Review
CPS
Country Partnership Strategy
CPS CR Country Partnership Strategy Completion
Report
CSO
Civil society organizations
DAF-2 Second Distressed Asset Fund
DeMPA Debt Management Performance Assessment
DPL
Development Policy Loan
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
EC
European Commission
ECA
Europe and Central Asia
ECD
Early childhood development
EE
Energy Efficiency
EITI
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EU
European Union
FDI
Foreign direct investment
FSA
Financial Supervision Agency
FY
Financial Year
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GGFR Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership
GIZ
German Development Agency
GOK
Government of Kazakhstan
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
IDA
International Development Agency
IDF
Institutional Development Fund
IDIP II Irrigation and Drainage Improvement
Project – Phase II
IDR
Issuer Default Rating
IEG
Independent Evaluation Group
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFI
International Financial Institution
IFRS
International Financial Reporting Standards
ILO
International Labor Organization
IMF
International Monetary Fund

IPSAS

International Public Sector Accounting
Standards
JERP
Joint Economic Research Program
JPMT
Joint Portfolio Monitoring Team
KEGOC Kazakhstan Electricity Grid Operating
Company
KZT
Kazakhstan Tenge
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
MICs
Middle Income Countries
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MoU
Memorandum of Understanding
MSME Micro and Small/medium Enterprises
NBK
National Bank of Kazakhstan
NF
National Fund of the Republic of
Kazakhstan
NPL
Non-performing loans
OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development
OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe
PAYG Pay-As-You-Go pension system
PCBs
Polychlorbiphenyls
PEFA
Public Expenditure and Financial
Responsibility Framework
PFM
Public Finance Management
PISA
Program for International Student
Assessment
POPs
Persistent Organic Pollutants
PPP
Public Private Partnership
RK
Republic of Kazakhstan
ROSC Report on Observance of Standards and
Codes
SAFE
Strengthening Accountability and the
Fiduciary Environment
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
SOE
State Owned Enterprises
SPV
special purpose vehicles
SYNAS II Syr Darya Control and Northern Aral Sea

TSA
UN
UNDP
US
USAID
WB
WBG
WHO
WTO

Project – Phase II
Targeted Social Assistance
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United States of America
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Health organization
World Trade Organization

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

IBRD
Philippe Le Houerou
Saroj Kumar Jha
Sebnem Akkaya

IFC
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Tomasz Telma
Oksana Nagayets

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates its sustained close collaboration with the Government
of Kazakhstan in shaping development of this World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy. The
document benefited from thoughtful discussions with government representatives and was enriched by
feedback from representatives of development partners, members of civil society organizations,
academics and representatives of the private sector—all of whom should be warmly thanked.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was prepared by a team lead by Sebnem Akkaya,
Country Manager for the World Bank in Kazakhstan and TTL of this CPS, with overall direction from the
former Country Director Motoo Konishi and ECA senior management. The core team included Sebnem
Akkaya, Saumya Mitra, Ilyas Sarsenov, Oksana Nagayets and Irina Galimova. The preparation of this
CPS involved a large number of contributors from the extended Kazakhstan country team. Although it is
impossible to name them all, they are all to be thanked and congratulated for their excellent collaboration
and teamwork. The following members made especially important contributions: Andrei Busuioc, Aliya
Mukay, Ahmed Shawky, Bakhtiyar Karimaov, Baktybek Zhumadil, Bakyt Arystanov, Dingyong Hou,
Ekaterine Vashakmadze, Elena Glinskaya, Emanuel Salinas, Fabrice Houdart, Frank Van Woerden,
Ignacio Jauregui, Imtiaz Hizkil, Ivor Beazley, Isak Froumin, Istvan Dobozi, Jacques Bure, John Otieno
Ogallo, Katelijn Van den Berg, Klaudijo Stroligo, Lars Jessen, Luis Sanchez, Malcolm Childress, Mark
Thomas, Michael Carroll, Munawer Khwaja, Mustafa Dinc, Natasha Kapil, Nedim Jaganjac, Nurbek
Kurmanaliev, Peter Goodman, Rakhymzhan Assangaziev, Salamat Kusainova, Sandra Broka, Sarosh
Sattar, Serdar Jepbarov, Shynar Jetissova, Steen Byskov, Sunil Kumar Khosla, Talimjan Urazov, Tatiana
Sedova, Tatyana Li, William Dillinger, Yearly Beksultan and Yerlan Akishev.

REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR THE PERIOD FY12-17
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... i
I.

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................................................... 1
A.

Political Context ........................................................................................................... 1

B.

Recent Economic Developments .................................................................................. 2

C.

Poverty, Social and Gender Indicators ......................................................................... 5

D.

Economic Prospects ...................................................................................................... 8

III.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND GOVERNMENT AGENDA......................... 9

A.

Development Challenges .............................................................................................. 9

B.

The Government‘s Medium Term Strategy................................................................ 13

IV.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY............................................. 15

A.

Lessons Learned from Previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback .............................. 15

B.

Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy .................................................... 16

V.

IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY ........................................................................... 26
A.

Managing Program Implementation ........................................................................... 26

B.

Measuring Performance .............................................................................................. 28

C.

Deepening Engagement with Civil Society and Development Partners .................... 28

VI.

RISKS............................................................................................................................. 29

VII.

ANNEXES ..................................................................................................................... 31

Annex 1. FY05-11 Country Partnership Completion Report ............................................... 31
Annex 2. Country Partnership Strategy, FY12-17; Results Framework
Ongoing and Confirmed Program ......................................................................................... 51
Annex 3. Anti-Crisis Response ............................................................................................. 56
Annex 4. Government‘s Road Map Program (2009-10) and Road Map for Business 2020 59
Annex 5. Country Partnership Strategy – CSO Consultations ............................................ 60
Annex A2: Country at a Glance ............................................................................................ 62
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .............. 65
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program .................................................................. 66
Annex B5: Key Social Indicators ......................................................................................... 67
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators ................................................................................... 68
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators .................................................................................... 69
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ................................................... 70
Annex B8(b): IFC Committed and Outstanding Investment Portfolio ................................. 71

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy builds on the successful experience of the prior World
Bank Group Strategy in Kazakhstan. Over the past decade, Kazakhstan built a record of strong
macroeconomic management and a rules-driven fiscal framework, strengthened public management and
the business climate, and shifted resources towards social services and critical infrastructure. The Bank
Group supported this process primarily by transferring cutting-edge knowledge. A flexible Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) approach allowed adjustments to the program in response to changing
government priorities and country circumstances, thereby, ensuring strong government ownership of the
program. Through Joint Economic Research program (JERP), the Bank assisted with answers to the
―what and why,‖ providing policy analysis, strategic planning expertise, and good practice options.
Questions about ―how‖ were addressed through selective investment and budget support loans in highimpact areas, and by brokering access to a global network of experts and building implementation
capacity. Both the Bank and IFC provided timely and effective mitigation support during the financial
crisis.
2.
The crisis shifted the emphasis in the government’s development strategy towards growth
from non-oil sources. Balanced growth would reduce vulnerability to volatility in commodity prices.
The strategy is based on diversification, innovation, investment in human capital, and international trade
integration for job creation. Increasing emphasis is being put on strengthening governance, the business
enabling environment, and private enterprise. An improvement in the quality of public services and
measures to address skill shortages of the workforce, in particular to generate employment in the local
economy through the promotion of small and medium enterprises, were key policy initiatives.
3.
Successful implementation of Kazakhstan’s development agenda requires addressing key
challenges. In the near to medium term economic prospects depend on a continuation of stabilityoriented macroeconomic policies. Continued adherence to the rules-driven framework for resource
earnings and strengthened monitoring of borrowing by state owned enterprises would assist macrostability. Improved access to finance is essential for non-oil sector growth. Although bank liquidity is
ample, non-performing loans (NPLs) remain high and constrain banks‘ ability to provide fresh credit to
the non-oil sector, calling for timely implementation of the new insolvency regime and the government‘s
2011 strategy to complete NPL work-out. Enhancing medium-to long term prospects require raising nonoil productivity in a competitive environment. Central to sustained improvements in productivity are the
strengthening of the business climate, quality of education and skills creation; greater room for private
sector expansion in an environment of neutral incentives; progress on governance; and building
infrastructure connectivity.
4.
The objective of this CPS is to design a high impact program to help the government
implement development priorities. The CPS concentrates on the key priorities of competitiveness and
jobs; strengthened governance in public administration and service delivery; and safeguarding the
environment. In contrast to earlier CPSs, the proposed CPS is programmatic by inter-linking knowledge
interventions through sequenced products in a multi-year framework to maximize impact. The CPS
targets key areas of lagging performance as revealed by country development strategies or the Bank‘s
assessment tools, including international comparative analysis.
5.
The main IBRD instrument will be knowledge activities through the JERP, complemented by
selective investment projects in strategic high-impact areas. The CPS will continue the well-tested
tradition of a flexible architecture that responds to the client‘s development agenda, retaining focus on
interventions where the Bank has a comparative advantage, drawing on its pool of knowledge from the
frontiers of development research and experience. Knowledge transfer and capacity enhancement will be
the dominant drivers in the choice of lending projects. The CPS mainstreams governance in knowledge

i

and lending activities as a cross-cutting theme together with specific interventions, in such areas as public
finance management, civil service reform, deregulation, custom and tax administration and social
assistance targeting. It also recognizes the role Kazakhstan can play as a provider of experience, expertise,
and assistance in the Central Asia region and in a broader regional context. The results focus of the CPS
will be enhanced under the programmatic JERP structure, and through measures to facilitate timely
implementation as well as joint monitoring and evaluation of the portfolio result indicators. Greater
emphasis will be placed on simplicity of project design, given capacity constraints, and ensuring project
readiness at entry to minimize delays in implementation.
6.
The CPS encompasses the Bank Group in a thoroughly integrated manner. IFC will promote
the development of private sector through investment and advisory operations in support of economic
diversification. IFC‘s strategy in Kazakhstan is fully consistent with its regional approach focusing on
access to infrastructure, strengthening the financial sector, and supporting diversification and
competitiveness. The Corporation will maintain its current focus on strengthening the financial sector in
the short term, with medium term efforts targeting infrastructure. It will also promote SME development
particularly in agribusiness, manufacturing, and services. The establishment of best practices in
international banking, corporate governance and the regulatory environment will be targeted through IFC
advisory work and investment projects with strong demonstration effect. IFC also aims at supporting the
energy efficiency agenda as a cross-cutting theme in its activities. MIGA will continue to support
financial and manufacturing sectors.
7.
Close collaboration with the civil society and development partners will continue. The Bank‘s
current program benefits from constructive relations with civil society organizations (CSOs), a valuable
partner in identification of development needs as well as in design and M&E of project implementation.
The Bank Group will continue its close cooperation with other active development partners—the ADB,
EBRD, EC, GIZ, the UN agencies and USAID.
8.
The proposed strategy faces implementation risks but also offers rich rewards. The CPS is
predicated on stability in the relationship with the Bank Group and government results-oriented reforms.
It aims to foster a faster pace in governance reforms and a re-thinking of the role of the state to permit
greater room for private sector-driven diversification. The government‘s emphasis on diversification
provides opportunities for collaboration and dialogue. Success will depend on the quality of the
knowledge products and the skill with which the dialogue is conducted, but also on the willingness of the
Kazakh partners to continue drawing from international experience. The proposed deepening of the work
on governance in all three proposed areas of engagement will forearm the Bank Group to deal with
emerging risks to the program and the portfolio. Moreover, greater attention to address implementation
constraints and a sharper results focus will help improve the impact of knowledge and lending activities.

ii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Two decades ago, emerging from the break-up of the Soviet Union, the Kazakh economy was
half of its size today. Isolated from the world economy it faced the immense challenge of economic
transformation. Over the past decade, the country has made impressive policy strides, absorbed large
resource-based earnings responsibly, progressed towards developing a rules-driven fiscal framework,
strengthened public management and the business climate, and allocated resources for improved social
services and critical infrastructure to sustain growth. GDP per capita rose, in terms of constant 2011
dollars, from US$5,982 in 2000 to US$11,245 in 2011 and poverty incidence fell from 46.7 percent to 6.5
percent over the same period.
2.
Kazakhstan is now poised to attain a high-income status over the CPS period.
The
development of balanced economy with reduced vulnerability will, however, require the role of the state
to be redefined to permit a vigorous private sector to develop, governance to be strengthened to allow
greater accountability to civil society, tough second generation structural reforms to be embedded, and
public investments to be made in high pay-off areas: human capital and infrastructure. This Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) describes how the World Bank Group will contribute to this endeavor.
3.
The previous CPS provided a flexible architecture permitting the Bank Group to respond
swiftly to emerging demands. The partnership, anchored on knowledge products, contained a large
program of co-financed advisory work, with selective lending aimed at introducing new ideas and
building capacity. A CPS Progress Report in 2008 recommended maintaining the approach. Over 201011, the authorities developed a set of post-crisis medium term development strategies. The proposed CPS
realigns the Bank‘s assistance to government priorities by providing knowledge products and selected
lending.
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political Context
4.
Kazakhstan is a presidential republic. President Nazarbayev has served since independence and
most recently was re-elected in 2011 with a large majority; his term runs to 2016. Parliamentary elections
in January 2012 resulted in a multi-party chamber, with some opposition representation. There are signs
of growing activism and debate in parliament and emergence of a civil society demanding accountability.
5.
The country development strategy focuses on modernization and a shift towards growth from
non-oil sources. It is based on diversification, innovation, investment in human capital, and international
trade integration for job creation. Increasing emphasis is also being put on strengthening governance
(modernizing the judiciary and civil service), the business enabling environment and private sector
enterprise. Following the Parliamentary elections of January 2012, the President outlined the key
government priorities within this overall strategy. An improvement in the quality of public services, and
in skill levels of the workforce are key goals. Greater efforts on raising standards in education, including
vocational education and pension reforms would add to skills and the quality of life. Finally renewed
emphasis would be placed on regional development and diversification in one-industry towns.
6.
Kazakhstan carries increasing global weight. It is the ninth largest country in the world with a
land area equal to that of Western Europe, but with one of the lowest population densities in the world.
Strategically, it links the huge and fast growing markets of China and South Asia with Russia and
Western Europe by road, rail and ports on an internal sea, the Caspian. Oil reserves (proven) are the ninth
largest in the world; hydrocarbon output is the equivalent of nearly a quarter of GDP and accounts for

1

over two-thirds of exports. Kazakhstan is increasingly conscious of its regional potential in energy and
trade transit and its strategic responsibilities. Large cross-regional energy and transport investments are
envisaged. Kazakhstan has formed a customs union with Belarus and Russia in 2010. Global integration
is pursued through membership of the WTO. Kazakhstan became an IDA donor in 2010.
B. Recent Economic Developments
7.
Kazakhstan grew rapidly during 2000-07. GDP growth averaged 10 percent and average real
incomes more than doubled as the economy reaped efficiency gains from increasing market orientation,
and hydrocarbon output expanded amidst rising price. The country attracted large foreign direct
investment, privatized small and medium enterprises and housing, retained a liberal trade regime, and
adopted modern public resource management institutions. Expenditure restraint held the non-oil fiscal
deficit at 3 percent of GDP with large saving transfers into a stabilization fund (Figure 1). These policies
helped sterilize excessive inflow of oil revenues and prevent excessive real appreciation of the tenge.
Figure 1: Oil Revenue and Budget Deficit (% of GDP)
Oil Revenue
(total)
Oil Revenue
(spent by
budget)

Tax reform
Crisis

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

15
12
9
6
3
0
-3
-6
-9
-12
-15

Non-oil Deficit
(budget and
off-budget)
Non-oil Deficit
(average
benchmark)

Source: Ministry of Finance; World Bank staff estimates.

8.
Economic diversification proved elusive in the face of booming oil prices. The tradables
sector—agriculture and manufacturing—was squeezed, while non-tradable construction expanded
markedly (Figure 2). Growth remained concentrated in natural resource sectors, construction, and real
estate. By 2007 construction and real estate made up more than a quarter of value added at factor cost in
the economy. At the same time, productivity levels in agriculture and in manufacturing industry stagnated
and their shares in economic activity declined. Economic concentration led to the maintenance of a high
state share in economic activity—the state investment holding company Samruk-Kazyna annually invests
7-10 percent of GDP (versus government fixed capital investment of 5-6 percent of GDP, net of transfers
to state-owned enterprises).
9.
Tightening liquidity in international financial markets in 2007 hit Kazakhstan’s financial
sector. Domestic banks had relied extensively on foreign funding to finance rapid credit growth in
particular to real estate projects. The rapid growth in the banking system in the years prior to the crisis
was built high exposure to international bond and syndicated loans markets. Access to international
wholesale markets ceased in mid-2007 triggering a liquidity crisis and speculative runs, which the Central
Bank successfully managed helped by large reserves. The prices of residential and commercial property
fell sharply, leading to large losses for the banks. The second shock arose from the global financial crisis
in 2008 and the associated sharp decline in commodity prices in 2009, which led to an economic
slowdown and hence a deterioration in the quality of banks‘ assets.

2

Figure 2: Evolution of Economic Structure (% of value added)
70

60

Oil & Gas and
Mining

50
40

30

Construction
and Real Estate

20

Agriculture

10

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

0

Manufacturing
and Utilities

Source: Statistical Agency of Kazakhstan; World Bank staff estimates.

10. Kazakhstan weathered the global financial crisis well through a dexterous response combining
fiscal relaxation with bank stabilization measures. The authorities supported output with stimulus
programs directed at agriculture, small business, infrastructure and construction; an exceptional
drawdown from the ample holdings in the oil fund permitted the relaxation to be financed by off-budget
operations. The three major problem banks were recapitalized and, through negotiation, their external
debt was reduced by more than US$10 billion. Total official fiscal and banking support amounted to
US$17 billion. Meanwhile, the central bank extended liquidity support, and deposit insurance was greatly
bolstered resulting in renewed confidence in banks (see Annex 3).
11. The decisive approach to macroeconomic and financial sector management contributed to a
quick recovery in output. Kazakhstan‘s economy grew by 7.3 percent in 2010 and by 7.5 percent in
2011, compared with 1.2 percent growth in 2009 (Table 1). This performance reflects a demand-driven
recovery in capacity utilization from the low levels of the crisis in addition to an expansion of the oil
industry in response to price increases. The economic expectation has become broad-based with a revival
in agriculture and construction.
12. Kazakhstan’s external position has improved as commodity prices have strengthened. The
terms of trade gains have led to a strengthened external position; the current account surplus is estimated
at 7.3 percent of GDP in 2011 and gross international monetary and fiscal reserves stood at US$73 billion
(40 percent of GDP) at end- 2011. The authorities were building up international reserves (predominantly
in the National Fund) to sterilize excessive inflow of oil revenues and, thus, to limit excessive upward
pressure on the tenge. The central bank, nevertheless, allowed a 5.7 percent real appreciation of the tenge
against the US dollar in 2011, while the real effective exchange rate (against a basket of 24 currencies)
was kept almost flat.
13. Inflationary pressures resulting from commodity price shocks and an accommodating fiscal
stance have been contained by the end of 2011. By December 2011, CPI inflation decelerated to 7.4
percent year-on-year (from 9 percent registered in the middle of the year), below the 8 percent target. In
January 2012, CPI inflation decelerated further to 5.9 percent—the lowest over the last two years. The
monetary regime of a crawling exchange rate peg to the dollar and inflation targets will exert counterinflation pressures. Temporary direct administration of prices introduced in 2011 to smooth the food price
hikes remain in place; if not removed, could lead to excessive food imports, crowding out domestic
agriculture supply.

3

Table 1. Kazakhstan – Key Economic Indicators and Projections

National Accounts and Prices
Real GDP
Oil sector contribution to growth
Non-oil sector growth contribution
CPI, eop

Actual
Estim.
Projected
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
(Percent change, year-on-year)
9.6
9.7 10.7
8.9
3.3
1.2
7.3
7.5
6.0
5.8
5.8
5.9
1.7
1.4
1.9
1.3
2.0
1.8
2.9
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
7.9
8.3
8.8
7.6
1.3 -0.6
4.4
5.9
4.8
4.5
4.5
4.7
6.9
7.4
8.4 18.8
9.5
6.2
7.8
7.4
6.0
6.0
6.4
6.4

External Accounts
Current account (percent of GDP)
Net trade in goods and services
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Net foreign direct investments
Net banks' borrowing

0.8
6.8
20.6
13.8
5.4
2.4

Gross official FX reserves (stock)
Gross external debt (stock)
Public sector
Private sector

33.4
75.8
7.3
68.5

(In billions of US dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
-1.8 -2.5 -7.9
4.7 -3.5
2.0
7.3
3.8
3.2
3.0
10.3 14.6 15.1 33.5 15.0 28.9 46.8 38.1 39.1 41.3
28.3 38.8 48.4 72.0 43.9 60.8 88.9 76.4 79.8 83.4
18.0 24.1 33.3 38.5 29.0 32.0 42.1 38.4 40.6 42.2
2.1
6.7
8.0 13.1 10.1
2.9
8.8 11.6 11.4 10.0
2.5 15.5 12.2 -2.7 -10.0 -12.5 -0.4
0.0
0.3
0.6
(In percent of GDP)
26.5 41.0 36.8 35.5 41.2 40.0 39.2 44.2 47.5 49.4
76.0 91.4 92.4 80.9 97.8 79.8 67.1 65.8 64.0 61.2
3.8
3.9
2.0
1.6
3.2
3.5
3.4
3.8
3.8
3.6
72.2 87.5 90.4 79.3 94.6 76.4 63.6 61.9 60.1 57.6

Fiscal Accounts
Non-oil revenue
Expenditures and net lending
Non-oil deficit
Oil revenue
Budget oil revenue
National Fund revenue
Consolidated budget balance

17.7
22.1
-4.3
6.5
4.0
2.5
2.2

18.3
22.3
-4.0
9.7
4.6
5.0
5.6

17.8
20.3
-2.5
10.5
3.3
7.1
7.9

6.9
3.9

3.7
3.9

2.5
3.7

43.2
14.4
59.4
37.7

57.1
15.1
61.5
53.4

External debt and guarantees (stock)
Domestic debt (stock)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of US$)
Official FX reserves (US$ billion)
Oil production (millions of tons)
World oil price (US$ per barrel)

(In percent of GDP)
20.5 16.8 14.1 14.1 13.5
24.2 27.2 23.5 22.1 21.8
-3.7 -10.5 -9.4 -8.0 -8.3
8.7 12.9
8.6 10.9 14.5
2.0
8.4
6.5
5.6
6.2
6.7
4.6
2.1
5.3
8.3
5.0
2.5 -0.8
2.9
6.3
1.9
4.0

1.6
5.1

2.4
7.6

2.8
7.7

2.9
7.6

2.8
43.2
86.9
43.6
8.6
1.0
50.2
58.0
3.3
54.7

13.5
21.7
-8.2
12.4
5.6
6.8
4.2

13.5
20.5
-7.0
12.2
5.5
6.7
5.2

13.5
20.4
-7.0
11.8
5.5
6.3
4.8

13.5
20.0
-6.6
11.2
5.1
6.1
4.6

3.3
8.7

3.4
9.1

3.2
9.6

2.9
10.2

81.0 104.8 133.4 115.3 148.1 186.2 205.4 226.8 251.7 279.5
33.2 38.6 47.4 47.5 59.3 73.0 90.8 107.6 124.2 140.3
65.0 67.1 70.7 76.4 79.5 80.1 82.1 86.7 91.9 97.1
64.3 71.1 97.0 61.8 79.0 104.0 98.2 97.1 96.0 94.7

Source: Official statistics and World Bank staff estimates.

14. The fiscal position has improved significantly since the crisis. The non-oil deficit improved from
over 10 percent of GDP1 in 2008-09 to about 8 percent of GDP in 2011. The state budget deficit
(determining the net government borrowing) improved notably2 and is estimated at 2.1 percent of GDP in
2011. Fiscal policy is intended to be supportive of the anti-inflationary stance with the goal of bringing
the non-oil deficit down to pre-crisis levels over the coming period. The government has already
increased excise rates and reintroduced customs duty on oil exports. This is complemented with cuts in
1

Increase in the deficit reflects partly the 2008 tax reform which aimed at lowering the tax burden on the non-resource sectors of
the economy while increasing the tax burden on the extractive industries: the statutory rate of corporate income tax was cut from
30 percent to 20 percent for all sectors; in parallel, additional tax levies (i.e. severance tax and customs duty on oil exports) were
introduced for the extractive industries, resulting in an estimated 30 percent increase in the tax burden on extractive industries
compared to the levels before the tax reform.
2
The ―state budget deficit‖ is defined as that part of the total non-oil deficit not covered by oil revenue and is therefore equal to
net government borrowing.

4

non-priority spending and the removal of crisis spending (such as reduction in subsidies to SOEs and a
15-percent downsizing of the public administration), with budget outlays down to pre-crisis levels at
around 22 percent of GDP (from 27 percent of GDP during 2008-09). (See Annex 4)
15. Conditions in the banking sector constrain credit flows to productive non-oil activities.3
Although bank liquidity is ample, non-performing loans (NPLs) remain at about 33 percent of all loans.
Unresolved NPLs constrain investments and operations of affected firms, the majority of which are in the
non-oil sector. The government is improving the insolvency regime and developed a strategy in 2011 to
reduce the burden of the NPL on the banking system.4 However, full implementation is pending.
Meanwhile, solvency problems constrain banks‘ ability to provide fresh credit 5 and pose risks to public
finances.6 The BTA bank (formerly the county‘s biggest bank) defaulted again in January, 2012.7 The
bank had performed poorly in part due to its inability to realize income on the two thirds of its loan
portfolio classified as non-performing and to still-high cost of funding. Tax code amendments to
facilitate debt write offs for loans to qualified borrowers are helpful and efforts are underway to facilitate
debt workouts. In addition, the authorities strengthened the regulatory framework through measures to
discourage foreign currency lending and to increase the minimum capital requirement.
C. Poverty, Social and Gender Indicators
16. The past decade has seen a significant reduction of the poverty headcount in Kazakhstan.
Sustained growth has translated into the improvement of living standards and poverty reduction. Poverty
officially declined from 46.7 percent in 2001 to an estimated 6.5 percent in 2011, although the poverty
line (currently set at $2.25) is low for an upper-middle income country. The poverty rate is twice as high
in rural as compared to urban areas. Female-headed households that represent over 30 percent of all
households in the country have poverty rates similar to that of the male-headed households. Over a
quarter of the population living in households receives some form of social assistance, reducing
disparities. The level and coverage of social assistance programs require continuing reforms to protect
the most vulnerable which is among government‘s priorities. The downward trend in the unemployment
rate remained unabated during the crisis, with the unemployment rate at 5.5 percent today being less than
half of its level in early 2000. Unemployment rates are higher among the youth, women, those with less
education and those living in the south of the country.
17. Emphasis on improving social services over the past decade gained a new impetus during the
crisis, but outcomes lag Kazakhstan’s level of income. The share of the budgetary expenses allocated
3

NPLs amount to 32.6 percent of total loans (11 percent of GDP) and the ratio of credits in areas more than 90 days is 23.8
percent (8 percent of GDP). The official NPLs appear well provisioned with an amount equal to 31.9 percent of the credit
portfolio set aside to cover the losses. NPLs are concentrated with 25 large borrowers accounting for about one third; the
construction sector accounts for one-third of the NPLs.
4
The Council for Financial Stability has approved a strategy to improve the quality of banks assets, aiming to remove NPLs with
an approximate face value of $6 billion (about 37 percent of the total) from banks‘ main balance sheets in order to facilitate a
resumption of lending, while limiting costs and mitigating moral hazard. If successful, the plan would be expanded, drawing the
participation of both domestic and foreign investors. The strategy proposes the creation of a national asset management company
(the Second Distressed Asset Fund or DAF-2) and private (bank specific) asset management companies that would operate as
special purpose vehicles (SPV) through which banks would separate the non-performing assets.
5
The financial sector is closely intertwined with the domestically oriented non-resource Kazakh economy, whereas the resource
sector is funded from abroad and traded internationally. Oil accounts for about 70 percent of exports, 70 percent of FDI, and 25
percent of GDP, but for less than 3 percent of bank lending.
6
Fiscal risks stem in particular from the intervened banks in which Samruk-Kazyna holds large stakes through both equity and
non-equity instruments. Insured deposits and bank deposits from state enterprises are important sources of finance for the banks,
which pose further fiscal risks. In addition, state guaranteed minimum returns on the third pillar pensions pose risks given the
poor performance of the pension funds during the crisis.
7
BTA Bank was nationalized in February 2009, and it underwent a court supervised restructuring that was completed in
September 2010 using a legal framework introduced in the summer of 2009. The legal framework and the restructuring were
supported by the World Bank‘s Development Policy Loan in 2010.

5

to social sectors reached all time highs at about 60 percent in 2010-11. Despite progress in the UNDP‘s
human development index (improved from 80th in 2005 to 68th in 2011), life expectancy, at 68.6 years, is
at the level of the EU-15 in 1950 and lower than other countries of similar income. This is driven by slow
progress in male life expectancy—female advantage in life expectancy in Kazakhstan is 10 years, while
the world average is four years and ECA countries is seven years. Maternal and child health continue to
face challenges: infant mortality and under-five mortality rates are 26 and 29 per 1,000 live births,
respectively. Significant efforts will be required to achieve the related MDGs by 2015. Kazakhstan has
achieved near universal primary education (99 percent) and adult literacy (99.6 percent), extended
schooling to a 12-year compulsory cycle, and introduced a Unified National Test for those entering
tertiary education. Today there are various choices available to students who pass this test and a voucher
system that helps the best students pursue their course of study. Yet challenges remain to make access
more equitable and improve quality. The government also recognizes the need to confront skills shortages
by modernizing technical and vocational training.
18. High expectations for returns under the funded pension system did not materialize during the
decade following the initial reform. The pension system was transformed from a pay-as-you-go
(PAYG) scheme to a contribution-based, fully-funded accounts scheme in 1998. Real returns under the
system were low given risk aversion of the funds. Current pensioners continue to rely almost exclusively
on state pensions while lump sum distributions from individual accounts remain small. In response to the
decreasing purchasing power of pensions, a basic pension was introduced in 2005 and pensions continue
to be augmented each year at a rate exceeding inflation. The government is now considering further
reform options with assistance from the Bank.
19. Gender equality policies are paying off. Kazakhstan ranks 41st in the world on gender equality8
and does particularly well on economic participation, education, and health (in the top 25 place for all
these indicators). In female entrepreneurship, Kazakhstan stands out in ECA for high rates of female
participation in ownership and in top management: around 25 percent of firms in Kazakhstan are
managed by women, the 8th highest percentage in the region.9 (See Box 1). Nevertheless, there are gender
gaps which remain to be addressed; particularly as part of social policy objectives (see para 36).

8

World Economic Forum, Global Gender Gap report 2010: http://www.weforum.org/reports/global-gender-gap-report-2010.
This report measures gender inequality in four areas: economic participation and opportunity (salaries, participation levels and
access to high-skilled employment); educational attainment (access to basic and higher education); health and survival (life
expectancy and sex ratio); and political empowerment (representation in decision-making structures).
9
Ibid.

6

Box 1: Gender in Kazakhstan
The 2012 World Development Report (WDR) on Gender Equality and Development focuses on three areas: i)
endowments (health, education, land and other assets); ii) access to economic opportunities (how endowments generate
income); and iii) agency (the ability to make choices and take actions related to oneself). Applying this framework to
Kazakhstan shows that:
Endowments: There is considerable female advantage in life expectancy in Kazakhstan--women outlive men by 10
years (the world average female advantage is 4 years). Encouraging fertility is an explicit policy of the government, and
after stagnating in the 1990s, it increased to 2.65 in the late 2000s. About 40 percent of women in reproductive age use
contraceptives. Maternal mortality has been declining, and is now about 37 per 100,000 life births. The average age at
marriage for women is 24, while for men it is 27. Tuberculosis (TB) rates are higher among men (122 versus 90) per
100,000 persons. Iodine deficiency is considerably higher among women, especially in urban areas. Among those
registered with HIV/AIDS, 67 percent are men. There is no male advantage in primary school completion rates, and no
male advantage in enrollment in secondary or tertiary education. While women represent 50 percent of all students in
the basic and secondary education, in tertiary they represent 58 percent. Among those who are currently studying, men
are slightly overrepresented in Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) institutions, while women are
overrepresented among Masters and Ph.D. students (making up about 60 percent for each). Among post-doctoral
students, 42 percent are women. In terms of the field of study, women are overrepresented in medicine, education, and
economics, while men are overrepresented in transport, communications and sports. There is gender parity in such
fields of study as industry, construction, agriculture, arts and law.
Access to economic opportunities: Women make up close to half of the labor force, and women‘s labor force
participation rate is around 78 percent. Unemployment rate is higher among women (7.5 percent) as compared to men
(5.6 percent). Unemployed women are less likely to find work through public education service, although they are more
likely to participate in public works. Men and women are equally represented among self-employed workers, with the
rate of self-employment being about 32-35 percent. The unadjusted gender wage gap in Kazakhstan is just under 35
percent. The gender wage gap is the highest in industry and such service sectors as financial and hotels, and the lowest
in transport and communications, education and health. Work-related accidents are considerably higher among men,
representing over 80 percent of all cases.
In terms of the outcomes in the area of female entrepreneurship Kazakhstan is doing very well and it stands out in the
entire Eastern Europe and Central Asia region in its high rates of female participation in ownership and in top
management. Around 25 percent of firms in Kazakhstan are managed by women, resulting in 8th highest percentage of
female top managers in the region. Female participation in ownership and in top management is more common in retail
firms and in smaller firms. Female ownership is beneficial for women workers overall: in firms run by women 62
percent of the workforce is female while in male-run firms only 35 percent of the workforce is female. Lack of
availability of child care facilities is identified as a major impediment for female labor force participation, both for high
and low skilled women. Only 16 percent of children aged 1-6 attend early childhood development (ECD) centers.
Among children 5-6 years of age, 60 percent are in ECD centers. For both of these groups of children, there are no
gender differences in ECD attendance.
Agency: Only 2 out of 47 Senators in Kazakhstan are women, and 26 out of 107 members of parliament are women.
Women represent 21 percent of locally elected officials (update). The Gender Equality Strategy of the Republic of
Kazakhstan 2006-2016, which came into effect in December 2005 targets women representation to increase to 30
percent. Women represent 58 percent of all civil servants in the country.
The Kazakh Family Code states the rights of women in marital matters and gives equal rights to women and men. The
Constitution and laws of Kazakhstan also give equal rights. In late 2009 the President of Kazakhstan signed a new
gender equality law that prohibits discrimination based on gender. The President also signed a new law on domestic
violence that outlines the responsibilities of local and national governments and NGOs in providing support to domestic
violence victims, and sets a maximum sentence for spousal assault. (In Kazakhstan, as elsewhere in the region,
domestic violence is often seen as a private family matter.) There were 25 crisis centers in the country providing
assistance to women; six centers also provided shelter. The government has also adopted a national plan to combat
trafficking, which the above mentioned law also prohibits.
Source: Kazakhstan annual gender report "Men and Women in Kazakhstan" (2011); and World Bank report ―Opportunities for
Men and Women: Emerging Europe and Central Asia" (2011).

7

D. Economic Prospects
20. Kazakhstan’s near to medium term economic prospects depend on a continuation of stabilityoriented macroeconomic policies. The present rule of a fixed nominal dollar transfer from resource
earnings to the budget will reduce the dangers of a resource-fed overheated economy.10 A complementary
rule limits the interest cost of the public debt to 4.5 percent of the oil fund balance—although under
present fiscal and debt conditions this ceiling is not a binding constraint on borrowing. 11 The fiscal rule
could be refined to link the fiscal deficit to variations in the oil price from its long-run equilibrium,
thereby strengthening the counter-cyclicality of policies. The current practice of keeping all transfers to
public spending from the National Fund on-budget should be maintained with strong commitment. The
pace of reduction in the non-oil deficit could be accelerated with the elimination of socially inefficient
spending, and subsidies and transfers as remaining crisis-mitigation programs are phased out. Finally, a
rules-driven framework for external borrowing by state owned enterprises and the Samruk-Kazyna as
well as close monitoring of such borrowing would assist macro-stability.12 Current efforts to strengthen
the oversight over the SOEs with a tightening of informational requirements to monitor debt and quasifiscal activities are, therefore, timely.
21. A well functioning financial sector and improved access to finance remains an important
element of the growth and diversification agenda. A new legal framework governing bankruptcy and
insolvency is being developed to address problems of highly indebted firms—an essential foundation for
resolution of NPLs. Efforts are needed to ensure proper loan valuation and provisioning, decisive actions
to reduce bad loans and to replenish bank capital where needed. An important challenge is further
development of the credit infrastructure—pledge and real estate registries, microfinance, factoring,
leasing and venture capital—and the deepening of local currency bond markets so that multiple sources of
financing for the private sector at competitive prices can be developed.
22. Medium-to long term prospects depend on raising non-oil productivity. Absent productivity
revival in the non-oil sector, Kazakhstan faces moderate economic growth in the medium term. Real
annual growth rates are forecast to slow to 6 percent for the CPS period (Table 1), with the oil-sector
growing in the range of 4-6 percent and the rest of the economy at 6-8 percent (below pre-crisis highs of
9-11 percent). Central to sustained improvements in productivity are the strengthening of the business
climate, greater room for private sector expansion in an environment of neutral incentives, and progress
on the governance agenda. The external current account is expected to remain comfortably in surplus
during the CPS period. The sovereign balance sheet continues to be recognized strong as reflected by an
increase in the sovereign rating by credit rating agencies in November, 2011.13
23. The fiscal consolidation program is a keystone to stability. Current spending is expected to
remain constant at 14.5-15 percent of GDP for the CPS period. A gradual fiscal adjustment is expected to
be achieved mainly through a declining share of total capital spending from about 7 percent of GDP in
2010 to 5.5 percent of GDP by 2015 and partly by elimination of on-budget crisis-spending programs.
Non-oil revenue is assumed to remain constant at 13.5 percent of GDP while oil-related government
revenue declines as a share of GDP from 14.5 percent in 2011 to about 11.0 percent by 2015, reflecting a
10

Introduced in 2010, this rule sets the annual transfer from the oil fund to the budget at US$8 billion in nominal terms (as a
share of GDP, the transfer will fall from 4.4 percent in 2011 to 3.0 percent in 2015).
11
The rule applies only to central government debt, not debt taken on by SOEs.
12
The build-up of external debt within state-owned enterprises as part of inward investment agreements has been large and
constitutes a potential fiscal risk while reducing fiscal transparency and increasing distortions in resource allocation.
13
On November 7, 2011 Standard & Poor's raised its long- and short-term foreign currency sovereign credit ratings for
Kazakhstan to 'BBB+/A-2' from 'BBB/A-3' with a stable outlook, and on November 21, 2011 Fitch Ratings upgraded
Kazakhstan's long-term foreign and local currency Issuer Default Ratings (IDR) to 'BBB' from 'BBB-' and 'BBB+' from 'BBB',
respectively, and put the outlooks on the ratings as ‗positive‘.

8

projected decline in oil prices. Achieving greater budget efficiency requires streamlining transfers and
subsidy payments to state enterprises, abolition of interest rate subsidy schemes, and range of tax
expenditures that support industrial policy together with selected revenue measures, especially to promote
energy efficiency, and to move towards cost recovery in municipal services. Fiscal adjustment will benefit
from thorough analysis of consolidated on- and off-budget capital spending to ensure that investments
with high development impact are adequately funded and can be monitored on-budget.
24. Kazakhstan’s public and external debt burdens are sustainable even under stress scenarios.
Under base case assumptions total government debt remains around 12-13 percent of GDP over the
medium term. Net worth14 increases, however, as transfers to the reserves held in the oil fund rise to
exceed 30 percent of GDP by 2016. Moreover, external public debt will constitute less than 3.5 per cent
of GDP. A severe slowdown in the core Eurozone economies, particularly if accompanied by dampened
Russian growth and falling oil prices,15 would reduce Kazakh growth to the range of 4-5 percent.
However, government debt rises only fractionally to 17 percent of GDP by 2016 under this scenario.
25. Trade integration policies will affect prospects. The establishment of a customs union with
Belarus and Russia in 2010 entailed a doubling of the weighted average tariff and an increase in tariff
dispersal. The rise in protection will have efficiency costs in a resource-exporting country, where
diversification is reliant on international integration.16 However, the impact of greater protection will be
offset by improvements in trade facilitation and reductions in non-tariff barriers.17 Doing Business 2011
ranks Kazakhstan near the bottom of the list of countries in the ease of cross-border trading because of
severe customs service inefficiencies. The development of infrastructure to position the country as a
regional transit hub, the development of Caspian Sea ports and railroads, and the development of aviation,
will further assist productivity growth outside oil. Accession to the World Trade Organization would
deliver significant additional benefits.18
III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND GOVERNMENT AGENDA
26. The overarching national strategy is based on improved competitiveness, productivity and
economic diversification. Its success will depend on measures to strengthen governance (especially in
the judicial sector and civil service), improve human capital through education and pension system
reforms, raise the quality of public services—housing, labor force training—and stimulate growth in the
regions through diversification and promotion of small and medium enterprises.
A. Development Challenges
27. Sharpening competitiveness and fostering job creation. Critical to this challenge is promoting
output diversification. Significant legislative changes—easing business entry and exist conditions,
payment of taxes and protection of investors‘ rights through strengthened corporate disclosure
requirements—improved the business climate, as did improvements in insolvency procedures,
concessions and competition legal frameworks as well as the licensing and inspection requirements.
Currently, the emphasis is on improving areas that create formidable obstacles further—e.g. construction
14

Net worth = reserves in the National Fund – government debt and guarantees
Assumed to decline to U$50 per barrel under a stress scenario.
16
A recent study ―Kazakhstan: Assessment of Cost and Benefits of the Customs Union‖ (JERP Policy Note, June 2011) estimates
that the static effect of the customs union could lead to a loss in real income of 0.3 percent of consumption.
17
Ibid.
18
Expected conclusion of negotiations with WTO Working Party members by the end of 2012 is work-in-progress. According to
Kazakhstani authorities, most of the bilateral negotiations have been completed and bilateral market access agreements signed
with the Working Party members (including USA in September 2011). The ongoing negotiations with EU focus on application of
recently introduced customs duty on oil exports.
15

9

permits, access to financing, cross-border procedures, and licensing19 and permits—and strengthening
enforcement. These reforms will particularly benefit women as evidence shows that women-entrepreneurs
are at additional disadvantage when dealing with inspectors, or when trying to secure access to credit, and
obtain licenses and permits. Wide-ranging government support programs for local enterprises (import
substitution, local content requirements, and government support schemes) would benefit from
rationalization and consolidation, especially as they create distortions and opportunities for rent-seeking
behavior, repress productivity performance,20 and impose a heavy burden of coordination on a range of
ministries. The dominance over the economy by large state companies has squeezed the SME sector
(which generates only 30 percent of GDP). Kazakhstan is under-exporting related to its potential: only 5
percent of Kazakh firms export (versus 29 percent in ECA), and this ratio has declined over 2005-09.
28. Strengthening governance. Kazakhstan‘s rating in international lists of corruption is poor.21
Dominant state power with weak civil society bodies leads to limited scrutiny over the executive.
External accountability institutions such as the Accounts Committee (external audit), ombudsmen, and
parliamentary oversight bodies need further strengthening. The judiciary is perceived as weak,
particularly in areas of judicial integrity, independence, and dispute settling. Thus, addressing these
weaknesses along with improvements in global integrity remains vital. Governance strengthening has
been based on steady improvements in public financial management (PFM), a well developed Treasury
system, high budget credibility with estimates being adhered to, and a budget that is increasingly linked to
policy priorities. Further reforms on external and internal audits and on performance and results
monitoring are being addressed, but the approach to PFM reforms would benefit from a coherent
framework. The country scores well on e-governance. Measures to contain petty corruption have been
effective such as through the reductions in number of licenses required or inspections conducted, and
improvements in tax administration, but there remains an unfinished agenda in these areas. Moreover,
civil service reform to increase transparency in public sector operations, and comprehensive judicial
sector reforms will strengthen governance. Building on impressive progress made to date with
implementing Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) 22 by becoming EITI compliant in 2013
will be an important step in consolidating efforts to increase transparency in the oil, gas and mining
sectors.
29. Boosting employment and value added in agriculture. Kazakhstan enjoys the advantage of a
flexible labor market in the non-oil sector. Ownership of land is private, and urban land markets are
active, but land use planning and approval is cumbersome and non-transparent. Implementation of the
land code is slow in rural areas and agricultural land markets function poorly. The state dominates the
provision of services and finance for agriculture. Important reforms such as the strengthening of farmer
organizations, agricultural SME development, rural credit and agricultural insurance, veterinary and
advisory service, and improved irrigation infrastructure are needed to unlock the rich potential of
agriculture.

19

The ongoing efforts cover streamlining of the licensing and permits framework—over 30 percent of the licenses and permits
(originally estimated around 1200) were eliminated to date and a further 30 percent is expected to be eliminated in 2012.
20
Growth over the past decade has been highly capital-driven; a steady decline in total factor productivity has subtracted 1.5
percentage points per annum from growth with declines being most marked in mining, construction and processing industries.
Labor productivity is two-thirds of that in Russia and one-fifth that of the US.
21
The Transparency International latest (2011) Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) placed Kazakhstan at 120th rank (out of 183
countries) with a CPI score of 2.7; democracy index (Economic Intelligence Unit) 137 out of 167 and Global Integrity Index 76
out of 100.
22
Currently, 136 companies are included in EITI reporting, of which 81 are oil and gas companies and 55 are mining companies.
This number by far exceeds EITI reporting in any other EITI implementing country across the globe (there are currently 35). The
EITI MoU has been signed by the largest players.

10

30. Bolstering human capital. Although large investments in education have led to improvements,
secondary school results indicate a need to improve quality: Program for International Student
Assessment (PISA) 2009 results show that over half of the students scored below the basic competency
levels in each of the subjects, mathematics, reading, and sciences. Through a transition to a 12-year model
with per caput financing, improved teacher incentives and decentralization, standards would be raised.
Recent membership of the Bologna Process, improved governance in management, and independent
national accreditation in line with international norms will help improve tertiary education. The
mismatch in skills in the labor force necessitates reforms in the Technical and Vocational Education and
Training system.
31. Building road connectivity, lowering costs. Large capital investments to upgrade the major eastwest and north-south road and rail corridors linking China, Central Asia and Russia with Western Europe
have been the highest priority in transport, recognizing that diversified growth requires reduction in
economic distances and greatly improved connectivity between cities. A strengthened institutional
structure in the management of growing road network, complemented with a shift in expenditures towards
road operation and maintenance would raise efficiency in spending and provide the road users with a
better level of service. This would also help reduce the high costs of road transport. A focus on improved
facilitation, smooth functioning of border crossing points to reduce costs of business and improved
institutional framework for better asset management is necessary if the country is to realize its potential as
a regional logistics hub. Border crossing points are characterized by high corruption, multiple checks,
fragmented controls, low-quality services, and obsolete equipment, making them amongst the least
efficient in the world.
32. Extending power sector reforms. Kazakhstan has advanced greatly in power sector reforms: the
vertically integrated monopolistic sector was unbundled, most of the generation plants and regional
distribution companies were privatized, and a competitive wholesale market developed, with a modern
grid code. With efficient tariffs, the transmission sector is technologically advanced. Although
regulation has improved, heavy-handed government intervention is still present. Retail tariff-setting is
politicized and retail tariffs do not cover justifiable expenses, including the cost of modernization. As a
result, much of the distribution sector is mired in technological obsolescence—the chief cause of
inadequate reliability of supply, especially in winter, against the background of a sharp upswing in
electricity demand. Much needed foreign investment in generation has been slow given weaknesses in
regulation, the framework for public-private partnerships (PPPs), and poor tariff-setting policies.
33. Developing a comprehensive reform strategy for housing and communal services. Despite
reforms towards a greater role for the private sector, tariff differentiation, greater use of commercial
principles in company operations, the water sector suffers from large backlogs in maintenance and
investments, poor metering and inefficient management. Two major sets of reforms are necessary: first,
institutional development of municipal finance; and second a conducive environment for public-private
partnerships, clear policies on fiscal and financial support for PPPs, and improved concessions and related
laws. Similarly, deteriorating conditions in the housing sector (mostly addressed through grant financing
today) need a comprehensive approach, including development of effective system of financing and
resource-saving mechanisms.
34. Restructuring health care system. Despite recent improvements in resource use, maternal and
under-five mortality rates, burden of infectious diseases, access to health services and pharmaceuticals,
and improved financial protection, health indicators are significantly worse than in comparable countries,
and greater efforts such as a doubling of the pace of improvement in maternal and child mortality rates
will be needed to attain MDGs by 2015. The adult mortality rate, among the worst in the ECA region or
in middle-income countries, is explained by high incidence of non-communicable diseases—
cardiovascular, cancer, and other tobacco—and alcohol-related diseases and injuries. A major

11

management reform in health systems is underway to address outdated norms and practices, and
oversized network of publicly-owned facilities, while establishing regulatory framework and incentive
mechanisms for achieving greater efficiency and quality.
35. Consolidating social protection reforms. The social protection system has been reformed with the
introduction of the means-tested programs, Targeted Social Assistance (TSA) and housing assistance in
2002, as well as allowances for dependent children under 18 in 2006. Benefits and subsidies (formerly
known as ―privileges‖), have been monetized. Yet, the system remains over-reliant on categorical
transfers, hampering addressing vulnerability and social needs. The existing means tested targeted
programs need to increase coverage, reduce leakages, and incorporate incentives to help beneficiaries to
graduate from social assistance. To this end, the introduction of conditionality in current means tested
programs to require work from able recipients (activation) is envisaged; this would help low-skilled
workers, the unemployed, youth, and social assistance beneficiaries access jobs and graduate from
reliance on safety nets.
36. Advancing gender equality and development. The gender agenda—pursued integrally through
economic and social policies—has been mainstreamed into education, health, social protection, and labor
market policies (Box 1). Key issues are the political empowerment of women; making the business
climate friendlier to women, and addressing unmet demand for child care facilities. The coverage of preschool education is low and full coverage by 2020 is an official objective. In addition gender gaps in three
areas require attention: low male life expectancy, lagging male tertiary enrollment, and the gender wage
gap. The male-female gap in life expectancy at 10 years exceeds the world average of six years. The
gender gap in tertiary education is large (32 percent vs. 45 percent) raising concerns about sustaining
productivity gains into the future. Finally, the gender wage gap in Kazakhstan of 35 percent is above the
regional average of 29 percent and could reflect factors such as occupation segregation, hours worked and
years of experience.
37. Safeguarding the environment. The government has completed the clean-up of massive mercury
pollution along its Nura River, thereby removing a serious threat to health. Substantial progress in
modernization of regulatory and institutional framework for environmental management has been
achieved. Extreme inefficiency in energy use, high carbon dioxide intensity, and the legacy of pollution
and health burden of industries remain to be addressed. Present policy instruments provide insufficient
incentives for industries to apply the best available cost-minimizing modern technologies. Continued
reduction in the flaring of gas associated with hydrocarbon operations remains of high environmental
importance.
38. Embracing a regional role. Kazakhstan has taken impressive steps towards regional integration
through membership of the Eurasian Economic Community and by becoming a contributor to a regional
development instrument, the Anti-Crisis Fund. It pursues dialogue on regional cooperation through
bodies such as CAREC and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. It is making sound progress towards
membership of the World Trade Organization and chaired the OSCE in 2010. It became a donor to IDA
in 2010. Apart from investments through regional institutions, Kazakhstan provides bilateral investment
assistance through the Samruk-Kazyna in Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. Strengthening
institutional structures and the analytical and technical expertise to play an enhanced regional leadership
role will be important. This also applies to capacity in formulating policies and investments in energy and
transport that have a strong regional dimension.

12

B. The Government’s Medium Term Strategy
39. The government’s Strategic Plan for Development 2020 outlines a set of priorities intended to
achieve a competitive, diversified economy with macro-stability. These priorities, reinforced by the
President after the January 2012 parliamentary elections, focus on five themes:







Consolidating the progress towards economic recovery from the global crisis through business
environment reforms, and improving legal and financial systems;
Diversifying the economy through industrialization, with emphasis on enterprise modernization,
agro-industrial complex and infrastructure by a combination of state-led investments and FDI;
Sustaining growth through building the human resource base by increasing the quality of human
resources;
Ensuring that people have the basic social, housing and utility services, with emphasis on creating
employment opportunities for youth, and on modernization of municipal housing as well as water
supply network;
Advancing public sector reforms to increase efficiency, transparency and accountability by
streamlining government agencies, establishing the basis for performance-based public
management system, accelerating civil service reforms, and increasing the quality of government
services.

40. Macro-financial framework. The government places high priority on macro-stability, underpinned
by a strong banking sector that provides adequate credit to the non-oil sector, and strengthened public
resource management as pre-requisites for diversification. The absorption of resource earnings as
reflected in the fiscal stance (the non-oil deficit) is intended to be consistent with sharpened
competitiveness. The government is undertaking reform of the corporate insolvency system, plans to
privatize the intervened banks, and gradually develop capital markets.
41. Competitiveness and employment. The Strategic Plan is complemented by two other major policy
initiatives: the program on accelerated industrialization and a program to raise productivity that runs to
2020.23 These initiatives combine crisis-mitigation programs and enterprise modernization and innovation
promotion schemes. In addition, measures are planned to improve the investment climate, especially for
agriculture and small and medium size enterprises. These include relaxation of restrictions on private
investors and businesses, and incentive schemes for non-resource sectors through expansion of industrial
zones. Public spending on roads and rail, as well as rural infrastructure, including drainage and irrigation,
is planned to promote growth in manufacturing and agriculture. Home-grown innovation will be
promoted through increases in R&D spending, investments in knowledge and excellence in tertiary
education.
42. Infrastructure. The large investment program in transport and energy will be supplemented by
policies developed to encourage private sector participation through PPPs and other ways of private
financing of municipal infrastructure. Road investments will continue to focus on the major corridors, but
greater attention is expected to be paid to operation and maintenance needs and to the level of service
expected by road users. The government has adopted an ambitious program for expanding electricity
generation largely with private sector involvement—to be successful, reforms in the business
23

The industrialization and innovation program declares four priorities for the efforts of the state: (i) traditional: natural gas and
oil, mining and metallurgy, atomic and chemical energy; (ii) machine building, pharmaceuticals and construction industry; (iii)
non-raw material exports: agribusiness, light industry, tourism; and (iv) economies of the future: information and communication,
biotechnology, alternative power engineering and space activity.

13

environment, including tariff setting policies, will be required. Moreover, a further massive extension of
the high voltage transmission system to integrate the currently poorly connected regions into the national
network is envisaged. The government is demonstrating a strong interest in participating in regional
electricity projects in Central Asia and beyond.
43. Governance and public services. In the post-election January 2012 address to the parliament, the
president called for the development of a comprehensive anti-corruption program. The Strategy places
importance on bolstering the rule of law with measures for enhancing the transparency and independence
of courts and raising the legal culture of the population. The restructuring of the judiciary and the
introduction of modern international practices to raise standards in judicial services receive a high
priority. Other governance reforms centre on the business climate and on improvements in the regulatory
framework. The government intends to build on steady progress made with public financial management
reforms and in customs and tax administrations. Public expenditure efficiency reviews are being
conducted to inform sector strategies and budget management reforms. These centre on the improving
result orientation of budget and definition of inter-government fiscal relations through clarity in revenue
and expenditure responsibilities in practice, reforms in the authority of municipalities and cities to borrow
for investment and to contract with the private sector, as well as strengthening the control environment,
encompassing internal audits. Civil service reforms are aimed at raising professional standards,
improving pay and grading system, and increasing transparency in public sector operations.
44. Social policies. Two key priorities are social policies (education, health, employment for youth,
social protection); and equitable access to housing and utility services. Education reforms aim at rolling
out universal pre-school learning, raising secondary school results to internationally comparable levels by
2020, while raising standards in tertiary education, and a greatly expanded vocational and training system.
Health reforms focus on improvements in management and rationalization, strengthening preventive
services and improving diagnostics, upgrading sanitary and epidemiological services and enhancing the
quality and accessibility for pharmaceuticals. In social protection, emphasis is being placed on measures
to link beneficiaries to jobs and auxiliary services (education, child care) to help graduation from social
protection. The pension reform agenda includes measures to achieve a stable income replacement ratio
and to widen the coverage among the self-employed and informal workers. The government is planning a
major investment effort over the next decade in improving the housing stock and communal services,
particularly water. Recent budget allocations for these investments total US$11 billion and the
effectiveness of projects will depend on improvements in project design and implementation capacity.
The role of the private sector has not yet been clearly defined.
45. Environment. Energy efficiency concerns are higher now on the government agenda. The
government is legislating to reduce the environmental impact of growth. Increasing responsibility of the
users of natural resources for reducing the environmental discharges and developing the integrated
processing of waste are also among the priorities. The Strategy addresses global warming through the
promotion of low-carbon techniques and greater energy saving. These objectives will require measures to
attract private investment as well as a reform of permit regulations and their enforcement such that the
appropriate incentives to industry are put in place. Two significant measures taken to reduce gas flaring—
a ban on petroleum gas burning during the oil production operations and a requirement that oil producers
develop and implement associated gas recovery programs—provide a basis for further progress in this
area.

14

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
A. Lessons Learned from Previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback
Lessons Learned During 2004-2011 CPS
46. A key finding of the CPS Completion Report is that the WBG increased its relevance in a
middle income country based on global knowledge and experience. The strategy was designed to
allow the Government and the Bank to adjust the program to changing government priorities and country
circumstances and, thereby, to ensure strong government ownership while maximizing the Bank‘s
contribution to Kazakhstan‘s development. It was built on the premise of cutting-edge knowledge
transfer, bringing benefits that go well beyond funding. By delivering successful results under a growing
program, this approach has demonstrated that the Bank can be vital to addressing development challenges
of countries that enjoy commodity export windfalls and have low borrowing requirements.
47. The Bank Group has adroitly managed the program, ensuring that it remains demand-driven,
maintains strategic focus and generates impact. Through JERP, the Bank provided answers to the
―what and why.‖ It provided policy analysis, strategic planning expertise, and good practice options.
Questions about ―how and who‖ were addressed through selective, investment and budget support loans
in strategic high-impact areas, and by brokering access to a global network of experts, and building
implementation capacity. Bank support through investment operations has been successful in achieving
intended outcomes, with all closing projects over the past seven years being rated ―satisfactory‖ by the
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). The Bank‘s crisis-mitigation support through DPL was timely and
largely successful, with its policy framework under implementation. IFC‘s program was also responsive
to the changing macroeconomic environment during the financial crisis, providing rapid counter-cyclical
support to key private sector banks, and contributing to the stabilization of the banking sector and
resumption of trade finance and funding for SMEs. IFC‘s strategically focused private sector investments
were accompanied by advisory services, focusing on improving corporate governance standards and
strengthening the country‘s leasing sector.
48. An important challenge in implementation arises from country processes which are evolving
at a slower pace than dictated by the country’s development needs. Steps to simplify internal
processes to speed up project approval and implementation have been gradual. Project preparation is
rigidly bound to the annual budget preparation cycle, while signing and effectiveness are delayed by
repetitive clearance procedures, thereby prolonging the project cycle to no purpose, while discouraging
project restructurings. The progress to date in addressing these bottlenecks resulted in halving the time
needed to take a project from concept approval to effectiveness (down to 24 months from 40 months),
which gives some confidence for the attainability of further improvements. This CPS should help address
the remaining agenda (see pages 27-28 for further discussion).
49. The CPS is informed by the CPS Completion Report, the Country Portfolio Performance
Review, the assessments of IEG, as well as high-level dialogue with the government and the
experiences of other development partners in the country. The following key lessons have influenced
the design of the CPS:


On approach: The flexibility built-in into the previous CPS was critical to the emergence of a
strong and relevant AAA agenda and a portfolio that grew in number and size of projects. It
permitted a growing demand-led work agenda. The CPS program worked best when focused on
core policies, linked with the government‘s timetable, supported by systemic analytical work,
and structured within the long-term reform needs of the economy. The availability of analytical

15

work together with a well-designed pipeline permitted quick responses, especially during the
global financial crisis.


On process: Periodic discussions of a brainstorming nature were organized between the highest
levels of government (usually the prime minister) and Bank teams to set the strategic agenda and
discuss in-depth key development issues, both highly topical (such as the impact of changing
international economic prospects on the economy or financial sector responses to the effects of
the crisis) and long-term. These discussions have proven to be vital to relevance, quality and
timeliness of the Bank assistance as well as its impact.



On implementation: Maintaining the quality of the Bank portfolio requires, apart from
simplification of internal process, constant learning from doing. Most IBRD investment
operations, especially the new institution-building projects have been green-field, i.e. they
require adoption of new approaches and procedures, and most implementing agencies are first
time borrowers with all of the risks that entails in terms of the lack of familiarity with Bank
procedures. Moreover, the implementation of strategies that require wide coordination runs the
risk of failure or delays. Greater attention to keeping design simple, targeted and mindful of
capacity constraints is important. Systematic approach to validate project readiness is also
important to ensure adequate design and bidding features and avoid delays in implementation.

Findings from Multi-stakeholder Consultations
50. The WBG held consultations about the new CPS for Kazakhstan with stakeholders across
regions and received encouraging feedback for the preparation.24 This has influenced CPS and sown
seeds for the future. Overall, stakeholders believed that improvements in governance and a stronger voice
for civic society together with mechanisms for greater government accountability were essential to
sustained development. They emphasized education quality, accessibility and skills (as key factors in
increasing competitiveness and jobs); environmental protection and preservation; agricultural
modernization; governance with emphasis on judicial reform and corporate governance (both private and
public, latter with emphasis on transparency in SOE operations); quality of public services; financial
literacy; attention to opportunities for young and disabled as key areas of development focus for the
WBG‘s partnership with Kazakhstan. Concerning approach, they suggested that the WBG program put
greater emphasis on capacity building; facilitating faster progress in key development priorities;
development of strong M&E system to track impact of wide-ranging government initiatives with greater
role for CSOs in this respect; and greater public access to JERP AAA. Finally stakeholders called for the
WBG programs to leverage greater emphasis on the region specific development needs, and for local
initiatives at the community level to be better supported in order to strengthen civil society. These choices
are broadly consistent with this CPS, under which to further strengthen its partnership with Kazakhstan
and ensure that work carried out becomes increasingly responsive to client demand, the WBG will
continue to work with, and listen closely to broader range of stakeholders in Kazakhstan.
B. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy
Principles of the New CPS
51. The principal objective of this CPS is to help the government advance implementation of the
core development priorities through a high impact program. The CPS concentrates on the central
government priorities of competitiveness, improved governance notably through higher standards and
24

Stakeholder consultations involved CSOs from associations with special focus (environment, agriculture, health, transparency,
gender, youth, vulnerability) and from business community and think thanks from six diverse regions of Kazakhstan (represented
by Aktobe, Almaty, Astana, Kostanai, Shymkent, Ust-Kamenogorsk).

16

accountability in public service delivery, and safeguarding the environment. It has a programmatic
character—in contrast to the past—by inter-linking knowledge interventions through sequenced products
in a multi-year framework to maximize impact in consultation with the government. The CPS targets
areas of lagging performance, as revealed by the Bank‘s assessment tools, country-grown strategies or the
international comparative analysis. Accordingly, it indentifies the following principles of engagement to
the Kazakhstan development strategy:












The CPS will continue on the well-tested tradition of a flexible architecture that responds to the
client‘s medium term development agenda as well as the Bank‘s need to bring in and build up
international experience and develop wider lessons of a public goods character. A large portion
of the knowledge agenda will be client driven, subject to Bank policies and safeguards, with
selected Bank-chosen work of high development interest, such as possibly on aspects of
governance, poverty and growth strategy assessment. Knowledge transfer and capacity
enhancement will be the dominant drivers in the choice of lending projects.
The bulk of the assistance will be given through knowledge activities funded through Joint
Economic Research Program (JERP).25 A shift will occur towards multi-year programmatic work
to address medium-term development processes and sequenced approaches, which has been
initiated this fiscal year. This approach will strengthen strategic collaboration through improved
coordination and increase impact. Finally, JERP effectiveness would be enhanced by making key
publications available to the civil society at large in consultation with the government and
engaging in broader stakeholder consultations in key issues.
Selectivity by focusing on interventions where the Bank has a comparative advantage drawing on
its pool of knowledge from frontier development experiences. The CPS is informed both by the
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and other international comparative analysis
(e.g. Global Competitiveness Index, BEEPs, Governance Indicators), which pinpoint the
development lacunae that lie in governance and the quality of public management, apart from
technical improvements towards best practice that can be made across a range of public policies.
Continued emphasis will be given to sustainability and impact of Bank‘s operations by retaining
an appropriately diverse portfolio. Over the coming period needs in infrastructure sector are great
(in particular in transport and energy efficiency). The same is the case with institution building
and TA programs which are key to sustain benefits of investments over the long term. To ensure
successful results from the infrastructure projects, emphasis will be put on governance and
institutional arrangements that strengthen capacity and accountability for publicly-provided
services and promote conducive environment for results.
The CPS will adopt a coherent approach to engaging on governance that mainstreams
governance in knowledge and lending activities as a cross-cutting theme as noted above, while
focusing on specific interventions (such as public finance management and civil service reform,
improved level and targeting of social assistance to the poor and vulnerable). Greater attention to
results as reflected in this CPS will also help bring out the governance dimension. This is in line
with government‘s own strategy.
A stronger focus on monitoring, evaluation and results will include the identification jointly with
the government of a set of early result indicators to be used to screen projects during periodic
programming discussions. The result focus of the JERP will also be enhanced under the abovenoted new programmatic structure introduced in FY12 with activities developed as multi-year and
interconnected engagements.

25

JERP FY12 budget increased to over $4.38 million; the government contribution at 85 percent is at record high. The FY12 also
marks transformation of the JERP program to a programmatic structure with activities developed as multi-year and
interconnected engagements. This would help increase strategic focus of the program while consolidating the JERP (e.g. tasks are
reduced from 31 in FY11 to 21 in FY12).

17



The CPS will accord importance to the role Kazakhstan can play as a provider of experience,
expertise, and assistance in the Central Asia region and in a broader regional context. The Bank
will continue to promote regional cooperation in energy, water, transport, trade and
communicable diseases.

Development Objectives and Activities
52. The strategic themes of the CPS reflect the continuity in the Development Strategy 2020. The
CPS is aligned with the Strategy of the government and, hence, retains the overarching focus of the
previous CPS on competitiveness. It will strengthen emphasis on progress in interconnected elements for
higher impact. To this end, the following broad areas of engagement are proposed under the new CPS.




Improving competiveness and fostering job creation;
Strengthening governance and public services;
Ensuring development is environmentally sustainable.

53. The main instrument to support the government’s program will be the knowledge activities
through the JERP, complemented by selective investment projects in strategic high-impact areas.
Under the new CPS, the JERP budget is expected to amount to approximately US$4.4 million per fiscal
year with the government contributing around 85 percent of the funding. In each of the strategic CPS
theme, key JERP AAAs are underway mostly in a programmatic structure covering the next eighteen
months, and new activities are envisaged to be prepared over the course of the CPS. An indicative lending
program envelope for the first four years would be expected to total about US$2 billion (plus the
mobilization of counterpart funds from the government) allocated to areas where the government
considers the Bank‘s involvement in design and implementation to be of high value. In accordance with
the Government‘s preferences, all IBRD lending is foreseen in the form of investment projects. The CPS
holds out the possibility of extending program-for-results financing in view of capacity needs and strong
results orientation of investment programs, or deploying development policy operations to counter
external shocks, as was done in 2009, subject to IBRD‘s capital constraints and strong ownership by the
government or to support a far-reaching reform (e.g., in banking sector and/or diversification policy) in
the interests of bolstering macro-stability or adding to the overall reform thrust. The IBRD lending
program for the first year of the CPS is reasonably defined, selective and puts the emphasis on scaling-up
through repeater projects as shown in Table 2. This is expected to be followed by institutional reform
projects, an area of emphasis by the government in cooperation with the Bank. Both the indicative and
the ongoing program are well aligned with and support the strategic themes of the CPS.
54. The CPS covers the Bank Group in a thoroughly integrated manner. IFC will contribute to the
CPS agenda by promoting the development of private sector through investment and advisory operations
in support of economic diversification and growth agenda. IFC‘s strategy in Kazakhstan is fully
consistent with IFC‘s overall strategic approach across the ECA region of focusing on access to
infrastructure, strengthening the financial sector, and supporting diversification and competitiveness. In
the short term, IFC is focusing on strengthening the financial sector, both in the context of the 2008-09
crisis response and as a prerequisite to pursue the diversification agenda. In the medium term, more
efforts will be dedicated to supporting infrastructure development. IFC will also carry out investments to
promote SME development, as well as investments in agribusiness, manufacturing, and services.
Establishment of best practices in international banking, corporate governance and the regulatory
environment will be targeted through IFC advisory work and investment projects with strong
demonstration effect. IFC also aims at supporting the energy efficiency agenda as a cross-cutting theme in
its activities. Total annual investments could potentially amount to US$200-300 million, provided
suitable

18

Table 2. Indicative Work Program (IBRD, FY12-13)
Areas of Engagement

Current Portfolio

JERP-Programatic

Technology Commercialization Project
Technical
and
Vocational
Modernization Project

Proposed Lending

Development of MT Counter-Cyclical Macro-Economic East West Roads Project; US$1.2
Policy to Reduce Vulnerability to External Shocks
billion (FY12)

Education Improvement of Competitiveness through Reduction of Youth Corps Project Swiss TF;
Trade Berriers
US$20 million (FY12)

Agriculture Competitiveness Project

Agriculture Post
Project (Phase II)

Privatization

South West Roads Project

Enhancement of the Business Environment to Support Irrigation and Drainage
Competitiveness and Economic Deversification
Improvement Project (Phase II);
US$105 (FY13)
Assistance Enhancing Productivity and Competitiveness through Electricty Transmission Project;
Enterprise Modernization Support Mechanisms
(FY14)
Improvement of the Insolvency System

Improving
Enhancement of the M&E System in the Roads IFRS Application for Small and Medium Enterprises. Phase II
Competitiveness and
Administration - IDF Grant (associated with
Fostering Job Creation South West Roads Project)
Moinak Electricity Transmission Project

TA to Strengthen PPP Project Assessment

Alma Electricity Transmission Project

Education System Analysis towards Improving Quality
Post-Graduate Education Development
Strengthening Agricultural Strategy and Livestock Policy
Brainstorming Roundtable on Global Economic and Social
Prospects

Customs Development Project

Improvement of Approach to Result-Oriented Budgeting

Tax Administration Reform Project

Improvement of Intergovernmental Relations and Territorial
Development

Health Sector Technology Transfer Project

Improvement
Management

Statistical Capacity Building Project

Improvement of Social Safety Net System

Capacity
Building
for
Public Sector
Accounting Reform - SAFE Grant
Strengthening
Public Sector Audit Capacity Building IDF
Governance and Public
Grant
Services
Building Capacity in Procurement Audit
Agency - IDF Grant (associated with South
West Roads Project)

of State

Borrowing

and

Public

Institutional
(FY14-16)

Reform

Projects;

Debt

Strengthening Pension System
Technical Assistance to Build Capacity of the Internal Audit
System in Kazakhstan
Development of Public E-Procurement System

Further Improvement of the Financial Monitoring System
(AML/CFT)
Technical Assistance to the Civil Service Agency in Civil
Service Reform
Supporting the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Forest Protection and Reforestation Project

Economic Costs of Pollution and Potential Cleaner and
Greener Industrial Production

Forest Protection and Reforestation Grant
Ensuring Development
(GEF)
is Environmentally
Ust-Kamenogorsk Environment Remediation
Sustainable
Project

Energy Efficiency Project Swiss
TF; US$20 million (FY12)
Syr Darya Control and North Aral
Project (Phase II); (FY13)
Persistent Organic Pollutants
(POPs) Management GEF Grant
(FY12) and Project (FY13-14)

Note: JERP activities are expected to be expanded over the CPS period; lending figures are tentative and lending
program shows initial composition.

19

projects that meet IFC criteria for financial reporting, transparency, and commercial viability can be
identified. MIGA will continue to support financial and manufacturing sectors.26
55. Expected outcomes of the CPS adjusted to the AAA intensive and evolving nature of the
program. In these circumstances, the outcomes of the JERP-AAA are hard to specify and directly link
with the final country development outcomes since the progress on the latter is heavily dependent on the
timing and scope of the Government efforts. In addition, JERP-AAA involves large amount of capacity
building at the institutional level which makes results inherently hard to measure. The CPS results
framework recognizes these challenges and addresses them by identifying the expected outcome
(intermediate indicators) of each confirmed activity and the link with the corresponding government
development goals. Overall, the results framework is intended to provide an accountability framework
for the lending in the pipeline for FY12-13 and the confirmed JERP AAA program. The following section
presents the areas of engagement, instruments and expected outcomes.
Area of Engagement 1: Improving Competitiveness and Fostering Job Creation
56. Building on the Bank Group’s experience and intensive dialogue under the previous CPS,
Bank Group activities would support the objective of sharpened competitiveness and creation of
private sector jobs. The government targets an improvement from 72nd place (out of 139 economies)
today in the Global Competitiveness Index to 50th place by the end of this decade. The CPS program
focuses on improvements in lagging areas of the competitiveness index (institutions, business/investment
enabling environment, finance, infrastructure,) through knowledge and lending. The initial JERP program
covers public/private institutional development (e.g., reporting standards and corporate governance), the
regulatory environment, enterprise modernization, financial market development (insolvency reform,
resolution of corporate financial sector distress), agro growth and modernization agenda, trade barriers,
educational quality and availability of skilled male and female workforce, and PPP schemes. The Bank
will finance investments in critical public sector infrastructure with an emphasis on strengthening
governance of public sector providers.
Country Development Goal:
international integration

Achieve competitiveness gains through macro-stability and

57. Outcome 1: Strengthening fiscal discipline and trade openness. The rule governing domestic
absorption of oil earnings can be refined to sharpen its counter-cyclical impact on the economy; a JERP
product will present options. A country economic memorandum (funded by the Bank budget only) would
link developments in poverty and gender equality to economic policies necessary to maximize
competitiveness, and conduct due diligence analysis. Regional trade integration through the customs
union with Belarus and Russia and prospective membership of the WTO will require policies to enable
the private sector to take advantage of changing opportunities, including non-tariff measures and cost of
trade facilitation. A recent JERP study analyzed the impact of membership of the customs union and how
benefits could be maximized; an ongoing comprehensive JERP product expands this work to develop the
analytical basis for trade competitiveness through joint research, familiarizing policy makers with good
practices and applying new tools and techniques.
58. Outcome 2: Expanding non-oil sector exports and employment. A series of linked Bank activities
have promoted knowledge transfer in designing output diversification strategies. A notable JERP product
26

MIGA‘s portfolio in Kazakhstan consists of four projects, sponsored by Austrian and Dutch investors, in support of the
country‘s financial and manufacturing sectors. The combined gross exposure from these investments (as of end February 2012) is
US$399.3 million.

20

led to a development of wide-ranging reform framework and initial changes in the law for corporate
insolvency. Programmatic work on insolvency reform and developing an insolvency system for
individuals is in progress. The ongoing Technology Commercialization Project supports the marketing of
promising technology developed by enterprises. Key JERP products assist with help in improving lagging
―Doing Business‖ indicators (e.g. access to financing, construction permits, cross-border procedures),
and in advancing deregulation efforts (e.g. reform of licensing and permitting systems, including through
introduction of a risk-based approach to regulation). This work will address gender dimensions given the
different access men and women may experience. Complementary JERP products help design sector- and
firm-specific strategies to assist competitiveness, and identify improvements to approaches in official
industry support initiatives. A framework will be developed for evaluating the impact of business
environment reforms to strengthen evidence based reform agenda (gender analysis will be an integral
element of this work). JERP assistance to strengthen the institutional framework underpinning corporate
financial reporting in Kazakhstan and to guide reforms of SME financial reporting will continue. IFC
intends to expand its real sector investments, particularly in agribusiness, construction materials, and the
retail sectors. Complementary support for the development of infrastructure and logistics sector in
particular will also be required for these sectors to develop successfully. In agribusiness, IFC is exploring
opportunities to support food processing and food retail companies, where opportunities may arise for the
provision of supplier finance and for advisory services in the area of food safety. Advisory work on
resource use efficiency will accompany these investments where appropriate.
59. Outcome 3: Re-invigorating the financial sector. The Bank Group has provided analytical
assistance in handling crisis impacts and designing work-out schemes for the banking sector through
formal products as well as quick, informal consultations. It envisages continued close dialogue with the
objectives of restoring normal bank credit operations and attracting foreign capital and credit lines. The
Bank and IFC will focus on strategies for resolution of non-performing loans in banks, the development
of non-bank financial intermediaries in the context of improving access to credit, the management and
exit strategies for intervened banks, including re-privatization, and consumer protection in financial
services. IFC‘s efforts will also be facilitating the development of private distressed assets recovery
activities (subject to regulatory framework), and deepening the financial sector through investments in
insurance and asset management. Investment in distressed corporate assets will help companies with
liquidity needs, but strong fundamentals, to recover from the crisis and allow the companies‘ creditors
clean up their balance sheet. IFC is aiming to expand its Global Trade Finance Program by adding new
banks in Kazakhstan. It plans to resume financing for the real sector through targeted credit lines for
SMEs and energy efficiency. Energy efficiency lending may be accompanied by advisory work on
secondary legislation to put in place appropriate incentives and mechanisms for this product. IFC may
provide loans to microfinance companies, especially those that operate in the underserved regions, subject
to expected adoption of a new Microfinance Law. IFC‘s regional Azerbaijan and Central Asia Financial
Infrastructure Advisory Project may expand to include Kazakhstan in its next phase to support credit
information sharing systems.
Country Development Goal: Bolster human capital
60. Outcome 4: Building skills for employment. JERP activities have developed policies to raise the
quality of graduate education. In view of the centrality of the quality of human capital to
competitiveness, and in particular to reduce the skills shortages in the labor force, JERP will initially
concentrate on (i) an analysis of the PISA-2009 results; and (ii) an international policy benchmarking
exercise in three critical areas of education quality: teachers, student assessments and school autonomy
and accountability. The results of these exercises would be used to inform the education policy reform
discussion and further assistance modalities for design and implementation support. The ongoing
Technical and Vocational Education Modernization Project is directed at strengthening policies and
institutions that will help align technical and vocational education with the skills needs of the market. A

21

Swiss TF-funded Youth Corps Project is under preparation with a view to help provide service learning
opportunities for youth in Kazakhstan that serve the community while helping youth development in noncognitive skills, which is a factor in facilitating entrance into labor market. The analysis carried out in
these various activities will involve gender dimension.
Country Development Goal: Boost employment in agriculture
61. Outcome 5: Strengthening knowledge for sustained growth in agriculture. Through a series of
knowledge products and lending for drainage and irrigation, post-privatization support and enhancing
competiveness by information acquisition, the Bank has supported growth in employment in agriculture.
A notable JERP product was devoted to proposing reforms in the complex system of agricultural
subsidies that distorted incentives and production patterns. It informed a government decision to simplify
and restructure subsidies and reduce their impact. Agricultural production is expected to move towards
comparative advantage, with a shift away from grains and towards livestock (a government priority),
eventually permitting exports. The CPS will assist the government in achieving improved agricultural
competitiveness and food security, through diversification, and address rural-urban income disparities.
This will be achieved through knowledge and investments in irrigation, agricultural diversification and
livestock development complemented with other cross-cutting activities in strengthening business
enabling environment and trade competitiveness. Programmatic JERP products, built upon the
recommendations of earlier JERP-funded public expenditure and institutional review, will assess the
effectiveness of current agricultural programs, including subsidies, and develop a roadmap to identify
market opportunities and constraints, including gaps in public services and infrastructure. Consultation
with communities on the effectiveness of public services will include gender dimension. The CPS will
continue lending for investments in irrigation and water management through the Irrigation and Drainage
Improvement Project (IDIP II) and Syr Darya Control and Northern Aral Sea Project (SYNAS II). The
Bank will continue dialogue on diversification, including transformation of the use of marginal arable
land and development of livestock, using its knowledge base on control of animal disease and related
public health risks, improving pasture productivity and building competitive supply chains from farm to
processor. As discussed under Outcome 2, IFC will complement these efforts with direct investments
along the agribusiness supply chain and advisory work to promote resource use efficiency and improve
food safety standards.
Country Development Goal: Develop infrastructure connectivity to reduce economic distance
62. Outcome 6: Improving energy transmission to poor areas. Bank assistance through knowledge and
large-scale lending for transmission lines has led to the development of a modern grid, transmission tariff
rationalization and the establishment of a spot market for electricity. The CPS will build on investments
in transmission, focusing on the development and integration of the county‘s vast renewable energy
resources (in particular wind and hydro power) into the national grid, and strengthening key regional
power interconnections to alleviate severe network bottlenecks (especially between Kazakhstan and
Kyrgyzstan). The indicative program envisages a possibility of a third north-south electricity transmission
line project. The Bank will continue to assist the electricity grid operating company to enhance corporate
governance and financial standards to international best practice and to play a greater role in regionally
coordinated planning and operation of the central Asia power system.
63. Outcome 7: Building transport connectivity, lowering costs. The Bank is heavily engaged in
assisting with improving the competitiveness of transport corridors, road and rail. Overall economic
efficiency depends on lowered transport costs, greater volumes of freight and passengers, and expansion
of trade to the benefit of regional integration. Spending on much-needed maintenance has increased
annually by 10 percent in real terms—the portion of the main road network in ―poor‖ condition has fallen
from 40 percent to 25 percent over the past seven years. The ongoing South-West road project supports

22

implementation of a 2,840 km portion of the government investment program on upgrading and
rehabilitation of 8,300 km of roads along the six major CAREC corridors (Western Europe-Western Chin
International Transit Corridor) with a total cost of US$7.5 billion. The CPS will focus on supporting the
completion of the works on this Corridor thorough the East West Roads Project (305km), which will also
help introduce performance standards for operations and maintenance of selected road sections as a pilot.
The Government strategy also calls for non-discriminatory access to the rail network and a clear
separation between operation and management of the infrastructure, together with the elimination of
government-imposed price regulation. Half of the 1,400 km of new lines would be financed by the
private sector. A Bank study under way will assess the operational performance of selected rail corridors
and identify ways for increasing transit traffic, especially from China.
64. As part of the partnership program along the Corridor, the Bank also assists with the
implementation of institutional reforms which will eventually transform the major state-owned enterprise
in road planning and maintenance into a commercially oriented entity. This step would pave the way for
the introduction of tolling mechanisms and the contracting out of operation and maintenance on a
performance based method as well as the creation of a motorway management agency to be in charge of
all management, monitoring and planning of the investment along the Corridor. Besides all road users, the
road projects would benefit local and international shippers, manufactures, farmers and traders, and the
oil related industries. A notable category of beneficiaries would be the low income population living in
the area served by the road and needing markets for their products and access to social facilities. The
main institutional reform on railways seeks to raise competitiveness and the participation of the private
sector.

65. IFC intends to facilitate infrastructure development through PPP advisory work and direct
investments with both private sector and sub-national sponsors. Specific focus areas include logistics and
transport sectors to improve connectivity and trade, with early leads including Almaty Ring Road and
investments in rail car leasing. In addition, IFC will also support infrastructure investments for
Kazakhstan‘s oil and gas sector to encourage development and greater efficiency of services to the sector.
Area of Engagement 2: Strengthening Governance and Improving Efficiency
in Public Services Delivery
66. The CPS will assist in developing an efficient and accountable public sector. It will initially
focus on assisting improvements in budget management, intergovernmental financial management, and
SOE debt management along with modernization of the audit system. In addition, JERP assistance to
support the evolving reforms to improve level and coverage of social protection programs, and
sustainability of Kazakh pension system will continue. The Bank is also expected to maintain its support
to the government for improved transparency and institution building through facilitating successful
completion of the ongoing EITI validation process, development of anti-money laundering system and
development of e-procurement.
Country Development Goal: Improve public financial management and fight corruption
67. Outcome 8: Improving governance. The Bank will seek to engage in the development of the
government‘s comprehensive anti-corruption program. The CPS will continue assisting improvements in
revenue management institutions, and transparency and reporting of revenues from natural resources,
while supporting heightened efforts to advance civil service reforms. In revenue management a series of
JERP studies have provided policy and institutional advice on reforms in customs and tax administrations
which led to deep reforms in tax policy such that Kazakhstan is close to international best practice though
distortions in SME taxation remain a blemish. Through the ongoing Tax Administration Reform Project,
business process reforms will be undertaken and modern risk-based methods introduced within a sharper

23

focus on large taxpayers, this will lead to reduced discretion on the part of tax inspectors. Customs service
remains a critical weakness; through the ongoing Customs Development project, e-declaration and single
window will be introduced, risk-based methods used, but a shift in mindset away from excessive reliance
on controls will be necessary if corruption is to be reduced. The Bank will continue to facilitate efforts
towards attaining compliance with EITI norms by mid-2013. Improved reporting and tracking of
extractive industry revenues, with civil society participation, is a key contributor to strengthening
governance. Kazakhstan has recently become a party to international conventions on money laundering
and terrorist financing and has strengthened its anti-money laundering and countering terrorist financing
systems based on past JERP advice, but is not yet fully in compliance with the Financial Action Task
Force recommendations and standards of other international bodies. The JERP assistance in this area will
continue focusing on conducting money laundering national risk assessment and necessary refinements to
laws and practices towards adoption of international best practice norms by end-2013. In addition, the
World Bank will provide assistance to the National Bank of Kazakhstan in preparing their Money
Laundering Inspection Manual. Further JERP activity will provide advisory assistance to the Civil
Service Agency in the ongoing design of amendments to the civil service law, guide high priority goals of
anti-corruption and performance based pay system, and provide capacity building support.
68. Outcome 9: Strengthening budget and accounting institutions. A series of JERP products have
supported systematic reforms in public financial management. The government places importance on the
Bank‘s continued engagement in creating a modern, efficient, effective and accountable public sector. To
this end, the CPS would assist improvements in the results-focus of budget management (with a view to
strengthen the link between budget resources and policy goals, and support capacity-building for
sustainable implementation of this system), in intergovernmental financial management (initially with a
focus on improvement of targeted development transfers to housing and communal services, transport,
education and health—a key area in public service delivery given that over 60 percent of total revenues of
local budgets were transfers from higher level), and in debt management within state owned enterprises
(assisting in development of a framework for monitoring and oversight of their non-guaranteed quasipublic debt towards strengthening strategic long-term debt planning in Kazakhstan, and development of
domestic government debt market). Support to the Accounts Committee is envisaged to help key
international benchmarks on external audit and parliamentary oversight met over time. JERP will assist
the transition to international public sector accounting standards. An ongoing JERP product assists with
development of e-procurement with a focus on design of electronic auction system. A Statistical Capacity
Building Project-2011 introduces modern methods and sharpened skills in government statistics. A
several grant financed capacity-building projects—in audit and in procurement—help strengthen public
management. This entire agenda has a strong governance dimension, as is also the case with
improvements in business climate.
Country Development Goal: Raise efficiency in delivering critical public services
69. Outcome 10: Reforming social protection system. JERP assistance to support the evolving reforms
in improving the level and coverage of social protection programs will continue. The main thrust of the
reform is the inclusion within the targeted social assistance program of ―activation elements‖ that promote
graduation of prime-aged, able-bodied recipients from reliance on assistance to employment. The Bank
will assist in the design of complementary conditional cash transfer type programs linking receipt of
social assistance to a set of comprehensive services that promote self-sufficiency. An ongoing JERP
product continues advisory assistance on pension reforms. The multi-pillar system includes one linked to
private savings; concerns exist as to its financial sustainability and reliability. Hence, regulatory and
operational rules for the private pension industry are being revisited. Work on pensions addresses an
important gender issue, as, on average, elderly women have fewer working years during which they
accumulated pension contributions, and they also outnumber elderly men. As part of its efforts to

24

strengthen the domestic financial sector, IFC may invest in life insurance and private asset management
(including pension management) companies.
70. Outcome 11: Sharpening strategic approach to health reforms. Several JERP studies on the design
of a comprehensive health strategy and ongoing Health Sector Technology Transfer and Institutional
Reform Project have underpinned a close intellectual and policy engagement with the government. The
policy dialogue transformed from analysis of selected policy issues to a comprehensive assistance to
implementation of a comprehensive health reform strategy. The health project focuses on health financing
and management, health management information system, pharmaceutical policy, health care quality
improvement, medical education and science, and food safety. It introduces international standards in
these areas and builds institutional capacity through learning by doing. The agenda for deepening reforms
encompasses primary health care and the evaluation of health sector performance.
Area of Engagement 3: Ensuring Development is Environmentally Sustainable
71. Environmental protection, improved energy efficiency and low carbon strategy are ranked as
high priorities in Kazakhstan and essential to sustain growth. To support government‘s efforts in
these areas, the WBG assistance would initially focus on supporting efforts to pilot benchmarking
technologies in selected industries with best available practices and provide recommendations on reform
of environmental permit systems and monitoring and enforcement systems. Bank assistance will further
focus on rehabilitation of selected industrial contaminated sites while facilitating efforts to broaden and
deepen the implementation of Energy Efficiency agenda and water resource management. The Bank will
also continue the advisory assistance to Kazakhstan on reducing gas flaring to broaden and deepen the
benefits of the existing gas utilization program.
Country Development Goal: Fight climate change with a cleaner environment
72. Outcome 12: Safeguarding the environment. JERP will assist design industrial environmental
benchmark pilots to reduce the environmental impact and energy intensity of production. Reform of
environmental permits and monitoring and enforcement systems would be supported. Export
competitiveness in markets that demand low environmental-impact and products would be enhanced. The
Bank has provided knowledge in the rehabilitation of industrial contaminated sites. Pollution remediation
has been pursued through the ongoing Nura River Clean-Up Project and the Ust-Kamenogorsk
Environmental Remediation Project. The proposed Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) Management
Project would support the remediation of contaminated sites with Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) that
pose a serious risk to public health and the environment, and the removal and incineration of stockpiles
PCBs waste and obsolete pesticides. In addition, the Bank will help government scale up mechanisms
introduced under earlier lending operations for improvement of water resource management through
irrigation and drainage service delivery, and by improving the availability of water for productive
purposes in the Kazakh part of the Syr Darya basin.
73. Outcome 13: Raising energy efficiency. JERP assisted with analysis of options for raising energy
efficiency (EE) from current low levels (Kazakhstan ranks among the top ten of the most energy intensive
economies in the world). Encouragingly, this agenda has recently been set by the Government among top
development goals (with a targeted 25 percent reduction in energy inefficiency by 2020) and a new
legislation is under discussion in parliament. The Bank will provide technical assistance for the
establishment of a dedicated energy efficiency finance facility to support the development of viable
projects as part of a Swiss TF-funded Energy Efficiency Project of which the primary objective is
implementation of EE demonstration projects in selected sectors with high social impact, and quantified
energy savings. The Bank will initiate a dialogue with the authorities on the potential for adopting clean
coal technologies for electricity generation, given the abundance of low cost coal in the country. Private

25

sector interest in establishing thermal generation plants is strong and could be leveraged into clean coal
technologies provided the frameworks for tariff setting and PPPs are put in place. The Bank will also
continue the advisory assistance to Kazakhstan on reducing gas flaring and developing the existing gas
utilization program, while IFC may support power generation projects based on associated gas. The Bankled Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership will provide technical assistance and help draft further
changes to oil and gas sector legislation. IFC considers improving energy efficiency to be a cross-cutting
priority across all of it operations in Kazakhstan. To this end, it will focus on real sector investments
where resource use efficiency and energy efficiency can be increased, provide targeted credit lines to
banks for on-lending to industrial enterprises, and carry out advisory work, if needed, to facilitate energy
efficiency lending in the private sector. In the infrastructure sector, IFC may explore opportunities in
improving efficiency in the utilities sector, especially focusing on the distribution part of the district
heating. Investments in the waste management sector at the municipal sector will be considered by
engaging private investors directly or through PPP structures.
Gender Mainstreaming
74. The WBG emphasis on mainstreaming gender considerations into CPS program will continue.
In addition to above-discussed examples of CPS program elements that have a strong basis on gender
considerations, the following projects exhibit high gender dimension:27


South-West and East-West Road Project. The Strategy for Development of Road User Services
under these projects envisages that road development will have positive impact on income
growth, job creation and transformation of local economies. This is particularly the case for the
South West Road project large segments of which crosses the oblasts predominantly populated by
unemployed rural population; this will likely to affect women, living in villages along the
corridor, and representing the significant share of unemployed people.



The Health Sector Technology Transfer Project. This project supports the new State Health Care
Development Program, which targets a reduction in maternal mortality rate as a key performance
indicator. Clinical practice guidelines in primary care will focus on maternal health. The Program
also supports health promotion and disease prevention, resulting in gender-related benefits such
as a reduction of tobacco- and alcohol-related diseases and injuries, which is expected to raise
male life expectancy.

V. IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY
A. Managing Program Implementation
75. The CPS envisages a strong AAA program supplemented by selective lending linked to core
development priorities. As noted, the engagement will be mainly through the JERP with the
government currently funding 85 percent of the US$4.4 million annual program.28 The JERP will be
negotiated annually with a mid-year review. In order to ensure adequate quality and compliance with
Bank policies, JERP AAA will continue to follow the same cycle as the Bank AAA activities. Investment
lending will continue to be selective and upon demand by the government. As noted, half of the indicative
27

The Banks Small Grants program to support CSO capacity-building had a strong gender dimension in Kazakhstan, while it was
in place until this year (the program is currently being repurposed as part of the planned introduction of a new Global Partnership
Facility for Enhanced Social Accountability). Out of 64 CSOs, whose projects were supported under the program in 2004-2011,
18 represented women and gender associations and 43 were headed by women. The grant funds were used, in particular, to
support social and civic engagement and improve income generating skills of women in rural area, enhancing also their role in
local self-governance.
28
The Bank funding under the program reflects the learning involved by staff through the JERP policy dialogue and the potential
spillover benefits from Kazakhstan‘s development experience into other client countries.

26

envelope of US$2 billion for the CPS period will be allocated to the new East West Roads Project for the
fiscal year 2012, and the rest is expected to be financing projects in areas in which the government
considers the Bank can add value through involvement in design and implementation.
76. The ongoing WBG lending portfolio is well aligned with the CPS strategic themes and can
help maximize the impact of the WBG and Government resources through timely implementation.
The IBRD portfolio consists of 12 projects with a net IBRD commitment of US$2.6 billion, supporting
projects costing US$3.5 billion, reflecting high government co-financing. IFC has a committed portfolio
in the amount of US$404 million with 11 clients in the banking, manufacturing, agribusiness, and
services sectors that is performing well. The IBRD portfolio is based on high quality knowledge, fits well
with national priorities, with projects enjoying high degree of ownership (project are prepared only when
the authorizing environment is keenly supportive), and are increasingly directed at institutional reform
and embedding of international best practice. However, even adjusted for its youth (average age is 3.9
years) and the recent significant improvement in its performance,29 the portfolio is relatively slowdisbursing30 with mixed performance across projects. The recent CPPR (2011) highlights the principal
causes for this performance as:


Government procedures resulting in lengthy preparation and effectiveness, taking two years on
average with preparation half a year longer that the Bank average.



Variable readiness of new projects for implementation despite the long preparation. Internal
procedures within partner agencies make it difficult in some cases to timely establish necessary
project structures and approve key documents, required to start implementation.



Weaknesses in the system of monitoring and evaluation prevents timely identification and
response to project specific and the cross-cutting issues across the portfolio despite overall good
project supervision.
Table 3. Alignment of Existing Bank Portfolio with CPS Areas of Engagement

Areas of Engagement
(New CPS)

Nr of
projects
in
current
portfolio

Projects

Amount
(in $
mln)

Grants

Improving
Competitiveness and
Employment
Generation

6

2,308.3

1 IDF

Strengthening Public
Finance and Public
Sector for Efficient
Service Delivery

4

Technology Commercialization
Technical and Vocational Education Modernization
Agricultural Competitiveness
South West Roads Construction
Moinak Electricity Transmission
Alma Electricity Transmission
Customs Development
Tax Administration Reform
Statistical Capacity Building
Health Sector Technology Transfer

173.2

2 IDF,
1 SAFE

Ensuring
Development is
Sustainable

2

Forest Protection and Reforestation
Ust Kamenogorsk Remediation

54.3

1 GEF

29

Portfolio monitoring has been strengthened through closer implementation support particularly for complex and
16 slow
disbursing projects as well as proactive use of cancelations in case of a poor performing project. These efforts continue.
30
Portfolio disbursement ratio as of end February 2012 is 22.1 percent with the South-West Road Project (SWRP), which
accounts for 83.8 percent of the total portfolio, and is 10.5 percent excluding SWRP.

27

77. The authorities and the Bank share the view that a joint approach to addressing these three
weaknesses would be the most effective. The government has requested the Bank to draw lessons from
closing projects and best practice, and provide support for project-based institutional assessments. It also
requested Bank assistance in bringing more detailed performance assessment to the portfolio, including
improving information flows to and from line ministries, and application of safeguards and procedures.
This process is now being complemented through establishment of a Joint Portfolio Monitoring Team
(JPMT) that would concentrate on monitoring portfolio performance against key performance indicators
(riskiness, disbursements, outcome of completed projects, and key systemic, implementation, and policy
issues), and on problem projects that will lead to important decisions. The government is also at an
advance stage of preparing a proposal to streamline its external borrowing approval procedures for IFI
loans by aligning them with the annual budget approval process, which would be instrumental in
eliminating long project start up delays. Joint work will also focus on:


Improving quality at entry through ensuring fuller readiness for implementation by applying
jointly developed readiness guidelines, and through incorporation of lessons learnt from previous
operations particularly for complex and institution building projects;



Improving quality of implementation based on greater focus on joint monitoring and management
of the risks, establishing strong and sound M&E system, raising procurement and financial
management capacities of PIUs and state agencies.



Expanding ongoing high frequency training and consultations on procurement to areas of
financial management, and monitoring, and evaluation, particularly to track performance of
impact indicators and financial management.

B. Measuring Performance
78. The Bank will strengthen its results based monitoring and evaluation to assess the progress of
program and react effectively to challenges. The JPMT platform will be used for quality review and as
an instrument to track progress in implementing milestones and outputs, jointly with the counterparts. The
JERP AAA will maintain its quality at entry review system, while programmatic approach providing a
monitoring tool in itself through annual programming and mid-term review cycles to indentify progress
and calibrate follow-up work accordingly. The annual reviews of the CPS program, based on results
framework as a monitoring tool, will be implemented jointly with the Government. In addition, a
Progress Report will be prepared and submitted mid-way through this CPS period.
79. The results matrix will be expanded in the CPS progress report. As noted previously, the result
matrix is a living document. It reflects the ongoing JERP-AAA, current portfolio and lending operations
pipeline for the next two years. The CPS Progress Report will expand the results framework to reflect
Bank activities in the outer years of the CPS.
C. Deepening Engagement with Civil Society and Development Partners
80. Kazakhstan has an emerging civil society (but one concentrated in the large metropolis) that
wishes to engage on the development agenda. Most active CSOs focus on environment, business
enabling environment, gender, transparency, and vulnerability issues. The Bank‘s current program
exhibits constructive relations with CSOs where they play a role as a valuable partner in identification of
policy and institutional development issues or in design and M&E of project implementation in key areas.
The Bank has been engaged in establishment of the BOTA foundation to carry out educational and social
service work and provides implementation support to its operations. The EITI program has relied on
participation of Coalition of CSOs in the work of EITI multi-stakeholders group and the National
Stakeholders Council in which the Bank is an observer, providing assistance in the process of EITI

28

validation and for CSO capacity building. The South-West roads project benefits from public
consultations in design and implementation, a process that is currently in the process of being
systematized and strengthened through establishment of a multi-stakeholder group for monitoring both
the Bank projects and the projects funded by the other IFIs along the Western Europe-Western Chin
International Transit Corridor. The Youth Corps project will work through CSOs for its implementation
of grants to sponsor community service activities. This CPS aims at continuing to work with, and listen
closely to a broader range of CSOs in Kazakhstan.
81. Close collaboration with other multilateral institutions and development partners will
continue. In the area of improving competitiveness and fostering job creation, partners provide support
on expanding the role of the private sector and trade integration (EC, USAID), financial sector reforms
(IMF), building skills (EC, GIZ), agriculture (GIZ), SME development (ADB), electricity markets and
investments (EBRD, USAID), roads (ADB, EBRD). In broad governance agenda, partners provide
advice on local public administration reform, public sector implementation capacity (EC), civil service
reform (EC, UNDP), customs reforms (USAID), judicial sector reforms (EC, GIZ, USAID), social
protection (EC, UNICEF), and in health ((EC, USAID). In the area of environment, partners‘ focus is on
sustainability (EC, GIZ, UNDP), and in energy efficiency (EBRD).
VI. RISKS
82. Political Risks. Political stability and predictability will be important, especially stability in the
application of the rule of law. Critically, the pace of improvement in governance will need to be stepped
up. A greater role for political debate and accountability of the executive will bolster the prospects of
sustaining growth. Confidence will have to be established that improvements in the business climate will
endure and the country will remain open to playing its geo-political role in energy and trade. Social
stability will require improved public services, multi-faceted approaches matching rural youth, especially
in the south, with productive jobs, and voice through public participation in decision-making and
oversight processes. It will also require greater attention to the regions, especially those lagging, and to
foster SME development.
83. Managing Natural Resources and Economic Risks. Growth prospects depend on deepened trade
integration for productivity growth through imports of advanced technology, and, hence, on significant
volumes of foreign investment. Productivity growth will require greater freedom for resource allocation
by the private sector in a competitive environment of incentive neutrality and fair access to opportunities.
The government‘s emphasis on diversification provides opportunities for collaboration and dialogue. The
rules based oil fund has been robust. Diversification will require discipline on the absorption of oil
revenues and a fiscal stance that targets a faster adjustment in the non-oil deficit. Sheltering the economy
from oil price and volume volatility as well as the potential adverse impact of NPLs on the banking sector
will remain important.
84. External Risks. These arise from a continuation of the turmoil in the core Eurozone economies,
protracted adjustment in international banking markets, or a slow upturn in international output and trade.
Most immediate is the euro area debt crisis. A disorderly resolution of EU debt problems would lead to
broad-based risk-aversion in financial markets. This could lead to a sharp reversal in flows and portfolio
investment in particular, which if prolonged, may lead to weakening financial flows to Kazakhstan and
lower growth. The government recognizes these risks and considering contingency crisis-mitigation plans
to address the implications of a new round of global financial crisis. The country has large net external
assets which give the authorities considerable room for maneuver.

29

85. Risks to the CPS Approach and Mitigation. These mirror the above-outlined risks. The CPS is
predicated on continuity and stability in the relationship with the World Bank Group, and on more resultsoriented reform approach of the government. It aims to foster a faster pace in governance reforms and a
re-thinking of the role of the state in diversification policies. Success will depend on the quality of the
knowledge products and the skill with which the dialogue is conducted, but also on the willingness of the
Kazakh partners to continue drawing from international experience. In the event of adverse external
shocks, rapid policy advisory work as well as possible IBRD development policy operations to counter
external shocks subject to IBRDs capital constraints, and IFC assistance could be considered as
instruments of the WBG assistance, which collectively proved effective during the 2007-2009 crisis. The
proposed deepening of the work on governance as a cross-cutting theme in all three proposed areas of
engagement in the CPS will forearm the WBG to deal with risks to the program and to the portfolio as
they arise. Moreover, greater attention to implementation constraints and to a results focus will help to
improve the implementation of knowledge and lending activities.

30

VII.

ANNEXES
Annex 1. FY05-11 Country Partnership Completion Report
KAZAKHSTAN
CPS COMPLETION REPORT
FOR FY05-11

Document title
CPS
CPSPR
I.

Document issue date
August 10, 2004
May 1, 2008

Report No.
29412-KZ
43393-KZ

Introduction and Overview

1.
The 2004 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) reflected a flexible approach responding to
Kazakhstan’s development objectives and to its rapidly changing economic and social conditions.
The strategy was designed to ensure strong government ownership of the Bank‘s program, to allow the
Government and the Bank to adjust that program to changing government priorities and country
circumstances, and thereby to maximize the Bank‘s contribution to Kazakhstan‘s development. It was
built on the premise of cutting-edge knowledge transfer driven by the country needs and priorities. By
delivering successful results under a growing program, this approach has demonstrated that the Bank can
remain relevant in addressing development challenges of countries that enjoy commodity export windfalls
and have low borrowing requirements.31
2.
This Completion Report rates the World Bank Group supported program and World Bank
Group performance as satisfactory. The satisfactory rating for the former reflects significant progress
on several major development issues summarized in this completion report, and the latter is based on
continued generation of dialogue and debate around high quality AAA, responsiveness, CPS outcomes
(value added that Bank interventions brought to Kazakhstan‘s development agenda), innovation, and
strong, strategic partnership formed under the CPS. The Completion Report had been developed based on
consultations with the Government counterparts and the self-assessment by the Kazakhstan team.32
II.

Progress Toward Country Development Goals

3.
Kazakhstan grew rapidly over the past decade and made considerable progress in poverty
reduction. GDP per head rose, in terms of constant 2011 dollars, from US$5,982 in 2001 to US$11,245
in 2011, as the economy reaped efficiency gains from increasing market orientation, and hydrocarbon
output expanded amidst rising price. The poverty incidence fell from over 46.7 per cent to 6.5 percent,
although rapid growth, which was concentrated in large cities and resource-rich western regions, resulted
in some income disparity with the poverty rate 2.7 times higher in rural as compared to urban areas. Most
of the MDGs will be met.
4.
Both the pre- and post-crisis national strategy aimed at laying the legislative and institutional
foundations for improved competitiveness and economic diversification. The country progressed
31

The CPS was designed to serve as a basis for cooperation between the Bank and Kazakhstan for as long as it remained
relevant in the overall economic and political environment. "Relevance" was to be assessed against three criteria: the demand for
the Bank's services; the Bank's value-added to the development process; and, Kazakhstan's overall policy environment.
32
It draws from reviews of Aide-Memoires and ISRs of the projects active during the period under review, ICRs of projects
completed during the CPS period, Independent Evaluation Group reviews of ICRs, CPPRs and the 2008 CPS Progress Report.

31

towards developing a rules-driven fiscal framework, privatized small and medium enterprises and
housing, retained liberal trade regime, embarked on an ambitious public management and the business
climate reforms, and allocated resources for improved social services and critical infrastructure to sustain
growth. In parallel, large inflows of foreign direct investment were attracted in particular to the extractive
sectors.
5.
These achievements were made possible by the authorities’ focus on a consistent strategic
vision for economic development, based on integration into the global economy. Kazakhstan‘s
development progress reflects an openness to new ideas in economic management and the eagerness of
the government to learn from cutting-edge international experience and to embrace innovative
approaches. The CPS was instrumental in generating policy analyses and ideas; and the government
actively engaged intellectually with the Bank.
6.
Responsible fiscal management led to a substantial accumulation of resources in the National
Fund before the 2007 crisis hit. Total government spending averaged 22 percent of GDP for the precrisis period and the non-oil deficit averaged about 3 percent of GDP, despite rising oil prices and
revenues—an indication of fiscal restraint. Accumulated savings in the National Fund (NF) rose to
US$51 billion (about 30 percent of GDP) between 2001 (when the flows started) and end-2011.
7.
However, large capital inflows to the banks, encouraged by soaring commodity and real estate
prices coupled with foreign investment inflows, overheated the economy, led to currency
appreciation and planted the seeds of financial instability. Finance and construction became the major
drivers of economic growth. A sudden stop in foreign loans to the banking sector in August 2007
triggered a liquidity crisis and speculative runs; the global financial crisis in 2008 and the associated sharp
decline in commodity prices led to an economic slowdown and hence a deterioration in the quality of
bank assets.
8.
Kazakhstan withstood the effects of the global financial crisis well through a dexterous
response combining fiscal relaxation with bank stabilization measures. The authorities supported
output with stimulus programs directed at agriculture, small business, infrastructure and construction. The
three major problem banks were recapitalized and, through negotiation, external debt of banks was
reduced by more than US$10 billion. Total official fiscal and banking support amounted to US$17
billion, largely drawing on savings in the oil fund on an exceptional basis to finance both budget and offbudget transactions. Meanwhile, the central bank extended liquidity support, and deposit insurance was
greatly bolstered resulting in renewed confidence in banks.
9.
The decisive approach to macroeconomic and financial sector management contributed to a
quick recovery in output: GDP growth was 7.3 percent in 2010 and 7.5 percent in 2011. The economic
expectation is becoming more broad-based since 2011, with growth returning to agriculture (after the
contraction in 2010 due to drought), and construction. Inflationary pressures resulting from commodity
price shocks and an accommodating fiscal stance have been contained by the end of 2011.
10. A considerable improvement in the fiscal position has taken place since the crisis. The non-oil
balance improved from over 10 percent of GDP33 in 2008-09 to below 8.3 percent of GDP in 2011. The

33

Increase in the deficit reflects partly the 2008 tax reform which aimed at lowering the tax burden on the non-resource sectors of
the economy while increasing the tax burden on the extractive industries: the statutory rate of corporate income tax was cut from
30 percent to 20 percent for all sectors; in parallel, additional tax levies (i.e. severance tax and customs duty on oil exports) were
introduced for the extractive industries, resulting in an estimated 30 percent increase in the tax burden on extractive industries
compared to the levels before the tax reform.

32

state budget deficit that determines the level of borrowing of the central government improved notably 34
and is estimated at 2.1 percent of GDP in 2011. With the removal of crisis spending, budget outlays
returned to pre-crisis levels at around 22 percent of GDP (down from 27 percent during 2008-09). The
authorities aim to lower the broader non-oil fiscal deficit to 3 percent of GDP by 2020, which would
require resolute measures on both revenue and expenditures.
11. The progress made in reducing the external indebtedness of the banking sector needs to be
supported by a comprehensive debt-work out for banks and affected parties. The level of nonperforming loans (NPLs) remains high, limiting the capacity of the banking sector to finance productive
activities.35 Credit extension to the non-oil sector (which relies almost solely on domestic bank credit)
remains below levels needed to sustain high growth and most banks operate with substantial liquidity.
12. Emphasis on improving social services over the past decade gained a new impetus during the
crisis, but outcomes lag Kazakhstan’s level of income. The share of the budgetary expenses allocated
to social sectors reached all time highs at about 60 percent in 2010-11. The expenditures on social
security, health care, education and housing and utilities were higher in 2011 than their pre-crisis (2008)
levels spending. Despite improvements in services, outcomes are not yet at par with comparable countries
especially in adult mortality and secondary school results. A major management reform in health systems
is underway to address outdated norms and practices, and oversized network of publicly-owned facilities,
while establishing regulatory framework and incentive mechanisms for achieving greater access,
efficiency and quality. In education, focus is on improving access, equity and quality at all levels. The
government also recognizes the need to confront skills shortages by modernizing technical and vocational
training. These efforts are being complemented by introduction of activation measures in social protection
system to help low-skilled workers, the unemployed, youth, and social assistance beneficiaries access jobs
and graduate from reliance on safety nets.
13. The business climate has improved but output diversification progressed slowly. Significant
legislative changes—investor protection, insolvency procedures, concessions and the competition laws—
as well as the licensing and inspection requirements both led to a rise in the Doing Business (DB) rating
(to 47th position in 2012) and improvement in the overall enabling environment. Kazakhstan enjoys the
advantage of a flexible labor market in the non-oil sector. Ownership of land is private and urban land
markets are active, but land use planning and approval is cumbersome and non-transparent. The state
dominates the provision of services and finance. Along with an improved environment for domestic
competition, important reforms for agricultural SME development, rural credit and agricultural insurance
will help unlock the rich potential of agriculture.
14. Public financial management (PFM) improved during the CPS period. The Budget Code,
setting the framework for integration of planning and budgeting processes, is being implemented
performance-based budgeting advanced, and auditing and accounting systems enhanced. These reforms
build on existing strengths of the system with a well developed Treasury system, high budget credibility,
and a budget that is linked to policy priorities.
15. Relieving the infrastructure constraints to growth is a key component of government’s
competitiveness agenda. Large capital investments to upgrade the major east-west and north-south road
and rail corridors linking China, Central Asia and Russia with Western Europe have been made. A shift
34

The ―state budget deficit‖ is defined as that part of the total non-oil deficit not covered by oil revenue and is therefore equal to
net government borrowing.
35
Non-performing loans (NPLs) amount to 32.6 percent of total loans (11 percent of GDP) and the ratio of credits in areas more
than 90 days is 23.8 percent (8 percent of GDP). The official NPLs appear well provisioned with an amount equal to 31.9 percent
of the credit portfolio set aside to cover the losses. NPLs are concentrated with 25 large borrowers accounting for about one third;
the construction sector accounts for one-third of the NPLs.

33

in expenditures towards road maintenance (as transport networks are in poor condition) would both raise
efficiency in spending and help reduce the high costs of road transport. A focus on improved facilitation,
smooth functioning of border crossing points to reduce costs of business is necessary if the country is to
realize its potential as a regional logistics hub. Kazakhstan has also advanced greatly in power sector
reforms. With efficient tariffs, the transmission sector is technologically highly advanced. Improving
cost-recovery and modernization in the distribution and generation sector and strong regulation will help
bring needed foreign investments towards increasing the reliability of supply, especially in winter.
16. Efforts to safeguard the environment are evolving with greater government emphasis on
energy efficiency agenda. Substantial progress in modernization of regulatory and institutional
framework for environmental management has been achieved. Issues of extreme inefficiency in energy
use, carbon dioxide intensity, the legacy of pollution and health burden of industries are gaining more
emphasis, and along with continued reduction in the flaring of gas associated with hydrocarbon
operations, remain of high environmental importance.
17. Kazakhstan has taken impressive steps towards regional integration. It became member of the
Eurasian Economic Community and a contributor to a regional development instrument, the Anti-Crisis
Fund. It pursues dialogue on regional cooperation through bodies such as CAREC and the Shanghai
Cooperation. It is making sound progress towards membership of the World Trade Organization while
now operating in a newly established Common Economic Space with Russia and Belarus. It became a
donor to IDA in 2010. Apart from investments through regional institutions, Kazakhstan provides
bilateral investment assistance in Georgia, Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. A continued emphasis on
strengthening institutional structures and the analytical and technical expertise will also help Kazakhstan
play an enhanced regional leadership role.
III.

Outcomes Delivered with the Support of the CPS Program

18. The 2004 CPS builds on a framework for cooperation around cross-cutting areas on the
competitiveness agenda, including management of the oil windfall and increased public sector
efficiency; building capacity to improve business enabling environment; investment in human capital and
basic infrastructure; and mitigation of environmental concerns. In retrospect, these areas of engagement
were appropriate to the key development priorities and challenges of the country. The CPS was prepared
before the results-based approach became mandatory. Hence, this CPS Completion Report assesses the
Bank‘s performance based on the contribution made to the implementation of the Government‘s core
development goals. Such goals have been selected among the key areas that the Bank intended to support
through the CPS.
Pillar 1: Reducing losses in competitiveness through prudent management of the oil-windfall and
increased public sector efficiency
Country Development Goal: Maintain Prudent Macro and Inter-temporal Economic Management
19. A disciplined approach to fiscal management in the face of windfalls, the adoption of a fiscal
rule and the institutionalization of the National Fund are all critical government achievements that
have led to stable macroeconomic outcomes (as measured by growth, inflation, fiscal and debt
sustainability) supported by the CPS. The Joint Economic Research Program (JERP) provided
extensive advisory and analytical services (AAA) to the Government on the institutional design and
implementation of the National Fund (NF). These AAA services intensified during the recent crisis, when
the resources of the NF were used on an exceptional basis to bail out ailing banks and carry out successful
countercyclical fiscal policy. More recently, JERP advisory services helped the Government to avoid
fiscally risky banks‘ bailout strategies in the wake of a financial sector crisis and to balance

34

macroeconomic and monetary stability with sustainable growth objectives. JERP supported the
formulation of medium-term macroeconomic forecasts and government staff training in this area. JERP
AAAs on financial sector risks have spurred important amendments to the regulatory and supervision
framework for commercial banks and capital markets. The Development Policy Loan (2010) for US$1
billion supported the Government‘s efforts to set clear, binding rules on access to the NF resources, 36
enabling the Government to limit the use of NF resources and to withdraw the economic stimulus as the
economy recovered. Recent advisory work has focused on refinements to the fiscal rule taking
international experience into account (e.g. adoption of a countercyclical approach in the management of
oil revenues). Bank AAA under the JERP on all these elements were made highly effective by the
Government‘s approach of sponsoring a series of high-level brainstorming engagements with the Bank
(co-chaired by the Prime Minister), which helped clarify and internalize the policy advice and
recommendations. 37
20. The Bank has supported a shift in public spending towards more equitable public resource
use and improved delivery of key social services. From a low base, social spending rose slowly over the
pre-crisis era. The 2010 DPL supported the Government program to reallocate resources from nonpriority administrative expenditures and state-owned enterprise (SOE) transfers to social sectors
(eventually the latter increased from 52 percent in 2008 to almost 60 percent in 2010). The increased
allocations for social expenditure aim at supporting the ongoing institutional reforms to improve the
quality and efficacy of social assistance programs as well as social service delivery in health and
education. Efforts are also underway to better target spending on infrastructure and agriculture to foster
non-oil growth (supported by past and ongoing JERP advisory services).
21. The CPS program has supported the Government in strengthening fiscal and debt
management by better monitoring and analyzing fiscal risks, including those related to the SOE
sector. A fiscal risk arises from the indebtedness of the state-owned enterprises, with inadequate
information on debt and a weak framework for controlling debt. A high-level brainstorming session
focused on this issue in 2010 followed by policy recommendations and ongoing technical assistance
towards integrating SOE debt monitoring into fiscal policy. More broadly, these efforts aim to assist in
developing a medium term Debt Management Strategy drawing from the recommendations of the 2011
Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA).
Country Development Goal: Enhance Public Sector Efficiency and Transparency
22. The Bank support through the CPS has contributed to establishing gradually the building
blocks of a modern PFM system. The support provided by the Bank through advisory work, the PEFA
and the 2010 DPL towards implementation of a revised budget code culminated in the introduction of a
three-year budgeting on a rolling basis at the national and regional levels, more autonomy for budget
administrators allowing reallocation of resources between the budget line items during budget execution,
and the introduction of internal audit units in budgetary organizations. As the local level of Government
accounts for 40 percent of expenditures and provides the lion‘s share of social services to the population,
these changes are important for effective public expenditure outcomes. Progress in the implementation of
performance-based budgeting has gained pace with support from ongoing multi-year JERP AAA, which
is expected to facilitate stronger alignment of national strategies with budgetary resources throughout the
36

The fiscal rule adopted in April 2010 set a ceiling for the transfer from the NF to the budget at US$8 billion and mandated no
off-budget transfers to the state enterprise sector.
37
For instance the initial session focused on Building Blocks for Diversifying the Economy (FY04) during the preparation of the
Country Economic Memorandum (FY05). A further series discussed policy options on structural transformation, exchange rate
policy, industrial policy, and trade. In subsequent years the Bank organized, among others, two high level brainstorming sessions
upon request of the Government to address strategic macroeconomic policy questions - Managing Economic Crises (FY09) and
Discussion of draft Strategy of Kazakhstan Development Until 2020 (FY10).

35

next CPS. The Bank has also supported the design of an institutional framework for government agencies
that separates policy-making from policy implementation—advisory support started with
recommendations on improving public investment planning and then expanded to a full assessment of
financial management systems.
23. The Bank supported a successful reform of the tax system that reduced the taxation burden
for the non-oil sector. JERP AAA towards improving neutrality in taxation of non-oil sectors assisted
with the design and the implementation thereafter of a new 2008 Tax Code that introduced flat tax
regimes for personal and corporate income, set a higher tax burden for the resource and oil industries (a
key government policy measure in support of output diversification) and adopted a special tax regime that
lowers the tax burden on the small and medium enterprise sector. Kazakhstan has one of the lowest tax
burdens (outside of the oil sector) in the region. The 2012 Doing Business report rated Kazakhstan 13th
out of 183 countries in terms of ease of paying taxes, which makes it the top-ranked country not only in
Central Asia, but also in ECA region.38 The effective tax burden on oil sector almost doubled from 16-17
percent in 2003-2004 to over 30 percent in 2010.
24. The Bank, in addition, has been supporting improvements in revenue administration
institutions. Analytical work on the efficiency of Kazakhstan tax and customs administrations informed
modernization strategies for each institution, envisaging change management, smart procedures and
improved capacity. The Bank is assisting with implementation of these strategies through two projects39
which are expected to improve administrative practices and governance environment under the next CPS.
25. The signing in December 2006 of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) between the Government and the Bank accelerated the
pace of EITI implementation. Amendments to the Law on sub-soil use were passed, mandating
commitment to EITI for all new license holders. EITI now covers not just the oil and gas sector but
mining as well, with 136 companies participating including TengizChevrOil, the largest oil producer in
Kazakhstan (this level of participation exceeds reporting in any other EITI implementing country). The
share of companies that have signed the EITI memorandum represents over 95 percent of the total
extractive revenues generated in the country, improving significantly transparency in flows. An important
last step in consolidating these impressive efforts is achieving an EITI complaint status in 2013.
26. To strengthen anti-corruption efforts the Government has eliminated many administrative
barriers. Licensed activities had been reduced, and a strict order was established for inspections of
private entrepreneurs by state agencies. The country has ratified the UN Convention against Corruption in
2008, confirming its willingness to follow international standards in the field of preventing and combating
corruption, an area were there remains an unfinished agenda to be followed through under the next CPS.
The Bank also provided advisory assistance through the JERP towards establishment of a Committee for
Financial Monitoring under the Ministry of Finance to lead efforts in Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating Terrorism Financing (AML/CFT). The Committee was established in April 2008 and in July
2011 was accepted as new member of the Egmont Group—International Association of Financial
Intelligence Units.

38

In terms of total number of tax payments, Kazakhstan is ahead of ECA (37) and OECD (13) countries with only 7 annual
payments. Time spent by taxpayers has also improved – 188 hours per year and close to OECD similar indicator (186). Profit tax
with an effective rate of 15.9 percent is very close to OECD countries (15.4 percent effective rate), and total tax rate is equal to
only 28.6 percent (ECA – 40.4 percent, and OECD – 42.7 percent).
39
Customs Development Project (FY08-12) and Tax Administration Reform Project (FY10-14).

36

Pillar 2: Promoting competitiveness by strengthening government’s capacity to identify and reduce
barriers to business and private investors
Country Development Goal: Improve Business/Investment Environment
27. With CPS support, business environment reforms have resulted in reduced transaction costs,
requirements and time for businesses to comply with the law. Efforts continue to sustain significant
improvements in the business environment as measured by the Doing Business (DB) indicators, where
Kazakhstan moved from position 86 in 2005 to 47 in 2011. Close Bank collaboration with the interagency
working groups help guide steady improvements in numerous regulatory requirements making easier to
open businesses, pay taxes and protect investors‘ rights. Currently, the emphasis is on improving lagging
areas further (e.g. construction permits, access to financing, cross-border procedures) and enforcement.
28. The reach of business environment reforms extends beyond the areas directly measured by
DB rankings. The Bank has worked closely with the Ministry of Finance on overhauling the legal
framework governing bankruptcy and insolvency. As part of these efforts a new legal framework is
currently being developed to address important drawbacks that impede efficient resolution of problems
faced by highly indebted firms—this will provide an essential foundation for resolution of NPLs that
currently hold back the development of the financial sector. The ongoing joint efforts cover streamlining
of the licensing and permits framework, through which over 30 percent of the licenses and permits
(originally estimated around 1200) were eliminated to date and a further 30 percent is expected to be
eliminated in 2012. The Bank also collaborated with authorities to strengthen competition, through
enhancement of the legal framework and the institutional capacity of the Competition Protection Agency
(CPA). However, this is an area where a large unfinished agenda remains to be tackled through a
compressive approach that includes the CPA and other relevant institutions. Multi-ranging government
support programs for local enterprises (import substitution, local content requirements, and government
support schemes) create unfair competitive advantages at the firm level, opportunities for rent-seeking
behavior, and reduce the appeal of Kazakhstan as an FDI destination. The Bank advisory work involved
assessment of other mechanisms (e.g. supplier development programs and value chain analysis) as
alternatives to the normative industrial policy instruments to sharpen competitiveness and foster job
creation over the coming period.
29. IFC supports improvement of the investment climate in Kazakhstan, working at the
enterprise level. Despite obstacles from the lack of transparency regarding the ownership of enterprises
and financial intermediaries, and remaining weaknesses in corporate governance, IFC has been expanding
its private sector investment program in agribusiness, construction materials, and retail sectors (IFC
commitments in the real sector during the CPS period total US$214 million in ten projects). IFC client
companies provide employment to nearly 3,000 people, including 1,300 women. They generate about
US$100 million per year in purchases from local suppliers, stimulating economic activity along the
supply chain. Further developments in the areas of corporate governance and business transparency
should attract more private investors and bring greater efficiency as businesses mature and seek greater
access to international sources of financing. To support this process, IFC started a Corporate Governance
Advisory Services project in 2005 focusing on regulatory improvements, increasing general awareness of
corporate governance issues, and providing customized advice to private companies. More recently, IFC
expanded it is advisory support to help strengthen transparency of tax system (thorough increased
compliance and formalization) as part of a larger Central Asia focused initiative results from which are
expected under the next CPS.
30. Innovation promotion and enterprise modernization are among the top objectives of the
Government’s diversification agenda. The Bank advisory assistance in this area facilitated the transfer

37

of best-practice international experience to improve technological sophistication of local firms including
through the Technology Commercialization Project (FY08-12). The Project is facilitating the
establishment of strong linkages between universities, researchers and industry through
commercialization of technologies developed in Kazakhstan‘s research institutes. It also helps
Government implement initiatives such as scientific peer review mechanisms, financing instruments for
technical assistance and innovation, and enterprise sector monitoring on innovation. In parallel, the Bank
is providing policy and institutional capacity-building assistance through JERP to the National Innovation
Fund (the agency leading innovation in the industry in Kazakhstan) as well as other implementing
agencies that support enterprises, such as Kazakhstan Industrial Development Institute and the Investment
and Export Promotion Agency (Kaznex Invest).
31. The Bank’s analytical work has also contributed to trade policy agenda and formulation of a
national strategy for embracing the benefits of regional and global integration. Initially trade policy
support started as a high-level advisory service on the dual agendas of accession to WTO, and regional
integration, expanding more recently to support trade competitiveness agenda. A series of AAA work
have highlighted the importance of reducing trade facilitation costs and eliminating non-tariff barriers
(primarily standards and technical regulation barriers) in this regard. The on-going multi-year JERP
advisory on trade policy builds on this body of work, aiming at strengthening the country‘s trade
competitiveness through an integrated approach to needed policy and institutional reforms in the trade
policy and facilitation agenda as well as in the evolving trade integration agenda (the WTO accession
process is expected to reach the final stage of admission by the end of 2012).
Country Development Goal: Promote Financial Sector Development
32. The Bank supported authorities in their efforts to manage significant pressures on the
banking sector since mid-2007 and maintain the functioning of the financial sector. The joint BankIMF stocktaking through a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and its Update pointed to risks
including: (i) the pre-crisis rapid credit growth concentration in real estate; (ii) the reliance on
international wholesale borrowing to fund the credit growth; and (iii) weaknesses in the regulatory
frameworks and the supervision practices. The increasing financial distress in 2008 intensified the
dialogue (including through brainstorming session), which initially centered on curbing fiscal costs and
moral hazard by ensuring that unsecured creditors participated in the recapitalization of the large weak
banks. The 2010 DPL supported improvements to the legal framework that facilitated a court supervised
restructuring of the banks, which was eventually used to restructure liabilities of major troubled banks. In
addition, the DPL supported better bank resolution tools (providing a credible alternative to the
restructuring and enhancing authorities‘ ability to manage bank failures should resolution be needed).
The DPL-supported measures led to a significant improvement in the solvency ratios of the banking
sector through restructuring of two major banks; however, lack of progress in collecting revenues, and
high cost of funding prevent their full recovery.
33. The high level of NPLs remains a major problem for the banking sector, calling for a
comprehensive response. The Government developed a strategy to reduce the burden of the NPLs on the
banking system.40 Supported by the JERP advisory assistance from the Bank on the insolvency system,
tax code amendments to facilitate debt write offs for loans to qualified individuals are helpful; and efforts
are underway to facilitate debt workouts. In addition, the authorities strengthened the regulatory
40

The Council for Financial Stability has approved a strategy to improve the quality of banks assets, aiming to remove NPLs
with an approximate face value of $6 billion (about 37 percent of the total) from banks‘ main balance sheets in order to facilitate
a resumption of lending, while limiting costs and mitigating moral hazard. If successful, the plan would be expanded, drawing
the participation of both domestic and foreign investors. The strategy proposes the creation of a national asset management
company (the Second Distressed Asset Fund or DAF-2) and private (bank specific) asset management companies that would
operate as special purpose vehicles (SPV) through which banks would separate the non-performing assets.

38

framework through measures to discourage foreign currency lending and to increase the minimum capital
requirement. Over the coming period, these efforts will need to be broadened to ensure proper loan
valuation and provisioning in all banks along with decisive actions to reduce bad loans and to replenish
bank capital where needed.
34. During the crisis, IFC focused on supporting efforts to help stabilize the financial sector and
increase access to finance in the priority sectors in the economy. Over the past four years, IFC
provided US$680 million in equity, quasi-equity, senior debt, and trade finance to several banks in
Kazakhstan. During the CPS period, IFC investment clients in the banking sector provided over 350,000
Micro and Small/Medium Enterprise Finance loans (MSME); and at the end of 2010 held outstanding
MSME portfolios of over US$2.7 billion. In addition, IFC provided advisory support to a working group
designing regulations to deal with non-performing loans in the banking sector through its existing
Financial Market Crisis Response advisory project in Ukraine. These activities broadened IFC‘s pre-crisis
advisory services in the financial sector which supported development of leasing (project closed in 2005)
and mortgage finance (project closed in 2009), which jointly are estimated to have facilitated over
US$130 million of financing.
Country Development Goal: Promote Agriculture Competitiveness
35. Agriculture has excellent prospects and a number of policies have been developed to
strengthen this sector. JERP focused on key policy issues to promote the agriculture sector as an
important source of economic growth. The Government has sought the Bank‘s advice on the role of the
State as a facilitator to strengthen the sector‘s competitiveness. This includes establishing a level playing
field for all producers and maintaining quality in production. The Bank has provided perspectives through
two complementary agricultural policy and expenditure reviews and brainstorming events on this theme,
facilitating debate on gaps in public service provision and options on agricultural financing schemes. The
debate on effectiveness of subsidy programs in particular (most recently in 2010 brainstorming) translated
into more detailed socio-economic assessment of selected spending programs. Among the Government‘s
current sector plans are streamlining the subsidy programs and unleashing the potential of livestock sector
in a larger market which the common economic space with Russia and Belarus now provides.
36. The Bank supported rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure when this was needed most,
and assisted with application of innovative approaches in land management and agricultural
production and services. The Irrigation and Drainage Improvement Project (FY96-04) helped
rehabilitate more than 32,000 ha of lands, which resulted in crop yield increases up to 200 percent. With
the increase in capacity and own-funding means over time, the Bank assistance under the Project shifted
to focus on small scale pilots and innovative arrangements for the Government to scale-up. The Drylands
Management Project (FY03-10) helped demonstrate and promote sustainable land use practices in
marginal dry-land areas by testing environmental, social and economic viability of shifting from
(unsustainable) cereal-based production systems to pasture/rangeland-based livestock production systems
with results exceeding expectations (farmers participating in the project saw their cattle herd more than
doubled). The Government is currently planning wide-scale application of DMP lessons in consultation
with the Bank. The Agricultural Competitiveness Project (FY04-12) facilitated access to knowledge by
establishing an innovative competitive grants program to increase funding for the relevant applied
agricultural research, modernize veterinary facilities, and facilitate adoption of improved technologies
among small scale producers. Under the Second Agricultural Post-Privatization Assistance Project
(FY04-12) the Bank assisted with enhancing access to commercial financial services by farmers and
small/medium size rural enterprises along with reviewing the effectiveness of the mandatory crop
insurance program. The crisis and slow banking sector recovery undercut the prospects for this project to
fully achieve its objectives, but its training and technical assistance services provided beneficiaries and
policy makers with valuable experience.

39

37. IFC has carried out its first investments in the agribusiness sector during the CPS period. The
first agribusiness investment (FY10) was made in poultry company (in Ust-Kamenogorsk in eastern
Kazakhstan) and also involved advisory support on food safety to the company. This was followed by an
investment in a grain trader Soufflet Kazakhstan, as part of a multi-country facility, to help expand its
grain origination, trading, and processing operations. IFC efforts to identify suitable opportunities for
supporting private sector companies in primary agriculture has not yet brought results.
Pillar 3: Building the foundation for future competitiveness by investing in human capital and basic
infrastructure
Country Development Goal: Improve Quality of Human Capital
38. Public spending on human capital has grown and human development indicators have
improved over the CPS period (UNDP’s human development index improved from 80th in 2005 to
68th in 2011). Still, much remains to be done and human development indicators are inferior to those of
many countries at comparable levels of income per capita. The Government is aware of the need to
improve human development outcomes. Over the CPS period, number of high-level brainstorms
addressed key policy challenges facing health and education and helped the Government prioritize its
actions in these vital areas of social policy. The policy dialogue transformed from selected analysis of
policy issues to a comprehensive assistance under the Health Sector Technology Transfer and
Institutional Reform Project (FY09-13), which covers information system reform, health financing
reform, and health care quality improvement with full results are expected under the next CPS. Similarly,
analytical JERP work on education (ranging from the diagnostics and improving student assessment of
secondary education to the higher education reform), labor markets and competitiveness informed the
preparation of the Technical and Vocational Education Modernization Project (FY11-13), which aims at
improving the quality and relevance of skills and workforce development and alignment of the supply of
skills to market demands through close partnership with industries and employers. The project will also
strengthen governance, management, and financing of the system. Results from the project will come
during the next CPS. Prior work on higher education reform jointly with the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 2008 had fed into the strategy for the Ministry of Education
and Science.
39. The Bank has supported Kazakhstan’s social protection agenda through the JERP program
in several areas. At the Government‘s request, the Bank prepared a series of assessment reports on
improving the long-term sustainability of the Kazakh pension system with the last update is currently near
completion. It will be informing the planned amendments to the pension system‘s legal and institutional
framework under the next CPS. The Bank input for the 2020 Employment Strategy of the Government
was discussed in a brainstorming session last year and thereafter adopted. The Strategy builds on social
safety net (SSN) reform that balances the protection function—extent, reach and level of benefits—and
the promotion function by linking beneficiaries to jobs and auxiliary services (thus providing incentives
for work). Technical Assistance under JERP has supported these reforms, including through surveys that
identified the characteristics of those out of work and best practice international experience.
Country Development Goal: Maintain Adequate Basic Infrastructure
40. Relieving the infrastructure constraints to growth is a key component of Government’s
competitiveness agenda. Large capital investments to upgrade the major east-west and north-south road
and rail corridors linking China, Central Asia and Russia with Western Europe have been the highest
priority in transport, recognizing that diversified growth requires reduction in economic distances and
greatly improved connectivity between cities. As envisaged under the joint Bank and Government South-

40

West Road Project (FY09-13), a shift in expenditures towards road maintenance would both raise
efficiency in spending and help reduce the high costs of road transport. Kazakhstan has also advanced
greatly in power sector reforms: the vertically integrated monopolistic sector was unbundled, most of the
generation plants and regional distribution companies were privatized, and a competitive wholesale
market developed, with a modern grid code. With efficient tariffs, the transmission sector is highly
technologically advanced. Besides supporting key institutional reforms (tariff rationalization, modern
Grid Code, organized spot market, strengthening state-owned Kazakhstan Electricity Grid Operating
Company), the Bank has partially financed strategic investments in the transmission sector through four
consecutive projects41 that make it the most technologically advanced among the CIS.
41. IFC’s involvement in infrastructure has been limited reflecting the challenges of finding
suitable opportunities. IFC is currently undertaking infrastructure projects in Kazakhstan in the context
of regional investments. One such investment entailed a US$17.5 million loan to a subsidiary of Gulf
Agency Company, a global provider of marine related services, to purchase shipping vessels. IFC has also
involved in extensive advisory work in the area of Private Public Partnerships (PPPs), to support PPPs in
toll roads, solid waste, and urban transport solutions with limited results so far due to country‘s reliance
on sovereign-funded solutions.
Pillar 4: Ensuring future growth will not harm the environment as past liabilities are mitigated
Country Development Goal: Promote Environmentally Sustainable Growth
42. The impact of Bank-supported work addressing environmental concerns is tangible. The
Government is strongly committed to addressing key environmental legacy issues and is undertaking
substantial investments in the environment sector. Over the CPS period, Bank provided extensive
technical assistance to Kazakhstan on reducing gas flaring, which culminated in amendments to
Kazakhstan‘s Law on Oil, obliging extractive companies to reduce gas flaring through the gas utilization
program. Through the Nura River Clean-up Project (FY03-11), the Bank assisted with bringing the river
water in line with international standards for mercury concentration in surface waters which is an
important step in improving its suitability for drinking water preparation, though ongoing water pollution
of other industries in operation remains a problem. The Ust-Kamenogorsk Environmental Remediation
Project (FY07-13) is supporting prevention of the groundwater contamination plume's further migration
towards the residential areas and the city's sources of drinking water supply. Implementation so far has
contributed to strengthening the capacity of the laboratories in Ust-Kamenogorsk through training and the
purchase of modern laboratory equipment for measuring heavy metals and organic chemicals in drinking
and surface water, soils and groundwater; full results are expected under the next CPS.
43. The CPS program has made a major contribution to the recuperation of the Northern Aral
Sea (NAS). The outcomes of the Syr Darya Control and Northern Aral Sea Project (FY01-10) exceeded
expectations in terms of increase in fish production and livestock production by a large margin. The
increasing levels of water have also improved fauna and flora in the region. A follow-up project is under
preparation with a view to increase the irrigation water supply to agricultural areas while enhancing
human safety and the environment around NAS.
44. The Government recognizes the environmental regulatory framework and enforcement
practices need strengthening. Air and water pollution is significant and since the environmental
monitoring systems are not adequately funded, environmental statistics do not reflect the current pollution
load on the environment. Hazardous and non-hazardous water dumpsites and landfills often do not meet
41

Electricity Transmission Rehabilitation Project (FY99-09); North-South Electricity Transmission Project (FY06-11); Moinak
Electricity Transmission Project (FY10-12); and Alma Electricity Transmission Project (FY11-15).

41

international sanitary design standards for safe disposal of waste. Environmental regulations need to be
modernized to provide incentives to industries to apply best available techniques at reasonable costs in
abatement measures.
IV.

World Bank Group Performance

45. The 2004 CPS constituted a flexible response to Kazakhstan’s development objectives. The
strategy was designed to ensure strong government ownership of the Bank‘s program, to allow the
Government and the Bank to adjust that program to changing government priorities and country
circumstances, and thereby to maximize the Bank‘s contribution to Kazakhstan‘s development. At the
heart of the strategy lay a program of knowledge transfer across the range of development policy issues,
driven by country priorities. Selective investment and budget support loans in strategic high-impact areas
were also provided.
46. The knowledge-transfer program saw a substantial increase in the range, and amount of
government financing of analytical and technical assistance services. The JERP program grew from
US$1.3 million in 2004 (of which 40 percent was government-financed) to US$4.3 million in 2012 (85
percent government-financed). At the Government‘s request the Bank organized fifteen high-level
brainstorming sessions over the CPS period—all have been co-chaired by the Prime Minister. Among the
latest are global lessons for entrepreneurship, SME development and foreign investments; SOE debt
management; pro-active social safety net programs and policies to increase formality; intergovernmental
fiscal relations; and global economic prospects, reflecting growing focus on enterprise modernization,
fiscal risk management, and more even regional development. The importance and effectiveness of highlevel brainstorms to support the JERP-based policy dialogue on key development issues is valued by
Government, which in itself underlines the credibility of this dialogue. JERP effectiveness is being further
enhanced by making it more programmatic in nature starting with the current 4 th three-year cycle. As a
result, advisory products will be planned through multi-year or interconnected engagements in addition to
quick response activities.
47. Knowledge transfer was complemented by selective project-based assistance, where
investment-related capacity building needs and support for sophisticated structural reforms were
required. Analytical surveys of international good practice on key topics—the World Trade Organization
accession work, tax administration, utilities‘ tariff reform, technology commercialization, health and
education sector reforms—have often led to adapting best-practice to the Kazakhstan context. This was
followed in selected cases by government request to build on the analytical work through project lending
to support reforms as in the Customs and Tax Administration Development Projects, the Health Sector
Technology Transfer and Institutional Reform project, reflecting the view that Bank projects provide
knowledge and skill transfer beyond what is possible through analytical work alone. In particular, over
the past four years, there has been an increase in Bank‘s institution building and TA projects which
potentially have a large pay off both for the Bank and the Government in terms of increasing
sustainability of results that are being generated under joint programs.
48. An important challenge for the Bank arises from country processes which are evolving at a
slower pace than dictated by the country’s development needs. Under the 2004 CPS, the Government
had indicated its preference to see Bank projects designed for quick delivery (preparation held to 12
months and implementation to 3 years whenever possible)—an objective that required simplification of
government project-related processes. Such steps to simplify internal processes to speed up project
approval and implementation have been gradual. Project preparation is rigidly bound to the annual
budget preparation cycle, while signing and effectiveness are delayed by repetitive clearance procedures,
thereby prolonging the project cycle to no purpose.

42

49. The Bank jointly with the Government has formulated an action plan to improve portfolio
performance. Internal process issues were at the heart of the 2008 CPPR, and have been an important
part of the portfolio dialogue with the Government since then. The progress to date in addressing them
resulted in halving the time needed to take a project from concept approval to effectiveness (down to 24
months from 40 months), which gives some confidence for the attainability of further improvements. To
address the remaining agenda, the Government is currently reviewing ―envelope ratification‖ procedures
developed by a multi-agency working group which, once adopted, will radically simplify internal country
process. In addition, as part of the action plan from the participatory 2011CPPR, Bank and the
Government established a Joint Portfolio Monitoring Team to facilitate further improvements in the
project implementation performance, including through cross-project fertilization.
50. IFC operations in Kazakhstan expanded rapidly as a result of the Special Initiative for
Central Asia and Azerbaijan. The Special Initiative was launched in FY08 to increase investments in
the sub-region, with a particular focus on supporting MSME growth, strengthening the financial sector,
and providing direct financing for the real sectors and infrastructure. The initiative entailed an
establishment of a sub-regional hub in Almaty, a substantial increase of IFC staff in the country offices,
and reallocation of resources from other regional offices. Having the initiative launch roughly coincide
with the beginning of the financial crisis positioned IFC well to provide timely response, especially to the
financial sector of Kazakhstan.
51. IFC actively supported Government’s diversification agenda. Kazakhstan currently represents
IFC‘s sixth largest exposure in the ECA region with outstanding portfolio of US$382 million as of the
end of 2011. This constitutes a three-fold increase in the size of portfolio during the CPS period. Total
investments in Kazakhstan during the CPS period amounted to over US$1 billion in 27 projects, of which
US$950 million was for IFC‘s own account and US$110 million was raised through a syndication. Prior
to the crisis, IFC focused on SME development, investments in sectors of comparative advantage for
Kazakhstan (such as agri-business, oil-gas, general manufacturing, infrastructure, and services) and
developing leasing and mortgage finance. During the crisis, IFC rapidly expanded its focus to support
stabilization in the financial sector and increasing access to finance in the priority sectors in the economy.
Over the past four years primary component of IFC assistance (US$680 million) focused on equity, quasiequity, senior debt, and trade finance to several systemic private sector banks in Kazakhstan. IFC
investment portfolio in Kazakhstan is nearly fully disbursed (98 percent) and performing well, with no
NPLs as of the end of 2011. In addition, IFC has been actively providing advisory assistance in the areas
of corporate governance and business transparency, to address the key constraints to expansion of private
sector investment programs in Kazakhstan.
52. The Bank Group has done well in managing a growing program, ensuring that it remains
demand-driven, maintains strategic focus and generates impact. The group has been responsive to
Kazakhstan‘s evolving development priorities (working closely with partners such as IMF, EU, ADB),
and rapid pace of demand for high quality JERP-AAA in general, and to crisis-mitigation needs in
particular. Through JERP, the Bank provided assistance in answering questions about ―what and why‖ by
providing policy analysis, strategic planning expertise, and good practice options. Bank support through
investment operations has been largely successful in achieving their intended outcomes with all closing
projects over the past seven years were rated ―satisfactory‖ by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG).
The Bank‘s crisis-mitigation support through DPL, was timely and has been largely successful, with its
policy framework is under implementation now and, more broadly, the economic recovery is fully
underway. Questions about ―how and who‖ were addressed through ongoing implementation support of
the portfolio, while brokering access to a global network of experts, and direct contact with practitioners.
Implementation experience has been particularly useful where the project and policies are innovative or
complex. Thus, the Tax Administration Project benefited from experience gained under the Customs
Administration Project, and applied lessons about institutional change and incentives. Likewise,

43

consecutive energy sector projects draw successfully on experience, and knowledge gained, as well as
institutional capacity built by the counterpart agency—state-owned Kazakhstan Electricity Grid Operating
Company.
53. Both IFC’s performance and program were successful. IFC‘s program outcome rating is
supported by the strong results of IFC investments as evidenced by IEG‘s development outcome ratings
and the reach indicators.42 IFC operations have contributed to the CPS outcomes focusing on improving
business environment, strengthening the financial sector, including in the context of the financial crisis,
and supporting agribusiness. IFC‘s performance rating is supported by a rapid expansion of IFC‘s
investments, whereby over US$1 billion was provided to the private sector with a focus on the country‘s
strategic development priorities. IFC rapidly adapted to the changing macroeconomic environment during
the financial crisis, providing counter-cyclical support to key private sector banks in Kazakhstan, and
thereby contributing to the stabilization of the banking sector and resumption of trade finance and funding
for SMEs. Accompanying advisory services focused on improving the business environment by
improving corporate governance standards and tax transparency and strengthening the country‘s leasing
sector. All projects evaluated by IEG are rated highly on work quality and IFC role and additionality.
54. Overall realization of the program and the Bank Group’s performance was successful. The
satisfactory rating for the former reflects significant progress on several major development issues
summarized in this completion report and, the latter is based on continued generation of high quality
AAA, responsiveness, CPS outcomes (including value added that Bank interventions brought to
Kazakhstan‘s development agenda), innovation, and strong, strategic partnership formed under the CPS.
There remain multiple areas where international knowledge can bring Kazakhstan economic and
efficiency gains in the next CPS. Private sector development in an environment of greater domestic
competition and innovation policies are prime examples in this respect.
V.

Lessons and Recommendations

55. Flexibility in the CPS worked well in allowing emergence of a strong AAA agenda and a
selective portfolio that focused on core policy actions, linked with government’s timetable, and
supported by systemic analytical work. By delivering successful results under a growing program, this
approach has demonstrated that the Bank can remain relevant in addressing development challenges of
countries that enjoy commodity export windfalls and have low borrowing requirements.
56. The JERP approach requires constant attention to the client whose priorities shift frequently.
In extreme cases, this priority setting can become volatile which may lower the impact of Bank work. The
lesson learned is to balance responsiveness while keeping the strategic perspective on long term reform
needs of the economy. The Bank has achieved some success in this area. While not every Bank report was
accepted, there were many examples where they became wholly adopted and used to frame the
Government‘s strategic planning (e.g., health, WTO accession, tax administration, budget management,
insolvency procedures). In some other cases, when the timing was not right for implementing the
recommendations, the Government appreciated their value at a later point and relied on them to inform
policy choices (e.g., overheating and macroeconomic management). In parallel, the pressure of a
discerning client has helped improve the quality and responsiveness of the Bank‘s interventions.
57. High-level brainstorming events with the government to set the strategic agenda and discuss
in depth key development issues has proven to be vital to relevance, quality and timeliness of the
Bank assistance as well as its impact. The Bank has supported the Government‘s ambitious reform
42

Four IFC investments in Kazakhstan have been evaluated by IEG to date, of which two during the CPS period, both of them
with positive ratings. Not enough IFC investments have reached operating maturity to have a DOTS rating.

44

agenda through a series of brainstorming events which focus on learning from international experience as
counterparts build their capacity in reform formulation and implementation. The most recent
brainstorming in December 2011 addressed global economic prospects to inform the Government‘s
evaluation of policy priorities in the face of euro area debt crisis. The new Government appointed in
January 2012 has reconfirmed its desire to retain the brainstorming as a channel of dialogue which is an
important mechanism for consensus building activities and debates on important policy issues.
58. To maintain the quality of the Bank portfolio, learning from doing should be a constant
process. Most IBRD investment operations, especially the new institution-building projects in
Kazakhstan have been green-field, i.e. they require adoption of new approaches and procedures, and most
implementing agencies are first time borrowers with all of the risks that entails in terms of the lack of
familiarity with Bank procedures. Therefore, ensuring that implementation agency has legitimacy with
adequate mandate during implementation, and close monitoring and supervision are essential elements of
implementation. Strategies that require wide coordination run the risk of delays in implementation; hence,
program design must be kept simple along with continued efforts to facilitate improved coordination. The
Bank could also play a steering role in cross-project fertilization, facilitating learning form both positive
and negative lessons (which are equally important for successful implementation of projects). For
instance, the Bank procurement team based in the field conducts, on a weekly basis, procurement
workshops/training for all implementing units, which proved to be an effective learning platform.
59. The main drivers of the quality of the Bank portfolio affect also the Government’s own
investment program. Excessive centralization of decision-making and budgetary controls are factors in
slowing down project preparation and implementation. Through the JERP and the CPPRs, the Bank had
drawn the attention of the Government to key issues, requiring response. In addition, these issues are
being more systematically addressed under the new Budget Code which introduced medium-term
performance-focused budgeting, and more flexible and accountable financial management and
procurement mechanisms. Their implementation is being supported under the JERP and the next CPS.

45

CPS CR Annex Table 1. Kazakhstan: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
(FY05-11)
FY

Project Plans

CPS of August 10, 2004
FY05 Agricultural Post-Privatization
Assistance – Phase 2
Agriculture Competitiveness

FY06

FY07

FY08

Subtotal
Forest Protection and
Reforestation
Irrigation and Drainage –
Phase 2

Subtotal
Ust-Kamenogorsk
Environmental Remediation
Subtotal
Customs Development
Technology
Commercialization

Subtotal
Subtotal FY05-08
CPS Progress Report of May 1, 2008
FY09 Syr Darya and N.Aral Sea –
Phase 2
Territorial Development
South-West Roads
Subtotal
FY10 Irrigation and Drainage –
Phase 2

FY11

Subtotal
Technical and Vocational
Education

Subtotal
Subtotal FY09-11
TOTAL FY05-11

US$ millions
IBRD
TF

Project Status

US$ millions
IBRD
TF

35.0

35.00

0.68

24.00

0.62

59.0
30.0

Actual (US$15.4 million, after
partial cancellation)
Actual (US$14.7 million, after
partial cancellation)
Subtotal
Actual

59.00
30.00

1.30
5.41

189.0

Still in the pipeline

-

0.60

219.0
35.0

Additional actual projects:
North-South Electricity
Transmission
Subtotal
Actual

35.0
22.0
17.0

Subtotal
Actual
Actual

39.0
352.0

Additional actual projects:
Health Sector Technology Transfer
and Institutional Reform
Subtotal
Subtotal FY05-08

165.8

24.0

100.00
130.00
24.29

6.01
4.29

24.29
18.50
13.40

4.29

117.70
149.60
362.89

11.60

Still in the pipeline

-

2.70

250.0
2,255.0
2,670.8
131.0

Dropped
Actual
Subtotal
Still in the pipeline

2,125.00
2,125.00
-

0.86
3.56

131.0
92.2

Additional actual projects:
Tax Administration Reform
Public Sector Audit Capacity Bldg
Development Policy Operation
Moinak Electricity Transmission
Subtotal
Actual

92.2
2,894.0
3,246.0

Additional actual projects:
Alma Electricity Transmission
Strengthening Statistical System
Subtotal
Subtotal FY09-11
TOTAL FY05-11

46

17.00
0.46
1,000.00
48.00
1,065.00
29.23

78.00
20.00
127.23
3,317.23
3,680.12

0.46

4.02
15.62

CPS CR Annex Table 2. Kazakhstan: Joint Economic Research Program and Actual Deliveries
(FY05-11)
FY
FY05

FY06

JERP Plans
Reforming the Public Sector Wage System
CEM: The Challenge of Managing Kazakhstan's Oil Boom
Note on Harmonizing Infrastructure Tariffs for Railways
Case Study on Efficiency of State Procurement System in Health Sector
Case Study of Intergovernmental Health Finance
Review of Current System of Information Provision in Education
Review of Current System of National Examination and Quality
Assessment Systems
Report on Education Financing System at Local Level
Environmental Impact of Industrial Growth: The Case of Petrochemical
Industry
Review of the Water and Energy Legislation of the CA Countries from the
Point of View of Facilitating the Set-up of a the Water Energy Consortium
Report on International Experience in Managing International Transboundary River Basins
Transport Sector Strategy Development

Status
Actual
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY06
Partially completed
Actual

Follow-Up work on PEIR 2004
ROSC
Telecom Sector Reform and Information Society Development (egovernment)
Development of Financial Instruments to Attract Domestic Investments in
Infrastructure
PPP in Infrastructure: Options for Kazakhstan
Macroeconomic Modeling
Consequences of WTO accession for Kazakhstan: Quantitative
Assessment
Tariff Formulation and Regulation in Infrastructure
Strategic Plan to Improve Neutrality in Taxation of Non-oil Sector

Actual
Actual

TA for Improvement Healthcare Quality System
Strategic Note on Integration of the Graduate Education and Science
Systems
Evaluation of Agriculture and Food Program: Agriculture Policy
Assessment
Elaboration of Regional Programs of Territorial Development
FY07

Tax Administration Report
Customs Administration: Customs Modernization Project Preparation
Improvement of Planning, Implementation, M&E, and Auditing Processes
for Budget Investments
Introduction of e-Government and Digital Inclusion
PFMR in Agriculture, Health, Education
Public-Private Partnerships
Macroeconomic Modeling
WTO Accession: Legal Advice
Socio-Entrepreneurial Corporations

47

Actual
Partially completed
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY07
Actual (published in
FY08)
Actual
Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY07
Actual
Forwarded to FY08
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY08
Delivered in FY08
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

FY

FY08

JERP Plans
Comparative Analysis of the Legislation and Practices in the Area of
Competition Protection
EITI Support: Introduction and Capacity Building
TA for Improvement of Healthcare Quality System
Health Sector Technology Transfer and Institutional Reform: Project
Preparation
Higher Education in Kazakhstan as Factor of Innovation Development
Development of Vocational Education and Training: Project Preparation
Improvement of Multi-tiered Pension System
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund
Territorial Development: Project Preparation
Brainstorming Event: Achieving Competitiveness through Better
Governance

Status

Tax Administration Report
Support to the Administrative Reform
Build-up of a Training Basis for State Financial Institutions‘ Staff as well
as Accountants and Auditors of the Real Sector
Public Finance Management Review: PEFA
Development Program of the Agency for Statistics up to 2015
Analytical and Advisory Assistance for Comprehensive Modernization of
Communal Services
Technical Assistance for Implementation of PPP Program and Concession
Mechanisms
Developing Mechanism of Development and Support to Local Suppliers
(SME) for Large Transnational Companies
Markets Analysis to Enhance Competition and Detection and Elimination
of Impediments to Market Access
Facilitation of Regional Innovative Entrepreneurship on the Bases of
Techno Parks and Establishment of Technology Transfer System
EITI Support: Raising Public Awareness
Vocational Education and Training: Project Preparation
Development and Implementation of Activities on Increasing
Sustainability of Pension System
Support to Development of the Social Protection
Territorial Development: Project Preparation
Brainstorming Event: Administrative Reform Issues
Brainstorming Event: Human Development Agenda
Brainstorming Event: Food Price Increases and Agricultural Policies

Actual
Actual

48

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

Partially completed
Delivered in FY09
Actual
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY09
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

FY
FY09

FY10

JERP Plans
Tax Administration: Project Preparation
Administrative Reform
Survey on the Quality of Public Services
Development of the System of Internal Audit Services
E-government Diagnostics
Public Finance Management Review: PEIRs in Agriculture and Health
Establishment of the Financial Monitoring System (AML/CFT)
Analysis of Methodology of General Budgetary Transfers
Financial Stability and FSAP follow-up
International Economy Forum In Astana
Concept for the PPP Development and Fiscal Risk Management
Macroeconomic Forecasting and Modeling:
Kazakhstan Economic Reports ##1&2
Improvement of Doing Business Indicators
Enterprise Survey (ICA)
Markets with Imperfect Competition
EITI Support: Preparing for EITI validation
Strategy for the Development of Higher and Intermediate Education
Development of Vocational Education: Project Preparation
Support for Transition to a Multilevel Pension System
Poverty Assessment
Brainstorming Event: Impact of Global Financial Crisis on Kazakhstan
Brainstorming Event: Managing Economic Crises
Assessment of the Quality of Implementation of the State Planning
System in Pilot State Bodies
Public Finance Management Review: Review of Intergovernmental
Relations and Management of Local Budget Expenditures
Development of the Statistical Capacity: Master Plan Update
Establishment of the Financial Monitoring System
Further Improvement of the National Fund Management
International Economy Forum in Astana
Development of a Financial Model for the Management of Fiscal Risks
and Monitoring of Contingent Liabilities Associated with Public-Private
Partnerships
Macro-Economic Research: Kazakhstan Economic Report #3
Improvement of Doing Business Indicators
Improved Methodology of Tariff Setting in Water Supply and Sanitation
Sector
Antimonopoly Policy
EITI Support: EITI Validation - addressing corrective actions
Higher Education Development Strategy
Secondary Education Development Strategy
PROST Training: Pension Reform Operation Simulation Toolkit
Development of a New Sample for HBS
Improvement of the Social Protection System: Towards Further
Improvements in the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net
Brainstorming Event: Draft Kazakhstan Strategy 2020
Brainstorming Event: Regional Development
Brainstorming Event: Entrepreneurship Development

49

Status
Actual
Partially completed
Actual
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY10
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY10
Actual
Forwarded to FY10
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY10
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY10
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY10
Actual
Actual

Actual
Delivered in FY11
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

Actual
Actual
Actual
Delivered in FY10
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Actual
Actual

FY

FY11

JERP Plans
Additional Products:
International Consultancy in the Area of Tax Systems: SME Taxation
Issues

Status

Improvement of the Insolvency System
Advisory Assistance on Top-Level Civil Service Pay Reform
TA in Application of International Financial Reporting Standards for SMB
in the Republic of Kazakhstan. Phase I
Development of Public e-Procurement System
Development of the Statistical Capacity of the RK. Phase II: Project
Preparation
Further Improvement of the Financial Monitoring System
Establishment of Financing Mechanisms to Support Housing and Utilities
Services Sector based on International Experience
Advisory Assistance on Introduction of the New Financial Initiative
Improvement of Doing Business Indicators
Enhancement of the Competition Protection and Creation of Enabling
Conditions for the Goods Market Development
Development of Fair Competition in the Financial Services Market
TA in Development of Technological Innovations Competitiveness as Part
of Implementation of the SPAIID 2010-2014
EITI Support: EITI Transition and Expansion
Study of International Practice of Integration Unions: Assessment of Costs
and Benefits of the Customs Union for Kazakhstan
TA on Expanding the Ability of Kazakh Enterprises to Participate in the
Global Value Added Chain
TA in Development of Strategy of Technological Modernization and
Restructuring of Enterprises and Local Content Development
Technical Assistance on Mining Sector Strategy
Improvement of Postgraduate Education System
TA to Support Modernization of National Testing System
Development of the Endowment Fund for the New University and
Intellectual Schools
Identifying Options for Formalization of Self-employed Population
Improvement of the Social Protection System: Towards Further
Improvements in the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net
Brainstorming Event: State-owned Enterprise Debt Monitoring and
Management in Kazakhstan
Brainstorming Event: Comparative Analysis and Good Practice Lessons in
Designing Pro-Active Social Safety Net Programs and Policies to Increase
Formality
Brainstorming Event: Assignment of Revenues and Expenditures to
Subnational Units of Administration

Actual
Actual

Additional Products:
Economic Development Update: Kazakhstan Economic Report #4
Macro Analysis on the National Fund: The Fiscal Management of
Kazakhstan‘s Oil Revenues
Advisory Assistance on PROST Pension Model
E-Government Program Assessment

50

Delivered

Actual
Forwarded to FY12
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY12
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY12
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

Actual
Actual

Delivered
Delivered
Delivered
Delivered

Annex 2. KAZAKHSTAN: Country Partnership Strategy, FY12-17
Results Framework: Ongoing and Confirmed Program
Institutional Outcomes in
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

CPS Outcomes

Milestones and Outputs

Instruments and Partners

AREA OF ENGAGEMENT 1: IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS AND FOSTERING JOB CREATION
Strengthening fiscal
discipline and trade
openness/integration

Country Development Goal: Achieve competitiveness gains through macro-stability and international integration
Bank JERP: Fiscal Policy for Growth;
 A medium term debt management
 Prudent management of oil revenue is
Improvement of Public Debt Management,
strategy based on a cost-risk
maintained with the government net
including Mechanisms of Monitoring Debt of
analysis adopted and gradually
financial worth (as measured by the
SOE Sector;
broadened to include fiscal risks
difference between stock of National
Improvement of Competitiveness Through
from SOE activities.
Fund assets and sovereign debt) is
Reduction of Trade Barriers
above its 2012 level of 20 percent of
 National services-trade statistics
GDP by 2017.
aligned with Manual on Statistics
Bank Study: Country Economic Memorandum
in International Trade in Services
on Growth Agenda
(OECD).
 A regulatory impact assessment for
Partners: IMF, EC, USAID
non-tariff measures adopted and
conducted on a regular basis.

Expanding non-oil sector
exports and employment





A new Law on Permits System
adopted, setting framework for
risk-based, streamlined inspections
and technical regulations.
Institutional framework for
corporate financial reporting
(CFR) strengthened, as measured
by improvement in A&A ROSC
indicators, showing higher degree
of: (i) alignment of the
forthcoming new CFR legislation
with the international standards;
(ii) compliance of financial
information of corporate entities
with international standards
(International Financial Reporting
Standards, and Standards on
Audit).







Improved regulatory environment as
measured by Doing Business ratings
(up from 46 in 2011 to below 30 in
2017), and Business Environment and
Enterprise Performance (BEEPs;
percent of firms identifying business
licensing and permits as a major
constraint down from 25.2 percent in
2009 to below 15 percent by 2017).
Share of firms with female
participation in ownership increased
from 34.3 percent in 2009 to above 40
percent by 2017 and with a female top
manager increased from 24.7 percent in
2009 to above 30 percent by 2017
(BEEPs).
Technology Commercialization Office
established, awarding annually not less

51

Bank JERP: Enhancement of the Business
Environment;
Enhancing Productivity and Competitiveness
through Enterprise Modernization Support
Mechanisms;
Corporate Financial Reporting: IFRS for SMEs
adoption and implementation;
Bank Study: Accounting and Auditing Reports
on the Observance of Standards and Codes
(A&A and ROSC)
Bank Lending: Technology Commercialization
Project (FY08-12)
IFC Investments: Real sector investments
(manufacturing, agribusiness, and services)

Institutional Outcomes in
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

Re-invigorating the
financial sector

Building skills for
employment

CPS Outcomes

Milestones and Outputs







A new Law on Insolvency
introduced and institutional
capacity of the insolvency and
financial rehabilitation system
improved, facilitating faster
resolution of non-performing
loans.



Instruments and Partners

than 10 small technology
commercialization grants (precommercialization, joint research with
industry, international patenting,
industrial internship for scientists) and
facilitating above 15 groups of
scientists to perform high quality
research.

Partners: USAID, ADB, EBRD

Share of non-performing loans in total
loans (32.6 percent in 2012) are at least
halved by 2017 and remained well
provisioned.

Bank JERP: Improvement of the Insolvency
System
IFC Investments: Financial sector investments;
trade finance lines and credit lines for SMEs
Partners: IMF

Country Development Goal: Bolster human capital
Post graduate education standards
 Share of technical vocational education
are updated towards better
programs revised in accordance with
alignment with the Bologna
the new competency standards (to be
Process.
introduced from 2013) is at least 20
percent by 2017, better equipping
An innovative program of service
graduates with skills demanded in the
learning and life skills training
labor market.
initiated in 2013, benefiting 5,000
Kazakhstani youth.

Bank JERP: Education System Analysis
towards Improving Quality;
Post-Graduate Education Development
Bank Lending: Technical and Vocational
Education Modernization Project (FY11-13)
Swiss TF: Youth Corps Project
Partners: EC, GIZ

Strengthening knowledge
for sustained growth in
agriculture





Country Development Goal: Boost employment in agriculture
Weather/area indexed insurance
 New applied technologies in farming
system introduced on a pilot basis
(e.g. conservation agriculture, new
to strengthen the crop insurance
methods of vet diseases testing),
regime.
resulted in increase in crop/fodder
production, supporting 50 percent
Input subsidies in the total
increase in meat production (0.94
government spending on
million/tons in 2010) by 2017.
agriculture reduced with increased
spending on alternative forms of

Bank JERP: Strengthening Agricultural
Strategy and Livestock Policy
Bank Lending: Agricultural Post-Privatization
Productivity Assistance Project II (FY04-11);
Agriculture Competitiveness Proj. (FY04-12);
Irrigation and Drainage Project II (FY12-19)
IFC Investments: Lending to agribusiness

52

Institutional Outcomes in
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

CPS Outcomes

Milestones and Outputs
agricultural support schemes such
as irrigation during 2012-17.

Instruments and Partners
companies (food processing, food retail)
IFC Advisory: Food Safety Advisory, Resource
Use Efficiency
JSDF Grant: Community Based Aral Sea
Fisheries Management and Sustainable
Livelihoods

Partners: GIZ
Country Development Goal: Develop infrastructure connectivity to reduce economic distance
 Power transmission capacity (KEGOC) Bank Lending: Moinak Electricity
Transmission Project (FY10-12);
increased from 34,000 MVA by 5
Alma Electricity Transmission Prj (FY11-15);
percent between 2012 and 2017 to
North-South Electri. Transm. Prj III (FY13-16)
alleviate the existing and projected
power deficiencies in the Southern and
Partners: EBRD, USAID
Eastern part of the country.

Improving energy
transmission to poor areas

Building transport
connectivity, lowering costs



Road users survey introduced to
assess the service satisfaction
levels along the 1,062 km section
of the Western Europe-Western
China (WE-WC) Road Corridor
(between Shymkent and the border
of Kyzylorda Oblast with Aktobe
Oblast), with the number of users
interviewed by the Committee for
Roads (nil in 2012) increasing
gradually to reach 500 by 2017.



Increased transport efficiency through
reduction in road user costs and the rate
of road crash fatalities along the same
1,062 km section of the WE-WC Road
Corridor by at least 10 percent,
respectively, by 2013 (road users cost
is US$ 0.26 per vehicle-km in 2007;
and road crash fatalities are 11 per 100
million vehicle-km in 2007).

Bank Study: Rail Trade Logistics Study
Bank Lending: South-West Roads Project
(FY09-13);
East-West Roads Project (FY12-15)
Bank-IDF Grant (SWRP): Enhancement of the
Monitoring and Evaluation System in the Road
Administration
IFC Investments: Private and sub-national
infrastructure projects
IFC Advisory: Transaction Advisory Project
Partners: ADB, EBRD

53

Institutional Outcomes in
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS

CPS Outcomes

Milestones and Outputs

Instruments and Partners

AREA OF ENGAGEMENT 2: STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE AND IMPROVING EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC SERVICES DELIVERY
Improving governance




Strengthening budget and
accounting institutions






Country Development Goal: Improve public financial management and fight corruption
Bank JERP: Civil Service Reform;
Civil Service ethics/code of
 Physical inspections of import
Supporting the Extractive Industries
conduct provisions strengthened in
declarations by customs reduced from
Transparency Initiative (EITI);
the Civil Service Law.
70 percent in 2007 to 20 percent by
Improvement of Financial Monitoring System
2017; and average customs processing
Law on Combating Legalization of
(AML/CTF)
time at border posts (2 hours in 2010)
Illegally Gained Income and
reduced by 75 percent by 2017 as
Financing of Terrorism amended in
Bank Lending: Customs Devel. Prj (FY08-12);
evidenced from client surveys.
accordance with international
Tax Administration Reform Project (FY10-14)
standards.
Links between ministry budgets
and the medium term strategic and
policy objectives of government
improved by introduction of nonfinancial results indicators to
assess budget proposals and
monitor performance; roll out of
the new system to sub-national
governments initiated.
International Public Sector
Accounting Standards (IPSAS)
adopted.
Audit system strengthened to
perform financial and performance
audits in accordance with good
practice norms.







E-procurement transactions (25,000 in
2012) increased by 20 percent by 2017,
and efficiency of the e-procurement
system enhanced by introduction of an
electronic reverse auction system by
2014.
Quality and efficiency of public
spending improved through
introduction of targeted reviews of
selected areas of public on a rolling
basis, with at least first 4 reviews
completed during 2013-16.
International standard user satisfaction
survey on quality and reliability of
statistical data introduced in 2012 with
satisfaction rates reaching 80 percent
by 2017.

Partners: EC, UNDP, USAID, GIZ
Bank JERP: Improved Approach to ResultsOriented Budgeting;
Improvement in Intergovern. Fiscal Relations;
Development of Public e-Procurement System;
Expenditure Efficiency reviews
Bank Lending: Statistical Capacity Building
Project (FY12-17)
Bank-SAFE Grant: Capacity Building for
Public Sector Accounting Reform
Bank-IDF Grants: Public Sector Audit
Capacity Building;
Building Capacity in Procurement Audit
Agency (linked with SWRP)
Partners: EC, UNDP, USAID, GIZ

Reforming social protection
system



Country Development Goal: Raise efficiency in delivering critical public services
Regulations governing mandatory
 Conditional cash transfers are piloted in Bank JERP: Improvement of Social Safety Net
System;
defined contribution to the pension
at least two regions of the country; and
Strengthening Pension System
fund are revised to improve
depending on need, gender parity is
sustainability of the system.
targeted in activation support services
Partners: UNICEF
utilization.

54

Institutional Outcomes in
the Government Strategy to
be supported by the CPS
Sharpening strategic
approach to health reforms

CPS Outcomes

Milestones and Outputs



Food safety regulation and norms
aligned with WTO requirements.
Interventions with proven success
to positively affect male life
expectancy are piloted.



Population's out-of-pocket health
payments in total health expenditures
(32.9 percent in 2010) declined by 10
percent by 2016.

Instruments and Partners
Bank Lending: Health Sector Technology
Transfer and Institutional Reform Project
(FY09-13)
Partners: WHO, USAID, UNICEF, EC

AREA OF ENGAGEMENT 3: ENSURING DEVELOPMENT IS ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE
Safeguarding the
environment





Raising energy efficiency



Country Development Goal: Fight climate change with a cleaner environment
Bank JERP: Improving Industrial
The built-up of hazardous
 Reforestation works on 44,000 ha
Competitiveness through Greener Production
pollutants from prioritized sources
completed; and damage (9 ha per 1
in the Ust-Kamenogorsk city‘s
case of fire on average during 2009-11)
Bank Lending: Forest Protection and
groundwater (outside the industrial
from forest fire in Irtysh Pine Forest
Reforestation Project (FY05-14);
zone) stopped, and rehabilitation of
reduced by 50 percent by 2017.
Ust-Kamen. Environ. Remediat. Prj (FY07-13);
PCB contaminated sites underway.  Water supply systems rehabilitated in
SyrDarya II (FY13-18);
Clustering-based gas utilization
113,000 ha covering 4 southern
Persistent Organ. Pollut. Manag. Prj (FY13-14)
approach introduced in Kyzylorda
Oblasts, bringing water distribution by
oblast leading to gas flaring
service providers to levels demanded
GEF Grants: Forest Protect. and Reforest. Prj;
reduction, and reliable supply of
by farmers.
Persistent Organic Pollutants Management Prj
processed gas for local household
and industrial needs.
Partners: EC, GIZ, UNDP, GEF
Swiss TF: Energy Efficiency Proj. (FY12-16)

Comparative energy consumption
in targeted public and residential
sectors reduced by at least 10
percent between 2012 and 2017
(baseline will be established as part
of the project preparation).

IFC Investments: Credit lines to banks for
Energy Efficiency loans
IFC Advisory: Resource Use Efficiency
Partners: EBRD

55

Annex 3. KAZAKHSTAN - Anti-Crisis Response
1.
Kazakhstan’s economy withstood two waves of financial crisis which hit the country in 2007
and in 2008-09 thanks to considerable fiscal and international exchange buffers accumulated
during the commodity price boom and timely actions taken by the Government of Kazakhstan.
Government‘s anti-crisis actions included a one-off 20 percent devaluation of the tenge, large fiscal
stimulus package (equivalent of 7-8 percent of GDP), and measures to restore financial stability. The
latter included liquidity support (equivalent of 3 percent of GDP), increase in household deposit
insurance, solvency support (equivalent of 4 percent of GDP and debt swaps and unsecured support to the
banks equivalent to 7 percent of GDP), bank nationalizations, debt restructuring (equivalent of 10 percent
of GDP in cost to foreign creditors), and measures to strengthen bank resolution, regulatory and
supervisory framework. Bank regulatory framework measures included increase in the minimum capital
requirements of banks and modifications in prudential requirements particularly those relating to external
borrowing and lending to entities with parents in select off-shore centers, and institution of special funds
to refinance loans to select sectors. Measures to strengthen bank supervisory framework included
introduction of an early response mechanism, introduction of a system of on-site dedicated supervision,
enhancement of off-site monitoring and on-site examinations of banks. In addition, the authorities
strengthened financial monitoring system, which suffered from fragmentation at the outset of the Global
financial crisis. The chronology of the anti-crisis response measures and their estimated costs is presented
in Table 1.
2.
Government anti-crisis measures proved to be effective in averting prolonged recession,
increase in unemployment and decline in real incomes of the households, which already suffered
from the negative effect related to 20 percent devaluation of national currency. Positive growth in
2009 might not have been achieved in the absence of the stimulus programs. Increases in public salaries
contributed directly to the continuation of positive growth in real average incomes in 2009, even though a
number of sectors did experience real declines. Kazakhstan did not experience major increases in
unemployment that was seen in many other countries during the crisis, partly due to effective public jobs
program financed through anti-crisis stimulus package. The official unemployment rate (ILO definition)
crept up to 7 percent but was brought down to 6.3 percent by the end of 2009.
3.
Strengthening banking restructuring and resolution framework was introduced to handle
troubled banks. The framework was introduced in a law of July 11, 2009 (185-IV), which stipulated two
major provisions for the medium and longer term:


Allowing creation of bridge banks and purchase and assumption agreements. Purchase and
assumption allows for healthy parts of a failing banks assets and liabilities to be transferred to a
healthy bank thereby preserving key parts of the failing bank. If another healthy bank is not
available, the assets and liabilities can be transferred to a bridge bank, which is a temporary
institution managed by the authorities. The bridge bank would subsequently be merged or sold.



Introducing a specialized financial court for bank restructurings. The bank restructuring process
has been created, requiring a specialized court process in which creditors must agree to a plan of
repayment, which is then submitted for court approval after endorsement by the regulatory
authorities. The main purpose of this change in the law was to allow for the protection of
Kazakhstani assets from claims of creditors abroad when a bank is in restructuring proceedings.
This law strengthens incentives in commercial banks for responsible risk taking. It provided the
Government with a credible alternative for the resolution of two large problem banks, BTA and
Alliance, while the banks remained open.

56

Table 1: Timeline of Major Events, Response Measures and Associated Costs, 2007-2009

1/Channeled half through budget and half through S-K ($1 billion);2/ Channeled half through S-K;
3/ Channeled through KazAgro.

4.
Steps were taken to strengthen financial sector regulatory and supervision framework. The Law
on Financial Stability (October 2008) and a number of supporting regulations issued by the Financial

57

Supervision Agency43 (FSA) stipulated important provisions which enhanced means for due-diligence in
bank supervision and intervening in a problem banks:


The Early Warning System which is based on a set of key indicators corresponding to the
liquidity position, risk profile, and capital of the bank or pension fund. These indicators are
monitored on a monthly basis. If the performance of a bank deteriorates, placing it on track to
violate prudential norms (but has not actually violated them), the FSA is given the authority to
take actions to begin to rectify the situation. The FSA is taking a number of measures to improve
the calculation of various norms in closer correspondence to best international practice. This will
strengthen the effectiveness of the system while protecting banks from arbitrary interventions.



The enhanced scope for external control by the FSA and Government. The FSA can now take
actions against large shareholders whose actions are perceived to possibly harm a bank. The Law
also provides conditions whereby the Government can purchase shares and take virtual control of
a problem bank even without the permission of shareholders.



Measures discouraging banks’ foreign borrowing and lending. Given that the Kazakhstan
financial crisis was rooted in excessive borrowing and lending in foreign currency, a number of
recent regulatory changes have targeted this area. In 2009, the FSA introduced a new
requirement of 20 percent provisions for all loans issued in foreign currency to unhedged
borrowers. In 2010, the FSA tighten other prudential norms to limit the expansion of credit
financed through foreign borrowing, including a restriction that foreign loans cannot exceed 30
percent of liabilities. Finally, the regulation of loans granted to persons incorporated in off-shore
zones was made much stricter.



The FSA has swiftly stepped up its supervisory and due diligence activities. It has increased onsite examinations, and placed a permanent regulatory specialist in each of the seven largest banks
with more frequent detailed inspections. As of March 2009, these largest banks were also
required to draw up detailed contingency plans in the case of financial distress, subject to
approval by the FSA. Going forward, these steps could be further strengthened by move towards
more risk-based supervision, more flexible and sophisticated monitoring, while further enhancing
offsite and onsite supervision capacity.

5.
Efforts were also made to strengthen requirements for transparency in bank operations and
ownership, and to work-out the current large stock of non-performing loans. With more limited
opportunities for expanding attracted resources from foreign sources, the expansion of the banking sector
will depend critically on increasing the domestic deposit base, which requires improving the reputation of
Kazakhstani banks among the population. While banks will need to work primarily themselves to reestablish their reputations, the National Bank and FSA plan to facilitate this process through changes in
banking regulation. This includes extending regulation beyond prudential norms to a comprehensive
assessment of internal systems of risk management, making the results of regular stress testing of
individual banks public, and increasing the role of independent members of boards of directors.

43

Financial Supervision Agency was merged with the National Bank of the Republic of Kazakhstan and reorganized into the
Committee for Financial Supervision of in April 2011.

58

Annex 4. KAZAKHSTAN – Government’s Road Map Program (2009-10) and Road Map for
Business 2020
1.
The government’s first “Road Map” Program was designed to contain a sudden rise in
unemployment during the crisis through creation of public works in the regions. The key objectives
of the Program were: (i) to contain the increase in unemployment through provision of short-term
employment and job creation in public works and other social programs; and (ii) to rehabilitate social
infrastructure and facilities as a necessary condition for post-crisis sustainable development. The program
covered additional financing of projects in housing and utilities; construction and maintenance of local
roads; maintenance of social infrastructure (schools and hospitals); maintenance of social infrastructure
outside of main cities (libraries, movie theaters, etc.); creation of social jobs (including through 50 percent
co-financing of salaries for selected target groups); youth internships and vocational training and
retraining.
2.
The implementation of the Program was phased-in over two stages. During the first stage,
total allocations for each region were determined on the basis of an assessment of regional risk level,
under an ―Employment Map,‖ assessing probabilities of layoffs. At the next stage, potential local
infrastructure projects/public works were submitted by the regional authorities for consideration under the
Program. According to the official report on the Program implementation over 2009-10, the Road Map
allocated 343 billion tenge (about US$2.3 billion) in co-financing contributions from the republican and
regional budgets, and created an estimated 392,000 temporary and permanent work places. In addition,
113,500 workers received training under the program, following which 70 percent found employment.
The Road Map also gave special attention to employment opportunities for workers laid off following the
completion of public projects. To address youth unemployment, the state employment authority arranged
internships for 90,000 of new graduates.
3.
Results-monitoring of the Road Map implementation received a very high priority. The
Road Map Program was coordinated and monitored by an Inter-Agency Commission (IAC) headed by the
Prime Minister. The Commission included representatives of the Parliament, various associations, and
the mass media. The functions of the IAC included: (i) determining employment risk levels on a regional
basis, (ii) setting regional finance limits, (iii) developing appropriate performance indicators for
evaluation, (iv) monitoring of implementation of the program on a weekly basis, (v) approval of reports
submitted from the local level, and (vi) reviewing monthly reports on implementation with participation
of the mass media. Parallel commissions have been set up at the regional level under the leadership of the
regional akims (governors). The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection was responsible for the day-today monitoring of the Road Map. A website has been created, http://dorkarta.enbek.gov.kz/, that
provided detailed information on specific projects, administers, and oblasts, including financing, jobs
created, and number of people trained.
4.
The implementation of the Road Map Program was completed in 2010, with its key lessons
informing design of a new post-crisis support mechanism for small and medium enterprises,
namely the “Road Map for Bussiness-2020.” This follow-up program aims at providing support to
export-oriented small and medium enterprises by facilitating their access to finance (through interest rate
subsidies) and by employment support measures in the form of training and internships. The employment
support component of the Program is focused on the following key areas: (i) training of specialists
required for implementation of projects that are part of the industrialization strategy; (ii) training of
technical specialists to fill the existing vacancies; (iii) replacement of foreign labor with local personnel
by using capacity of technical and vocational education; (iv) arranging internships; and (v) creating jobs
for public works. The monitoring and evaluation of the Program remains as its key feature to measure the
impact and fine-tune the Program as necessary. In its first year of implementation, the program has seen
significant increase in the number of SMEs (about 100) that developed capacity to export.

59

Annex 5. KAZAKHSTAN CPS – CSO Consultations
Background
1.
As part of the CPS preparation process, consultations between the WBG and local Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs) were held in Astana on February 29, 2012. To engage with as many CSOs from
different regions as possible, a video-conference was organized with five other major cities of
Kazakhstan, namely Almaty, Shymkent, Ust-Kamenogorsk, Kostanay and Aktobe. Among the
participants were representatives of the most active civil society organizations from business community,
think tanks, and associations, focusing on environmental protection, gender, transparency and
governance, agricultural development, healthcare, disabled, and youth. The information about the event
and background material were made available on the website of the Bank prior the consultations.
Objectives of the Consultations
2.

The consultations aimed at:
 Soliciting the views of CSOs on Kazakhstan‘s development priorities;
 Seeking feedback on the proposed CPS areas of engagement, approaches and instruments to
help the country implement those priorities;
 Informing CSOs on the World Bank‘s ongoing operations and opportunities for closer
engagement.

Feedback from the Consultations
3.
The WBG received encouraging feedback for the preparation. Overall, CSOs believed that
improvements in governance and a stronger voice for civil society together with mechanisms for greater
government accountability were essential to sustained development. They emphasized the following as
key areas of development focus for the WBG‘s partnership with Kazakhstan:








Education quality, accessibility and skills (as key factors in increasing competitiveness and jobs)
were highlighted as areas deserving greater attention. Participants suggested that low competency
results under PISA 2009 along with high unemployment rate among the educated young and
women in local economy reflect low quality and relevance both at secondary, and technical and
vocational education system. Among the top areas requiring attention, diagnosis of underlying
reasons for these poor results, lowering informality in labor market, providing assistance to
disabled youths in secondary schools in rural areas were highlighted.
Inefficient business regulatory framework, difficulties in access to finance, and slow pace of
agricultural modernization were highlighted as reasons for low competitiveness. The participants
suggested that the competitiveness and jobs agenda should accord greater attention to region and
sector specific barriers especially in lagging rayons and small towns, and relying more on
feedback from business associations with sector specific knowledge.
Participants emphasized lagging performance in governance and transparency agenda as a key
factor undercutting the country‘s development prospects. Judicial reform, increasing standards in
public administration and in delivery of public services (including through a streamlined service
provision procedures) were highlighted as areas of priority in the reform agenda. The need for
strengthened monitoring and increased transparency in the operations of SOEs along with
improved capacity in anti-money laundering through certification of anti-money laundering
specialists were also highlighted.
Safeguarding environment was highlighted as a key element of sustainable development agenda.
Water and land degradation, deforestation, low energy efficiency, water contamination and air

60

pollution in the industrial regions were of particular concern to CSOs. Participants emphasized
the need for promotion of green growth strategy and better public outreach in this endeavor
including through environmental literacy programs. They also emphasized the need for
mainstreaming environmental measures better in infrastructure projects.
4.
Concerning the CPS approach, participants suggested the WBG to put greater emphasis on capacity
building; facilitating faster progress in key development priorities; development of strong M&E system to
track impact of wide-ranging government initiatives with greater role for CSOs in this respect; and greater
public access to JERP AAA. They also called for the WBG programs to leverage greater emphasis on the
region specific development needs, and for local initiatives at the community level to be better supported
in order to strengthen civil society. These choices are broadly consistent with this CPS, under which to
further strengthen its partnership with Kazakhstan and ensure that work carried out becomes increasingly
responsive to client demand, the WBG will continue to work with, and listen closely to broader range of
stakeholders in Kazakhstan.

61

Annex A2: KAZAKHSTAN – Country at a Glance
Kazakhstan

Euro pe &
Central
A sia

Upper
middle
inco me

16.3
2,725
1.4
59

404
23,549
0.3
64

1,002
48,659
0.9
75

122.4
7,500
10,320

2,746
6,793
12,609

7,515
7,502
12,440

7.3
5.8

-5.8
-6.1

-2.6
-3.4

<2
<2
68
29
5

4
9
70
19
..

..
..
72
19
..

100
100
109
109

99
97
100
98

94
91
111
110

95
97

95
89

95
84

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

•( 2 0 10 )

Age distribution, 2009
Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 4 – 2 0 10 )
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
70
60
50

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

40

30
20

0
1990

(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
United States
Japan
Germany

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2 0 10

..

112

189

298

..
..
..

0
0
112

58
83
10

97
37
18

..
..

0.1
7

1.1
13

0.3
19

1995

2000

2009

..

- - - - _
N e t A id F lo ws

1

10

Kazakhstan

Europe & Central Asia

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
20

15
10
5

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

0
-5
-10

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-15

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

..
..

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

90.9
101.5
0.0
181

13.2
17.4

7.1
19.5

142.1
100

147.4
122

95

-

GDP

05

-

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 10
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

14.9
..

16.3
..

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

33.9
32.5
..
33.6

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

..
..
..

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

..
..
..

14.9
18,292

16.3
148,052

0.9
..

-0.9
-4.1

0.9
8.3

8.7
40.5
17.7
50.8

4.8
42.4
13.1
52.8

..
..
..
..

-8.0
-7.1
..
-5.2

3.8
9.0
6.3
8.3

67.1
12.4
43.2

61.9
12.1
18.5

49.3
10.8
25.1

..
..
..

-5.2
-7.1
-19.0

9.2
7.1
15.2

7.8
30.5
15.6

56.6
49.1
21.2

44.0
29.2
27.1

..
..

-1.9
-12.7

4.7
4.4

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. Gro up data are fo r 2009. .. indicates data are no t available.

•a. A id data are fo r 2009.

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

62

"I

Kazakhstan
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2 0 10
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

9,288
7,120
1,371

60,838
31,956
21,818

Voice and accountability

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

366
2.0

3,013
2.0

Regulatory quality

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

122

124

Rule of law

Reserves, including go ld

2,096

~I

Political stability

Control of corruption

;JI
0

28,275

a 2009
a 2000

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e
(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

21.9
20.0
20.3

25.0
23.8
15.0

-0.1

2.9

25

50

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

30
30

10
20

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure
Overall surplus/deficit

75

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

2000

2009

86.5

89.9

14

118

3.6

30.0

77
1.2
..

77
1.2

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

12,433
3,371
–

118,151
35,770
–

68.0
32.0

79.8
53.3

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

1,283
19

12,601
131

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

5,076
31.7

..
4,871
..

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

8.6

14.7

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

2.0

2.3

2,709

4,525

2000

2009

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

1,057
50
20
62

547
115
32
17

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

89
89
29

335
267
116

3

10

22
0

222
190

Composition of total external debt, 2010
Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

Private,
104,985

~

L'v

(US$ millio ns)

Short-term,
9,084
IBRD, 1,830
Other multilateral, 1,257
Bilateral, 995

"'=
US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
A ccess to /co st o f financing
Tax rates

"
"

Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2 0 10

–
–
–

19
1.0
40

2000

2 0 10

..
..

20.1
15.4

7.3
13.6

41.0
-8.7

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

63

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

3/20/12

"I

Millennium Development Goals

Kazakhstan

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

Ka za k hs t a n

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
<2
..
9.5
..

19 9 5
5.0
34.6
6.7
6.7

2000
<2
46.7
8.1
3.8

2009
<2
12.1
8.7
4.9

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

..
..
100
100

..
103
94

87
94
93
100

89
106
99
100

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

..
..
..

..

102
49
10

99
50
18

57
48
89

50
43
95

44
38
99

33
29
99

78
..
..

76
100
59

59
99
66

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
0.1
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
139
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
48

0.1
139
51

0.1
196
88

0.1
163
80

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
96
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
96
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
1.3
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
15.9
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
1.6

96
96
..
..
10.5
1.4

96
97
1.2
..
8.6
2.0

95
97
1.2

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

12.4
0.0
0.0
..

12.3
1.3
0.7
..

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

--

-

--

-

-

--

-

--

-

-

--

G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

Education indicators (%)

100

100

~ r=tpp t\fVl!'1l

107
13

8.2
0.0
0.0
..

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

..

t-

r-

75

45
100
51

..
14.7
2.3

23.7
94.4
33.4
..

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
140
120

100

75

80
50

50

60

25

40

25

0

--

2000

2005

20

2009

0

0

1990

1995

2000

2009

--.n. n n"-"- rr
2000

2005

n
2009

Primary net enrollment ratio

-a- Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

•

Kazakhstan

•

Europe & Central Asia

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

64

•
•

Fixed + mobile subscribers
Internet users

3/20/12

Annex B2: KAZAKHSTAN – Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
As of Date 03/04/2012

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
a
Number of Projects Under Implementation
b
Average Implementation Period (years)
a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
e
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2009

2010

2011

2012

11
3.7
27.3
3.2
27.3
3.2
19.9

14
3.9
14.3
1.3
14.3
1.3
7.0

14
3.7
21.4
2.5
21.4
2.5
13.3

12
4.0
25.0
2.9
25.0
2.9
20.7

no
1264
115

no
1569
112

yes
1862
133

no
1706
142

Since FY 80
23
1,625.3

Last Five
FYs
4
280.4

13.0
1.7

0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

65

Annex B3: KAZAKHSTAN – IFC Investment Operations Program

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants

60.5

110.4

352.8

353.5

102.5

IFC's Own Account*

60.5

110.4

242.8

353.5

102.5

Financial Markets

17

90

43

94

82

Manufacturing

83

10

27

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
-

Agribusiness

-

-

Consumer & Social Services

-

-

26

Infrastructure

-

-

5

5

100

100

100

100

100

78

50

5

15

16

28

6

14

42

..

Total

!

-

5
1

13

-

-

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Loan

50

Equity

50

Quasi-Loan

-

Quasi-Equity

-

Guarantee

-

..

Total

1

5
-

-

18

100

1

66

100

-

19

1

100

-

25

1

100

79

1

100

j

Annex B5: KAZAKHSTAN – Key Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

Europe &
Central
Asia

15.8
1.1
56.0
3.1

15.8
-0.7
55.9
2.3

16.3
1.4
54.3
2.6

404.2
0.2
64.0
1.8

1,001.7
0.9
74.9
2.0

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

..
..
..

6.5
3.7
10.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)

..
..

1,280
47

7,500
227

6,793
141

7,502
127

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

..
..
..

32.7
7.5
40.4

27.8
8.7
39.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

3.0
..

2.5
4.1

3.9
4.1

3.8
4.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

89
90
89

92
93
92

93
93
92

..
..
..

96
99
92

95
99
90

96
98
89

95
98
86

..
..
..

95
93
7

99
98
5

96
95
..

93
93
..

69
64
73

65
60
70

68
64
73

70
66
75

72
69
75

53
63

43
50

29
33

19
21

19
23

312
140
..
..

306
136
76
100

370
147
45
100

286
123
32
97

201
123
82
96

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Grow th rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net prim ary school enrollm ent rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an im proved w ater source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Im m unization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Upperm iddleincom e

CAS Annex B5. This table w as produced from the CMU LDB system.
03/27/12
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

67

Annex B6: KAZAKHSTAN – Key Economic Indicators
Actual

Estimate
2011

• 2009 • 2010

2008

Projected

• 2012 • 2013 • 2014

• 2016

2015

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a
Agriculture
Industry and construction
Services

100
6
43
51

100
6
40
53

100
5
42
53

100
6
40
54

100
4
39
57

100
3
38
59

100
3
37
60

100
3
36
61

100
3
35
62

Total consumption
Total investment
Government investment
Private investment

52
28
6
22

62
29
6
24

60
25
5
20

54
25
5
20

59
25
5
20

60
26
4
21

60
26
4
22

60
26
4
22

61
26
4
22

Exports (GNFS)b

57

42

44

50

39

37

35

33

31

Imports (GNFS)b

37

34

29

28

24

23

22

20

18

Gross domestic savings

28

29

25

25

25

26

26

26

26

Gross national savings c

32

26

27

32

29

29

29

29

29

6,140
3.3
2.0

6,790
1.2
-1.4

7,500
7.3
5.8

8,200
7.5
6.0

10,160
6.0
4.9

11,640
5.8
4.7

12,790
5.8
4.7

14,090
5.9
4.8

15,570
6.0
5.1

Exports (GNFS)b

76,396

48,167

65,086

93,311

81,103

84,720

88,669

92,420

95,947

b

Imports (GNFS)
Current account balance
Net foreign direct investment
Net portfolio investment
Net long-term loans

49,571
6,326
13,118
-9,378
1,376

39,001
-4,068
10,082
3,053
-3,778

43,268
3,013
2,857
8,528
-8,166

52,596
13,606
8,772
-12,561
-521

49,051
7,851
11,638
-18,569
-470

51,852
7,282
11,427
-15,810
-339

54,019
7,557
10,018
-16,522
42

56,059
7,793
8,587
-17,685
749

56,677
9,308
5,863
-18,804
861

Change in reserves d

-2,189

-2,462

-4,719

-200

549

-1,560

-96

1,556

3,772

14.1
23.5
-9.4
8.6
-0.8
0.5
2.4
-2.1

14.1
22.1
-8.0
10.9
2.9
1.0
1.5
-5.3

13.5
21.8
-8.3
14.5
6.3
0.6
1.5
-8.3

13.5
21.7
-8.2
12.4
4.2
0.7
1.9
-6.8

13.5
20.5
-7.0
12.2
5.2
0.3
1.2
-6.7

13.5
20.5
-7.0
11.8
4.8
0.1
1.4
-6.3

13.5
20.1
-6.6
11.3
4.7
0.0
1.5
-6.2

13.5
20.0
-6.6
11.0
4.5
-0.1
1.6
-6.0

20.6
6.8

26.5
10.2

26.1
10.6

29.1
10.5

33.2
12.1

36.7
12.5

39.5
12.9

41.8
13.2

43.7
13.4

130.3
17.2
20.9

108.0
7.3
4.7

116.5
7.1
19.5

124.6
8.3
16.4

122.5
7.3
4.6

122.0
5.9
4.1

121.6
5.9
4.6

121.1
5.9
4.6

120.6
5.9
4.6

GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real GDP growth rates (%)
Real GDP per capita growth rates (%)
Balance of payments (US$ million)

e

Fiscal accounts (as % of GDP at market prices)
Non-oil revenue
16.8
Expenditures and net lending
27.2
Non-oil deficit
-10.5
Oil revenue
12.9
Consolidated budget balance
2.5
Foreign financing
0.0
Domestic financing
2.1
NFRK revenue (-)
-4.6
NFRK assets (stock)
Government debt (stock)
Price indices
Terms of trade index (2000=100)
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources. Negative value means an increase in reserves.
Consolidated general government. Includes savings in the National Fund (NFRK).
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." A decrease in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 2000 is base year.

68

Annex B7: KAZAKHSTAN – Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

Actual
2009

2008

Total debt outstanding and

2010

Estimate
2011

2012

2013

Projected
2014

2015

2016

107,933

112,782

118,151

124,907

135,051

145,121

154,095

162,191

167,360

Net disbursements (US$m)a

11,040

4,849

5,369

6,756

10,144

10,070

8,973

8,096

5,169

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a

31,830

30,427

21,831

24,231

23,930

25,463

27,023

28,446

30,071

141.3
80.9
41.7
..

234.1
97.8
63.2
..

181.5
79.8
33.5
..

133.9
67.1
26.0
..

166.5
65.8
29.5
..

171.3
64.0
30.1
..

173.8
61.4
30.5
..

175.5
58.3
30.8
..

174.4
54.3
31.3
..

42.4

43.9

77.0

95.3

113.5

42.5

59.8

112.0

108.9

16.2
0.1

15.0
0.1

14.5
0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.5

0.6

463

547

1,830

2,612

3,671

4,553

5,170

5,360

5,096

guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

0.5

0.5

1.4

1.8

2.4

2.7

3.0

2.9

2.7

IDA TDO (US$m)d

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

141
120
21

267
235
31

417
311
106

426
330
96

39

225

410

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)
Of which present value of

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity

e

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

69

Annex B8: KAZAKHSTAN – Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of Date 03/04/2012
Closed Projects

27

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

893.24
4.25
1,447.54
1,261.36
2,340.78
1,265.61

Total Undisbursed (Active)

1,662.16

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

1,662.16

Difference Between

Active Projects
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P049721
P116919
P096998
P078301
P087485
P101928
P120985
P090695
P114766
P099270
P116696
P102177
P078342
Overall Result

AGRIC COMPETITIVENESS
MS
ALMA TRANSMISSION PROJECT
S
CUSTOMS DEVT
S
FORESTRY
MU
FORESTRY (GEF) - KZ
MU
HLTH SEC TECH (JERP)
MS
KAZSTAT
S
KZ Tech Commercialization Proj
MU
MOINAK ELECTRICITY TRANS PROJECT
S
SOUTH WEST ROADS
S
Tax Administration Reform Project
MS
TVEM
MS
UST-KAMENOGORSK ENV REMED MU

Implementation
Progress

MS
S
MS
MU
MU
MS
S
MS
S
MS
S
S
MU

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal Year

IBRD

IBRD,
revised

2005
2011
2008
2006
2006
2008
2011
2008
2010
2009
2010
2011
2007

24
78
18.5
30

14.7
78
18.5
30

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

70

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

9.3

0.3
77.5
16.9
9.0
2.2
88.3
20.0
12.9
16.7
1352.1
16.2
28.0
24.3
1664.4

9.6
29.4
16.9
1.8
1.2
78.4

5
117.7 117.7
20
20
13.4
13.4
48
48
2125
2125
17
17
29.23 29.23
24.29 24.29
2545.12 2535.8

5

9.3

12.7
10.3
842.4
0.5
-1.2
7.5
1009.6

1.8

78.4

67.1

7.5
154.9

Annex B8(b): KAZAKHSTAN – IFC Committed and Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of Date 03/04/2012 (in US$ millions)

Sector

Institution

Financial Markets

ATF Bank

-

Financial Markets

Archimedes

-

Financial Markets

BCC

Financial Markets

MSME Resource

-

Financial Markets

RBS Kazakhstan

-

Financial Markets

SK Leasing

-

Manufacturing

Altyn-IMS

2

0
-

Manufacturing

Jambyl Cement

46

18

Agribusiness

Soufflet Finance

Agribusiness

UKPF

Services

Home Mart

Total Portfolio

LN

Committed Portfolio
QL +
GT
Total
QE

ET

22

14
20
105

-

60

-

-

-

3

58

198

-

-

0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

-

-

25

-

3
33
0
15

69

85

172

60

-

-

-

-

-

22

-

-

-

-

3

58

198

-

-

0

-

-

-

-

0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

59

77

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

25

-

3
33

-

0

-

-

2

-

-

0
-

64

77

46

13

404

77

14
20
103

PART

60

-

45

71

ET

-

14
2

*Excluding regional projects.

LN

-

15

58

PART

Outstanding Portfolio
QL +
GT
Total
QE

0
15

64

85

171

58

60

15

14
1
45
396

-

77

55°N

50°E

55°E

60°E
To Chelyabinsk

KAZAKHSTAN

l

Toby

Kostanai

PAVLODAR
Ekibastuz

50°N

ASTANA

(Ishim)
Esil

Öskemen
skemen
(Ust-Kamenogorsk)

Semipalatinsk

Aktobe

lg
Vo

yz
Yrgh

hai
Torg
Turgay

EAST
KAZAKHSTAN

Karagandy

Arkalyk

Ka za k h

a

Z

Atyrau

AKTOBE

U pl an ds

Shalkar
Zhezkazgan

su

Sa
ry

as

MANGYSTAU

Saryshaghan

Baikonur

Ile

pi

ZHAMBYL

Kyzyl-Orda

KYZYLORDA

Shu

Tal
as

r
Sy

an

Aktau

Sea

Ustyurt
Plateau

Leps

Lake
Balkash

da
ri y a

To Nukus

AZERBAIJAN

UZBEK ISTA N
UZBEKISTA

40°N

Shu

Almaty

KYRGYZ
R E P.

Shymkent

KAZAKHSTAN

55°E

200

100
60°E

300 Kilometers

200 Miles

A FGHA
FGHANI
NISTA
STAN
N
65°E

80°E

K AZAK H STAN
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

70°E

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

GALASY (CITIES WITH
REGIONAL STATUS)
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS
OBLAST BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

IBRD 33425R1

JANUARY 2007

0

100

Pik Khan-Tengri
(6995 m)

OBLAST CAPITALS
To Dushanbe

TA J I K I S TA N
0

CHINA

Taldykorgan

To Naryn

KAZAKHSTAN

To
Bukhoro

To Urumqi

To Korla

40°N

TU R KM
K M ENISTAN
ENISTA N

45vN

(Ch
u)

Taraz

SOUTH

1990 LEVEL OF ARAL SEA
1960 LEVEL OF ARAL SEA

ar
ata
l

ALMATY

Turkistan
2001 LEVEL OF ARAL SEA

To Urumqi

Lake
Alakol

i

K

C

Aral
Sea

Balkhash

KARAGHANDY

Aral

45°N

Beineu

Lake
Zaisan

Ayakos

Embi

hem

50°E

b‘

Ural

To Barnaul

Pavlodar

AKMOLA

KOSTANAI

ATYRAU

To Astrakhan‘

(Irt
ysh
)

Kokshetau

To r g h a y
Plateau

(Ural)

WEST
KAZAKHSTAN

To
Novosibirsk

k
Zhaiy

Chapaevo

85°E

To Kurgan

Petropavlovsk

Ural'sk

50°N

80°E

O

To Orenburg

To
Novosibirsk

75°E

NORTH

To
Ufa

To
Saratov

70°E

tis
Er

Vo
lg

a

R U S S I A N
F E D E R A T I O N
To
Samara

To
Tyumen‘

65°E

