Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 72959-TJ

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
TAJIKISTAN
FOR THE PERIOD FY10-13

October 2, 2012

International Development Association
Central Asia Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy was May 25, 2010
Currency Equivalents
(Exchange Rate as of August 29, 2012)
Currency Unit: Tajik Somoni (TJS)
US$1.00: TJS 4.76
TJS1.00: US$ 0.20
Fiscal Year
January 1―December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA Analytic & Advisory Activities
ADB Asian Development Bank
BEE Business Enabling Environment
BEEPS Business Environment and Enterprise
Performance Survey
CASA Central Asia – South Asia (transmission
project)
CEM Country Economic Memorandum
CGAC Country Governance and Anticorruption
Strategy
CIF
Climate Investment Fund
CPIA Country Policy & Institutional Assessment
CPPR Country Portfolio Performance Review
CPS Country Partnership Strategy
CPSPR Country Partnership Strategy Progress
Report
DCC Development Coordination Council
DPO Development Policy Operation
DSA Debt Sustainability Analysis
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
EC
European Commission
ECA Europe and Central Asia
ESW Economic and Sector Work
EU
European Union
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
FSAP Financial Sector Assessment Program
GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security
Program
GBAO Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GIZ
German Agency for International
Cooperation

GPF Governance Partnership Facility
HPP Hydroelectric Power Project
IDA International Development Association
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFIs
International Financial Institutions
IMF International Monetary Fund
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
NBT National Bank of Tajikistan
NDS National Development Strategy
NPL Non-Performing Loan
NTC National Testing Center
PEFA Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
PDPG Programmatic Development Policy Grant
PFM Public Financial Management
PHC Primary Health Care
PIU
Project Implementation Unit
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PPCR Pilot Program for Climate Resistance
PPP
Public-Private Partnership
PRS Poverty Reduction Strategy
SDR Special Drawing Right
SCISPM State Committee on Investments and State
Property Management
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises
SOEs State-owned Enterprises
TALCO Tajikistan Aluminum Company
TA
Technical Assistance
WBG World Bank Group
WTO World Trade Organization

IDA
Philippe H. Le Houérou
Vice President:
Saroj Kumar Jha
Country Director:
Marsha McGraw Olive
Country Manager
Task Team Leaders: Fabrice Houdart/Zainiddin Karaev

IFC
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Tomasz Telma
Moazzam Mekan
Oksana Nagayets/Christopher
David Miller

This CPSPR was prepared under the guidance of Saroj Kumar Jha, Country Director, Mehrnaz
Teymourian, former Country Program Coordinator, and Marsha McGraw Olive, Country Manager, with
overall direction from the ECA Chief Economist, Indermit Gill, and Lead Economist, M. Willem van
Eeghen. The CPSPR team included Fabrice Houdart, Zainiddin Karaev (co-TTLs), and Oksana Nagayets
and Christopher Miller (co-TTLs from IFC side), and David Pearce, and contributions from the entire
Tajikistan Country Team are gratefully acknowledged. Administrative support was provided by Olesya
Gafurova.

Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
for
Tajikistan

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 5

II.

RECENT ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS .......................... 5
A. Recent Economic and Political Developments ........................................................ 5
B. Future Prospects ....................................................................................................... 7

III.

PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES .......................................................... 8

IV.

IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND ADJUSTMENTS TO CPS ...................11
A. Portfolio Performance―IDA, IFC & Trust Funds ...................................................11
B. Analytical and Advisory Activities ...........................................................................12
C. CPS Program FY13-14 .............................................................................................12
D. Coordination and Partnerships .................................................................................17

V.

RISKS .............................................................................................................................17

Box 1:

Progress against selected CPS Intermediate Indicators ……………………

Annexes
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:
Annex 7:
Annex 8:

Updated Results Matrix
Gender Disparities in Tajikistan
AAA, IDA and TFs by CPS result areas
Tajikistan At-A-Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IFC Investment Operations
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
IFC Committed and Outstanding Portfolio by Client

7

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
TAJIKISTAN

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPSPR) assesses
implementation to date of the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS) for Tajikistan for the period FY10-13. Prepared in the wake of the 2008-09 global
economic crisis, the CPS’ objectives were twofold: (a) to reduce the negative impact on poverty
and vulnerability; and (b) to pave the way for post-crisis recovery and sustained development.
Governance was a cross-cutting theme in the context of Tajikistan’s Country Governance and
Anti-Corruption (CGAC) strategy. Progress towards CPS outcomes since mid-2010 has been
broadly satisfactory, particularly the authorities’ two-pronged crisis management response to the
global economic downturn. Most intermediate indicators have been met and nearly all the results
expected by end-FY13 are on track.
2.
The CPSPR proposes that the shift in emphasis already underway—from crisis
mitigation to the structural reforms needed for inclusive growth—be accelerated, while
remaining alert to Tajikistan’s chronic vulnerability to external shocks. Governance will be
mainstreamed into all operations and gender will be given greater priority. Originally programmed
for FY10-13, the CPSPR proposes that the CPS be extended by one year, i.e. to end-FY14, which
will align drafting of the next CPS with the government’s timetable for preparation of its second
long-term National Development Strategy (NDS), 2016-25.
II.
A.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

Recent Economic and Political Developments

3.
Tajikistan withstood the 2008-09 global downturn better than expected, thanks partly
to prudent economic management and partly to timely budget support from development
partners. The main effects of the crisis were twofold: a 30 percent decline in remittances from
Tajik migrants in Russia—from an estimated $2.3 billion in 2008 to $1.6 billion in 2009; and
lower international prices as well as reduced exports of aluminium and cotton. As a result,
economic growth fell from 7.9 percent in 2008 to 3.9 percent in 2009. The authorities reacted with
a two-pronged anti-crisis strategy of increased public spending, including on social programs
designed to create jobs, and greater exchange rate flexibility to facilitate current account
adjustment. At the same time, budget support from several development partners—including the
IDA-financed Programmatic Development Policy Grants (PDPG) 4 and 5—helped maintain public
expenditures on education, health, and social protection and supported government efforts to
mitigate the impact of the crisis on poverty and vulnerability.
4.
Growth recovered quickly in the post-crisis period, with real GDP expanding by 6.5
percent in 2010 and a further 7.4 percent in 2011. This was due partly to increased exports and
a full recovery and growth in remittance flows compared to the pre-crisis period—estimated at
$2.9 billion or 45 percent of GDP in 2011—and partly to services, which accounted for more than

5

half of total growth in 2011. Agriculture also contributed, with the value of output rising by 7.9
percent in 2011, owing mainly to the largest cotton harvest in 20 years (up 34 percent over 2010).
Meanwhile, industry expanded by 5.9 percent, driven largely by chemicals, food, and textile
processing. Going forward, most of the average 6 percent annual growth projected over the
medium term is expected to come initially from construction, trade, and other services, with
exports of non-cotton agriculture, energy, and mining likely to make an increasing contribution
over time.
5.
Prudent macroeconomic management has been maintained, leading to better inflation
control and fiscal recovery. In 2011, government revenues increased by 31 percent over 2010 in
nominal terms and fiscal policy was tightened during the second half in anticipation of a possible
regional or global slowdown in 2012. As a result, the fiscal balance (excluding the externallyfinanced public investment program) recorded a surplus equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP rather
than the 0.6 percent deficit projected earlier. After having risen steadily during the first half of the
year, headline inflation declined to 9.3 percent by end-2011 (year-on-year), reflecting lower
international food and commodity prices. During January to July 2012, the consumer price index
(CPI) rose by 2.9 percent, a modest increase compared to recent trends, which has allowed the
National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) to gradually lower the refinance rate from around 10 percent in
end-2011 to 6.5 percent in August. Since Tajikistan is highly dependent on food grain imports, in
light of the recent spike in international food prices the government recently signed contracts with
suppliers in Kazakhstan and Pakistan to replenish its reserves. The Somoni has been stable in
relation to the dollar, and international reserves accumulation by NBT has been in line with IMF
program targets.
6.
The ratio of Tajikistan’s public and publicly guaranteed debt to GDP is projected to
decline from 34.4 percent in 2010 to 32.5 percent in 2011, according to the 2011 joint
International Monetary Fund (IMF)-World Bank debt sustainability analysis (DSA). Its external
debt is largely concessional, shared roughly equally between bilateral and multilateral creditors,
with China accounting for about 38 percent of the total. Based partly on a detailed assessment
undertaken in 2011, the Ministry of Finance’s public debt management strategy for 2012-14
reaffirms the government’s commitment to: (a) keep public and publicly guaranteed debt below 40
percent of GDP; (b) only contract new loans with at least a 35 percent grant element; and (c)
undertake cost-benefit analyses of large investments.
7.
Although the poverty headcount dropped from 72 percent in 2003 to 47 percent in
2009, Tajikistan remains the poorest country in Europe and Central Asia. Economic growth
is highly dependent on the external environment: remittances, for example, depend heavily on
developments in Russia, where 90 percent of all Tajik labor migrants work. Thus, the risk that
these flows could decline again is ever present, with the women and children who rely upon
remittance income being especially vulnerable. Moreover, there are signs, including from a recent
World Bank analysis, that 2007-09 growth benefitted better-off urban households more than the
rural poor, although it is unclear whether this reflects a change in poverty-growth dynamics or
simply the sharp, temporary decline in remittances in 2009. Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous
Oblast (GBAO) and Khatlon are the poorest oblasts: 62 percent and 54 percent of their respective
populations were living below the poverty line in 2009, compared to 48 percent in Sogd, 39
percent in RRP, and 34 percent in Dushanbe. Recognizing that the country’s two main social
programs have little or no impact on poverty—their budgets are too small and their resources are

6

poorly targeted—the government is now taking steps to reform them with World Bank and
European Union financial and technical support.
8.
The country’s political environment, characterized by a strong presidency, remains
essentially unchanged. The next presidential election is due in November, 2013 and the next
parliamentary elections in February, 2014, but neither are expected to alter the political landscape
significantly. Meanwhile, deteriorating internal security during the past year, public discontent
over poor service delivery (especially long winter power shortages), and civil society’s lack of
voice could potentially trigger social instability. At the same time, regional cooperation remains
complicated, resulting in serious physical and policy obstacles to external trade. Moreover, the
political and security outlook in Afghanistan beyond 2014 has created new uncertainties, given
Tajikistan’s long and porous border with its neighbour.
B.

Future Prospects

9.
To maintain recent high levels of growth, Tajikistan needs to tackle several important
structural reforms, the effective implementation of which will require more resolute and
visible political will given the difficulties of the reforms. These include changes in difficult areas
such as improving energy efficiency, including energy sector governance, the ongoing
restructuring of agriculture and related irrigation and water management, the development of the
financial and private sectors, and implementation of the new tax code. Continued strong
development partner coordination and the support of champions in both government and civil
society will also be crucial. Meanwhile, the country’s economy remains vulnerable to several
external factors. Exports of cotton and aluminum, for example, are unlikely to remain as important
in the future as in the past. Similarly, remittances will probably increase more slowly over time
from their currently high base. On the other hand, if a greater share of remittances went into
productive private investment, they could be an important contributor to future growth. Exports of
summer surplus electricity could also become significant in the medium and longer term.
10.
Tajikistan's biggest economic challenge is to lift its very low rates of private
investment. Total investment, dominated by public investment, has averaged around 20 percent
of GDP during the past decade, of which private investment accounted for one quarter or only
about 5 percent of GDP. While the government has undertaken a wide range of legal, procedural,
and regulatory steps in recent years designed to improve the business environment—reflected inter
alia in Tajikistan’s ranking among the top 10 most improved countries in the WBG’s Doing
Business two years in a row (2010 and 2011)—the development of the country’s private sector and
of an appropriate legal framework for its growth remain a work in progress. For example, beyond
the Doing Business indicators (many of which show a differential outcome for male and female
entrepreneurs), enterprises face numerous practical and structural constraints, such as tax policy
and administration, energy supply, access to credit, shortages of skilled labor, and corruption in
dealing with public officials.
11.
Achieving higher rates of private as well as foreign direct investment (FDI) will
require a strengthened banking system and, more broadly, greater recognition of the role
that financial intermediation can and should play in supporting growth. In this context,
although non-performing loans declined from 28 percent of gross loans in early 2010 to 15 percent
by end-2011, partly due to the government’s cotton debt resolution framework, they remain quite
high and will continue to require close monitoring and, if needed, remedial action. Meanwhile, the
7

resolution of a major commercial bank, now under discussion, needs to follow international
principles to improve governance and strengthen the banking system and credit culture. Equally
important, directed lending, which distorts local markets, crowds out private investment,
undermines banks’ governance, and poses quasi-fiscal risks—needs to be ended without further
delay. At the same time, continued prudent macroeconomic management and rebuilding fiscal
buffers and international reserves will also be important in dealing with increased risks in the
global economy.
12.
An overarching requirement will be to address the country’s gender disparities
which, despite relatively high overall levels of human capital endowment, remain significant.
Available data indicate that gender disparities in education are small at the primary and secondary
levels, but substantial at the tertiary level. Moreover, though women constitute 45 percent of the
labour force, which is comparable to the average for all low income countries, their average
monthly earnings are barely half those of men, and the number of female managers and owners of
enterprises is very low. (Annex 2 analyses Tajikistan’s gender disparities in more detail.)
III.

PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES

13.
Overall progress towards CPS outcomes since mid-2010 has been broadly
satisfactory, particularly the authorities’ two-pronged crisis management response to the
global downturn. With support from development partners, they maintained public spending on
education, health, and social protection at 42 percent of the budget, ensured access to key public
services for the poor, and strengthened social protection for vulnerable groups. Besides these
short-term crisis mitigation measures, the authorities also made significant, albeit variable progress
towards: (a) improving the business environment, thereby facilitating private sector development;
(b) increasing agricultural productivity through land reform, ‘freedom to farm’, and better water
management; (c) upgrading energy efficiency and reliability; (d) enriching the quality of education
and health; and (e) strengthening public administration and public finance management, including
the piloting of several CGAC-related initiatives (cf. paras. 17-18). Box 1 below summarizes
progress towards CPS outcomes as measured by selected intermediate indicators.
Box 1: Progress towards CPS Outcomes—selected intermediate indicators 1
Macroeconomic stability and balanced fiscal policy—Achieved
Tajikistan maintained positive growth during the global downturn and doubled GDP growth from 3.9% in 2009 to
7.4% in 2011. Public spending on education, health, and social protection was maintained at the targeted (2008)
baseline of 42% of total budget, equivalent to 7.3% of GDP.
Access to critical public services—Ongoing
IDA/TF-financed basic education and primary health care (PHC) facilities were constructed or rehabilitated as
planned. Gross enrollment for basic education was 97% in 2011, including 95% for girls. The average number of
PHC visits per capita for Khatlon and Sogd oblasts increased from 2.5 and 3.78 in 2009 to 3.06 and 4.3
respectively in 2011. However, countrywide roll-out of health per capita financing and oblast-level pooling
reforms was postponed to 2014, pending a review by the Ministry of Finance of their fiscal impact.
Enhanced social protection for vulnerable groups—Ongoing
More than 10,500 people have been involved in public works in the most food insecure districts, earning an
1

Annex 1 updates the results that the CPS expects to influence by end-FY14 (including intermediate indicators for FY13), linked
to the CPS’ original strategic country-level outcomes.

8

average income of about $250 equivalent per person. A pilot project targeting social assistance provision to
vulnerable groups has been launched successfully in two districts, with plans for countrywide implementation in
coming years.
Business-enabling environment—Achieved
Corporate income tax rate was cut from 25% to 15%; the cost and number of procedures required to start a
business and obtain a construction permit were reduced substantially; and revisions to laws and/or regulations
relating to the central bank, banking, deposit insurance, and bank liquidation were adopted in line with the
financial sector action plan (FSAP), though implementation is slow. In 2011 Doing Business, Tajikistan was one
of the 10 most improved countries for the 2nd straight year, although its overall ranking (139 of 183) remains low.
Agricultural productivity—Achieved
Over 50,000 land-use certificates were issued in restructured farms, covering 158,000 individual land shares. Key
agricultural reforms are now underway, such as ‘freedom to farm’; agricultural taxation; role of local government;
access to credit; and institutional arrangements for off- and on-farm water management. According to a 2011
rural vulnerability and resilience survey, 45% of households reported less government interference in dekhan
farms’ cropping decisions. Improved access to irrigation was provided on over 44,000 hectares, with 74% of
farmers reporting increased crop yields.
Energy efficiency and reliability—Ongoing
Data for power outages and number of days below the (reservoir) dead zone—two end-FY11 indicators—are not
yet available, and planned electricity tariff increases to cost recovery level were postponed. Barqi Tajik (BT)
installed 165,000 meters in Dushanbe, increased billing by 50%, and rehabilitated several distribution networks.
The TALCO energy efficiency audit has been completed. BT and Tajiktransgas are executing financial
management improvement plans (including migration to IFRS).
Quality of education and health—Achieved
Education—per capita financing was rolled out nationwide; the EMIS-2 design was reviewed and
recommendations adopted; the National Testing Center (NTC) piloted common university entrance examination
and standardized classroom assessments; and a life skills training curriculum for migrant workers was developed.
Health—per capita financing for primary health care is in place in 42 rayons in 2 oblasts and 302 doctors and 923
nurses were trained in family medicine.
Public administration/civil service performance—Ongoing
A new performance-based salary grid, including a 35% increase in entry-level salaries, was extended to all civil
servants effective September 1, 2011. A new law on public administration organization was approved in
December 2011 and Resolution 34 of January 21, 2012 authorized the re-organization of 10 ministries.
Accountability and transparency of public finances—Ongoing
Since 2010, quarterly budget execution reports have been posted on the Ministry of Finance’s website. The
unified budget classification and Chart of Accounts compatible with 2001 GFS was implemented for the 2012
budget. A law on external audit was approved in June 2011 and a presidential decree establishing an external
audit body was issued at end-2011. The two top auditors received parliamentary approval in 2012. A new Tax
Code with input from the private sector was approved in September 2012.

14.
The Bank Group’s response to the crisis, specifically to the country’s needs for
emergency budget and energy support, was prompt and practical. It consisted of two single
tranche PDPGs totalling $35.4 million—$25.4 million in FY10 and $10 million in FY11—as well
as additional financing of $15 million for energy emergency recovery assistance in FY10. In
addition, two Trust Fund commitments totalling $16.3 million addressed the crisis’ impact on
poverty and vulnerability directly—a $6.3 million Russia Food Price Crisis Rapid Response Trust
Fund grant for emergency food security and seed imports, and a $10 million EU Food Crisis Rapid
Response Facility grant for public employment for sustainable agriculture and water management
in selected districts of Khatlon oblast. Results on the ground included: (a) the urgent rehabilitation
of the power grid in Dushanbe and of local district heating systems to ensure supply to hospitals,
schools, and households during the winter; and (b) employment of more than 10,500 people in five
of the poorest, most food insecure districts on community-based drainage and irrigation
infrastructure public works programs. Meanwhile, a $2.8 million Japan Social Development Fund
grant, approved towards end-FY09, financed nutrition investments in severely food insecure

9

districts of Khatlon, including micro-nutrient supplements to under five year old children and
pregnant and lactating women. Finally, a $13.5 million grant under the Education for All Fast
Track Initiative Catalytic Fund (FTI-3), approved in FY10, increased access to improved primary
school infrastructure and more efficient delivery of quality education services.
15.
Besides crisis mitigation, the two PDPGs also supported initial progress towards the
second of the CPS’ two principal objectives—post-crisis recovery and sustainable growth.
While the larger PDPG-4 in FY10 focused mainly on protecting social spending and the gains
from earlier reforms, the PDPG-5 in FY11 (and the proposed PDPG-6 in FY13) put progressively
more emphasis on efforts to promote sustainable growth. These include reforms in three policy
areas: first, maintaining delivery of basic social services; second, improving the environment for
private sector development; and third, increasing the government’s effectiveness, including: (a)
strengthening the capacity of agencies, committees, ministries, and other public institutions (e.g.
per capita financing for primary health care); (b) improving public financial management (e.g.
introducing a single treasury account); and (c) enhancing the transparency of large state-owned
enterprises (e.g. publishing their audited accounts). These PDPG-supported reforms complement
those being carried out under ongoing IDA-financed investment projects in agriculture, education,
health, and social protection, as well as technical assistance in public administration and public
financial management.
16.
Meanwhile, progress was made in laying the foundation for stronger growth and key
structural reforms. Improving the business environment and enhancing the investment climate
are two related areas where, with Bank and International Finance Corporation (IFC) technical
assistance, Tajikistan’s legislation and regulatory environment have progressed significantly
during the last 2-3 years. For example, the rate of corporate income tax was reduced from 25
percent to 15 percent; the number of procedures and days required to start a business fell from 13
to 5 and from 62 to 24 respectively; and the number of procedures required to obtain a construction
permit was cut from 32 to 26. In addition, a one-stop shop for company registration has been
established and a public-private partnership law and amendments to the customs code have been
drafted.
17.
Tajikistan’s ratings for governance—especially for accountability, transparency, and
corruption in public services—are among the worst in Europe and Central Asia. Governance
is thus an integral, cross-cutting theme of the CPS, backed by a four year (FY10-13) $3.8 million
Governance Partnership Facility (GPF) grant. The CPS’ governance strategy focuses on the
country’s three most important governance challenges: (a) increasing public accountability and
transparency in key sectors, such as agriculture, banking, and energy; (b) developing institutional
capacity; and (c) fostering overall demand for good governance. It also introduces a new projectspecific tool—the governance checklist—designed to ensure that each investment project
addresses these three challenges throughout the project cycle while at the same time taking
fiduciary and political economy risks into account.
18.
The Country Team is fully engaged in implementation of the CGAC strategy.
Progress since FY10 includes the following: first, in the area of public accountability and
transparency, an energy efficiency audit of TALCO, Tajikistan’s largest state-owned enterprise,
has been completed, governance assessments of agriculture and mining have been finished, and a
policy note for the banking sector is planned; second, a civil service administration pilot capacity
building program has been initiated; and third, support for the promotion of demand for good

10

governance is being provided to the parliament―to help strengthen its finance and economics
committee’s oversight of the budget and the committee’s overall analytical capacity―and to civil
society organisations to engage them in the monitoring of IDA-financed projects. Meanwhile, the
governance checklist and associated institutional, governance, and political economy analyses
helped shape the design of the (FY11) 2nd Dushanbe Water Supply and (FY12) Private Sector
Competitiveness (mining component) projects.
IV.
A.

IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND ADJUSTMENTS TO CPS

CPS Program and Portfolio Performance

19.
Outcomes to date have been broadly in line with expectations in mid-2010. IDA
commitments of $140.5 million in FY10-12 exceeded original CPS plans by $21.1 million, or
about 17 percent. Budget support (PDPGs 4 and 5) totalling $35.4 million accounted for 25
percent of the total and additional financing totalling $43 million—to scale up five ongoing
operations in education, energy, health, land registration, and water management—accounted for
31 percent. The balance of $62.1 million, or 44 percent, was for six new operations: winter energy
emergency support, a second Dushanbe water supply project, social protection technical
assistance, regional hydro-meteorological capacity building, municipal infrastructure, and private
sector competitiveness.
20.
Portfolio performance improved during the period, although several systemic issues
remain. Disbursements increased, thanks mainly to the increasing number of mature projects and
in some cases better implementation. Commitments at risk declined from 29 percent in FY09 to
13.5 percent in FY13, although the number of problem projects remained at 3. The most recent
country portfolio performance review (CPPR), conducted jointly with the government and the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) in July 2012, piloted a focus on results, using health and
transport as examples. Previous joint reviews focused mainly on nuts and bolts of implementation
of Bank-financed projects. The line ministries concerned demonstrated that a focus on results
enabled them to view partnership from both a practical and political perspective and the approach
is becoming more familiar to the State Committee on Investments and State Property Management
(SCISPM). The government continued moving towards more integrated project implementation
arrangements—a key area of concern from the previous (2011) CPPR—specifically the
incorporation of project implementation units (PIUs) into line ministries, thereby facilitating
institutional impact and project sustainability. During the recent Country Procurement Status
Review, the Bank discovered that procurement arrangements in Bank financed projects had been
modified by the SCISPM, resulting in implementation delays and lack of accountability. The
Bank is working with the SCISPM to find a solution.
21.
Trust Funds were an important supplement to IDA resources in FY10-12, accounting
for about 30 percent of total combined commitments. Tajikistan’s Trust Fund portfolio—one
of the largest in ECA—has 48 active operations with net commitments of $64.5 million. During
FY 09-11, more than $57 million were mobilized―mainly for agriculture (51 percent), but also for
education (22 percent), public law & administration (12 percent) and health (9 percent)―and $19
million disbursed. Efforts to limit new trust fund requests only to supplement existing projects or
activities—which accounted for more than half the 21 grants approved in FY11—will continue
during the remaining CPS period. Tajikistan is also one of nine countries chosen by the Climate
11

Investment Fund (CIF) for implementation of Pilot Programs for Climate Resistance (PPCR).
Activities under the first phase have been completed and recommendations for the second phase
have been submitted to the implementing partners. The recently approved regional hydrometeorological project is the first phase 2 PPCR project underway.
22.
IFC continued to promote private sector development through a combination of
investments and advisory activities. It invested $19.4 million in seven projects during FY10-12,
including $2 million through its Global Trade Finance Program in Eskhata Bank and $5 million
through a global agribusiness project in a commodity trading company, ECOM. Besides a first
investment in agribusiness, the other operations were loans to, and equity investments in existing
clients, First Microfinance Bank and Tajik Access Bank, which were accompanied by advisory
services to strengthen their microfinance activities and assist their transformation into deposittaking commercial banks. Tajikistan also benefitted from a regional financial sector infrastructure
project, which helped establish the country’s first credit bureau. Meanwhile, a new Agricultural
Finance and Regulatory Reform Advisory Project was launched, focused on agricultural
equipment leasing and finance and key regulatory issues. The long-standing business enabling
environment advisory project concluded its next phase, contributing to Tajikistan’s improved
ranking in Doing Business (2010, 2011 and 2012) and facilitating important progress on permits
reform.
B.

Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA)

23.
Dissemination of analytical and advisory activities, especially the 2011 Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM) 2, remains an important vehicle for policy dialogue.
Analytical and advisory activities remained central to implementation of the CPS and fostering
country dialogue. These focused mostly on economic policy, social protection, poverty and
agriculture. A social protection study helped inform the piloting of a poverty targeting mechanism
for social assistance provision. Besides the CEM, which helped advance the dialogue on
macroeconomic management and key structural reforms, a poverty assessment update 3 and two
studies under the Pilot Program for Climate Change were completed during the period. A Khatlon
regional development study (FY13) and sector-specific activities, such as the feasibility study for
results-based financing in health, are paving the way for preparation of subsequent operations.
Meanwhile, gender received specific attention in rural livelihoods, nutrition, and health
projects―a focus that will be broadened in the remainder of the CPS (cf. para. 27 below).
C.

CPS Program FY13-14

24.
Going forward, the shift in program emphasis already underway—from crisis
mitigation to the structural reforms needed to achieve inclusive, sustainable growth—will
accelerate and intensify. The government’s ongoing NDS (2006-15), its upcoming 4th Poverty
Reduction Strategy (PRS-4) (2013-15), and the recommendations contained in the Bank’s 2011
CEM will together provide the policy framework for planned operational and analytical and
advisory activities in FY13-14. The main goal will be to help stimulate increased private
investment through private and financial sector development. The other four country-level
2

Tajikistan’s Quest for Growth: Stimulating Private Investment, Report No. 54677-TJ, January 2011

3

Delivering Social Assistance to the Poorest Households (Report No. 56593-TJ, April 2011)

12

priorities are: public administration and governance; human capital development; energy security,
and food security. Governance will remain a key cross-cutting theme and be increasingly
mainstreamed into operations, in line with the CGAC strategy discussed above (paras.17-18), and
gender will be accorded greater focus and priority (cf. para. 27 below). The emphasis on financial
and private sector development and public sector management will also address the two weakest
clusters in Tajikistan’s 2011 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA).
25.
The current CPS would be extended by one year from end-FY13 to end-FY14 to align
with the government’s medium-term planning process. The rationale for this is two-fold. First,
it would enable design of the next CPS (commencing FY15) to be aligned more closely to the
government’s timetable for preparation of its second NDS, 2016-25. Second, given the shift in
program emphasis for the balance of the current CPS, it would permit more time for both the
government and the WBG to assess the impact of on-going and planned structural reforms, thereby
improving the quality of the baseline for the next CPS.
26.
Against this background and building on continued government reform efforts, a new
series of annual development policy operations (DPOs) will be initiated in FY14. Although
the crisis mitigation response to the global downturn is now completed, continued budget support
is justified for the following three reasons: first, the series of six PDPG operations now nearing
completion has been an important vehicle for policy dialogue and instrumental in catalysing many
of the structural reforms now in place or underway; second, PDPG operations have complemented
and reinforced sector-specific reforms supported under other IDA-financed projects (e.g. in
agriculture, education, health, social protection, and public administration); and third, Tajikistan’s
CPIA rating has improved - from 3.2 in 2007 to 3.4 in 2011—indirect evidence of the improving
policy environment. The scope and timing of individual DPOs would be proportionate to the
scope and timing of the government’s reform program, with clear a priori rules of engagement.
The policy framework would be more selective than the PDPG series and designed to achieve
results in a fairly short period of time.
27.
Given Tajikistan’s pervasive gender disparities, a gender lens will be incorporated in
individual projects to ensure that sector-specific issues are addressed―especially in
agriculture, education, and health. In this connection, a recent study on access to finance for
women in rural areas generated important data that will be used to inform future analytical and
operational work. With increased migration of men to work outside Tajikistan, women constitute
an increasing share of the agricultural labor force. The Tajikistan Environmental Land
Management and Rural Livelihoods Project (FY13)—to be funded by the Pilot Program for
Climate Resilience (PPCR), GEF, and other partners—provides for planning and screening of rural
production and land investments to include consideration of issues faced by women and to involve
them in decision-making, access to project benefits, and associated monitoring. Ongoing
educational projects, including a national testing center for access to higher education and a
proposed skills development project in FY15 will address gender in their design and preparation.
Finally, a gender assessment and gender monitoring are planned for FY13 and FY14 respectively.
28.
The results framework has been revised, streamlined, and updated to reflect the shift
in program emphasis and the adjustments proposed for FY13-14. Three examples of what the
shift in emphasis will entail in terms of planned results include the following. First, scaling up
pilots and/or implementing recently-approved structural reforms to support private sector-led
growth—e.g. ensuring the functioning of one-stop shops, and introducing new public-private

13

partnership (together with IFC); introducing an integrated land and property register based on the
recently-approved land code, which will also help protect women's property rights; developing
links from farm to market and sustainable land management practices, also critical for women who
account for up to three quarters of the agricultural labor force. Second, implementing new
initiatives to strengthen demand side governance—e.g. bringing citizens' voice to bear by
disseminating a nation-wide scorecard on social services and using this data as a baseline for the
next PRSP; and using development policy operations and individual projects (e.g. private sector
competitiveness-mining, health results-based financing, NGO monitoring of IDA -financed
projects) to focus on other critical governance issues. Third, from maintaining social expenditures
to improving the quality of social services—in education, by focusing on content improvement and
early childhood preparation; in health, by introducing results-based financing for better quality
maternal and child health services; in targeting social assistance, by scaling up from a 2-rayon pilot
to 10 rayons and later to a national register; and in water supply, by combining forces with EBRD
to introduce a national mechanism for investment in safe drinking water.
Private and financial sector development
29.
Private sector development would be supported through a combination of investment
and associated analytical and advisory activities. The private sector part of the reform agenda
and policy dialogue underway in the context of PDPGs 5-6 will be followed up during
implementation of the new $10 million private sector competitiveness project approved last May.
Its objectives are to help further improve the business environment, to encourage the development
of high potential industries such as mining, and to increase access to financial services. In
addition, reforms in tax policy and administration—identified as one of the main constraints to
private sector development—will be supported by a proposed $15 million tax administration
project later in FY13.
30.
The main focus of IFC’s activities is expected to remain unchanged. IFC will continue
to provide advisory services for improving the investment climate upon request. These are
expected to include simplified tax administration, in consultation with the Bank, as well as
activities designed to strengthen the regulatory environment, especially for climate change, energy,
and public private partnerships (PPPs). IFC is currently conducting a study of the Khatlon region,
jointly with the Bank, which will help chart a path for growth through the combined resources of
the public and private sectors. Its contribution will focus on regional comparative advantage and
competitiveness and attempt to identify sectors or businesses that could be priorities for
investment. IFC’s focus on strengthening the real sectors will continue to target agribusiness
through investments and ongoing advisory work, including continued engagement with a leading
international cotton trading company on a program to strengthen its supplier network in Tajikistan.
However, major direct investments in local companies are unlikely, given the widespread underreporting that precludes a full appraisal of their true financial condition.
31.
In infrastructure, IFC will explore opportunities for advisory work in energy,
especially hydropower, where the country’s potential is very high. It is providing PPIAF
assistance to establish a bankable Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for the new Sangtuda
hydropower project and is considering a large investment in this project. It will remain engaged in
regional transmission programs for power exchange, such as the proposed Central Asia – South
Asia power transmission line project (CASA-1000). IFC has an existing advisory engagement
with the Government of Tajikistan with regard to structuring a tender for private sector
14

participation in the development of the Konimansur silver mine. This project requires a substantial
amount of institutional capacity building and has progressed slowly to date. If IFC is able to
secure the necessary level of political commitment from the Government to take the Konimansur
mandate to completion, the project could have a major impact on Tajikistan’s economic
development and would position the World Bank Group for greater involvement in mining.
32.
In the financial sector, Bank-supported activities include four ongoing grants from
the Financial Reform and Strengthening Initiative Trust Fund (FIRST). These are designed
to: (a) strengthen bank regulation and supervision; (b) improve access to credit by modernizing the
system for moveable collateral; (c) strengthen the payments system; and (d) promote the
development of a more competitive insurance market. At the same time, IFC will explore
opportunities to help strengthen the banking system, encourage the development of microfinance,
and stimulate leasing. However, there are presently few institutions that IFC can engage with
directly, given their limited transparency and/or small asset and equity base. Meanwhile, advisory
work on financial infrastructure, agricultural finance, and microfinance may pave the way for
potential IFC investments later.
Public administration and governance
33.
Besides the new series of annual DPOs, the ongoing public expenditure review will
assess the quality of public spending and make recommendations to strengthen budgetary
analysis and processes. In particular, it will address four main issues: (a) whether the
composition of public spending is consistent with the goals of faster economic growth and more
rapid poverty reduction; (b) the impact of increased education and health spending on outcomes,
regional equity, and public satisfaction with service delivery; (c) whether the current sectoral
distribution of capital expenditure is appropriate, including implications for long-term fiscal
sustainability; and (d) the quasi-fiscal deficit associated with Barki Tajik (Tajikistan’s largest
enterprise), especially the measures needed to ensure it operates on sound commercial principles.
Second, as noted earlier, the governance checklist and associated institutional, governance, and
political economy analyses will help shape the design of the proposed health results-based
financing and agricultural competitiveness projects. Third, analytical work on procurement, the
TALCO energy efficiency audit, and the institutional governance review planned for FY13 will
further the governance, public accountability and transparency agendas.
Human capital development
34.
Human capital development and social protection remain important priorities, given
the limited progress on several Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Greater emphasis is
particularly needed on maternal and child health and also on the quality of education outcomes.
Based on a detailed feasibility study carried out last year, a $15 million health results-based
financing project is currently under preparation for consideration later in FY13. At the same time,
the Bank is the supervising entity for a proposed Global Partnership for Education grant currently
under preparation also for consideration later in FY13. In addition, analytical work on skills
development planned for FY14 will draw on the work and experience of GIZ and other
development partners and inform a proposed FY15 operation. As for social protection, a European
Union-funded pilot project to target cash benefits is now being evaluated as the basis for a
proposed nation-wide system; and, the communal services strategy included in the abovementioned $11.9 million additional financing for municipal infrastructure would pave the way for
15

the proposed communal services development fund tentatively planned for FY14, together with the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). Finally, if and when needed to
address contingencies arising from the country’s vulnerability to natural disasters, IDA would seek
to mobilize the incremental resources required.
Energy security
35.
Additional financing of $18 million for the Energy Loss Reduction Project approved
in FY12 will help establish the preconditions necessary for further development of the sector,
including financial management reforms and improvements in energy efficiency. It also
includes financing for studies of the proposed CASA-1000 transmission line and assessment
studies for the Rogun hydropower project under consideration by the government. Responding to
a government request for an independent economic, environmental, social and technical
assessment of Rogun, the Bank committed to a role designed to ensure credible, transparent
assessments that will bear international scrutiny and facilitate riparian dialogue. Per the
Government’s binding instructions, activity at the site will be restricted to general maintenance and
construction for safety purposes only, until i) the assessment studies are completed and reviewed
by the Panel of Experts; and ii) the riparian consultations have taken place. In particular, there will
be no activity leading to diversion of the Vaksh River during this period. An independent panel of
Bank-financed experts will review the assessment studies and prepare a separate report. The Bank
will also undertake a comprehensive review of all relevant reports, including on the prospects for
broadly beneficial regional water management arrangements. Finally, the ongoing power
alternatives study, expected to be completed later this year, will examine power alternatives
(without reservoir storage), as well as efficiency measures, power supply, and regional trade
options.
Food security and agriculture
36.
A $28 million Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) grant, with an
additional $18 million grant from IDA, will strengthen food security in the poorest districts
of the south. The operation scales up successful experience under the EU grant (cf. para. 14)
while advancing institutional reforms in water management and land property rights. Private
investment in agriculture will be promoted through strengthened property rights as a result of the
$10 million additional financing for land registration and cadastre approved in FY12. At the same
time, to mitigate the risks of spring flooding, the additional financing of $11.9 million for
municipal infrastructure approved in FY12 also included a special allocation of up to $2 million to
fortify river embankments and, as a result, an estimated 1,000 rural homes were protected.
Meanwhile, analytical work in FY13 on Khatlon Regional Development, the role of government in
agriculture, irrigation and drainage investment planning and management, and a rural investment
climate assessment will together provide a holistic view of the reforms required to facilitate
preparation of agricultural competitiveness and water management operations in FY14 and FY15
respectively.
Regional issues
37.
At the regional level, the Bank will continue to help Tajikistan explore opportunities
for enhanced cooperation. For example, the proposed CASA-1000 project (FY14) would enable
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan to export summer surplus electricity to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
16

Tajikistan is receiving financial and technical advisory services through the ongoing Energy Loss
Reduction Project. The next meeting of the Tajikistan Development Forum currently planned for
December 2012 will focus on multi-donor, cross-sectoral initiatives that may also include stronger
connectivity through regional linkages.
D.

Coordination & Partnerships

38.
Given the limited IDA and other resources available, greater coherence among
development partners will be a focus of the next meeting of the Tajikistan Development
Forum. The Development Coordination Council (DCC) in Dushanbe has played a key role in
strengthening country ownership and mutual accountability through sector and thematic working
groups, in line with the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. In December 2010, it helped
organize a 2-day high-level meeting of the Tajikistan Development Forum and, in December 2011,
a 1-day follow-up meeting. The World Bank is currently chair of the DCC and will lead its
preparations for the upcoming Development Forum. Meanwhile, it will coordinate with
development partners having supplementary resources and, in addition, seek to use Trust Funds
more strategically, i.e. to co-finance ongoing or planned IDA-financed operations rather than to
finance new, separate activities.
V.

RISKS

39.
None of the specific contingencies discussed in the original CPS materialized, but two
of the four risk areas identified—macroeconomic and geo-political―remain valid. Regarding
macroeconomic risks, although Tajikistan weathered the 2008-09 global downturn better than
expected at the time, the risk of possibly slower growth in Russia—and thus of declining
remittances and even the involuntary repatriation of Tajik migrants—remains. Second,
weaknesses in the prudential regulation and supervision of Tajikistan’s banks exacerbate concerns
about directed lending and the resolution of associated non-performing loans—the accumulation of
which poses significant quasi-fiscal risks. These must be reduced while eliminating directed
lending altogether. The Bank is working closely with the IMF with the aim of ensuring that
directed lending is discontinued without further delay and also that the troubled banks concerned
are resolved according to international principles. Finally, Tajikistan’s public finance management
system is characterized by insufficient internal controls, inadequate transparency, weak
governance, low capacity, and poor cash management and budget execution—all of which could
undermine efforts to enforce fiscal discipline and accountability. These are being addressed
through technical assistance in response to key recommendations of the PEFA, CPSR, and IMF
reports and implementation of the Public Finance Management Modernization Project. The Bank
sees closer collaboration with other development partners as key to moving this agenda forward as
well as a high degree of vigilance in its operational activities. However, some risks remain and
cannot be fully mitigated.
40.
The potential for political and social instability as a result of uncertainties in
neighbouring Afghanistan remains high. Increasing tension between Tajikistan and its
neighbours over regional issues—especially the management and use of trans-boundary energy
and water resources—constitutes a continuing risk. The public consultations among riparian states
in connection with the Rogun assessment studies will allow for open discussion of national
viewpoints and potentially contribute to a process of evidence-based policy dialogue.

17

Furthermore, although the government has consolidated its control of the country, sporadic
incidents could affect political stability. Broader risks related to political-military issues are
beyond the scope of the WBG’s mandate, and hence, staff will liaise with key bilateral agencies as
well as the UN Specialized Agencies concerned to monitor political and security developments,
and to assess their potential impact on the CPS program.
41.
Finally, the country’s weak human and institutional capacity and governance remain
significant risks to CPS implementation. These weaknesses are partly a legacy of Tajikistan’s
civil war and partly a function of its political economy and limited financial resources. Capacity
constraints also may limit the scope for governance reforms. In addition, weak public financial
management may pose a macro and governance risk. It was partly for these reasons that Tajikistan
was one of four countries in Europe and Central Asia selected to pilot the Country Governance and
Anti-Corruption Framework (CGAC) with, as reported elsewhere in this CPSPR, broadly
satisfactory initial experience. Continued implementation of CGAC-related activities, in particular
the planned mainstreaming of the governance checklist in all ongoing and new projects, as well as
ongoing and planned analytical activities and technical assistance in public administration and
public finance management, will be the main instruments for mitigating and managing operational
risks related to governance.

18

Annex 1: Results Matrix
(New): new or refined result;
(On Track): on track to reach end of CPS objective;
(Achieved): achieved during the first half of the CPS period (Scaled Up): target scaled up for additional year
Strategic countrylevel outcomes 4

Results CPS expects to influence by endFY14 and related indicators

Milestones for monitoring progress

1. Strengthening the business enabling environment
Improving
investment climate and
developing
private
sector and entrepreneurship (NDS p.
15)

Strengthen financial sector legislative and
regulatory framework*(Ongoing)
• Expand number of bank or micro finance
accounts and associated deposits :
Baseline: 3% of
population & 11% of GDP (2008)
Target: 6% of
population and 18% of GDP (2014) (New)
• Number of taxes paid by businesses to be
reduced.
Baseline: 21 (2008)
Target: 11 (2014) – (New)

4

• New Permits Law adopted (Achieved)
• Amendments to NBT Law, Banking and
Deposit Insurance Laws (Achieved);
• Secured
lending regime, and related
regulations adopted as per FSAP (Ongoing)
• Medium-term post-FSAP strategy and action
plan adopted and implementation underway
(Achieved)
• IFC investment debt and equity in financial
institutions and MFOs increased (Ongoing)
• $4 million investment facilitated by IFC AS
projects
• Credit Bureau established and banks utilizing
credit bureau information
• New draft Tax Code adopted (Achieved)

Cf. Tajikistan: National Development Strategy (NDS), 2006-15

19

Ongoing Projects:
• Land
Registration
and
Cadastre System (2005)
• Business
Enabling
Environment AS (IFC)
• Konimansur
Infrastructure
Advisory Mandate (IFC)
• Central
Asia
Corporate
Governance, Microfinance, and
Financial Infrastructure (IFC)
• PDPG 4-6 series (2010-13)
• DPO1 (2014)
• Tax Administration Reform
Project (2013-17)
• Private
Sector
Competitiveness project (201216)
AAA:
• Doing Business Reform TA
Trust Funds:
• IDF: PSD Reform
• IDF: Tax Service Capacity
Strengthening
• FIRST: Payment Systems
• FIRST: Secured Transactions
• FIRST: Banking Regulation
and Supervision

• FIRST: Insurance Market
Development
• SECO Trust Fund on PSD
Partners:
DFID, EC, IMF, SECO, USAID
2. Improving public sector administration and public finance management
Develop
public
administration
characterized
by
transparency,
accountability
and
anti-corruption (NDS
p. 11)

Strengthen
incentives
for
better
performance by civil servants
• Expand merit-based recruitment, as
measured by
ratio of applicants per
vacancy filled competitively (grades 3 and
below) *
Baseline: 1.4:1 (2008)
Target: 2:1 (2014 - Ongoing/Scaled Up))
• New performance-based, salary grid
introduced throughout civil service (2012 –
Ongoing/Scaled Up)*

Ongoing Projects:
• Ratio of applicants per vacancy to reach 2:1 by
end-2012 (Achieved)
• 10 ministries reorganization plans implemented
by end-2013 (Resolution 34 of January 24, 2012)
(Ongoing)
• Law on Organization of Public Administration
implemented by end-2012 (Ongoing)

• PDPG-6 ( FY2012-13)
AAA:
• IGR

Partners:
DFiD, EC, IMF, Japan, SDC,
USAID

• Performance-based appraisal and salary grid
implemented by end-2012 (Stalled)

Increasing transparency in management
of public finances,
including strengthened preparation and
execution of
state
and local government
budgets (NDS p. 17)

Improve transparency and accountability
of public financial management
• Budget
comprehensiveness
and
transparency improved, as measured by
PEFA indicator PI5 (budget classification)
*
Baseline: D (2007)
Target: B (2014 – New)
• Improved control of budget execution, as
measured by timely submission of annual
audit reports to parliament *
Baseline: 0 (2009)
Target: Timely submission of annual audit
reports to parliament (2014 - Scaled Up)

• New (2001 GFS) budget classification and
Chart of Accounts implemented in 2012-14
budgets (Achieved for 2012)
• Budget execution reports covering central and
local governments published in timely manner
• Implementation of Law on External Audit
underway by mid-2012 (Ongoing – law approved)
• Independent external audit body created by
end-2012 (Achieved)

20

Ongoing Projects:
• PFMMP
New Projects:
• PDPG-6 (FY2010-13)
• Tax Administration Reform
Project (TARP) FY13-17
(under preparation)
New AAA:
• IGR
• PEFA
Trust Funds:
• EC-DFID MDTF
• SECO TF: Public Sector
Accounting Reform Project
Partners:
DFiD, EC, IMF, USAID

3. Improving access to higher quality social services
Expanding access to
water supply and
sanitation
services
(NDS p. 50)
• Reduce by half
population without
sustainable access
to safe drinking
water (MDG #7)

Developing
human
potential by increasing
quantity
&
quality
of
social
services for poor
(NDS p. 11)
• Achieve 100% net
primary
school
enroll-ment by 2015
(MDG #2)
• Increase share of
girls completing 9
years of education to
98% by 2015 (MDG
#3)
• Reduce
infant
mortality (MDG #4)
• Reduce maternal
mortality (MDG #5)
• Reduce prevalence
of infectious diseases
(MDG #6)

Improved provision of safe water in
Dushanbe and selected municipalities:
• Population with access to safe water
expanded in Dushanbe and in 8
municipalities:
Baseline: 1.3 million (2008)
Target: 1.6 million (2013)
• Combined technical and commercial
losses reduced*
Baseline: 70% (2008)
Target: 50% (2013)
Strengthen quality of public education and
health services
• Administration of fair, transparent
university entrance exams
Baseline: 0 entrance exams (2008)
Target: New Unified Entrance Exams
system is ready for 2014/2015 academic
year Higher Education Admission;( FY14
- Ongoing)
• Improved efficiency of health care,
measured by implementation of provider
payment reforms*
Target: By 2014, full per capita financing
in place in two rayons and primary health
care results-based performance payment
system in place in 1 rayon (from 0 in 2012)
(New – Scaled down)

Dushanbe:
• New billing & collection system in place
• Pressure zones established to reduce leakage
(2014 – New)
• SWTP filters upgrade underway (2014 – New)
Municipalities
• New billing & collection systems piloted in
Kurgan-Tuibe, Vosé, Kulyob, Dangara, &
Farkar (2014 – New)
• Metering program piloted in Farkhar (2014 –
New)

• EMIS-2 design reviewed and recommendations
adopted (Achieved)
• National Testing Center (NTC) operationalized
(Achieved)
• Unified university entrance exam piloted by
NTC (Scaled Up)

• Full per capita financing in place in at least 2
districts (Achieved)
• Operational manual for results-based financing
scheme prepared in Sogd and Khatlon (Achieved)

• Quality of primary health care services
improved in project areas, measured by
number of doctors & nurses trained in
updated clinical disease mgt. protocols
Target: By 2014, 425 doctors and 1,233
nurses (from 183 and 453 in 2009) (On

Ongoing Projects:
• 2nd Dushanbe Water Supply
(2011-15)
• Municipal
Infrastructure
Development (MIDP)—AF
Partners:
ADB,
EBRD,
UNICEF, USAID

Switzerland,

Ongoing Projects:
• EMP
• CBHP and AF
• Central Asia HIV/AIDS
New Projects:
• EMP AF (FY2010)
• Health (FY2013)
Trust Funds:
• EFA-FTI III
• Russian Education Aid for
Development (READ)
• Health Results Innovation
Trust Fund
• Japanese Social Development
Fund Nutrition Project
• Rapid Social Response Trust
Fund-Protecting & Promoting
Access to Maternal &
Neonatal Health Services
• Health Policy Monitoring IDF
Grant
Partners:
ADB, AKF, Australia, EC, GTZ,
IOM, KfW, Russia, SDC,
UNICEF, USAID, WHO

21

Track)
4. Strengthening the energy sector
Ensuring
Tajikistan’s energy
security(NDS p. 27)

• Reduce commercial and technical losses*
Baselines: 19.3% electricity and 16.8% gas
(2008)
Targets: 12% electricity and 15% gas
(2013)
• Improve transparency in financial
management
of
Barki
Tajik
and
Tajiktransgaz, as measured by timeliness
and public availability of audited financial
statements on their respective websites*
(On Track)

• 160,000 electricity meters installed in
Dushanbe and 80,000 gas meters installed
countrywide (Achieved)

• Commercial agreements on export electricity
market negotiated with governments of Kyrgyz
Republic, Afghanistan, and Pakistan (Scaled Up)

• Expand regional transmission network
Baseline: No construction (2008)
Target: First contract signed (2014 - Scaled
Up)

Ongoing Projects:
• Energy Loss Reduction (ERLP
– 2005-14)
• AF to ERLP (2013)
• PDPG FY2012-2014
• Regional Transmission Interconnection,
(CASA-1000)
–
(2014-2018)
AAA:
• A&A ROSC
• Final Feasibility Study for
CASA 1000
• Alternative Power Options
Study
Trust Funds:
• Financial
Management
Improvement Program at Barki
Tajik and Tajiktransgaz (SECO)
• CAEWDP multi-donor Trust
Fund
Partners:
ADB, DfID, IMF, KfW, SECO,
USAID

• Increase in electricity tariffs to cost
recovery levels ($0.03 cents per kwh)
(Delayed)

5. Increasing food security
Raising agricultural
productivity (NDS p.
27)

• Farmers’ access to land improved, as
measured by issuance of new land use
certificates, disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 808 (2009)
Target: 86,000 (2014) (Scaled Up) – 25%
women (New)

• 60,000 new land use certificates to be issued
by March 2013 (On track)

• Annual
incremental
revenue
per
beneficiary household increased as result of
selected successful rural production

22

Ongoing Projects:
• Land Registration and
Cadastre
• FVWRMP (2005-2013)
• EFSSIP
• South Tajikistan Cotton
Lending (IFC)
• PDPG 4-6
• Agri-finance Advisory
Services (IFC)
• Public Employment Program

investments
Baseline:
$400
from
productivity
investments;
$ 140 from land resource investments
(2009)
Target: $550 and $550, respectively (2014)
(Scaled up)
• Proportion of farmers and other
stakeholders reporting less government
interference, disaggregated by sex*
Baseline: 35% (2009) all
20% women (New)
Target: 75% (2014 – Scaled up) all
75% women (New)

• Proportion of farmers and other stakeholders
reporting less government interference in
planting/production decisions to increase to
between 45-50% (Achieved)

*Governance-related indicators are mainstreamed at the sector level.

23

AF (2013)
• Regional Hydromet project
(2011-2016)
AAA:
• CAWEDP
• Enhanced Livestock
Productivity
• Integrated Water Management
• TA for PPCR Strategic
Program preparation
Trust Funds:
• GEF: Land Management
Partners:
ADB, AKDN, CIDA, DFID,
EBRD, GTZ, KfW, SECO,
UNDP, USAID

Annex 2. Gender Disparities in Tajikistan
Despite relatively high levels of human capital endowment compared to other low income countries and
progress in several gender-related areas over the last decade, Tajikistan is still affected by significant
gender disparities―in education, especially in enrollments at the tertiary level, and in health, especially in
terms of maternal mortality. Access to economic opportunities by women―characterized by low labor
force participation, depressed wages, and few female business managers and owners―is also limited.
GENDER GAPS IN HUMAN CAPITAL
Education. While enrollment rates at all levels of education are significantly higher in Tajikistan than
the average for low income countries, net primary and secondary enrollment rates for boys are
respectively 4 and 5 percentage points higher than for girls. Moreover, gross tertiary enrollment rates for
boys are 17 percentage points higher than for girls. This large gender gap at the tertiary level may be a
function of the high out-migration of young men and consequently the differential rates of return to
education and ultimately wages.
Health. Selected health indicators point to an overall reduction in gender disparities between 2000 and
2010. The gender gap in life expectancy is 7 percentage points, which is comparable to the OECD
average. Moreover, female life expectancy in Tajikistan is 71 years, compared to 60 years for low
income countries in 2010. Maternal mortality is an estimated 65/100,000 births, which, although double
the ECA developing countries’ average, is about six times lower than the average for all low income
countries, and reflects the number of women receiving pre-natal care (80 percent in 2008). Finally,
fertility rates in Tajikistan remain the highest in Central Asia, despite a decline since 1990, although
adolescent fertility is in line with the ECA average.

GENDER GAPS IN ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
Labor markets and entrepreneurship. Gender disparities in labor markets and access to economic
opportunities are large. Labor force participation (60% for women and 78% for men) is similar to the
ECA developing countries’ average (58 and 76% respectively), but below the average seen in low income
countries. It decreased between 2000-2010 for both women (―2%age points) and men (―1%age point),
in contrast to low income countries where it increased by 2%age points for women.
Gender inequalities are also present in terms of female earnings relative to male earnings. According to
UNECE, women’s average monthly earnings are 49% of men’s in 2011 which places Tajikistan scores
well below ECA’s average. This wage gap could be due to occupational segregation, differences in hours
worked and productivity, and/or discrimination. Lastly, the share of formal SMEs with women’s
ownership in Tajikistan is similar to the ECA regional average at 34%. The share of these firms with
women in top management positions is low (12%) compared to ECA regional average of 19%.
Voice and agency. Women’s political participation in Tajikistan, as in most countries, remains low but
has shown improvements in recent years. Women represent a low but increasing share of members of
parliament (19% in 2010 compared to 15% in 2000, according to UNECE), and an even lower share of
government ministers (12% in 2006, in line with the ECA average of 13%).
Sources: WDI, World Bank Gender Statistics, UNECE Gender Statistics

24

Annex 3. AAA, IDA and TFs by CPS themes
CPS Themes
Cross Cutting
1. Strengthening the
business enabling
environment

2. Improving public
sector administration
and public finance
management
3. Improving access
to higher quality
social services

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Institutional governance review
Gender assessment and monitoring
Country Economic Memorandum
Pipeline:
Khatlon Regional Development Study
(FY13)
Institutional and Governance Review
Country Economic Memorandum
PEFA
Country Procurement Status Review
Health, nutrition & population statistics and
indicators
Protecting access to maternal & child health
services
Pipeline:
Water management
Professional and vocational skills
development

4. Strengthening the
energy sector

Rogun Assessment Studies
Power Supply Alternatives Study

5. Increasing food
security

Role of government in agriculture
development
Rural Investment Climate Assessment

IDA grant

Trust Funds
Governance Partnership Facility

PDPG 4
Private Sector Competitiveness
Pipeline
PDPG 6 (FY13, $20 m)
DPO 1 (FY14, $10 m)
Pipeline
Tax administration (FY13, $18 m)

SECO PSD TF

Community and Basic Health Project (AF)
Social Protection Technical Assistance
Education Modernisation (AF)
Land Registration & Cadastre (AF)
Ferghana Valley (AF)
Municipal Infrastructure Development
Pipeline
PDPG 6 (FY13, $20 m)
Health Services Improvement (FY13, $15m)
Municipal Services Development Fund
(FY13, $20 m)

Emergency Food Security Crisis and
Seed Imports (AF)
Social Protection Technical
Assistance (RSR)
Protecting and Promoting Access to
Maternal and Neonatal Health
Services

Winter Energy Emergency Support Facility
PDPG 4
Energy Loss Reduction (AF)
Pipeline
PDPG 6 (FY13, $20 m)
CASA 1000 (FY14, $3 m)
Hydromet Regional Project
Pipeline:
Public Employment for Sustainable
Agriculture (PAMP II) (FY14, $7 m)

25

Pipeline
Education Fast Track Initiative – 3
Global Partnership for Education
(GPE-4)
CAWEDP multi-donor Trust Fund

Pipeline
Public Employment for Sustainable
Agriculture (PAMP II)
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
Land Management and Rural
Livelihoods

Annex 4. Tajikistan at a glance

26

27

Millennium Development Goals

Tajikistan

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Tajikistan

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
..
..
..
..

..
..
102
100

..
99
81
..

95
93
74
100

97
104
87
100

..

..
40
3

89
40
3

90
37
19

111
87
70

93
75
88

63
52
94

37
..

2000
49.4
96.0
8.4
..

2010
6.6
46.7
8.3
15.0

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

116
91
68

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

120
90
..

170
81
..

120
71
34

64
83
37

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

0.1
93
50

0.1
91
38

0.1
125
36

0.2
206
44

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..
..
2.9
1.9
1.3
3.0

62
89
..
4.1
0.4
2.7

61
90
2.9
4.1
0.4
2.8

64
94
2.9
4.1
0.5
5.5

4.5
0.0
0.0
..

4.5
0.0
..
..

3.5
0.0
0.0
..

5.3
86.4
11.5
..

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

100

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
100

100

80

75
75

60

50

50
40

25
25

0
2000

2005

20

2010
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2005

2010

Primary net enrollm ent ratio
Fixed + mob ile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in prima ry & secondary
education

Ta jikistan

Europ e & Central Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

28

Internet users

4/5/12

Annex 5. Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
(as of 9/18/2012)

29

Annex 6. IFC Investment Operations
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Account

17.1
17.1

16.2
16.2

1.0
1.0

6.4
6.4

12.0
12.0

Original Commitments by Sector (%)
Financial Markets
Agribusiness
Consumer & Social Services
Infrastructure
Total

100
100

44
43
12
100

100
100

80
20
100

44
56
100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Loan
Equity
Quasi-Equity (Loan) and Quasi-Loan
Guarantee
Total

91
9
100

74
12
12
1
100

44
56
100

82
18
100

56
42
2
100

* Includes a fraction of a global project allocated to Tajikistan

30

*
*

Annex 7: Operations Portfolio

31

Annex 8: IFC Committed and Outstanding Portfolio by Client
As of 06/30/2012
In USD millions
Sector
Financial Markets
Financial Markets
Financial Markets
Financial Markets
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Agribusiness
Agribusiness
Infrastructure
Infrastructure
Total Portfolio

Institution
Eskhata Bank
FMBT
SEF IMON
Tajik Access
Amiri
Giavoni
SEF FOM
TPS (T)
ECOM Global*
Tajero
Pamir Energy
Stucky LakeSarez

LN
4.3
1.7
6.2
4.0
1.3
0.2
6.5
1.7
0.0
25.9

ET
0.5
2.0
0.4
0.0
2.9

Committed Portfolio
QL + QE
GT
0.3
5.0
1.9
6.9
0.3

* Fraction of a global project allocated to Tajikistan

32

Total
4.6
2.2
6.2
6.0
1.3
0.4
0.2
6.5
5.0
1.7
0.0
1.9
36.0

PART
-

LN
3.0
1.7
6.2
3.4
1.3
0.2
6.5
1.7
0.0
24.0

ET
0.5
2.0
0.4
0.0
2.9

Outstanding Portfolio
QL + QE
GT
Total
0.3
3.3
2.2
6.2
5.4
1.3
0.4
0.2
6.5
5.0
5.0
1.7
0.0
5.0
0.3
32.2

PART
-

Rayons

70°E

KAZAKHSTAN

To
Tashkent

TAJIKISTAN

To
Andijon

57

Fergana
Valley Dary
Taboshar

52

To
Bukhoro

Kayrakkum
Reservoir

Chkolovsk

49

r

To
Andijon

Konibodom

56

51 53

48

SOGD
REGION

58

UraTyube

To
Kyzyl-Kiya

Tr

ans

iAla

Ran

ge

Jirgatal'

10
Rasht

7

5

4

6

38°N

29

21

Garavuti

23
h

Shahrtuz

24

Vakhs

22

32
27 KurganTyube
30

26

JAMOAT (SUB-DISTRICT) BOUNDARIES
RAYON (DISTRICT) BOUNDARIES
AUTONOMOUS OBLAST BOUNDARY*
OBLAST BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
* Area with no oblast-level administrative divisions,
where rayons are under direct republic jurisdiction.

0

20

37

P

Pan
j

44

Kulyab 39

0

BADAKHSHAN

Pik Revolution
(6,974 m)

a

ng
ta

m

18

i

42

Rukhch

A.O.

r

40

20

Rangkul'

60

80 Kilometers

40

60 Miles

20

CHI N A

Murgab Murgab

Lake
Sarezskoye

38°N

s
Alichur

41

Moskovskiy

19

KHATLON
REGION

33

Pyanj

Khorog

To
Baghlan

16

Pamir

Pik Karl Marx
(6723 m )

Andarob

17

Vrang

nj
Pa

MAY 2007

70°E

PAKISTAN
72°E

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

IBRD 33493R

Ishkashim

AF GHA NISTA N
68°E

RAILROADS

Lake
Karakul'

Vanj 15

35

28

MAIN ROADS

su
Ak

To
Qarshi

Kalaikhum

38
34

NATIONAL CAPITAL

GHORNO-

31
25

OBLAST CENTERS

Pik Lenin
(7134 m )

13

14
43

36

3

AUTONOMOUS OBLAST CENTER*

12

40

Nurek

UZ B E K IS TAN

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

74°E

To
Osh

Pik Imeni
Ismail Samani
(7495 m )

11

9

8
Obigarm

1 DUSHANBE
2

TAJ IK ISTAN

39 Kulob
40 Baljuvon
41 Moskva
42 Shurobod
43 Khovaling
44 Muminobod
45 Pandjakent
46 Ayni
47 Shahriston
48 Zafarobod
49 Istaravshan
50 Ghonchi
51 Spitamen
52 Matchin
53 Jabor Rasulob
54 Kuhistoni Mastchoh
55 Ghafurov
56 Konibodom
57 Asht
58 Isfara
40°N

54

Komsomolabad

Region under
direct Republic
subordination

Murghob
Nosir Khusrav
Shahrituz
Qabodiyon
Jilikul
Khuroson
Qumsangir
Bokhtar
Kolkhozobod
Jomi
Vakshs
Yovon
Sarband
Panj
Danghara
Farkhor
Norak
Vose
Sovet

To
Sary-Tash

an
Zeravsh

46

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

KY RGY Z REP.

Ayni

45

Tursunzoda
Shahrinav
Rudaki
Hissor
Varzob
Fayzobod
Vahdat
Roghun
Nurobod
Rasht
Tojikobod
Tavildara
Jirgatol
Darvoz
Vanj
Ishkoshim
Roshtqala
Rushon
Shughnon

72°E

50

47
Pendzhikent

Sy

55

Khodjand
To
Bukhoro

UZBEKISTAN

a

To
Tashkent

40°N

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Ba
r

68°E

