Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 67224-KE

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 5, 2012

Eastern Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCE2)
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution an
d may be used by recipients onl y in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

US$1.00

=

85 Ksh (as of March 2012)

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

July 1-June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
AfDB
AIDS

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
AusAID Australian Agency for International
Development
CDD
Community Driven Development
CPS
Country Partnership Strategy
Civil Society Organization
CSO
DANIDA Danish Agency for International
Development
DCG
Development Partner
Coordination Group
DPL
Development Policy Loan
EAC
East African Community
EACC
Ethics and Anti-Corruption
Commission
EMIS
Education Management
Information System
ESRP
Energy Sector Recovery Project
EU
European Union
GAC
Governance and Anti-Corruption
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GEF
Global Environment Facility
HIV
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IAD
Internal Audit Department
ICC
International Criminal Court
ICT
Information and Communication
Technology
IDA
International Development
Association
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFMIS
Integrated Financial Management

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

IDA
Obiageli K. Ezekwesili
Johannes Zutt
Johannes Widmann

System
Institutional Integrity Department
Independent Power Producers
Kenya Anti-Corruption
Commission
KEMS Kenya Medical Supply Agency
KESSP Kenya Education Sector Support
Project
KJAS
Kenya Joint Assistance Strategy
KPLC
Kenya Power and Lighting
Company
MDG
Millennium Development Goals
MIC
Middle Income Country
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises
NCPB
National Cereals and Produce
Board
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
OVC
Orphans and Vulnerable Children
PforR
Program For Results
PFM
Public Finance Management
PPP
Public-Private Partnerships
PRG
Partial Risk Guarantee
SWAp
Sector Wide Approach
TOWA Total War against HIV and AIDS
USAID United States Agency for
International Development
WBI
World Bank Institute
WBG
World Bank Group
WSP
Water and Sanitation Program
INT
IPP
KACC

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Jean Philippe Prosper
Aida Kimemia

MIGA
Michel Wormser
Ravi Vish
Conor Healy

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary..........................................................
I. Introduction
..............................................................
II. Country Context..........................................................1
A.
Economic Context...................................................1
B.
Political Context.....................................................2

1

III. Progress toward CPS Outcomes and Emerging Challenges
..................
.......... 4
A.
Progress on CPS Objective 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential ......................
5
B.
Progress on CPS Objective 2: Addressing Inequality and Social Exclusion
.
............ 7
C.
Progress on CPS Objective 3: Managing Resource Constraints and Environmental
Challenges
.........................................................
8
D.
Progress on Governance
....................
8..........................8
E.
Progress on Gender...........................................
........ 10
IV. Adjustments to the CPS and Lessons Learned in Implementation
..................
10
A.
Lessons Learned ....................................................
10
B.
CPS Program Adjustments
.................... ................
11
11....
......... 13
.....................................
C.
Implementation Progress
D.
Changes to the Results Framework
..............................
......... 15
V. Risks....................................................................
Table 1: Progress on CPS Outcomes
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

15
............

4..............................

1: Updated Results Framework for the Kenya CPS FYI 0-FY13 .......................
17
2: Updated and Revised CPS Outcomes
...............................
......... 25
3: Ongoing and Proposed Knowledge Program
..............................
..... 26
4: Planned versus Actual Lending Program and Pipeline............................27
5: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management......................28
6: IDA Operations Portfolio....................................................29
7: Kenya Regional Portfolio .............................
.................. 30
8: Kenya Trust Fund Portfolio.................................................31
9: Kenya IFC Portfolio ...............................................................
32
10: Kenya at a Glance....................................................
33

Map of Kenya No. IBRD 33426

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
Executive Summary
i.

This Progress Report shows that the FY1O-13 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for Kenya remains relevant and that progress has been made in achieving its objectives.
The CPS, dated March 23, 2010, departed from previous strategies in (i) articulating a longerterm (10-20 year) strategic outlook, (ii) attempting to identify national solutions for national
development problems, (iii) aiming to shift Bank engagement away from project lending toward a
programmatic approach, combining knowledge and financing in core areas such as energy, roads,
water and urban development, and (iv) aiming to support Kenya's achievement of Middle Income
Country (MIC) status.

ii.

Several key changes have occurred in Kenya since the Board discussed the CPS in
April 2010. A new Constitution was adopted in 2010, introducing the largest governance
reforms since independence as well as an ambitious program of devolution. In addition, several
structural trends have become more pronounced. These include sustained high growth in East
Africa, enabling sustained poverty reduction and a broadening of the middle class, but also
shining a spotlight on Nairobi as a regional hub and Mombasa as a natural (but underperforming)
transport hub. Kenya is also a good example of the new aid architecture: as Kenya grows,
traditional donors are less important, new donors are becoming more important, and a high degree
of fragmentation and volatility continues to hinder aid effectiveness.

iii.
While the risks identified in the CPS have grown larger, the opportunities have as
well. Devolution provides an opportunity to rectify the unequal distribution of investments and
services across Kenya, but also brings the risk that poor regions with lower capacity will fall
further behind. The new Constitution brings unprecedented opportunities to improve
governance, including through increased transparency (e.g., the open data portal and public
vetting of government officials, including in the judiciary), but also increases the risk of elite
capture (e.g., through decentralizing corruption to the new county governments). Finally,
elections (due by March 15, 2012) involve the risk of electoral violence, which has sullied many
of Kenya's polls in the past, but also provide an opportunity to overcome a legacy of electionrelated violence, to bring an end to its extra-constitutional coalition government, and to make a
fresh political start.
iv.

The World Bank Group (WBG) will continue to help advance governance reforms in
Kenya, using its combined strengths as a convener, knowledge provider, and significant
financier. In line with the Bank's Strategy for Africa, it will focus on three key areas: (i)
fostering partnerships, (ii) providing knowledge, and (iii) leveraging finance. In terms of
partnerships and knowledge, Kenya's high literacy, social vibrancy and emerging middle class
provide additional opportunities to expand the Bank's knowledge program and engage actively
with a broad range of stakeholders, including through social media. While the current lending
program remains heavily focused on investment lending in key growth sectors such as transport,
energy, water and urban development, a shift to development policy lending and program-forresults (PforR) financing-in the right circumstances-would provide more natural new
instruments to help advance governance reforms and leverage the Bank's limited resources.

i

I. Introduction
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPS PR) assesses the
implementation of the World Bank's FY10-13 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
Kenya. The CPS intends to make a catalytic contribution to Kenya's continuing transformation
to a middle-income country (MIC). Over the CPS period, the World Bank Group (WBG) aims
to contribute to achieving more inclusive growth by supporting activities aiming to (i) unleash
Kenya's growth potential; (ii) reduce inequality and social exclusion; and (iii) address resource
constraints and environmental challenges. Within these objectives, the CPS is supporting eight
outcomes and seven sub-outcomes. This CPS PR describes changes in the country context,
progress toward CPS outcomes, and remaining challenges, and it also adjusts the Bank's
program and updates the risk framework.
II. Country Context
A.

Economic Context

2.
Kenya started the CPS period by rebounding from economic difficulties in 2008-09
and registering strong growth. In 2010, growth reached 5.6 percent of GDP. This was a large
improvement over 1.7 percent in 2008 and 2.5 percent in 2009, when growth was hampered by
violence following the December 2007 elections, higher international food and fuel prices, the
global financial crisis, and four consecutive rain failures, resulting in widespread drought.
Growth in 2010, by contrast, benefited from a strong recovery in agriculture, helped by good
rains, and a rebound in the industrial and services sectors.
3.
But the country had to navigate another economic storm in 2011. Inflation increased
substantially, reaching about 19 percent for 2011 (from 3 percent at end-2010). The depreciating
shilling reached an all-time low of 107 to the US dollar in October 2011, before recovering to
about 85 by year-end, after the central bank sharply tightened monetary policy. High inflation
was sparked by higher import prices-initially for food and fuel-which in turn weakened the
shilling and put further pressure on prices. Because of the shilling depreciation, import prices
continued to rise even after global food and fuel prices had started to retreat. (In Kenya, food
prices have been well above global prices-and higher than in other African countries-due to a
government policy of maintaining high maize producer prices). Despite these challenges, Kenya
still grew at more than 4.0 percent in 2011. This was lower than in 2010, but still higher than
during the 2008-09 crisis, and higher than the average growth rate for 2000-2010. This growth
was driven primarily by good performance in the services sector and tourism. Agriculture also
performed better than expected, despite a severe drought in the middle of the year, and the short
rains promised a strong harvest for end-2011 and early 2012.
4.
Recent shocks have provided fresh impetus to fiscal consolidation, which started in
FY2011/12. Initially, the Government planned to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio from 48.8
percent in 2010/2011 to 46.7 percent by 2013/2014, but recent shocks and the need to reduce
domestic demand have called for a more aggressive consolidation, targeting 44.6 percent by
2013/14. This is to be achieved through spending cuts in the medium term and improve the
primary deficit from -2.7 percent to -2.2 percent of GDP. If the envisaged consolidation takes
place, it will rebuild fiscal policy buffers back to pre-crisis levels. That said, fiscal consolidation

1

will be more difficult in light of emerging pressures, including the implementation of the new
Constitution and the upcoming elections.
5.
Kenya's medium-term growth prospects are mixed and, while Kenya could still be
on the cusp of entering a period of sustained growth, there are substantial risks going
forward. For 2012, assuming a favorable external environment, restoration of macroeconomic
stability, stabilization in Somalia and a peaceful run-up to the next general elections followed by
a peaceful transition of power, Kenya could grow at 5.0 percent. But if these optimistic
assumptions are not met, growth could be as low as 3.1 percent. The risks are significant that
either (i) national elections bring a period of economic uncertainty or (ii) the economic crisis in
the Euro zone deepens. Even on the optimistic scenario, growth would remain substantially
lower than the 10 percent rate anticipated under the Kenya's Vision 2030 development strategy.
Even so, Kenya could still reach MIC status of US$1,000 GDP per capita by 2020, provided that
growth accelerates to an average of 6 percent over the remaining period.
6.
Deep structural problems are the key impediment to growth and continue to call for
WBG support over the rest of the CPS period and beyond. As the Government in 2011
struggled to respond to renewed external pressures, but without the significant fiscal buffer that
had existed in 2008-09, the economy became increasingly imbalanced, with the current account
deficit in 2011 exceeding 10 percent of GDP. Kenya's overall export performance remains
disappointing, due to a number of factors, including inefficiencies at the port of Mombasa, an
inadequate and expensive supply of energy, underdeveloped transport networks, limited reform
of business regulations, and a lack of decisive action to curb corruption. This makes Kenya too
expensive for many international investors, especially in manufacturing, despite lower labor
costs than in emerging Asia. While Kenya is globally competitive in a number of sectorsespecially tea, tourism and horticulture-it has not sufficiently ventured into new products, such
as textiles (beyond the African Growth and Opportunities Act) and chemicals (where some
potential exists). In addition, Kenya is struggling to manage a structural shift from a
predominantly rural to an increasingly urban economy, and the need to protect cities as growth
poles during devolution. A more welcoming business environment, improved infrastructure
(including a modernized port as Mombasa), and strong action to curb corruption would help
Kenya to re-start its export engine and establish a deeper industrial base. On the positive side,
Kenya is already diversifying its export markets away from Europe and towards Asia and Africa:
today more than 45 percent of Kenya's trade is with other African countries, and trade with Asia
is rising exponentially. This positive development can also be more fully exploited.
B.

Political Context

7.
The next year will define the next decade for Kenya, as the country will undergo
several changes that provide important opportunities for political renewal. First, the new
Constitution has provided Kenya with a roadmap to a more inclusive and equitable future. It
introduces the most far-reaching institutional reforms in Kenya's history, and its impact is
already being felt (e.g., in the televised vetting processes used to appoint a new Chief Justice and
Deputy Chief Justice, and the large amounts of budgetary and other government data made
available online in Kenya's open data initiative). Second, a key test of Kenya's growing
maturity will be how the Government and the country manage the next elections, which should
take place by March 15, 2013. These elections will be the first since the violent 2007 elections,
and they will be unusually complicated, as voters will be voting not only for the president and

2

members of parliament, but also for senator, county governor, county assembly member, and
female representative. Third, these challenges will need to be addressed in a context of growing
economic uncertainty. High food and fuel prices, drought in the Horn of Africa, and the euro
crisis have weakened Kenya's external position, which was already fragile given its large current
account deficit. Going forward, the Government will need to contain macroeconomic pressures
by maintaining a tight monetary stance and exercising fiscal prudence. To manage these
challenges, Kenya's policy makers will need to display skill and steadfast leadership. Kenyans
have high expectations for the next elections and their leaders will need to move forward with
high-quality planning and execution to ensure that these expectations are not disappointed.
8.
The approval of the new Constitution was a watershed moment in Kenya's postindependence history. It was approved in a public referendum by 67 percent of the voters. Key
changes that it introduced include subjecting the presidency to more checks and balances;
increasing the independence of the judiciary; strengthening parliamentary oversight over the
executive; devolving government to 47 elected county governments to create a better centerregion balance; and protecting the rights of women, marginalized groups, and the disabled
through an ambitious bill of rights. The Government and its international partners are now
focusing on the large legislative agenda that must be completed to implement these reforms, and
successful implementation of the new Constitution is likely to be the single most critical factor in
determining Kenya's development prospects. It may also trigger significant changes in the
Bank's engagement in Kenya.
While the new Constitution offers avenues for improving and building credible
9.
institutions, vested interests remain strong and impunity continues to pose the biggest
governance challenge. In June 2011, in line with the constitution, the Government established a
new Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) to replace the Kenya Anti-Corruption
Commission (KACC), which ceased to exist. While the EACC as a constitutional body has a
stronger legal foundation than the KACC and so could be more powerful in the long term, there
have already been serious attempts to undermine its effectiveness. Also in line with the new
Constitution, the Government appointed a new Chief Justice, Attorney General, and Director of
Public Prosecution, but there has still been no successful prosecution of any politicallyconnected individual for corruption or involvement in post-election violence. Issues of fraud and
corruption remain daily fare, and much more needs to be done to control them. Improving
governance and in particular strengthening fiduciary oversight and integrity mechanisms will
therefore continue to be critical challenges for the Government and across the Bank's portfolio.
10.
Kenya's devolution program is one of the most ambitious in the world, transferring
a substantial amount of power and resources to an entirely new level of government and
carrying the promise of a more equitable model of development. Rather than giving political
autonomy to administrative units that are already in place, Kenya in one go will replace eight
provinces and 280+ districts with forty-seven new counties. This devolution is intended to
rectify the unequal distribution across the country of investments and services that, historically,
has been concentrated spatially to the benefit of some regions at the expense of others. Although
the transition into a devolved state can continue for up to three years after the next elections,
much analytical and technical work is already underway to understand the implications of
devolution for the Government and for the Bank's portfolio.

3

11.
For devolution to work, several challenges will need to be addressed. One is ensuring
that the devolution of functions from central to local levels will not result in deterioration in
service delivery. While the national government will remain responsible for policy, oversight
and some service delivery, county governments will be responsible for a range of service
delivery functions in the health, agriculture, transport and water sectors. There is a real risk that
the poorer and more remote counties that hope to gain the most from devolution will in fact lose
the most, at least in the short term, because regions that have been historically left out are
precisely the ones least able seamlessly to take over service delivery obligations. Moreover,
while the Constitution mandates that at least 15 percent of national revenue be transferred to
counties, this is unlikely to be enough to finance all devolved functions. Ensuring appropriate
financing-including possibly through conditional block grants-will be critical to avoiding
additional fiscal stress and ensuring that service delivery standards are maintained.
III. Progress toward CPS Outcomes and Emerging Challenges
12.
Kenya's progress toward CPS outcomes has been largely positive, but important
challenges remain. The following section describes how Kenya's new realities affect the
Bank's program under each CPS outcome. Table 1 provides an overview of progress on each
outcome. A more detailed assessment of progress is provided in Annex 1.
Table 1: Progress on CPS Outcomes
CPS outcome 1.1: Improved business environment and competitiveness
CPS outcome 1.2: Improved core infrastructure, with deeper regional integration
CPS sub-outcome 1. 2a: Transport

CPS sub-outcome 1.2b: Energy
CPS sub-outcome 1.2c: Water
CPS sub-outcome 1.2d: Information and communication technology
I CPS outcome 1.3: Enhanced agricultural productivity, with a focus on food security
CPS outcome 1.4: Strengthening public sector management and improving subnational governance, especially in urban areas
CPS outcome 2.1: Better access to health care, education, and basic infrastructure
services
CPS sub-outcome 2.1a: Better access to health care
CPS sub-outcome 2.1b: Better access to education
CPS sub-outcome 2.1c: Better access to basic infrastructure services
CPS outcome 2.2: Establishing comprehensive scalable social protection mechanisms
CPS outcome 3.1: Improved management of key natural resources

CPS outcome 3.2: Adapting to climate change

4

A.

Progress on CPS Objective 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential
13.
The CPS outcomes under the first objective are: (i) improving Kenya's business
environment and competitiveness; (ii) improving core infrastructure, especially in roads,
electricity, and water supply, with a view to deepening regional integration; (iii) enhancing
agricultural productivity, with a special focus on food security; and (iv) strengthening public
sector management and improving sub-national governance, especially in urban areas.
14.
Overall progress on improving Kenya's business environment has been mixed, and
challenges remain to improve its competitiveness. Even though Kenya implemented reforms
in areas covered by the DoingBusiness and Global Competitiveness surveys, its DoingBusiness
ranking fell over 2009-2011 due to faster progress by other countries. While this CPS outcome
takes a narrow focus on the regulatory environment, the Bank's program takes a broader
perspective, including particularly on the need to establish more private-public partnerships
(PPPs) and increase access to finance. Key challenges going forward include improving the
lending environment, improving exports (particularly for manufacturing), and attracting foreign
direct investment (which remains below expected levels for Kenya).
15.
Progress in the transport sector has been mixed, and challenges remain to deepen
regional integration. Kenya has an extensive road network, but only 11 percent of roads are in
good condition. The time to move a container through the port or to travel from Mombasa to
Uganda has improved, but at a slower pace than expected. With strong growth in East Africa,
constraints in the port are an increasing impediment to trade and investment; hence increasing
the port's capacity and operational efficiency are critically important. The need to attract private
investors into transport infrastructure also remains an important objective, and to this end the
capacity of the construction industry to deliver and maintain capital projects needs further
improvement. While the transport sector has generally succeeded in institutional reform, its
capacity to deliver services remains limited and it also needs to adjust to devolution.
16.
There has been good progress in the energy sector, but attracting private
investments to meet the country's energy needs remains a challenge. The number of
electricity connections has risen significantly, but transmission and distribution losses remain
higher than expected. IDA is anchoring an expansion of geothermal generation at Olkaria, and
an innovative combination of IDA, IFC, and MIGA credits and guarantees is supporting
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) in thermal, geothermal and wind generation. Even so,
Kenya will need more investment in generation capacity to keep pace with its growth, and it will
also need to shift generation capacity over time from drought-sensitive hydropower and fuel
price-sensitive thermal options to greener technologies. The key challenge going forward is to
attract more private investment, and this will require identifying more long-term financing for
energy projects in Kenya. In addition, there is a need to understand better the volatility of oil and
gas prices, which continue to have a negative impact.
17.
Good progress has also been made on improving access to water, but shifting water
service delivery modalities so that they accommodate devolution will be a challenge. Over
the short term, critical legislation, including a draft bill for the National Land Commission, needs
to be reviewed to ensure consistency and harmony across laws during the institutional
transformation of the water sector. Important analytical work has been done to inform this

5

process and to identify investment needs to meet current and future demand-for households,
industry and agriculture. As with transport and energy, enlarging access to private-sector
financing will be critical to satisfying Kenya's growing needs for water production, storage and
delivery. Investing in private water infrastructure remains particularly difficult in poorer urban
areas, given their high degree of informality.
18.
Good progress was achieved in the information and communications sector,
including a fast expansion of access and the deployment of one of the first government open
data portals in Africa. Access to internet services rose dramatically, from 1.3 million
subscribers in 2007 to 14.3 million (37 percent of the population) by 2011. In addition, 80
percent of Kenyan adults own a mobile phone and another 10 percent regularly borrow one; and
calling rates have dropped sharply, making Kenya's communication costs among the lowest
worldwide. In July 2011, Kenya also launched its open data portal, which provides free access
to large digital datasets online. The government is now developing a plan to institutionalize the
portal through enabling policy reforms (including access to information legislation), expand
datasets and usability, and conduct sustained outreach with data users and the public.
19.
Agriculture productivity has declined, and so enhancing productivity and also food
security remains a key objective. Kenya continues to suffer from a structural food deficit.
Hence food prices, particularly for maize, are usually high. Reforms, both to improve food
productivity and enhance domestic and regional marketing systems, are urgently needed to
unleash the sector's potential and to attract private sector investments and participation. The
Bank has tried to persuade the government to abandon its high maize price policy, to permit
maize imports to enter the country duty free and to reform the National Cereals and Produce
Board (which has been prone to corruption) but with limited success. Furthermore, climate
variability and change are increasingly affecting agricultural productivity and food security, as
evidenced by numerous droughts in recent years: an EU-UN-WBG drought impact assessment
completed in January 2012 found that damages and losses to the Kenyan economy resulting from
drought over 2008-11 totaled a cumulative US$12 billion, with 72 percent occurring in livestock
and 13 percent in agriculture. Thus climate-smart agriculture remains a priority.
20.
Progress towards strengthening public sector management and improving subnational governance, especially in urban areas, has been slow, though the new Constitution
has increased the urgency of this effort. Among other things, the new Constitution provides
the basis to overhaul the institutional and legal framework for public financial management
(PFM). As 15 percent of national revenues are to be transferred to the counties, the rest of the
CPS period will be dominated by the need to introduce prudent fiscal management practices in
county governments, while further strengthening central fiscal management practices. There
have generally been improvements over the past two years, including strengthening audit and
other oversight capacities, and rolling out Fixed Assets, Cash Management and Accounts
Receivable of Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS) across central ministries.
Nevertheless, PFM remains weak and issues remain, such as weak financial reporting, an
ineffective internal control framework, and an audit backlog with regard to local authorities.

6

B.

Progress on CPS Objective 2: Addressing Inequality and Social Exclusion

21.
CPS outcomes under the second objective are: (i) improving access to health care,
education, and basic infrastructure services; and (ii) establishing comprehensive scalable social
protection mechanisms.
22.
There has been encouraging progress in the health sector, based on the
implementation of enhanced governance mechanisms, which needs to be sustained. During
FY10-1 1, over 25.3 million people directly benefited from activities under the health SWAp;
about one million children were fully immunized in their first year. A joint donor-government
fiduciary review suggests that grants and essential medicines are also reaching health facilities as
intended. This progress comes after a long period of limited success, due to governance issues,
and so the Bank's engagement remains focused on addressing corruption risks. Other forwardlooking challenges include strengthening M&E and improving record-keeping at health facilities.
Under the constitution, the delivery of health services will be devolved to county governmentsa process that needs to be managed carefully to ensure that service delivery is not impeded.
23.
While education indicators have improved, governance issues ended a donor
program supporting the government, providing important lessons for future engagement in
the sector. Data from the Ministry of Education showed improvements in key indicators, but
due to emerging evidence of corruption (uncovered by the government's Internal Audit
Department (IAD) with Bank support), IDA support was effectively ended in July 2009, about
17 months before credit closure. Post-election violence and lack of quality monitoring data also
negatively affected implementation. Partly as a result, overall progress in the sector was
unsatisfactory and significant risks exist with respect to: (i) achieving the education MDGs; (ii)
improving sector capacity, especially for collecting and analyzing data; (iii) increasing access to
secondary school; and (iv) improving the school-to-work transition. Among the greatest
challenges in the sector now are inadequate oversight and accountability systems.
24.
Overall progress on urban infrastructure development was slow, and devolution will
pose a key challenge, as new counties will be in charge of urban service delivery. While the
constitution strengthens claims of citizens for access to basic urban services, including adequate
housing and water and sanitation, it also shifts the management of urban revenues and services
from stand-alone national bodies to the new counties. A 2011 urban areas and cities act, to
become effective after the elections, provides for classification, governance and management of
urban areas-but the constitution does not recognize urban governments as such. Instead, the
counties will need to create urban governments as their delegated agencies-a process that the
Bank is supporting and that will also affect the implementation of Bank projects in ways that are
still under assessment.
25.
There has been some progress in providing social protection to vulnerable groups,
but a key challenge remains to establish a more integrated social protection system. The
Bank's support to youth employment suffered from weaknesses in the financial management of a
public works component originally envisaged to be implemented through six line ministries in
eight districts. This complicated implementation mechanism made it difficult to ensure a
sufficient span of control over all sub-project activities, and so the component was cancelled. By
contrast, there has been good progress in providing cash transfers to orphans and vulnerable

7

children. The government's overriding challenge now is to defragment social protection and
provide a more strategic, holistic and consolidate approach, including for post-disaster relief.
Progress on CPS Objective 3:
C.
Managing Resource Constraints and Environmental Challenges
26.
CPS outcomes under the third objective are: (i) improving management of key natural
resources; and (ii) adapting to climate change.
27.
Progress on improving the management of natural resources has been mixed, and
further progress will be linked to finding a long-term solution to pressing land-use issues.
Forest areas managed according to approved plans have increased in number, but more slowly
than expected. In addition, establishment of a national drought contingency fund and drought
management system was stalled due to integrity issues in the Arid Lands Project, which
supported these efforts, though the government established a Drought Management Authority in
2011 on its own. Going forward, livelihood investments will be linked to the devolution agenda
and the Bank's dialogue on a country-wide program to provide support to marginalized areas.
This will help both to leverage support for sustainable natural resource management and to guide
and encourage government use of community-driven development (CDD) approaches.
28.
Progress on specific indicators for climate change adaptation has been slow, but
climate change as a key issue has been increasingly mainstreamed across the portfolio. In
particular, the Bank is helping to improve forest and water management; to diversify the sources
of energy towards renewables; and to improve readiness and response in cases of climateinduced emergencies. For example, IDA in response to the 2011 drought has programmed
resources from the Crisis Response Window in agriculture (helping farmers to adopt better crop
technologies and pastoralists to diversify livelihoods), health (enhancing surveillance, drug and
medical supplies, and treatment of malnutrition), water resources (expanding water supply and
storage facilities), social protection (strengthening safety nets), energy (developing generation
alternatives to hydropower) and disaster risk reduction. The effort to introduce bus rapid
transport and commuter rail, particularly in Nairobi, is also intended to reduce carbon emissions.
D.

Progress on Governance

29.
A renewed faith in Kenya's democracy provides Kenyans with unprecedented
opportunities and major challenges going forward. Kenya today features a vibrant multiparty democracy, a very vocal media and high levels of transparency but, paradoxically, low
levels of accountability and high levels of corruption. Recent developments, including
reconciliation after the 2007 elections as well as the adoption of a new Constitution, are helping
to improve openness and increase citizens' voice, strengthen the role of the judiciary, achieve
legal reforms, improve service delivery, attain a more equitable distribution of resources, and
strengthen political good will. The challenges going forward are therefore to (i) protect the new
openness (e.g. sustain the open data initiative, improve data quality and provide whistle blower
protection), (ii) manage citizen expectations in a politically-challenging environment (e.g.
around the upcoming elections, the war with al Shaabab and the legal processes of the
International Criminal Court), (iii) fight impunity and disregard for the rule of law, and (iv) keep
devolution from resulting in elite capture (e.g. the decentralization of corruption) while
strengthening the capacity for its implementation (e.g. improve public finances and procurement,
absorption capacity and transparency and accountability at the local level).

8

30.
To help the government seize these opportunities and address the challenges, the
Bank will continue to focus on governance as a cross-cutting and prime objective of its
strategy. The Africa Region's strategy identifies governance and public sector capacity as its
foundation and notes that governance and leadership constitute the main challenges underlying
Africa's development. This is especially true in Kenya, and the Bank's strategy will continue to
have a strong governance focus. In order to better underline this focus, the Bank identified three
key areas that best highlight the Bank's contribution to this important agenda: (i) increased
public confidence in the judiciary, (ii) improved openness and accountability, and (iii)
meaningful devolution. Future Bank efforts will broadly focus in these areas, which will provide
useful building blocks for the next CPS.
31.
During the first half of the CPS period, the Bank addressed serious governance
issues in its portfolio, through firm implementation of the GAC agenda. In September 2009,
the government's Internal Audit Department (IAD) concluded a forensic audit of the Kenya
Education Sector Support Project (KESSP) and the Western Kenya CDD project, finding
substantial questionable spending, and possible fraud and corruption, under each project.
Disbursements were immediately suspended and work undertaken to determine what caused the
integrity failures, whether systemic issues contributed, and how such systemic issues could best
be addressed. Throughout this period, the Bank's Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) conducted
and finalized a forensic audit of phase two of the Arid Lands Management Project, presenting its
findings to the government in April 2011. In this case, project disbursements were informally
suspended in July 2010, based on a verbal communication of INT's initial findings, and work is
now underway to understand fully the implications of INT's report. KESSP and Arid Lands both
closed in December 2010, as scheduled, without resuming disbursements, but Western Kenya
CDD is slowly resuming operations, after a 16-month suspension, with (inter alia) a new
professionally-recruited project implementation unit.
32.
Over FY11-12, the Bank incorporated key lessons from IAD audits and INT
investigations and issued new guidance on projects with decentralized expenditures. Of the
entire Bank portfolio of about US$2.2 billion, US$2 billion involve centralized expenditures
(where the Bank directly supervises procurement, financial management, compliance, and valuefor-money, dealing mostly with large-scale contracts). For such projects, anti-corruption efforts
have focused on improving procurement, including by eliminating pre-qualification (to reduce
opportunities for cartel behavior) and by undertaking independent reviews of procurement
processes in parallel to government processes to ensure that there is compliance with all
requirements. These and other measures appear to have resulted in some success, as bids for
road contracts (for example) now number seven to nine per contract (as opposed to two or three
previously), include companies of many nationalities and regions (as opposed to one region or
nationality in some cases), and result in some bids below engineers' estimates (as opposed to
bids five or more percent above). More recently, the Bank's anti-corruption efforts have
focused on the US$200 million in portfolio activities involving decentralized expenditures
(namely, small expenditures at local level involving myriad spending agencies), where the Bank
relies on intermediaries to supervise procurement, financial management, compliance and valuefor-money. In response to these risks, the Bank is enhancing project design and implementation
support in ways further detailed below (see paragraph 40).

9

E.

Progress on Gender

33.
Another cross-cutting issue is gender, and the Bank continues to support the
integration of gender concerns in design, implementation, and M&E across its portfolio.
Inter alia, the Bank has helped the government to establish gender-related targets in government
Performance Contracts; to gather gender-disaggregated data on water and sanitation, household
energy, and climate management through surveying 4,100 men and women under a Banksupported agriculture project; and to remove gender-related obstacles to access to safe water
(e.g., by eliminating the need to supply a title deed as collateral for a water connection, reducing
connection fees, and amortizing meter repayment). Based on survey and other work, Gender
Policy Notes are now being developed at the sectoral level, aiming to expand women's access to
water, sanitation services, modern energy, and opportunities in agriculture. IDA has also
facilitated South-South exchanges to strengthen Kenya's capacity to diagnose policy options and
challenges for gender mainstreaming.
IV. Adjustments to the CPS and Lessons Learned in Implementation
34.
The overall objectives of the CPS remain valid and relevant. The following section
provides a brief reflection on the lessons learned in implementation thus far, outlines some
adjustments to the Bank's program in light of the new realities on the ground, and introduces a
few changes to the results framework to improve its realism. Any changes to the original CPS
reflect a deepening of the Bank's strategic directions rather than a new course direction.
A.
Lessons Learned
35.
Lessons have been in four areas, prompting some program adjustments. These
include: (i) the devolution agenda, (ii) the use of new Bank lending instruments, (iii) knowledge,
partnerships and leveraging of finance (in line with the World Bank strategy for Africa), and (iv)
governance. Regarding devolution, it is now clear that it will affect a range of sectors, including
water (where new institutional arrangements could lead to inefficiencies in the use of scarce
resources), agriculture (where it offers the chance for better service delivery and enhanced
productivity), health (where it will require building capacity at the county level to manage the
transition and sustain the focus on the health MDGs), and urban (where the management of
urban revenues and services will shift from standalone entities to the new counties). Regarding
instruments, experience shows that an exclusive use of sector investment loans is limiting the
Bank's ability to support government efforts to achieve specified reforms. In particular, the
consolidation of social protection efforts could best be supported through the new PforR
instrument, and various government-wide PFM and private sector development (PSD) efforts
could best be supported by development policy lending. In this context, the opportunity to use
these instruments will continue to be explored during the remaining CPS period. Regarding
leveraging of financing, facilitation of public-private partnerships (PPP) beyond the relatively
well-covered energy sector is increasingly important to support private investments, and
partnerships with civil society and the media need to be strengthened to close the gap between
transparency and accountability. Regarding governance, it will continue to pose the biggest
challenge for the Bank's program in Kenya. The focus going forward will be to support the
strengthening of key national and county institutions to deal with governance challenges and to
address GAC challenges within the Bank's portfolio, through strengthening reporting and
monitoring systems and an enhanced emphasis on social accountability. In addition to these
adjustments, as Kenya starts to reach MIC status and its dependency on aid falls further (from a

10

current 10% of the budget), the Bank will have to step up its efforts as a knowledge provider
even more.
B.

CPS Program Adjustments

36.
While the exact form of devolution will be determined after the elections, the Bank
is already adjusting to its potential impact. With AusAID support, the Bank has been running
a large analytical and technical program to provide policy and institutional reform advice to the
government to help manage the complex transition from its current centralized to a more
decentralized structure. The four aspects of devolution that will impact development
programming in Kenya are (i) functional assignments, (ii) inter-governmental fiscal relations,
(iii) civil servant assignments, and (iv) accountability mechanisms. The decentralization of some
currently centralized functions will impact a number of Bank operations, including particularly
urban development projects, which will have to reorient activities selectively from national to
local (county-level) structures. To accommodate these changes, project preparation or
implementation already involves close attention to the possibility of institutional transition, with
a view to ensuring that appropriate capacity is built into whatever local structures finally emerge.
With at least 15 percent of national revenues to be transferred to the new county governments,
the Bank is also working hard to ensure that devolved functions are appropriately financed, that
intergovernmental fiscal relations are appropriate (and in particular that devolved functions are
adequately financed, possibly with conditional grants), and that new structures do not create
distortions. In addition, the Bank's social development and PFM teams are refocusing their
activities to enable them to provide hands-on support to introduce appropriate accountability
measures in county governments.
37.
Given Kenya's far-reaching governance reforms, the Bank will explore the use of
instruments that are better suited to support this agenda. The current Bank portfolio entirely
involves sector investment lending. A planned PforR operation in social protection will
introduce a focus on results-based lending, and help to reduce fragmentation within the sector.
To this end, IDA has helped to articulate a social protection policy on the national level and is
now working towards consolidating existing programs onto a single registry, using biometric
identification, a private payment provider, and consolidated management information and M&E
systems, so that the government is better able to provide support to vulnerable populations, even
at times of emergency. Despite government achievement of most prior actions related to a
planned development policy loan (DPL)-which the Bank saw as the most effective vehicle for
supporting key PFM and private sector development reforms-issues unrelated to the project
have stalled presentation of the loan (see below). Even so, a properly-structured DPL series
remains the best way to achieve development effectiveness, for the following reasons:
* Support to governance reforms. A DPL is ideally suited to helping to implement the
constitution, which involves the most sustained governance reform in Kenya's history.
* Leverage. As aid remains relatively flat and Kenya's budget continues to grow, a DPL
series would help to focus donors and the relevant parts of government on an articulated
multi-year policy and institutional reform program, particularly in complex areas
requiring multi-agency/ministry cooperation over a sustained multi-year period.
* Lower fiduciary risks. Kenya's CPIA rating of 3.8 is better than the rating for most
countries receiving budget support, and a commitment to open data provides new
opportunities to reduce leakage and improve service delivery.

11

*

Complementary IMF program. Since 2011, the IMF has supported a substantial and
successful policy-based operation, which includes governance reforms (such as the
introduction of a Treasury single account); a complementary IDA program, focused on
social and structural reforms, would enhance the transformative impact of that program.

38.
In line with the World Bank strategy for Africa, the Bank's strategy for Kenya will
enhance its focus in three key areas: (i) knowledge, (ii) partnerships and (iii) leveraging of
finance. Given that Kenya aims to reach MIC status by 2020 and that it is becoming less and
less an aid-dependant country, the Bank's enhanced focus on being a knowledge provider rather
than a traditional project financier will increasingly take center-stage. The highly-successful
launch (in 2009) of the bi-annual Kenya Economic Updates, which have helped the Bank to
frame debate on Kenya's economic reform agenda, will provide a model for disseminating
upcoming poverty work and flagship sectoral work (most recently, in water, education and social
protection). As IDA (and more generally donor) financing continues to become a smaller part of
Kenya's overall development financing, and Kenya seeks to learn the lessons of experience from
developing countries that are slightly ahead of it, the focus on applying global development
experience to local development problems will grow. Partnerships will also be crucial for the
Bank to remain relevant in Kenya. This includes: partnerships with other donors to achieve
scale; partnerships with the private sector to leverage more private sector financing, especially
for infrastructure; and partnerships with the media and civil society to continue to improve
governance and accountability. Leveraging additional sources of finance will also be of
importance in the WBG's work, as Kenya's financing needs, as a MIC, will be far beyond the
ability of the WBG, even in conjunction with other donor partners, to finance. Recent successes
point a way forward: for example, the combination of IFC investments and IDA and MIGA
guarantees is enabling Independent Power Projects to achieve financial closure on investments
that will bring up to 600MW of new power to the grid. But challenges remain, as shown by the
failure of a six-year WBG effort to support a private consortium to solve Nairobi's downtown
traffic congestion (in that case the WBG withdrew in January 2010 due to integrity concerns
about one of the private investors). Even so, the WBG and the government recognize that public
private partnerships (PPPs)-in energy, transport and water as well as other sectors-will be
needed to achieve Kenya's development goals, and the Bank remains committed to helping to
identify "bankable" deals.
39.
Partnerships with other development partners remain important to the WBG in
Kenya. The Development Partner Coordination Group (DCG) involves a monthly meeting of
heads of mission and agencies and is currently chaired jointly by the World Bank Country
Director and the Swedish Ambassador. Regular attendees include all of the traditional bilateral
agencies, as well as the Bank, the IMF, AfDB, the EU, and the UN; non-traditional donors
(Brazil, China, and India) have also been invited, but attend irregularly. DCG discussions focus
on high-level issues, including (over the past few years) Kenya's economic prospects as well as
its political challenges, which will receive more attention in the run-up to the next elections. The
Aid Effectiveness Group (AEG) is the key mechanism for donor-government coordination at the
technical level: it is co-chaired by the Ministry of Finance, and typically involves deputy heads
of mission. Starting in June 2009, the Bank also tried to establish a regularly-scheduled
Development Partnership Forum (DPF) that would bring together government leaders as well as
ambassadors and heads of development agencies to discuss the overall government program as

12

well as key priorities for joint donor-government implementation in the coming 6-12 months.
The DPF met in November 2009, June and November 2010, and in a technical "pre"-DPF
meeting in June 2011, but the Government cancelled the November 2011 meeting for internal
reasons. The next meeting is now expected to take place in May or June 2012.
40.
Implementation of the GAC agenda will have to be further enhanced, building on
lessons learned (both negative and positive). Integrity issues in some of the Bank's projects
have pushed the Bank to develop new approaches to project design and implementation support.
Given that corruption risks appear currently to be concentrated on the small portion of the
portfolio with decentralized expenditures, a Kenya Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC)
committee has been established within the Bank team to monitor ongoing and planned operations
for effective anti-corruption measures. In light particularly of the IDA findings on KESSP and
the Western Kenya CDD project and the INT findings on Arid Lands, IDA projects with
decentralized expenditures are now placing enhanced attention on: (i) improved project recordkeeping; (ii) improved management information systems and reporting; (iii) enhanced
supervision, including randomized site visits and geo-mapping; (iv) continual third-party
monitoring, involving qualified fiduciary agencies in selective cases; (v) stronger social
accountability, with more effective information disclosure as well as complaints and grievance
handling mechanisms; (vi) reduction or elimination of expenditure categories that are highly
prone to abuse; and (vii) recruitment of project staff, where needed, through professional
agencies that will control for inappropriate associations. Even though these efforts will
undoubtedly help to guard the Bank's monies, the ultimate objective remains to strengthen
country governance systems and make sure corruption risks are reduced with respect to
government's own expenditures. To that end, the government's Internal Audit Department (with
INT support) will conduct from April an expanded forensic audit of the Arid Lands project,
though coverage may not be complete due to the high levels of insecurity in north-eastern Kenya
resulting from clan-fighting, Somali refugee movements, and the presence of al Shabaab. In
addition, at the Treasury's request, IDA is working with MoF to devise a new government policy
on decentralized expenditures, incorporating lessons from experience with the Bank portfolio.
C.

Implementation Progress

41.
As planned, implementation of the CPS brought a new way of doing business to the
Bank's engagement in Kenya. Over the last three years, average project size increased from
about US$50 million to US$115 million, excluding regional projects, and it is still increasing. In
addition, average disbursements increased from about US$65 million per year over FYO2-07 to
US$241 million in FY11. A strong effort has also been made to take a more programmatic and
longer-term approach. Recognizing that Kenya's key development challenges will take decades
of concerted effort to address fully, lending and financing are now focusing increasingly on
identifying, initiating and implementing programs on a national transformative scale, to be
implemented over 10 or more years. To this end, projects are being prepared in key sectors
(energy, transport, water, urban and social protection) in parallel, with earlier projects supporting
the preparatory work (e.g., analysis, feasibility studies, design work) needed to enable later
projects to get a quick start. As of June 2011, the indicative IDA16 envelope for Kenya is
SDR1,144 million, including a final FY12 allocation of SDR397.6 million. Subsequently, an
additional $90 million of Crisis Response Window funding was approved, indicatively, to
support drought-mitigation activities in light of the Horn of Africa drought in 2011.

13

While a few planned IDA projects were cancelled, most are on track, albeit with
42.
some delays. Planned projects that were not delivered include the third phase of Arid Lands and
a second phase of the Education Sector Support Project: in both cases, these successor projects
were cancelled due to integrity issues in their predecessors. In addition, an FY11 effort to
prepare a DPL was only partially successful: while the prior actions were mostly completed,
some donors expressed unwillingness to support the DPL until they were satisfied that the ICC
prosecutions, implementation of the Constitution, and free, fair and peaceful elections were on
track or, in the case elections, completed. Annex 3 shows the planned and the actual lending
program, as well as the proposed lending program for the remainder of the CPS period.
43.
A further consolidation of the current program is underway, both for knowledge
and for lending. Program selectivity will take into account lessons learned thus far in CPS
implementation, with a strong focus on: (i) achieving development solutions in areas where
knowledge or lending will take place; (ii) engaging with relevant issues where the Bank has the
capacity to provide value; (iii) responding to Government demand and commitment; (iv)
achieving complementarity to other aspects of the program; and (v) enhancing partnerships with
other development partners, civil society, and private sector.
44.
The current IDA portfolio has 21 projects with net commitments of US$2.4 billion
and seven regional projects with net commitments of US$386 million. The undisbursed
balance as of March 2012 was about US$1.67 billion. Key sectors include: transport (33
percent), energy (21 percent), water and urban (15 percent), and health (13 percent). There are
two problem projects. Kenya's portfolio performance is reasonable, with key performance
indicators above AFR and Bank-wide averages, though lagging disbursements are an issue.
With new commitments averaging US$540 million per year, the portfolio grew by U$ 1.1 billion
over FY10- 11, with large new investments in the energy, roads, and urban sectors. There are 64
active Trust Funds (TF), with a total commitment of about US$81 million. This is a relatively
small TF portfolio for a country the size of Kenya, but further analysis is required to reduce
fragmentation in Bank-executed TFs and to ensure that recipient-executed TFs are aligned with
CPS objectives. The average TF disbursement rate is about 50 percent. The current IDA,
regional and TF portfolios are presented in more detail in Annex 5, 6 and 7.
45.
In FY11, IFC committed US$172 million, up from US$60 million the previous year.
New commitments in FY12 are expected to increase substantially to more than US$400 million,
mainly in finance and infrastructure. This includes, as noted above, the first of the jointly
supported IPPs plus IFC support alongside IDA to KPLC, the power distribution company, a
restructuring of the Rift Valley Railways, bringing in a new operator and new capital, and
support to Kenya Airways in their route and fleet expansion. In the financial sector IFC
supported a number of banks, including $100 million to Equity Bank, oriented primarily to lowincome consumers and micro/small businesses. The IFC Kenya portfolio is presented in more
detail in Annex 9.
46.
The World Bank Institute (WBI) maintains a large and robust program in the
region and much of that work focuses on efforts in Kenya supporting capacity development
and governance. As the program in the region develops, WBI is building on synergies with the
IDA program to support Open Budget Data, improved transparency in PFM, Mapping for

14

Results, and increased social accountability through programs with the media, civil society and
parliaments. Given the large lending effort, WBI work also complements ongoing activities in
support of climate change, urban development, public private partnerships and improvements in
health sector delivery.
D.

Changes to the Results Framework

47.
While the CPS results framework remains robust, a few changes are being
introduced to improve its realism. (i) Three (out of 30) CPS outcome indicators are being
replaced with new indicators that better capture the Bank's contribution to CPS outcomes. This
does not constitute a major change, especially since most new indicators are derived from the
same projects as the previous indicators. (ii) CPS pillar 2, reducing inequality and social
exclusion, is being merged with pillar 3, managing resource constraints and environmental
challenges. Together they now comprise a new CPS pillar 2, reducing inequality and
strengthening resilience. This change improves the alignment of the CPS with the Africa
Region's strategy, which was finalized one year after the CPS. Specifically, it improves
alignment of the new pillar 2 of the CPS with pillar 2 of the Africa Strategy, vulnerability and
resilience, which addresses macroeconomic and idiosyncratic shocks such as natural disasters,
disease, food shortages, conflict, political violence, and climate change. (iii) Another "change"
includes the addition of a governance "pillar" to the results framework. Governance was already
identified as a cross-cutting objective in the CPS, but it was felt that highlighting it within the
results framework would enhance its prominence. (iv) A specific CPS outcome on climate
change was dropped, as it was mainly associated with a project (Arid Lands) that was delayed
due to corruption issues in the predecessor operation. That said, climate-sensitive indicators
have instead been added across the results framework to better capture its multi-sectoral nature.
Annex 2 describes changes to the CPS results framework in more detail.
V. Risks
48.
While the risks already identified in the CPS remain relevant, the manifestation of
those risks and therefore their impact on the Bank's program have changed. For example,
while the CPS identified the risks to global economic shocks, Kenya has shown more
vulnerability than anticipated and in 2011 the Bank's policy dialogue had unexpectedly to focus
on the basic need to maintain macroeconomic stability. Another external shock already
identified in the CPS was the country's vulnerability to droughts. A recent drought impact
assessment found that drought-related damages and losses cost the economy a cumulative US$12
billion over 2008-11. The Bank embraced those findings while working on drought management
measures through various sector projects and within its policy dialogue. While the CPS also
emphasized security issues, the Kenyan army's incursion into Somalia in 2011 and its pending
merger with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) further impacts Bank
engagement in areas infiltrated by al Shaabab. The CPS also acknowledged that the program
will be subject to fiduciary risks, and this continues to be the case. The program is now able to
build on INT and IAD findings to implement anti-corruption measures across the portfolio,
which should help to mitigate those risks.
49.
The upcoming elections pose the potential risk of violence, though the Kenyan
political system has matured significantly since the violent aftermath of the December 2007
elections. The ICC prosecution of four high-level government officials charged with committing

15

crimes against humanity during the post-election violence of 2007-08 has sent a strong message
that the incitation of violence will attract repercussions. The Government has also passed new
hate speech laws and prosecuted violators of that law. Moreover, the August 2010 referendum
on the new Constitution, conducted by a newly-constituted independent electoral commission,
was conducted peacefully and professionally. At the same time, security forces have been
retrained, and stakeholders in Kenya are making concerted efforts to thwart incipient activity that
could lead to widespread violence. Even so, the possibility that such violence will occur at the
time of the elections remains high, as most elections in Kenya in the era of multiparty democracy
have involved some violence. If violence occurs, it is likely negatively to affect project
implementation, as in 2007-08, when various Bank-supported activities had to come to a halt in
the violence-affected areas.
50.
The change in government that must occur through the next elections also brings
some risk of policy reversals. Although Kenya's largest political parties and likely presidential
frontrunners agree on the broad development agenda, as set out in Vision 2030 and supported by
the CPS, the risk of policy reversal remains. In particular, fiscal pressure and weak economic
growth could strengthen the political clout of parliamentarians and other stakeholders who have
continued to lobby for distortionary policy measures, such as introducing price controls on fuel,
maize and other basic commodities, or capping the interest rates charged by banks. If such
measures were to be enacted by parliament (as has happened even in the current administration),
and the executive did not continue to demonstrate the policy restraint that has served Kenya so
well over the last decade, macroeconomic management and subsequently growth could decline
sharply, erasing many of the gains of the past. The same is true for areas in which the country
made unexpected recent progress, such as the open data initiative and strengthened audit
capacity: recent gains have been dramatic, but are not yet deeply entrenched and so could be
relatively easily reversed. To mitigate these risks, the Bank will continue to work closely with
like-minded officials in the central bank and the Ministry of Finance and also continue to focus
analytical work (including just-in-time pieces as well as the biannual Kenya Economic Update)
highlighting positive and negative developments as well as key emerging risks.

16

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Kenya CPS FY1O-FY13
Vision 2030 Objectives
CPS Progress Report Status
CPS Milestones and Status
and Key Indicators
CPS Pillar 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential
Private Sector
Development
MTP Objective: A
vibrant and globally
competitive
financial
comettie
inncal
sector driving high levels
of savings and Kenya's
investment need
* Drive increases in
efficiency and depth
through selected
reforms
* Broaden access to
financial services,
including formalizing
informal finance and
extend access to
microfinance
* Deepen capital markets
by raising institutional
capital and expanding
bond and equity markets
* Improve the business
environment in critical
areas, such as licensing
and security
* Implement efficiencyenhancing reforms in
the sector.

CPS Outcome: Improved business
environment and competitiveness
Kenya' Doing Business ranking
improves.
(2009)Business.
95, Target
(2013) 78. Baseline
Source. Doing
Off
Track. [109 (June 2011)]
Access tofinance increases Baseline
(2009): 40.5%, Target (2013) 55%
Source: Biennial FinAccess surveys.
Some Progress. [FinAccess survey will
be updated in FY13. Proxyindicators
that show progress are: Number of
deposit accounts has increased from
2.55m in 2005 to 14.7 million at end of
August 2011 (including deposit taking
MFIs); branch network increased from
534 in 2005 to 1,113 end of August
2011, with sharper increase in rural areas
(152%); 7,828 agents approved as of end
August 2010.]

e

WBG Program

Time to issue and registerconstruction
permitsfalls. Baseline (2009): 120
days, Target (2013): 90 days in pilot

Ongoing: FLSTAP (closes March 2013),
MSME (closes June 2012), Kenya
Investment Climate Program (Regulatory

municipalities.
Source:
surveys.
No Progress. [125
daysDB
(June
2011)]
Time to registerpropertydrops.
Baseline (2009): 64 days, Target (2013):
45 days. Source: DB surveys. No
Progress. [64 (June 2011)]

Reform, Doing
SpecialBusiness),
EconomicAMSME,
Zone, Subnational
Municipal Program, WIN and ESMID.
Pipeline: Nairobi Metro Services Project
(FY12), Kenya Infrastructure
Finance/PPP APL (FY13), Kenya
Subnational Investment Climate
Program, IFC investment and advisory
services for financial intermediaries and
MFIs, Credit Reference Bureau Program
(FY10-13), Regional DPO on regional
integration (trade), Growth Poles Project
(FY14)
AAA: Kenya Economic Update (FY1014), PER ( 1St done in FY10, 2 nd for
FY12), Governance ESW, Growth
Diagnostic Notes, FSAP update 2010,
Post-FSAP update (mortgage market,
spreads analysis; access to finance,
FY10-12), Tourism: Polishing the jewel
(FY10), FPD Policy notes (FY10- 1),
Insolvency and Creditor Rights ROSC
(FY12), Doing Business Report (FY1114), Integrated Growth Poles/competitive
partnership initiative (FY11),
Manufacturing exports analytics (FY1),
Subnational Doing Business (nt done in
FY 10, 2 nd for FY12), Kenya Investment
Climate Program (FY1-13), Investment
Climate Assessment (FY13).
Regional: Regional Tourism ESW
(FY1), Regional Study on SME
Financing (FY13).

Outstanding issues in corporate bond
market increase. Baseline (2009): <1%
of GDP, target (2013): 3% of GDP.
Source: Capital Markets Authority data.
Good Progress. [2.8% in 2012]
Volume ofBank support institutional
development-microfinance rises
(amount). Baseline (June 2009):
US$491,319, target (June 2012):
US$5,750,000. Source: MSME Project
data. Good Progress. [US$3.9 million]
9 Increasedformalizationoffinancial
sector institutions Baseline (2008):
SACCOs licensed: none; Deposit Taking
Microfinance (DTMs) Institutions: none;
Good Progress. SACCOs: [83 licensed
issued] DTMs [6 licensed]
Credit Information Bureaux licensed and
operationalfor banks and extended to
MTDs and SACCOs; positive
information collected. Good Progress [2
bureaux licensed; 950,000 credit reports
accessed -only negative information and
for banks. Focus on positive information
and extending coverage to SACCOs and
MTDs included in Finance Bill 2012,
pending implementation]
17

Vision 2030 Objectives
CPS Progress Report Status
and Key Indicators
Infrastructure
MTP Objective:
CPS Outcome: Improved core
Deploying world class
infrastructure, with deeper regional
infrastructure facilities
integration
and services
Transport:
Transport:
* Strengthen the
Northern Corridorroad in Kenya in
fair or good condition rises
institutional and
regulatory framework
(percentage). Baseline (2009): 54%,
target (2013): 80%. Source: University
for infrastructure
of Nairobi Enterprises and Services
development
* Raise efficiency and
data. Good Progress. [70%
quality of transport
(December 2010)]
infrastructure
and
ondiCtio resGo
andservices,rpored
servicesthe
port ofMombasa to Malaba
* Enhance private(border
of Uganda)falls. Baseline
participation in the
(2009): annual average 18 hours, target
provision of
(2013) 12 hours, Source: University of
infrastructure facilities
Nir*obte prisesTandrers
data

CPS Milestones and Status

Transport:
Roads rehabilitatedand consfructed
(km). Good Progress. [Over 200 k

WBG Program

Security arrangements at the port of
Mombasa put into place and the onestop-shop operational. Source: East

Ongoing:
Transport Sector Support Project (FY11),
Northern Corridor Transport
Improvement Project (FY04, FY09), East
Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation
Project (Regional FY06), Kenya
Investment Climate Program (Trade
Facilitation), Rift Valley Railways (IFC
Portfolio).

Facilitation Project reports. Good
Progress. [Implementation of
integrated security system at port of
Mombasa
including
of all staff ongoing,
on security
matters.]training

Pipeline:
National Urban Transport Improvement
(FY13), East Africa Regional Transport
Links
(Regional
FY13);
IFC
supportProject
for Kenya
Airways
(FY 12)

rehabilitten

i uaoje

BaselinebyUTrnptainSciy
Ugadarofailwarises.
Progress/Achieved.
[9 hours
Directflights between Nairobi and the
Mombasa-Timboroa (750km of about
United States in operation. Source:
920 ki) (June 2011)]
SDervice
data on airlines schedules available on

Proposed new AAA: Construction

Annualfreight carriedby Kenya-

Devolution
on Road Development
(FY14)

the
internet.
Slow Progress.
Kenyatta
International
Airport[Jomo
cleared
decfits
AdiSTranfor
widerofec uity rk

(2009): 1.56 million tons, target (2013)
Source:
more than 2.3 million tons. Univestrasity
Kenya Railway Corporation/RiftUStKey,btwdrsciyrsk
continue to prohibit actual flights.]
Valley Railways. Currently n/a.
[Team will need to provide data
*National
ConstfructionAuthority
update.]
establishedandfunctional. Source:
Northern Corridor project reports.
rTime of cross-bordertrade declines
e
e
dAchieved.
[Bill passed by Parliament
bnnaine (2g
days tKeporta
and signed into law by the President.]
container Target (2013): 21 days to
export a container, 20 days to import a
container. Source: Doing Business
surveys). Some Progress. [26 days for
export; 24 days for import (June
2011)]

Kenya-Uganda railway concession
functioning Source: East African Trade
and Transport Facilitation Project
reports. Some Progress. [Concession
restructured, with efforts underway to
recapitalize railway and
professionalize management.]
18

Study (FY13),or

Vision 2030 Objectives
and Key Indicators

Energy:
" Rural electrification

CPS Progress Report Status
Energy:
* Number of electricity connections rises.

wind/geothermal-reachedfinancia
closure. [New Indicator] 009): 16.3% o

Water and sanitation:

Water:

" Upgrade water supply
sytm ra
nal
coverage,(IPta
areas and
augment/expand rural
water supplies

9 Number ofpeople in project area with
ccs pereagetw
oiprvdwtrsore
of peplh ith acces
ssmialaenOutput-Based
(baseline (June 2009): 8 million, target
(2012) 9.5 million. Source: Water
Regulation Information System, with
data reported in the WaSSIP reports).
*oFvewGood Progress. [However, project ISR
rahsercan
ber of people.withaccess
Percentage increased from 27% to 50%
in 2007-2011.]

WBG Program

Ongoing: Electricity Expansion Project

Energy:

9
Baseline (June 2009): 1,267,198
connections, target (June 2013):
additional 30,000 (Electricity Expansion
Project) and 250,000 (Energy Sector
Recovery Project). Source: KPLC
Reports/Project data. Good Progress
[350,000 households under the ESRP
Septmber201]
" Transmission and distribution losses
*
decline. Baseline (June 2009): 16.3% of
energy purchased, target (2013): 15.2%.
Source: KPLC Reports. Slow Progress.
[16.2% in September 2011]
Five new Independent Power Projects

Expand sewage

CPS Milestones and Status

Transmission lines constructed or
(FY0, FY09), Ligtin Afr (TA)
rehabilitatedunder the Electricity
Expansion Project. Baseline (2010): 0,
(FY09), IFC Tsavo Power Portfolio
Project, IPPS MEGA.
target (2013): 40 km. Source: Project
reports. Some Progress. [Bidding
documents for transmission lines
Pipein PR
Sco Power
prepared, supervisory consultant hired,
GeneratinePR (FY12), La turka
construction expected to begin Feb
Indroject (FY12), Kenetiopi
202.]KPLC
and IPPs (FY12-13), Scaling-up
Distributionlines (66kV
ot 33 kV
e
kV)
Renewable Energy Project (FY13), IPPs
constructed or rehabilitatedunder the
MEGA.
constructtoneastettodofowhichnare
Energy Sector Recovery Projectand
New: Power Development (FY 15)
ElectricityExpansion Project. Baseline
(Dec. 31, 2009): 515, target (2013):
Ongoing AAA:TA portfolio to
strengthen the capacity of sector entities
km. Source: Projects' reports.
1,775
r
Good Progress. [1,200km September for improved sector regulation, planning,
Propon
2011]

Ongoing: IDA: Water and Sanitation
*Transfer

rm

of water and sanitation assets
iityan
oa utoiist

the water services boards completed.
Source: WaSSIP reports. Some
Progress. [Technical work completed]
Number ofnewpiped household water
connections that are resultingfrom the
project intervention (baseline (2010): 0,
Target (mid-2013): 42,300. Source:
Water and Sanitation Project data. Good
Progress. [36,388 new piped household

9 Percentage ofpeople in project area
connections that are resulting from the
with access to adequate sewerage
project interventions in 2011.]
services or safe sanitation rises
9 muto aktiac
cesdto
(baseline (2007): 10%, target (2012):
exaont ofwarket finaneacessed
30%. Source: with data reported in the
epand wrat Supr p se:riesrep US
WaSSIP reports). Good Progress. [20%
and rurl, are B20m12)
US$
in March 2011]
1million. Targenito01). S$
19

Services Improvement Project (WaSSIP;
FY08), WSP Global Partnership on
Aid (GPOBA): Kenya
Microfinance for Water Project
Pipeline: IDA: WaSSIP AF (FY12),
WSP/GPOBA: Nairobi Sanitation
(FY12), Water Development and Climate
Resilience Project (FY13); WSP,IFC,
IDA: Embu and Malindi water services
providers gain access to commercial
finance for expanded supply (FY12),
WSP finance facility for urban water
service providers (FY 13); Nairobi Urban
Sanitation project (FY13)
AAA: Enhancing Women's Participation
in Water Governance structures; TA for
Commercial Finance Facility for Urban
Water Supply (WSP, FY12)

Vision 2030 Objectives
CPS Progress Report Status
and Key Indicators
Information and
ICT
Communication
Access to Internet services rises
Technology
(number of subscribers). Baseline
fiberJue21.GoPrgs!Acivd
* Lay under-sea
1.25 million, target: 3 million.
"Lyudrsafbr(2007):
otccbeSource:
[14.3
data. Achieved. Commission
KenyaCommunications
optic cableof
* Offer government
services online,
Ai!riculture
MTP Objective:
Innovative,
commercially-oriented,
seraceronine
competitive,
and modern
agricultural sector
" Increase productivity
ASAL development,

CPS Milestones and Status

une

cable coped

Arget:

[hecalsometd]Economic
[hecalsometd](IFC

WBG Program
Ongoing:
Regional Communications Infrastructure
Project/KTCIP; IFC KMIP (IFC Special
Zone Project); EASSy Cable
Portfolio project).

million subscribers; 36.7% of the
Pipeline:
population with Internet access
KTCIP AF (FY12)
(December 2010)]
CPS Outcome: Enhanced agricultural
*Harmonized
agriculturalsector
Ongoing:
productivity, with a focus on food
development strategy and
KAPAP (FY09); WKCDD; GEF Kenya
security
implementationframework completed
adaptation to climate change in the Arid
9 Average yields of selected agicultural
and strategy being implemented.
Lands NRMP (FY07), East Africa
pouat
ih-Iteme adedossamr'acsst
on rmIC
(FY12
prdcsi
mlhlefrigSuc:KPPrprs
odAgricultural KPipl
Productivity (Regional
systems in project area rise. Baseline
Progress/Achieved. [ASDS approved FY09); IFC Project, GEF-Western Indian
Ocean Marine Highway Dev and Coastal
by sector ministries and Cabinet in
(2009): maize yields increase by annual
and Marine Contamination Prevention.
begun.]
implementation
2010;
Nov
of 3%; target (2013): 5%.
(
average
Source: KAPAP-specific surveys
Pipeline:
esupportedfinancial
institutionsrises
Agriculture Drought Recovery (FY13),
project). No update available.
(number of farmers), (baseline (2009):
Regional Pastoral Project (FY13), IFC
[KAPAP Impact Assessment and
0. Source: IFC project reports). Some
investment in horticulture and tea sector
Baseline survey ongoing, June results
Progress. [i advanced negotiations
and advisory services for the coffee
expected.]
with KCB and early negotiations with
sector (FYi 11-13)
Earningsfrom small holder
Equity Bank for $200 million of
agriculturalactivities in project area
financing (in aggregate).]
AAA:
rise. Baseline (2009): net annual
Agribusinesses access to loansfrom
Land TA (FY08-10), Agriculture Policy
income: male Ksh 128,270, female Ksh
IFC-supportedprojects (three) or
Review, ESW-Rural gender methodology
98,748, target (2013): male 20%
through wholesalefundingJfacility
and baseline data (co-financed by the
increase, female: 25% increase,
rises. Baseline (2009): 0. IFC project
Gender Action Plan), Western Indian
Source: KAPAP-specific surveys. No
reports). Some Progress. [Launched
Ocean Fisheries TA.
update available. [KAPAP Impact
an advisory services project to support
Assessment and Baseline survey
coffee farmers improve yields and
ongoing, June results expected.]
coffee husbandry through a partnership
with ECOM a global commodities
trading company. Target is to reach
15,000 farmers in 3 years.]

20

Vision 2030 Objectives
CPS Progress Report Status
and Key Indicators
CPS Pillar 2: Reducing Inequality and Strengthening Resilience
Social and
CPS Outcome: Better access to health
Infrastructure Services
care, education, and basic
infrastructure services
Health
Health
9
Vision 2030 Objective:
nutrition, orpopulationservices
Equitablehealth,
healthcare system of the
rises. Baseline (2009): 0, target (2013):
(18,300,000). Source: Health SWAp
highest possible quality
* Provide a functional,
efficient and sustainable
health infrastructure
networkovrhlofte(1.milo)we
netwrk
* Reduce health
inequalities and reverse
9
downward trends,

reports. Good Progress. [During FY1011, over 25.3 million individuals
directly benefited from the project and
verhal ofthem(142 mllin) ere
females.]
Eligible children under-one yearfully
immunized nationwide (totals). Baseline
(2010): 1.2 million, Target (2013): 13
million. Source: Health SWAp data.
(21):Hmamasuceleselt.]uy(F1)
Good Progress. [5.8 million in 2011.]

9HSSFfacilities meeting core financial
management requirements rise,
(percent)Baseline (2010): 0%, Target
directy50%. Source: Health Sector
Services Fund. Good Progress. [20%
in 2011.]
Proportionofyouth aged 1524
reporting condom use in the last sexual
encounter with a non-regularpartner
(ofthose reportingsexual intercourse
i thelas 12
mnthagno witha
nemennreglarartnr
partner it
Mont) Baseline (20103):F=%,
M=7%
eT):(2013) Fata.
Serice G u. Progress
ood
. d%
Good
2011.]
Progres [n
*various

CPS Milestones and Status

Facilities (level 2-3) receiving drugs

WBG Program

Ongoing:
Health Swap (FY10) and Additional

Target (2013) 20% increase from
baseline. Source: Health SWAp data.
Good Progress. [Procurement, s l

Health Laboratory Networking Project
(FY10); Total War Against H1V/AIDS

accountability pilots and supervision
visits underway.]
Health personnel receiving trainingin

mediine JF

financialmanagement andprocurement
(number). Baseline (2010): 0, target
(2013): 2,000. Source: Health SWAp
data. Good ProgressAchieved. [4,648
staff in 265 districts and 664 health
centers received training in planning and
financial management of Health Sector

New: Medicine Regulatory Harmonization
(FY12), Additional Financing for disease
control programs to meet Global Fund
shortfalls (FY3)

Healt

frcanitiat

Pipeline:

AAA:
Health PER (FY1), Health Financing
Services Fund. Training for dispensary (FY12) (IFCQ
Proposed new AAA: Devolution Access
staff almost completed in 4 provinces
to Service Delivery (FYI3/14), Health
and ongoing in 4 others.]
Number ofpeople benefitingfrom health Service Delivery Indicators (FY3),
services from 30 IFC-supportedprivote Multi-secorcutriin AessmenStud (FY123),
healthcarecompanies rises. BaselineBaseline
(2009): 0. Source: IFC project reports.
Some Progress. [Limited information,
but preliminary survey underway;
strategy to be developed to measure
two
year. Through
next equity
progress
healthcareover
private
vehicles
(EVHA and IFHA), IFC has financed
two healthcare companies in Kenya,
namely Nairobi Women's Hospital and
AAR. Another three institutions are at
stages of the due diligence
process and financing should be in place
in the coming months.]

21

Vision 2030 Objectives
and Key Indicators
Education
MTP Objective: Improve
access and equity to
education at all levels
tranis erllent and5%,
transitionrt3
* Improve quality of
education at all levels.

CPS Progress Report Status
Education

Net enrollment rate in primary
education rises (disaggregated by
gender). Baseline (2006): 83% 2006,
target: 95%. Source: Ministry of
Education. Good Progress. [92.9% in

BaPriar(2completion%ratere(ecn).
Baselin (2008):*ter, tae(02
baeinesryo
%
in Nortease:
adet
,at5.
ore:
Mint09]
Euain ood Pors
[83% inu2009
2009; Nothas
]e
" Primary to secondary education
transition rate rises (percent). Baseline
(2008) 60%, target (2012), 75%.
Source: Ministry of Education. Good
9
Progress. [66.9% in 2009]
education gross enrollment
Uniersit
trantrie (aeres). (aecine (0b:
306%, target ) 5 (0r1e), 75ub

Ministry of Education. Good Progress
inc2009]
[4% in 2009.].
Slum Up!radini!
Slum upgrading
MTP Objective:
*Urban
slum residents who gain access
Adequate and decent
to improved infrastructureservices
housing in a sustainable
under the Informal Settlements
environment
Improvement Project (number
vulnrabe
ad
a
goup,
aftr
itershidisaggregated
copleionrissCRskholc
by
beneficiaries,
the
gender). Baseline: 0, Target: 100,000.
development and access
Source: project surveys. Data not
to affordable and
available. [Project effective since
adequate housing
June 2011.]
Vulnerable Groups
CPS Outcome: Establishing
MTP Objective: Gender
comprehensive scalable social
equity in power and
protection mechanisms
resource distribution,
9 Interns employed or self-employed
improved livelihoods for
immediately after internship, and a year
responsible, globally
competitive and
prosperous youth
Increase opportunity

CPS Milestones and Status

(percent, to be disaggregated by
gender). Baseline (2010): 0, Target:
35% (2013). Source: Project-specific
surveys. Some Progress. [The first
internship cycle is still in progress

horty.f
to
.
[IneriP report Go o rogress.
ig
[inte uity fnctio ,lli
Sector governance and management
strengthened. Source: KESSP
Governance and Anti-Corruption and
Risk Policy Management Action Plan.
Slow/No Progress. [Process underway
but very difficult dialogue due to

WBG Program
Pipeline: Global Partnership for
Education (TF)
New: Education SWAp, including ECD
follow-up (FY 3/14)
AAA: Education PER (FY10), Education
PETS and Service Delivery Indicators
(FY12), System Assessment
Benchmarking for Results (SABER): Earl
Childhood (FY12), School Health and
Nutrition (FY 12); Teacher Performance
and Student Learing (FY12), Realizing
the Youth Dividend (FY12), Innovative
Financing for Higher Education (FY12)
Proposed New AAA: Measuring Skills
and Knowledge for Greater Growth and
Competitiveness (FY13), Integrated
Education Data Management (FY13),
Teachers (FY13).

sector.]

slum upgrading initiatives
commence infive cities. Source:
Kenya Informal Settlement
Improvement Project reports. Data not
since
[Project effectivereptiosPa.
eFacilitate Transfemret
available.
2011.]
30,
June

*Citywide

Ongoing: Slum Upgrading/Informal
Settlements Improvement (FY1 1); Propoor component of WASSIP, FIRST
Shelter Afrique, ESMID, FLSTAP.
Pipeline: Nairobi Metropolitan Services
Project (FY12).
AAA: FPD Dialogue, FSAP update/part
2-housing finance (FY 1/ 12).
Proposed new AAA: Demography of
Urban Slums

Ongoing:
and Vulnerable Children Cash
Transfer Project (FY09), Youth
Empowerment (FY 10).
Pipeline:
Integrated Social Protection Program
(FY13)
AAA:
Social Protection Sector Review (FY12),
Building Social Protection Systems in
Establishment of a single registry to
cover key cash transferprograms. [New Kenya (RSR grant for advisory activities)
nOrphans
apIterated s caia prot
t elction
lc
arned. cabie:tanrelate
plCa ndeh immentatio
fer
Sorc
lGood Progress. [Cabinet Memorandum
signed by the Minister. Revised draft
strategy to be sent to Cabinet in March.]

22

Vision 2030 Objectives
and Key Indicators
* Provide financial
support to all vulnerable
groups.

CPS Progress Report Status

WBG Program

milestone.]

FY11-13).

National Drought Contingency Fund
esshenisur
fund
ueseegnis
ore rd
Lands 2 project reports. Not achieved.
[Project was cancelled due to
corruption charges in predecessor

Ongoing:
GEF Adaptation to Climate Change in
Arid Lands, WKCDD (FY07), Natural
RsucsMngmn rjc
F0)
Laeoria
nviromentaloet F0)
ManemetPa nv renal
Casalement P
Rojec FY1)

project.]
Drought management system in place
and functioning at the district and
national level. Source: Arid Lands 2

Pipeline:
Water Development and Climate
Resilience Project (FY13); IFC

* Improve water storage
capacity

project reports. Not achieved. [Project
was cancelled due to corruption

engagement with Lake Naivasha
watershed stakeholders (FY12-13)

* Conserve strategic
natural resources in a
sustainable manner
without compromising
economic growth

charges in predecessor project.]
Early flood warning system established
and functioning in Western Kenya
(gender disaggregated data included)
addresransparencies.mmunica:ions
[New Indicator]
Draft Basin-wide water andfisheries

* Map ASAL and high
risk disaster zones.

management agreementprepared.
201):nernlauit.]rouemn
Baseline (2009): 0, target (2013): 100.
Source: Lake Victoria Environment
Management 2 Project surveys.
No/Slow Progress. [no progress, but

Environment
MTP Objective:
Enhancing access to
clean, secure, and
susanabl
sevirnmet
sustainable environment,
water and sanitation
availability and
establish a monitoring
program for water

(October 2011).]

CPS Milestones and Status

* Beneficiary households receiving

predictable cash transfers rises under
the Cash Transferfor OVC (number).
Baseline (2009): 0, target (end- 2013):
50,000. Source: OVC Project specific
surveys. Good Progress. [149,260
(April 2011)]
CPS Outcome: Improved management
of key natural resources
ofrssmngdacrigt
approvedplans rises. Baseline (end
2009): 21,000 hectares, target (2013):
300,000 hectares. Source: NRM
Project surveys. Good Progress.
[141,000 has in 2011]

activities underway]

0some

CPS Governance Pillar (Cross-Cutting)
New CPS Governance Outcomes
Public Sector
CPS Outcome: Improved
Governance
MTP Objective: A
citizen-focused and
results-oriented
institution
SPromote transparency,

Transparency and Accountability
*Financial statementsprepared on time
in accordance with acceptable
accountingstandards through IFMIS
(centralgovernment) and LAIFOMS
(local government). Central baseline

Annual procurement
d audits indicate
Ongoing: Institutional Reform and
improvement in compliance with
Capacity Building project (FY06);
procurement regulations. Baseline
Municipal Program (FY10),
(2005): procurement not covered as a
fou rafritra
ui,tre
edInfrastructure Project (KTCIP) (FY08),
focus1are internal
r
audit,
tretend FLSTAP (closes March 2013), GPF (TF),
STATCAP
23

Vision 2030 Objectives
and Key Indicators
accountability,
participation, and the
rule of law.

CPS Progress Report Status
(2005): 0. Source: Institutional
Reform Capacity Building Project
reports. Municipal baseline (2009): 0
Target (2013): 6. Source: Municipal
Program reports). Central: Not
Achieved. [Purchasing, Accounts
Payable and General Ledger financial
reporting not yet undertaken using
IFMIS. Other modules of IFMIS have
not been operationalized.]; Municipal:
Data not available.
* PEFA scores ofA/B rise. Baseline
(2008): 12 of 28, target (2013): 15 of
28. Source: Biennial PEFA surveys).
Data not available. [There was no
PEFA in 2010.]
* External audit reportspreparedand
published in a timely fashion in
accordancewith Public Audit Act
2003. Partially Achieved. [Audit is
being carried out and in compliance
with the Kenya National Audit Office
(KNAO) Act, 2003. Audit
Committees established, but not all
functioning and local government
authorities audit reports are in arrears.]

CPS Milestones and Status
carried out in 90% of ministries.
Source: Inst. Reform Capacity Building
Project reports). Partially Achieved.
[Guidelines for annual procurement
audits developed and regulations in
place, but implementation and
compliance are weak.]
Muiplti
have prioritizedcapital
plans line t
o re
Municipal Program reports. Dt not

24

WBG Program

Pipeline: Nairobi Metropolitan Services
Project (FY12), KTCIP AF (FY12)
New: Governance Partnerships Facility
(TF) support to supply-side (PFM and
PSR) and demand-side (information
dissemination and accountability system)
reforms
Ongoing AAA: Country Procurement
Assessment Review, Insolvency and
Creditor Rights ROSC (FY12), Policy
Notes (M&E Assessment, Social
Accountability), PEFA (FY12/13)
Proposed new AAA: Governance
Assessment, Portfolio Review of
Decentralization, Access to Information
and Data, FM related TA and AAA,
Accounting and Auditing, Sector FM
assessments, Procurement reforms,
Enhanced Capacity for CSOs and Media

Annex 2: Updated and Revised CPS Outcomes
Original CPS Indicators
| Updated and Revised Indicators/Outcomes
CPS Outcome: Improved core infrastructure, with deeper regional integration.
Energy
* Five new Independent Power Projects (IPP), at least
* New Indicator. Indicator captures new operations and
two of which are green, reached financial closure.
focus on IPPs, including climate-change sensitivity.
Water
* Area under irrigation in project area rises. Baseline
(2007): 270 ha. Target (mid-2013): 3,500 ha

* Replaced. Indicator is not aligned with main sector

focus. Under the NRM project, there has been good
progress under this indicator, with works contracts for
two major irrigation investments in advanced stages.
* Amount of marketfinance accessed to expand water
* New Indicator. This milestone directly supports the
increased access outcome indicator, as the money is for
supply services in urban and ruralareas. Baseline
(2012) US$1.3 million. Target (2013) US$6 million.
infrastructure investments.
CPS Outcome: Better access to health care, education, and basic infrastructure
Health
* Healthfacilities (level 2-3) without tracer drugsfor
* Replaced. Indicator does not reflect well the Bank's
program. In addition, supply of essential drugs under
more than two weeks declines (%). Baseline: 23%.
Target (2013): 5%. Source: KEMSA Navison data,
the project has not yet started.
presented in the Health SWAp Reports.
* Proportionof youth aged 15-24 reportingcondom use * New Indicator. To reflect part of program focus.
in last sexual encounter with a non-regularpartner
(ofthose reportingsexual intercoursewith a
nonregularpartnerin last 12 months). Baseline
(2003): F=24%, M=47%. Target (2013) F=55%,
M=75%. Sources: TOWA project data. Good
Progress
CPS Outcome: Improved management of key natural resources
Replaced. No to slow Progress. Indicator was replaced
* Cumulativepercentage reduction in untreated
by indicator that allows for better measurement of
effluent disposedby targeted municipalitiesinto
three hotspots ofLake Victoria (%). Baseline
progress.
(2009): 0%. Target (2013): 10%. Source: Lake
Victoria Environment Management 2 Project
surveys.
* Regional standardsfor industrialand effluent
New Indicator. Better indicator to capture project
discharges into Lake Victoria ready for adoption.
progress.
Baseline (2009): n/a. Target: standards adopted.
CPS Outcome: Adapting to climate change.
* CPS outcome indicator not measured.
* CPS outcome dropped. Climate-sensitive indicators
continue to be measured (and have been added) across
results framework to better capture multi-sectorality.
CPS Governance Pillar (Cross-Cutting)
The CPS identified governance as a cross-cutting area. The CPS Progress Report suggests adding governance as a
cross-cutting pillar to the CPS results frameworks. The CPS outcome on strengthening public sector management
(previous under the CPS pillar 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential) is being changed into Improved
Transparency and Accountability.
SCPS outcome on strengthening public sector
*Reformulated CPS Outcome: Improved Transparency
management and improving sub-national govemnance
and Accountability.

25

Annex 3: Ongoing and Proposed Knowledge Program
CPS Pillar 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential
Continued/Ongoing
*
Kenya Economic Updates (FY10-14)
*
PER (FY12)
*
Post-FSAP update (FY10-12)
*
Insolvency and Creditor Risks ROSC (FY12)
*
Subnational Doing Business (FY12)
*
Investment Climate Program (FY10- 14) and Assessment (FY13)
*
TA energy sector (capacity strengthening) FY10-14
New
*
Port Development Study (FY13)
*
Oil and Gas Study (FY13)
CPS Pillar 2: Reducing Inequality and Strengthening Resilience
Continued/Ongoing
*
IFC health financing TA (FY12)
*
Multi-sector nutrition assessment (FY12)
*
Education PETS and Service Delivery Indicators (FY12)
*
School Health and Nutrition (FY12)
*
Realizing the Youth Dividend (FY12)
*
Innovative Financing for Higher Education (FY12)
*
Social Protection Sector Review (FY12)
*
Building Social Protection Systems in Kenya (RSR grant for advisory activities) FY11-13
New
*
Poverty Updates (FY13/14)
*
Devolution Access to Service Delivery (FY13/14)
*
Health Service Delivery Indicators (FY13)
*
Human Resources in Health Study (FY13)
*
Measuring Skills and Knowledge for Greater Growth and Competitiveness (FY13)
*
Integrated Education Data Management (FY13)
*
Teacher Performance and Student Learning (FY13)
CPS Governance "Pillar"
Continued/Ongoing
*
Decentralization Report
*
Procurement Assessment Review (FY12)
*
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA; FY12/13)
New
*
Access to Information and Data (FY13/14)
*
County Systems Assessment (FY13)
*
Judicial Performance (F 13/14)

26

Annex 4: Planned versus Actual Lending Program and Pipeline
Currents tatus
CPS

FY
dklivred

2010

Program

Planned
(LSS)

Planned
year

Annex 2)

Comment

Electricity Expansion
Municipal Program

30.0
100.0

FY10
FY10

Amount lowered by $20m
Delivered as planned

Youth Empowerment

60.0

FY10

Delivered as planned

Health SWAp
2011

of CPS IDA pipeline (as dkscrilbd in CPS

100.0

Subtotal
Coastal Development
Nairobi Urban Toll Road (NUTR)

610.0
35.0
180.0

FY 11+ Advanced to FY10
FY10
Delivered FYI1
FYI 1+ Toll road cancelled, due to integrity

Amount (U Sm
IDA
CRW*

30.0

-

100.0

-

60.0

-

157.0

-

647.0
35.0
300.0

-

100.0

-

-

issues conceming concessionaire, but
other components supported in
substituted Transport Sector Support

SlumUpgrading

100.0

FYll+

project
Renamed Informal Settlements
Improvement; delivered as planned

TOWA additionalfinancing

n/a

Subtotal
2012

FYO7

AF to fll GFATM gap

315.0

Health SWAp AF

n/a

n/a

AF to addressdroughtemergency

Private Sector Power Generation (PRG)

40.0

FY12

Partial risk guarantees

Subtotal
Note: Status of pipl ine projects apparing in Annex 2 of April: 010 CPS but not

2012+

55.0
490.0

-

41.5

57.0
-

41.5

57.0

yet delivred

Nairobi Metropolitan Services
PPP Infrastructure Finance

100.0
100.0

FY 11+ On track for 12 delivery
FYI 1+ On track for FY13 delivery

300.0
100.0

-

Water Resources Development

DO.0

FYll +

400.0

-

Development Policy Operation

100.0

FYll +

Arid Lands Resource Management 3

100.0

FYI1+

FYlI+

KESSP2

DO.0

On track for FY13 delivery; renamed
Water Security and Climate Resilience
Prior actions completed, but project not
presented due to country circumstances

-

-

-

Cancelled, due to corruption findings in
predecessor project

-

-

Cancelled, due to corruption findings in

-

-

predecessor project
Proposed pileline or remainder ofCPS period

CPS

IFY
deliwred
2012

Program

Planned

Planned

amount

year

Comment

Proposedanount
IDA

CRW
20.0

Water and SanitationImprovementAF

300.0

FY12

Includes response to 2011 drought

280.0

Nairobi Metropolitan Services

300.0

FY12

Third project in urban series

300.0

-

KCTIPAF

39.0

FY12

Includes $14mlDA realocation

55.0

-

Northern CorridorTransportAF

43.0

FY12

IDA reallocation of cancelled funds

43.0

-

Ethiopia-Kenya Interconnector (regional

131.0 FY12/13

153.0

-

project)

2013+

Subtotal (including approwd and regional projects)
250.0
Water Security and Climate Resilience

FY13

On track

872.5
250.0

Pastoral Livelihoods Recovery and
Resilience (regional project)
PPP Infrastructure Finance

25.0

FY13

100.0

FY13+

Part of'regional response to 2011 Horn of
Africa drought
Subject to PPP pipeline development

100.0

-

Judicial Performance Improvement

100.0

FY13+

Revives project postponed in FY09

100.0

-

Integrated Social Protection Program

200.0

FY13+

Will incorporate CT-OVC project

200.0

-

Scaling-up Renewable Energy
Lake Turkana Wind Project (PRG)

130.0
20.0

FY13+
FY13

Supported by $50m SREP TF resources
Partial risk guarantee

130.0
20.0

-

Nairobi Urban Transport APL

20.0

FY12/13

Will address issues not addressed when
NUTR was cancelled

200.0

-

Subtotal

25.0

77.0
-

1,025.0

* IDA Crisis Response Window

27

-

-

-

Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 3/20/2012

Indicator

2009

2010

2011

2012

16
3.3
6.3
5.6
25.0
10.1
20.0

19
3.3
10.5
8.2
15.8
11.6
18.9

21
3.5
4.8
3.7
9.5
6.6
11.9

20
3.8
10.0
6.1
20.0
9.8
9.0

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
105
3
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
3,628.8
90.1
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
58.1
33.3
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
52.1
39.9

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

28

Annex 6: IDA Operations Portfolio
Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3120/2012
Closed Projects

IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

134

733.91
0.00
539.83
686.60
1,273.74
686.60
1,650.24
1.25
1,651.49

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual
Disbursements

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P083250
P091979
P111545
P094692
P103037
P083131
P108845
P088600
P074091
P113542
P066488
P085414
P082615
P095050
P081712
P074106
P096367
P111546
P124109
P109683
P085007

Financial & Legal Sec TA
KE- Adaptation Climate Change (KACCAL)
KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09)
KE-Coastal CD SIL (FY08)
KE-Electricity SIL (2010)
KE-Energy Sec Recovery PrJ (FY05)
KE-FMSCEDP (Coastal CD) GEF (FISH)
KE-GEF Ag prd & Sust. Land Mgmt(KAPSLMP)
KE-Health SWAP (FY10)
KE-Informal Settlements Impro\ement Proj
KE-Municipal Program (FY10)
KE-Natl STATCAP Dev
KE-Northern Corridor Tmsprt SIL (FY04)
KE-NRM SIL (FY07)
KE-Tot War Against HIV/AIDS-TOWA (FY07
KE-W Kenya CDD/Flood Mitigation (FY07)
KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08)
KE-Youth Empowerment Project (FY10)
KE:Transport Sector Support Project
Kenya Agric Productivity & Agribusiness
MSME Competitiveness

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

IDA

S
#
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
MS
S
S
MS
S
MU
S
MU
S
MS
MS

S
#
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
MS
S
MS
MS
S
MS
S
MU
S
MS
MS

2005
2010
2009
2011
2010
2005
2011
2011
2010
2011
2010
2007
2004
2007
2007
2007
2008
2010
2011
2009
2005

18

Overall Result

'
'
r
'
r
'
r
'
r
'
'
r
'
r
V
r
'
'

Undisb.

11.7

Orig.

10.9

Frm Rev'd

0.6

45.5
50
35
330
160
5.0
10.0
156.8
100
100
20.5
460
68.5
135
86
150
60
300
82
22
2333.8

29

GRANT

60.5

24.2
35.0
323.8
61.2
4.6
8.1
125.7
103.6
93.8
12.1
263.0
38.0
43.0
71.4
37.3
46.9
292.1
60.7
6.4
1,662.9

(3.0)
24.5
(25.7)

5.8

(7.4)
11.9
10.7
(12.3)
15.8
18.6
27.4
31.5
12.4

153.7
27.4

22.2
5.1

4.7

133.2

192.2

Annex 7: Kenya Regional Portfolio

~

C.,

P112688
PO72202
P100406
P112456

Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity
3A-GEF SWIOFisheries SIL(FY07)
3A-Lake Victoria Phase IIAP 1 (FY09)
Regional Trade Facilitation Project II
P111556 3A-East Afr PublHIthLaborat Net(FY10)
P079734 3A-EAfr Trade & Transp Facil(FY06)
PO94103 3A-Teleconrnunications AF (FY07)

J

AFTAR
LEGESSE 6/11/2009
AFTEN VINCENT 6/28/2007
AFTEN BRAGA
3/3/2009
AFTFW
VIS
6/14/2011
AFTHE SCHNEIDMAN5/25/2010
AFTTR WAITHAKA
1/24/2006
TWICT
NETO
3/29/2007

-

jC

7/22/2009
10/9/2007
5/8/2009
#
6/22/2010
3/6/2006
5/22/2007

2/16/2010
10/9/2007
7/30/2009
#
9/7/2010
6/5/2006
8/21/2007

1!

#
2/27/2015
2.4
3/17/2011 11/30/2011
4.3
#
6/30/2013 MS MU 2.7
#
4/30/2017 # # 0.4
#
3/30/2016 S S 1.4
12/8/2008 9/30/2014
5.8
1/10/201112/31/2013
4.6

EE

30.0
12.0
30.0
25.0
23.5
150.6
114.4
385.520

Grand Total

30

2,779.8

1

1

Annex 8: Kenya Trust Fund Portfolio

TF09821
TF01135
TF09561
TF09569
TF09880
TF09161
TF09646

IDF Grant for Building Capacity of Diaspora Affairs Directorate in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Capacity Building for Agricultural Carbon Project Development
Gender Action Plan (GAP) 2009
EUFCRRF Kenya
Readiness mechanisms for climate smart agriculture
GEF FSP-KENYAAGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND SUSTAINABLE LAND MANAGEMENT
Enhancing Agricultural Productivity Project

P121227
P121368
P109683
P109683
P129610
PO88600
P109683

500.00
200.00
120.00
0.00
150.00
108.69
189.96
58.57
970.00
77.50
10,000.00 1,870.04
24,226.23 5,251.23

200.00
300.00
0.00
30.00
149.92
0.08
192.76
1.15
87.05
214.25
1,870.04 8,129.96
25,407.32
236.47

TFO9857 W1-The Empirics of Governance

P124003

820.00

85.80

TF01091
TF09670
TF09887
TF09916
TF09666
TFO09352
TF09308
TF09352
TF09757

P129204
P121332
P125539
P125388
P120038
P95050
P083172
PO95050
P108845

46.75
181.00
164.35
183.77
135.74
56.50
727.27
1,936.38
5,000.00

2.75
31.91
63.01
-6.46
39.69
5.50
124.15
292.81
258.54

TFO9950 PPIAF Kenya Infrastructure Finance/PPP project

P121019

124.24

7.38

7.38

86.861

TF01006 Kenya: #10160 Strengthening Accounting & Auditing Legal Framework
TFO9041 CAPACITY BUILDING OF RURAL TRADIflONAL HERBALISTS- BANK-EXECUTED

P126674 1

106.25

0.00

0.00

71.25

PO74091

59.88

10.66

50.68

6.70

TFO9840 Pro-Poor Healthcare Supply Chains in Kenya

PO74091

50.00

31.73

44.26

0.79

TFO9884 JKenya HRBF K&L Grant

PO74091

125.00

11.01

29.88

4.0

TF09049
TF01126
TF09729
TF09482
TF09653
TF09727
TF09727
TF09727
TF09730
TF09702
TF09727
TF09730
TF01095
TF07161
TF09934
TF09874
TF09916
TF09039
TFO09415
TF05757
TF01072
TF09834
TF09670
TF09859
TF01092

P074091
P118865
P096288
P117536
P121504
P111545
P111545
P111545
P121594
P111546
P111545
P111546
P113542
P066488
P125526
P118665
P125826
P102064
P116605
P103458
P128680
P122163
P121330
P121024
P128633

1,218.88
167.51
675.00
0.00
50.00
17.00
350.00
39.01
145.00
53.88
100.80
14.53
43.08
8.13
64.61
0.00
1,150.00
147.27
1,000.00
0.00
9,424.75 3,180.02
500.00
95.62
1,401.27
66.96
0.00
0.00
400.00
0.00
123.60
1.05
113.50
52.97
1,340.00
340.00
100.00
8.90
6,137.50
0.00
487.90
147.03
35.00
0.00
226.00
4.30
82.75
62.71
100.00
0.00

617.87
601.01
0.00
350.00
50.00
0.00
285.42
1.62
128.15
3.05
97.62
3.18
8.13
34.95
0.00
64.61
287.76
806.12
400.00
600.00
9,381.79
42.96
448.02
51.98
66.96
877.46
0.00 4,840.15
0.00
60.00
82.69
26.68
52.97
10.78
1,000.00
340.00
73.21
26.79
253.43
22.50
147.03
291.36
20.00
15.00
42.72
183.28
66.39
7.51
0.00
100.00

P104075
P104075
P104075
P104075
P123640
P104075
P104075
P104075

37.51
0.00
44.77
0.00
28.81
0.00
112.97
0.00
240.10
172.83
383.77
30.83
383.77
77.03
1,773,64
135.56
74148.30 1

0.00
37.51
0.00
44.77
0.00
28.81
0.00
112.97
207.08
11.12
284.65
99.12
329.85
53.92
135,56
709.84
44766 10125,813.96

TF01009
TF01009
TF01009
TF09579
TF09782
TF05761
TF05761
TF09339
Total

KENYA: Assessment of Geothermal Development Company (GDC) for Enhanced Access to
GPOBA (W1): Kenya Electricity Expansion
Kenya SREP investment plan preparation
GPOBA (W3 Prep): Kenya Electricity Expansion Project
IKERural Biodiesel project
Support to Community Based Farm Forestry Enterprises in Semi-Arid Areas in Kenya (BankGEF MSP: KENYA GRANT FOR WILDLIFE CONSERVATION LEASING DEMONSTRATION
Support to Community Based Farm Forestry Enterprises in Semi-Arid Areas in Kenya
Kenya Coastal Development Project

CAPACITY BUILDING OF RURAL TRADITIONAL HERBALISTS
BNPP-Growth & Equity: Welfare and Services Monitoring via Mobile Phone Surveys
Kenya PER Gender Project
W2-STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE, TRANSPARENCY, AND ACCOUNTABILITY INKENYA
Support to the Government of Kenya for Social Protection Programming - Preparation and
CT-OVC Program Enhanced Supervision
CT-OVC Program Program Management
CT-OVC Program Trust Fund Administration
Support to the Government of Kenya for Social Protection Programming
Support to the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project
Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children
Republic of Kenya: Support to the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project
Kenya Urban Knowledge and Implementation Program
Kenya Municipal Project
Cities Alliance - Kenya Baseline State of the City Surveys
Kenya -Water Resources Assessment
PPIAF: PPP Options for the Management and Development of Irrigation Infrastructure
TTR - CGAP/GATES TECH PROGRAM EQUITY BANK
KCP II- KENYA-YOUTH FRIENDLY SVCS ON VOL.COUNSELLING AND TESTING
Kenya Olkaria II Geothermal Expansion Project
Kenya Climate Innovation Center
Mobile Apps thru Social Networking in Africa - Kenya
GPOBA (W1): Kenya Energy Expansion
Sharing results from GAP-funded activities on gender and agriculture in Kenya
StAR - Kenya Country Engagement
WSP TRUST FUNDS
GPOBA (W3 SPN): Mcrofinance for Small Piped Water Schemes - Kenya
GPOBA (W3 SPN): Micro-finance for Small Piped Water Schemes - Kenya
GPOBA (W3 SPN): Micro-finance for Small Piped Water Schemes - Kenya
GPOBA W3 - EU Cont - Kenya Comm. Water Supervision
GPOBA (W1): Kenya OBA Finance Facility
GPOBA KENYA COMMUNITY WATER
GPOBA KENYA COMMUNITY WATER
GPOBAW3 - EU Grant to Kenya Community Water

31

99.65

5.61

2.75
44.00
145.75
35.25
159.91
0.32
0.00
183.77
107.55
28.19
10.49
46.01
588.49
138.78
886.38 1,049.9
258.54 4,741.46

Annex 9: Kenya IFC Portfolio
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 212912012
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FYApproval

Company

2006
0
2004
2010
0
7/8/1982
2010
0
0
0
1996/99/09
2011
2006
2005
2005
0
2007
2000

Abe-kenya
Boa - kenya
Bp kenya
Braeburn
Cfc stanbic
Dtb kenya
Ecobank kenya
Ips(k)-allpack
lps(k)-frigoken
lps(k)-prem food
K-rep bank
Kcb
Kingdom hotel
Kongoni
Magadi soda co.
Premier gas
Rir
Tsavo power
Total Portfolio:

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

6
0
0
4
0
30
0
0
0
0
0
100
9
0.34
0
0
22
1.37

0.48
0
5
0
0
4.45
0
0.36
0.06
0.11
3.65
0
0
0
0
2
0
0.83

0
8
0
0
10
15
12.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17.46
0.13

172.71

16.94

63.09

Disbursed Outstanding
Partici

Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

32

**Quasi
Equity *GTIRM

Partici

pant

pant

Loan

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.57
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.14

0
0
0
2
0
30
0
0
0
0
0
100
9
0.34
0
0
6.59
1.37

0.48
0
3.58
0
0
4.45
0
0.36
0.06
0.11
1.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.83

0
8
0
0
10
15
12.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17.46
0.13

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.57
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.14

0.57

2.14

149.3

11.27

63.09

0.57

2.14

*GTIRM

Equit

Annex 10: Kenya at a Glance

Kenya at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
Kenya
11009
Population,mid-year(millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GN I (Atlas method, US$ billions)

SubSaharan
Africa

39.8
760
30.3

840
1,126
946

2.6
2.8

2.5
2.9

2/25/11

Lowincome

Developmentdiamond*

846
Life expectancy
433

Average annual growth, 2003-09
Population (%)
Laborforce (%)

2.2
2.6

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2003-09)
Poverty (%ofpopulation belownationalpovertyline)
Urban population (%of totalpopulation)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Literacy (%ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primaryenrollment (%of school-age population)
Male
Female

Gross

GNI

I

per

primary

enrollment

capita
47
22
54
55
17
59
87
112
113

37
52
81
25
60
62
100
105

29
57
76
28
64
66
104
107

110

95

100

..

..

Access to improved water source

Low-income grotp

Kenya -

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
'

1989

1999

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exportsofgoodsandservices/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

8.3
24.9
23.0
17.8
18.0

12.9
15.5
20.8
9.0
12.0

2008 '
30.0
20.3
27.6
6.1
13.9

2009
29.4
20.9
25.2
7.8
154

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Totaldebtservice/exports

-6.8
3.4
71.2
36.9

-3.5
1.3
50.2
25.5

-4A
0A
24.7
5.1

-5.5
0.4
27.2
4A

Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

..

..

..

..

..

..

Economicratios*

Trade

T
Capital
formation

Domestic
savings

19.4
65.4

Indebtedness
1989-99 1999-09
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exportsofgoodsandservices

2.2
-0.9
2.3

2008 '

2009

2009-13

4.1
1.4

1.6
-1.1

2.6
-0.1

4.9

6.3

7.5

-7.0

5.9

2008

2009

Low-incomegroup

Kenya -

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
o

1989

1999

(%lofGDP)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing

30.2
19.0
11.7

32.4
15.8

21.0
15.1

11.4

20
15
10
5

8.9

8.7

Services

50.8

50.8

63.9

62.1

Householdfinalconsumptionexpenditure

64.2

75.3

77.2

75.9

15.8
27A

16.7
41.8

16.3
38.3

General gov't final consumption expenditure
Importsofgoodsandservices

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

18.1
30.1

1989-99 1999-09
2.3
1.5
1.6
4.5
1.9
3.9
3.4
4.1

2008 '
-4.3
4.6
3.5
2.7
-0.7

Householdfinalconsumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

3.4

4.3

8.1
4.2

2.1
8A

2.3
11.1

Importsofgoodsandservices

9.6

7.7

6.6

Growth of capital and GDP(%)

22.6
15.3

2009
-2.4
3.6
2.0
4.2
3.7
5.5
3.8

04

05

06

GCF

07

08

*

GDP

09

Growth ofexportsandimports(%)
20
5

5
0
-5
-lo

04

05

06

Exports

07

08

Imports

-0.2

Note: 2009 data are preliminaryestimates.
This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.
*The diamonds showfour key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. Ifdata are missing, the diamond wil
be incomplete.

33

0

Kenya
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
D
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1989

1999

2008 '

2009

Inflation (%)
30

13.8
9.8

5.7
4.2

25.1
11.9

1.9
6.7

2

15
10

Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

5
o
25.6
2.5
-3.6

21.7
3.9
13.4

22.8
-0.4
-5.0

I
05

04

23.9
1.0
-8.4

07

06

09

08

CP

GDPdefitor

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Petroleum
Coffee
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

I

1989

1999

2008 '

2009

913
42
153
194
1,780
51
343
593

1,755
138
172
420

5,040
117
155
625

4,502
95
202
526

2,895
156
527
680

11497
617
2,987
3,063

10,297
567
2,006
3,065

Exportandimportlevels(US$ mill.)
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
03

Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index(2000=00)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

25
27
94

93
90
103

1989
1,905
2,492
-586

1999
2,687
3,528
-842

Net income
Net current transfers

-244
267

Current account balance

-563

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

623
-60

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, localVUS$)

341
20.6

791
70.3

1989
5,889
889
893

1999
6,475
91
2,220

166
181
92

178
182
98

04

05

06

ClExports

07

08

09

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

r

2008 P
8,291
12,563
-4,272

2009
7,413
11,253
-3,840

CurrentaccountbalancetoGDP(%)
4

-173
564

-46
2,995

-65
2,297

0
-2

-450

-1323

-1,608

4

844
479

2,072
-464

2,928
69.2

3,127
77.4

51B
-68

2
2
03

05

06

0

0

-

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

r

2008 '
7,427
0
3,050

2009

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

709
150
8

693
70
39

408
0
99

382
0
D4

Com po sition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

379
385
161
62
0

196
-126
-68
52
2

1,099
48
-8
96
5

1,270
203
24
141
3

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

Compositionof2009debt(US$mill.)

8,005
0
3,156

G: 1,011
F:352
B: 3,156

E:2,330

C:451
D: 705

392
244
79
165
79
86

0
78
82
-3

150
178
75
14

525
164
81
83

28
-31

24
79

22
61

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

A- IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D -Other multilateral

E- Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

2/25/11

IBRD 33426R2

KENYA
CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

e

DISTRICT CAPITALS*

RAILROADS



NATIONAL CAPITAL

o

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

-

) 36

34E

SOUTH SUDAN

40E

38E

,

2E

TOMurle
Korungu
Karun

TO

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

-

E T H l O Pl A

Loki.kio

4N

h liTo.

J
.*'

-__

Desert

To

Kakuna

.

Ronu

Mand

""

Lake

%I---

Turkana
Turkana

4N

NorthHorr

SeMandera

Lda
Marsabit
E|Wak

Buna

UGANLDA

South Horr

Lokichar

Tarbaj

Marsabit

2N

Kongatet
WesPokot

Wfair

c,Samburu

4k

 SOMALIA
To f, TransNzo lg
Mbole
Kitale
Marweo

Maralal
Kapedo

NaArcher's

Eld,e

0

Mangat

'akp

Gas

Garba

NakNkr

Mbalarmbala

siolo,

TO

''4

Kismay

anTiMn)eru

0adiNahpu

Kosumu
KThichoNyndrod'TharakaNitdi
Kirinjyaig( E bu

Nyn

Garissa

Grss

Gi9iEmb

N mIJIfra

<Kisfl
I.C

'

Tul.

KKak kmg

HamBa K ercho

E

Post

MUusint Barn,

Bungom(
TKGish usia
Kpala

BeshaPa

Mrn

SiNet

acltakos-MTaaRvo
KMy.e

-

'M\

itraMusma

WctorbsTo. Narok
|gonlrren

N

Aerobi ch

achako 71>i

eKonzo

akuens

do7

eOnero

--.

Tona
River-p-.--

B0ohei
Lamod

o.
sa

KENYA

Galana

MaTANZANIA
T vee
. Prk

on

IKwale

.

Kwale
120

160

200 Kilometers

.
|

0

40

80

INDIAN

Mahindi
Taita/Tave

80

2S

T sa ogjf

Toi
Mshi

40

t

GaeLaou

C>&

ruTsav

0

T

Noanger

Ikutha
Kibwez

-

eTt

tui Kitui

--- iIN5,DIAN

kiMohnd
25

TO

Klmigone

arok

|

|

Shimoni

120 Miles

| |

OCEAN

i

Thismap was producd b
the Map Design Unit ofTh
omasa
Theboundanes,
. o asaworld Bank.
colors, denommaotions and
ny other mnformaion shown
onhis map do not iimply,o

|

.1110Y

n fity

2011

D.~oany... endorsemn-t or

3436

38E

40E

boundaries.

/s

JULY2011

4S

