Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No: 65702-ZM

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA

FOR THE PERIOD 2008-2012

November 15, 2011

Country Management Unit: AFCS3
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Authorization.

DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FISCAL YEAR BUDGET
January 1 – December 31

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
As of June 30, 2011
Currency Unit: Zambian Kwacha (K)
US$ 1 = K4793
K 1 = US$.000209

Regional Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:
Contributors to the Report and Task Team:

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Kundhavi Kadiresan
Kapil Kapoor
Alex Mwanakasale, Barbara Mwila Kazimbaya-Senkwe,
Bobak Rezaian, Carla Bertoncino, Cecil Nundwe, Elvis
Mtonga, Fenwick M. Chitalu, Gael Raballand, Indira J.
Ekanayake, Jean-Michel G. Pavy, Julio E. Revilla, Jumbe
Jeremiah Ngoma, Justin Runji, Jutta Ursula Kern,
Kanyuka Mumba, Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares, Marcus
J. Wishart. Monica Beuran, Monique Vledder, Musonda
Ronald Upenyu Mutasa, Rosemary Sunkutu, Patricia
Palale, Pazhayannur K. Subramanian, Samuel Munzele
Maimbo, Sofia U. Bettencourt, Wedex Ilunga, W. Marie
Sheppard, Yisgedullish Amde, Cathleen Sosopi.

ii

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA:
ABB:
ADSP:
CAS:
CDT:
CEMP:

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Activity Based Budgeting
Agricultural Development Support Program
Country Assistance Strategy
Cotton Development Trust
Consolidated Environmental Management
Plans
CPs:
Cooperating Partners
DANIDA: Danish International Development Agency
Development
DFID:
Department for International Development
DTIS:
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
ECZ:
Environmental Council of Zambia
EDRP:
Emergency Drought Recovery Project
EITI:
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative
EMGCI:
Economic Management and Growth
Credit
ESW:
Economic and Sector Work
EU:
European Union
FNDP:
Fifth National Development Plan
FSP:
Fertilizer Support Program
GDLN:
Global Development Learning Network
GDP:
Growth Domestic Product
GEF:
Global Environment Facility
GTZ:
German Technical Cooperation
HIPC:
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
HR:
Human Resource
IAES:
Increased Access to Electricity
Servicies
ICA:
Investment Climate Assessment
ICR:
Implementation Completion Report
IDA:
International Development Association
IFAD:
International Fund for Agricultural
Development
IFC:
International Finance Corporation
IFMIS:
Integrated Financial Management Information
Systems
IMF:
International Monetary Fund
IRS:
Indoor Residual Spraying
ISR:
Implementation Status Report
JASZ:
Joint Assistance Strategy for Zambia
JICA:
Japan International Cooperation Agency
LCMS:
Living Conditions Monitoring Survey
LWSC :
Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company
MACEPA: Malaria Control and Evaluation Partnerships
in Africa
MDGs:
Millennium Development Goals
MDRI:
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
MDTF:
Multi Donor Trust Fund
MIGA:
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MoE:
Ministry of Education
MoFNP:
Ministry of Finance and National
Planning
MoU:
Memorandum of Understanding
MTEF:
Medium Term Expenditure Framework

MTENR:

Ministry of Tourism, Environment and
Natural Resources
NRFA:
National Road Fund Agency
NP:
National Park
OAG:
Office of the Auditor General
OASNTC: Open Africa South North Tourism
Corridor
OECD:
Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development
OPRC:
Operational Procurement Review
Committee
OVC:
Orphans and Vulnerable Children
PAF:
Performance Assessment Framework
PEFA:
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability Assessment
PEMFAR: Public Expenditure Management &
Financial Accountability Review
PER:
Public Expenditure Review
PFM:
Public Financial Management
PMEC:
Payroll Management and Establishment
Control
PPI AF:
Public Private Infrastructure Advisory
Fund
PSPF:
Public Service Pension Fund
PVA:
Poverty & Vulnerability Assessment
RDA:
Road Development Agency
ROADSIP: Road Sector Investment Program
RSZ:
Railway Systems of Zambia
SAG:
Sector Advisory Groups
SEED:
Support for Economic Expansion and
Diversification
SIDA:
Swedish International Development
Agency
SOE:
State owned enterprises
SNDP
Sixth National Development Plan
SWAP:
Sector Wide Approach
TEVET:
Technical Education Vocational
TF:
Trust Fund
USAID:
United States Agency for International
WB:
World Bank
WSPIP:
Water Sector Performance
Improvement Project
WWF:
World Wildlife Fund for Nature
ZANACO: Zambia National Commercial Bank
ZANARA: Zambia National Response to
HIV/AIDS
ZAWA:
Zambia Wildlife Authority
ZCCM:
Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines
ZESCO:
Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation
ZNTB:
Zambia National Tender Board
ZPA:
Zambia Privatization Agency
ZPPA:
Zambia Public Procurement Authority
ZRA:
Zambia Revenue Authority
ZRL:
Zambia Railways

iii

Table of Contents
I.
II.

III.
IV.
V.

VI.
VII.

INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1
PROGRESS TOWARDS CAS OUTCOMES .................................................................... 2
A.
Block I: Macroeconomic and Expenditure Management ......................................... 2
B.
Block II: Institutional Capacity Enhancement .......................................................... 3
C.
Block III: Infrastructure Development...................................................................... 4
D.
Block IV: Social Sector Development ...................................................................... 6
CHALLENGES GOING FORWARD ............................................................................... 7
ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS PROGRAM ................................................................... 8
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND PARTNERSHIPS ................................................. 10
A.
Implementation Issues ............................................................................................ 10
B.
Partnerships ............................................................................................................. 11
IFC, MIGA and WBI ........................................................................................................ 12
RISKS AND MITIGATION............................................................................................. 14

Annexes
Annex Table 1: Zambia: Key Macroeconomic Results during CAS Period ................................ 16
Annex Table 2: Zambia: Social Sector Results During the CAS Period ...................................... 17
Annex Table 3: CAS Progress Report – Results Framework ....................................................... 18
Annex Table 4: Updated and Revised CAS Indicators ................................................................. 28
Annex Table 5: Comparison of Indicative and Actual Bank Program (Lending and Non
Lending) ........................................................................................................................................ 30
Annex Table 6: Global Programs and Bilateral Grants Under Implementation ........................... 31
As of October 12, 2011 ................................................................................................................. 33
As of October 2011 ....................................................................................................................... 34
Annex Table 9B: IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio ................................................................... 35
Annex Table 10: Zambia at a Glance ........................................................................................... 36
Annex Table 11: Map of Zambia ................................................................................................. 39

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) assesses the implementation of
the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Zambia1. The FY2008-11 CAS is being
implemented through a multi-sectoral program of assistance, which is closely aligned with the
government‟s development objectives identified in Zambia‟s Fifth National Development Plan (FNDP),
which covered the period 2006-10 and the Sixth National Development Plan (SNDP), which was
launched by Government in February 2011 and covers the period 2011-15. To ensure consistency with
Government‟s development objectives, the FY2008-11 CAS was organized around four overlapping
areas: (i) macroeconomic and expenditure management; (ii) institutional capacity enhancement; (iii)
infrastructure development; and (iv) social sector development. Supporting good governance is a theme
that runs across the CAS, with extensive political economy diagnostics informing the Bank‟s dialogue
with the authorities and governance related initiatives mainstreamed across the Bank‟s entire portfolio in
the country. Within the broader program of support, the CAS gives special emphasis to two areas:
improved transparency and management of fiscal resources, with particular emphasis on revenues
mobilized from the copper sector; and increased competitiveness, both through reforms in the policy
environment and targeted investments to bridge the infrastructure gap in order to increase employment
opportunities for the population through improved connectivity and integration.
2.
This CAS Progress Report was prepared at a time when Zambia was getting ready for
national elections, which has since taken place on September 20, 2011, with the opposition Patriotic
Front (PF) leader, Mr Michael Sata, winning the presidential election, after 20 years of rule by the
Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD). Therefore, it provides an occasion to anticipate
opportunities in the post election period to define a new path forward, that will result in a step change in
the Bank‟s engagement with Zambia, especially since its GNI per capita has reached US$1,070 and the
country has just joined the ranks of lower middle-income economies. With its emphasis on helping
Zambia improve competitiveness, the mainstreaming of the governance agenda and the innovative use of
political economy diagnostics to facilitate policy change, the FY2008-11 Zambia CAS anticipated many
elements of the World Bank‟s new Africa Strategy, as was discussed by the Board on March, 1, 20112.
3.
The CAS Progress Report is also prepared at a time when the external environment
confronting Zambia is favorable. The international price of copper, Zambia‟s main export, remains high
and, with the right mining tax regime and tax administration, can provide the country with vital financial
resources to address its infrastructure deficit. Moreover, the rapid global increase in food prices presents a
unique opportunity for Zambia to take advantage of its assets, in particular the abundance of fertile land,
vast water resources, and a long history of political stability, to significantly accelerate the pace at which
it creates jobs and prosperity for its citizens, especially those in rural areas that have not benefited
sufficiently from recent economic growth, as discussed below.
4.
This CASPR reports on progress toward CAS outcomes, identifies challenges and updates the
risk framework. It recommends extending the current CAS period to the end of calendar year 2012,
which should pave the way for engaging the next Government and other stakeholders in the
preparation of a new CAS. It concludes that while the objectives of the CAS, and indeed the strategy

1

Implementation of the Bank‟s program was impacted by the death of President Mwanawasa in FY09 and the period of national
elections that followed, resulting in several tasks, especially lending operations, slipping into the following year and having a
cascading effect. As a result, the mid-term evaluation of the CAS was also deferred.
2

Africa‟s Future and the World Bank‟s Support to it. World Bank, March 2011.

1

itself, remain relevant and consistent with Government‟s development priorities, policies that presently
limit Zambia‟s competitiveness, widen the rural-urban divide, and hence the ability of the economy to
create much needed productive employment, should take center stage in the Bank‟s dialogue with the
authorities and become the focus of a more ambitious World Bank supported program in the future.

II.

PROGRESS TOWARDS CAS OUTCOMES

5.
While many challenges remain, notably the continued high rates of poverty notwithstanding
good growth outcomes, and are discussed in Section III, progress towards CAS outcomes has
generally been encouraging. There have been improvements in the overall macroeconomic environment
as well as in some sectoral policies, which have contributed to Zambia‟s improved ranking in the 2011
Doing Business indicators. The Results Matrix (Annex Table 3) provides a detailed assessment of
progress made to date towards the achievement of CAS outcomes and milestones. The following sections
summarize progress made across the four major CAS building blocks.
A.

Block I: Macroeconomic and Expenditure Management

6.
The CAS outcome for this component states that over the CAS period, the macroeconomic
environment and expenditure management will be stable and support the growth and
diversification of the economy. Zambia indeed has enjoyed a period of rapid economic growth during
the CAS period, and has just moved from a „low income‟ country category to a 'lower middle income‟
country category, with a GNI per capita of US$1,070 for Calendar Year 2010 data3. Zambia‟s economic
growth, which averaged 5 percent annually since 2000, picked up pace and grew in excess of 6 percent
annually during the past three years, a remarkable achievement especially in light of the global financial
crisis. Revised estimates indicate that the economy grew by 7.6 percent in 2010, driven by high
international copper prices, a bumper maize harvest, and a boom in the construction sector and is
expected to sustain the same level in 2011.
7.
Inflation has fallen to single digits. After a peak level of about 16.6 percent at the end of 2008,
due to high food and fuel prices, inflation fell to 9.9 percent in 2009 and further to 7.9 percent in
December 2010 (Annex Table 1). This downward trend is due in part to rapid reductions in food prices,
following the bumper crop harvests in 2009 and 2010 (food price inflation went down to 4.4 percent in
December 2010, from 8 percent in 2009 and 20.5 percent in 2008); and also due to the appreciation of the
kwacha. Inflation remained low in the 12-month period ending in August 2011 at 8.3 percent.
8.
Zambia’s external position has improved as the flexible exchange rate regime has allowed the
economy to adjust to external shocks. The flexible exchange rate has allowed currency values to
mitigate sharp changes in copper prices, while enabling interventions in the domestic foreign-exchange
market to address excess volatility. The current account deficit (including grants) is estimated to have
narrowed to about 2 percent of GDP in 2010 from 3.2 percent in 2009, as a result of strong copper
exports, thus keeping the trade balance in surplus for the last five years. International reserves increased
from US$500 million - US$1 billion during 2005 - 2008, to more than US$2 billion in 2010, sufficient to
finance about four months of imports. Public sector external debt remains moderate following extensive
debt relief in 2005-2006 and stood at about 10 percent of GDP in 2010. Zambia was recently awarded a
credit rating of B+ by Fitch and by Standard and Poor‟s on its long-term public external debt. This is four
notches below investment-grade and similar to the ratings for Ghana, Kenya and Angola.

3

Lower Middle Income Countries have GNI per capita of US$1,006- US$3,975 for Calendar Year 2010 data.

2

9.
Fiscal revenues, excluding grants, rose to 17.9 percent of GDP in 2010, up from 16 percent in
2009, but down from 18.6 percent in 2008. Relative to GDP, collections of income and value added
taxes are estimated to have increased in 2010 compared to the two previous years. Mining taxes have also
risen to about 2.3 percent of GDP in 2010, up from only 1 percent in 2009, following the collection of tax
arrears and an increase in tax collections from the mining sector. In order to improve macroeconomic
management, Government has instilled greater fiscal discipline in expenditure management, adopted a
Medium Term Expenditure Framework as the basis for forward looking and policy-based fiscal planning,
and improved Parliamentary oversight of the budget through the establishment of the Public Accounts
Committee, which is chaired by an opposition political party. Audits of mining companies have started in
order to ensure that mining companies pay what should be paid under existing legislation. The review of
the legislation on public expenditure management is on track: the Public Procurement Act was enacted in
2008, while the Accountants Act, the Loans Guarantees Act, and Public Finance Act are in draft form.
10. The World Bank’s support over the CAS period has focused on helping Zambia better
manage its financial resources in order to allow fiscal policy to support the inclusive growth
agenda. The Bank‟s interventions have been channelled through annual budget support operations and
have centred on harmonized policy dialogue around the Performance Assessment Framework (PAF)
agreed with the government and cooperating partners (CPs). The interventions have focused on improving
public sector performance, including public financial management, and supporting broad-based growth by
improving efficiency in the energy sector and reducing cost of doing business. In 2010, the Bank,
working in close partnership with Government and other cooperating partners contributed to the ongoing
macroeconomic dialogue and fiscal and financial management by preparing a comprehensive Public
Expenditure Review (PER) covering a wide range of issues from resource mobilization, the effects of a
growing mining sector, the budget process, public investment management, to sectoral issues dealing with
the agriculture, roads and water sectors, and provided detailed policy recommendations to improve the
quality and the effectiveness of public spending across sectors.
B.

Block II: Institutional Capacity Enhancement

11. The CAS outcome for this component emphasizes the need for strengthened public
management, improved business environment and agricultural productivity. There has been limited
progress towards meeting these objectives. The World Bank is a lead donor for the multi-donor supported
Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability (PEMFA) program. The program has had
mixed results because the objectives of several components of the program have not been fully achieved
and have been delivered later than envisaged. The program has facilitated the installation of the Integrated
Financial Management Information Systems (IFMIS) in the Ministry of Finance and National Planning
and in seven other Ministries/Departments. IFMIS coverage is intended to expand to 40 Government
entities by 2013. The initial implementation of IFMIS was delayed significantly due to challenges which
are now being addressed by the government such as poor implementation of a change management
strategy, challenges in contract management with the supplier, and the constant staff changes at project
management level.
12. It is too early to determine the impact of these actions on Zambia’s PFM indicators. However,
the results of the Public Expenditure Review show that significant weaknesses exist in budget preparation
and execution: variances across individual budget heads continue to be significant (averaging 15 percent);
the accessibility of budget information to the wider public remains limited; internal payroll controls need
to be strengthened; and delays in updating personnel records and in implementing recommendations by
the Auditor-General and PAC persist. Full implementation of IFMIS remains critical in order to process
and produce timely financial information.

3

13. While a new Public Procurement Act was approved in October 2008, its actual
implementation has been slow in taking off. There are lingering concerns about the ability of the
Zambia Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA) to transform itself into a procurement regulator and a
recent decision taken by Government further extends by two years the period over which such
transformation will take place. Encouragingly, audit coverage has increased considerably and the Office
of the Auditor General (OAG) is now present in all nine provinces and 36 (out of 72) districts and there is
a minimum of one provincial officer per province in place. The percentage of entities covered by annual
audit has increased significantly in recent years to about 80% in 2010. The OAG has emerged as a strong
oversight institution, and besides the usual financial audits, the OAG has recently carried out
performance, systems and forensic audits in the Ministry of Health and the Roads Development Agency.
14. The World Bank is supporting a program to improve the governance and transparency of the
natural resources. To contribute to the conservation of biodiversity and tourism development, the Bank
is assisting Zambia through a variety of instruments. The flagship program supports capacity building and
infrastructure development in the Kafue National Park, which is one of the largest in the world and
features a world-class wildlife tourism experience. While there are early indications of a recovery in
wildlife and tourism revenues have increased, weak coordination between the Zambia Wildlife Authority
(ZAWA) and the Ministry of Tourism, Environment, and Natural Resources (MTENR), insufficient
budgetary allocations to the sector, and slow progress in addressing key policy constraints in the forest
and in the wildlife sectors continue to impede progress in the sector.
15. To improve transparency and accountability in the management of mining sector revenues,
the Bank has supported the government with the implementation of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI). Zambia became an EITI candidate country in May 2009 and is working
to become an EITI compliant country at the end of 2011. The Zambia EITI council comprising 15
members drawn from government, mining companies and civil society was formed in 2009, supported by
a secretariat. The first EITI Revenue Reconciliation Report was published in February 2011 and the EITI
validation process is underway. The Bank has supported the development of a mining cadastre, which is
operational, but full functionality and transparency, as well as supportive institutional arrangements, are
still under development. The Bank is also supporting the revisions of the Mining and Minerals Act, which
is expected to result in amendments after the elections. Both initiatives are supported by the Support to
Economic Expansion Diversification (SEED) project.
16. With support from both the Bank and IFC, there has been good progress towards improving
the business environment. Zambia‟s Doing Business Rank improved from 116 in 2008 to 76 in 2011,
with the country being recognized as among the top 10 reformers globally in 2011, reflecting improved
business regulation in areas such as starting a business, trading across borders and enforcing contracts. In
the financial sector, financial intermediation is on the rise, regulatory and supervisory frameworks have
been strengthened considerably, financial sector infrastructure has improved, non-performing loans have
fallen, and credit to private sector has increased. The Bank of Zambia, with technical support from the
World Bank, completed the preparation of the second phase of the Financial Sector Development Plan
(FSDP) II in early 2010. The FSDP II is both a vision statement and a comprehensive financial sector
development strategy designed to address the current weaknesses of the financial system. FSDP II aims to
improve the business environment by reducing the impediments of limited and costly access to finance,
and is being supported by a consortium of donors.
C.

Block III: Infrastructure Development

17. The CAS outcome for this component targeted improvements in roads, bridges, access to
water, electricity services and irrigation systems. There has been progress in improving the transport

4

infrastructure, but the road sector faces challenges with regard to governance issues. Through the Road
Rehabilitation and Maintenance Program (RRMP I) the Bank has financed several activities in the
transport sector. Priority has been given to the construction/rehabilitation of all weather accessible river
crossings following the floods in 2006-2007, which caused severe damage to river crossings throughout
Zambia and negatively affected agricultural growth, reduced access to social services and markets by
local communities, constrained access to National Parks, and reduced tourism. The Bank also provided
analytical support by assisting the government in conducting a technical and financial review to address
issues of capacity to monitor and manage the concession to Railway Systems of Zambia (RSZ). The final
report was submitted in August 2010, with recommendations on the way forward, including a proposed
memorandum of understanding between government and RSZ.
18. Implementation of programs in the roads sector was adversely impacted when the Office of
the Auditor General (OAG) identified numerous instances of financial irregularity and corruption
in the roads sectors in 2009, which resulted in cooperating partners temporarily suspending the
preparation of new projects in the sector. To address the issues raised by the OAG, Government has
responded expeditiously and has made good progress in developing and implementing a governance
action plan in the sector, which included changes in the Board and Management of the Road
Development Agency (RDA) and the National Road Fund Agency (NRFA).
19. Progress towards increasing access to safe water has been good, but challenges remain. Under
the World Bank supported Water Sector Performance Improvement Project (WSPIP), Lusaka Water and
Sewerage Company (LWSC) has constructed new water kiosks in peri-urban areas. By April 2011, 99
kiosks were constructed or rehabilitated in 12 areas, with 56 currently supplying water. However,
significant effort will be needed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) target for water
and sanitation, among others.
20. Energy sector indicators are on track, but access to energy remains low. According to ZESCO
data, electricity access rate was only about 22 percent as of May 2010. The major energy tariff increases
announced by Government over the 2008-2010 period have improved the financial position of ZESCO
and the financial viability of the sector, resulting in significant amounts of investment from China and
India in the sector, which will almost double total generation capacity by 2016. The implementation of the
World Bank supported Increased Access to Electricity Services (IAES) Project has, however, been slower
than expected due to management changes at ZESCO and long lead times needed for procurement.
21. Over the past decade, Zambia’s agriculture sector has performed poorly as a result of the
policies in the sector. The sector grew only at about 1 percent per annum, and is characterized by high
cost of production resulting in low levels of competitiveness. During the CAS period there was a notable
increase in government expenditures on the provision of a fertilizer subsidy program that is not well
targeted4 and for resources allocated to the Food Reserve Agency for the purchase of maize at prices
significantly higher than the market price. Buoyed mostly by good rainfall and the subsidy, maize
production reached record levels of 2.8 million tons in 2010, and an expected 3 million tons in 2011.
22. The World Bank is heavily engaged in the agriculture sector in Zambia. In addition to
analytical work that addresses policy issues in the agriculture sector, the Bank has supported interventions
that provide farmers with improved infrastructure, access to finance, and interventions aimed at
improving productivity. The Agriculture Development and Support Project (ADSP), implemented by the

4

Zambia: Impact Assessment of the Fertilizer Support Program. World Bank, June 9, 2010.

5

Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, is designed to strengthen smallholder access to markets and to
increase competitiveness of agricultural commodities. The project focuses on several high potential
agricultural areas and has adopted a value chain approach to improve operating efficiency and increase
value added. Increased agricultural productivity and diversification will get a boost through the recently
approved US$115 million Irrigation Development and Support Project, which targets an estimated 70,000
beneficiaries and will irrigate 10,000 hectares of land held by smallholders, including emergent farmers.
23. Climate change and variability are becoming increasingly important issues in Zambia. Over
the last three decades, the frequency of droughts and floods has increased, costing Zambia an estimated
loss of economic growth equivalent to 0.4 percent annually. In the absence of adaptation, rainfall
variability alone could reduce GDP growth by 0.9 percentage points over the next decade5. Floods are
affecting increasingly larger areas. In addition to climate variability, climate change is also expected to
have significant impacts: average temperatures are expected to increase between 1.2 and 3.40 C by 2060.
Changes in average precipitation may vary by region, with Northern Zambia experiencing higher rainfall,
and central and western Zambia lower rainfall (GoZ). Overall, these impacts could bring widespread crop
failure, outbreaks of human and animal diseases, dislocation of human populations, destruction of assets
and infrastructure, and shorter growing seasons for key crops. Recognizing these vulnerabilities, the
Government of Zambia has mainstreamed climate change comprehensively into the Sixth National
Development Plan. Zambia qualifies for a large number of global climate funds and it will be critically
important that these initiatives be well coordinated. The World Bank has taken a lead role in assisting
Zambia‟s national program through the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR). In June 2010,
Zambia became the first country worldwide to activate Phase I of the PPCR (a US$1.5 million grant),
under the Ministry of Finance and National Planning. The government is also in the process of
establishing the institutional framework for a new comprehensive Climate Change Program.
D.

Block IV: Social Sector Development

24. The CAS outcome for this component emphasizes improved health programming and
strengthened skills and education. There is progress towards improving health programming, although
results in the sector have been adversely impacted by large scale misappropriation of resources that
resulted in disciplinary action against several officials from the Ministry of Health and substantial
remedial actions being implemented to improve governance in the sector. The Malaria Booster Program
(IDA credit and Russian Trust Fund) has made a significant contribution to the increased coverage of key
malaria prevention activities that took place between 2006 and 2010: (i) the percentage of children under
5 years of age who slept under an insecticide treated bed net increased from 24 to 70 percent; (ii) the
percentage of pregnant women who took 2+ doses of intermittent presumptive treatment (IPT) for
malaria increased from 59 to 70 percent; and (iii) the percentage of households that have at least one
insecticide treated net (ITN) increased from 38 to 64 percent. As a result of these interventions, the annual
number of malaria deaths decreased by at least 50 percent during the period 2008-2010. Additional
financing for the Malaria Booster Program is financing the purchase of bed nets in close collaboration
with the UN, ALMA, and other cooperating partners. The essential drugs public pilots program,
supported by the Bank, has led to dramatic increase in the availability of drugs in rural areas, after twelve
months of implementation. The government has decided to scale-up the program and it is estimated that
the improvement in the availability of ACTs will result in a 21 percent reduction in under-five child
deaths due to malaria. The Bank has also supported the government to pilot innovative approaches to

5

World Bank (2009). Managing Zambia‟s Water for Sustainable Growth and Poverty Reduction. A Country Water Assistance
Strategy for Zambia. June 2009 and background papers and World Bank (2011). Climate Resiliency- Adaptation to Climate
Change in Zambia (draft report). WB PPCR Climate Change Country Profile.

6

improve safe access to drugs through the private sector in underserved areas by piloting a price subsidy of
ACTs and RDTs to accredited private sector drug sellers in 4 districts in the country.
25. Although not a sector that the Bank is active in Zambia, some progress has been made
regarding education indicators. Zambia has attained gender parity in primary education and there have
been encouraging recent increases in the budgetary allocation for the sector. However, there are serious
quality issues that need to be addressed and the Bank has proposed analytical work and need for
investment in post-basic education, in particular technical and vocational education and training.

III.

CHALLENGES GOING FORWARD

26. Growth has not been accompanied by significant poverty reduction. Despite the acceleration in
the rate of growth and improvements in the macroeconomic environment, discussed above, this has not
resulted in a notable decline in poverty levels. The overall levels of poverty were estimated at 59 percent
according to the 2006 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (LCMS) and preliminary estimates of the
2010 LCMS indicate that poverty levels have remained largely unchanged at this level, implying that the
pattern of growth in Zambia, driven largely by the mining sector, has not been pro-poor. While analysis is
presently underway to update poverty and inequality indicators, the income divide remains large, with the
Gini coefficient estimated at 52.6 in 2006, the last year for which this indicator is available.
27. Growth has not generated sufficient employment. Preliminary numbers from the 2010 Labor
Force Survey suggest that formal employment has shrunk, from 12% of the labor force in 2005 to 10%
with the vast majority working in low-productive, owner-operated, informal “enterprises”. Of the 4.1
million Zambians who are employed, the vast majority work for informal enterprises.6 Most of these
informal microenterprises are located in rural areas (81 percent) and operate in agriculture production (70
percent) or wholesale and retail trade (21 percent). Increasing wealth in rural areas depends on increasing
and sustaining the productivity of rural (mostly household-) based businesses – an outcome that has
proved challenging.7 Low productivity, a dualistic economy, and a lack of competition limit the impact of
macro-economic growth on poverty reduction in rural areas. While large enterprises drive the economy,
they account for only 7 percent of employment. In addition, only few industries are competitive, even
regionally, with poor productivity undermining their ability to generate income and jobs. Productivity is
particularly low in rural areas, constrained by a lack of access to infrastructure (energy, transport, water &
ICT), education and finance. Results of the 2008 Investment Climate Assessment indicate that female
owned firms are even less productive as they tend to operate in low productivity sectors, have lower
levels of capital per worker, are smaller in size and face additional constraints in terms of accessing credit
and land. Meanwhile, a small number of large companies capture a disproportionate share of the market,
relative to their productivity, and low levels of competition persist in many industries.
28. Increased competitiveness and competition is essential if Zambia is to create jobs. Zambia
needs to improve substantially on broader measures of competitiveness and the quality of its business
enabling environment in order to enable the private sector to create jobs. On the World Economic
Forum‟s Global Competitiveness Index 2010-11, Zambia is only ranked 115 out of 139 countries and
progress with reforms in areas such as access to and cost of finance, competition policy, infrastructure and
labor is much needed. Less than a third of the population has access to finance, which remains a challenge
together with the continued high cost of borrowing. Labor regulations (e.g. high severance requirements)

6
7

Labor Force Surveys from 2005 and 2010.
Clarke, et al, „The Profile and Productivity of Zambian Businesses – Based on the Zambia Business Survey‟ (June 2010).

7

restrict labor market flexibility, impede formal employment and restrict the growth of the private sector 8.
In addition there is a significant gap between the practical vocational skills demanded by the private
sector and those produced by the educational system9.
29. The policy environment in the agriculture sector warrants particular attention. For Zambia to
take advantage of recent global developments, increase food exports and reduce rural poverty,
productivity in the agriculture sector needs to increase and costs reduced. Government‟s policy of
encouraging purchases of maize by the Food Reserve Agency at prices that are above import parity
imposes a significant cost on the treasury and inhibits exports, while at the same time contributing to high
domestic maize prices for the poor, many of whom are net purchasers of maize. The fertilizer subsidy
imposes a significant amount of additional cost, is not effectively targeted, and diverts expenditures in the
agriculture sector away from much needed investments in rural roads, irrigation, research and extension.
The land tenure system, which limits individual title to land, constrains the ability of small farmers to
access finance. This constraint is particularly acute for women, who comprise 65 percent of the rural
population and 85 percent of the total small-holder labor force for agriculture production. The land tenure
system, which limits individual title to land, constrains the ability of small farmers to access finance and
adversely impacts their willingness to invest in the sector10.
30. Along with the modest reduction in overall poverty, social indicators have improved at an
uneven pace. Zambia‟s rank in the UN Human Development Index is 150 out of 169 in 2010. There
have been advancements in education indicators, including rising primary and secondary school
enrolments (Annex Table 2) and marginal improvements in the youth literacy rate, although challenges
remain, such as overcrowded classrooms, limited access to education in rural areas and the poor quality of
education. The national HIV prevalence rate has remained high at about 14 percent, and is
disproportionately high among young women. Zambia needs to do more to make progress towards
attaining MDGs. The targets on hunger, universal primary education, gender equality, HIV/AIDS and
malaria are likely to be achieved by 2015. However, significant effort will be needed to achieve the
targets for maternal mortality, water and sanitation, child mortality, extreme poverty and environmental
sustainability11. The maternal mortality ratio of 591 per 100,000 live births implies that eight women die
each day from pregnancy related complications. The recent governance issues in the health sector has
complicated the achievement of health-related MDGs.

IV.

ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS PROGRAM

31. The key objectives of the FY08-11 CAS remain broadly relevant for Zambia and are closely
aligned with Zambia’s Sixth National Development Plan (SNDP, 2011-15). The SNDP restates the
government‟s commitment to eradicate poverty and pays particular emphasis for the need to address rural
poverty by improving competitiveness and focusing on job creation. As illustrated in Annex Table 5, the
emphasis on competitiveness, job creation and improved governance are central to the Bank‟s program in
Zambia and, as mentioned earlier, fully consistent with the Bank‟s new Africa strategy.
32.

Although growth and macroeconomic results have been commendable there has been slow

8

Severance pay for redundancy dismissal (weeks of Salary) in Zambia is 46.2 weeks compared to Rwanda‟s 8.7; Senegal‟s
10.5, South Africa‟s 5.3, Mauritius‟ 6.3: Source: Doing Business 2011:101-104
9
For a fuller discussion of these issues see „More Jobs and Prosperity in Zambia: What would it Take?‟ World Bank, April 2011.
10
This constraint is particularly acute for women, who comprise 65 percent of the rural population and 85 percent of
smallholders.
11
For a comprehensive analysis of the status of MDGs in Zambia see „Zambia: Millennium Development Goals Progress Report
2011‟ Ministry of Finance and National Planning and UNDP, 2011.

8

progress in translating economic growth into job creation and poverty reduction; thus a step
change in the Bank’s program might be necessary and will be the focus of the new Country
Assistance Strategy for Zambia that will be prepared. The following section discusses how the Bank‟s
program will be adjusted and re-prioritized to pave the way for the change.
33. Going forward, the Bank will deepen its AAA program with a focus on poverty. As discussed
above and as the preliminary results of the 2010 LCMS demonstrate, the pattern of mining sector led
growth in Zambia has not generated sufficient employment and has therefore had limited impact in
making a dent in poverty levels. When benchmarked against other countries, labor productivity of
Zambian firms is substantially lower, whereas unit labor costs are often higher, rendering Zambian firms
uncompetitive in regional and global markets, and limiting their ability to generate much needed jobs.
Additional, high levels of under nutrition are symptomatic of widespread poverty in the country. The
nutrition status of children in Zambia has continued to deteriorate, with the latest Demographic and
Health survey indicating chronic malnutrition at 43 percent; underweight children at 14 percent and
wasting at 5 percent – all contributing to lower levels of productivity and livelihood. It is proposed that
these issues take center stage in the Bank‟s dialogue with Government. The analytical foundations for this
dialogue have been established through the recently completed diagnostic work on the Jobs and
Prosperity initiative. This analysis will be further deepened and developed through the preparation of a
comprehensive Poverty Assessment, which will analyze shifts in poverty and inequality in Zambia in
recent years and include background papers exploring the relationship between economic growth, poverty
and inequality; labor market, employment and productivity; gender dimensions of poverty; and the impact
of public policy, including social protection programs, on poverty. This analysis and the subsequent
dialogue with the new Government will identify key policies and investments that the Bank will support
through the new CAS.
34. In recent years, the Bank has actively sought to engage with various stakeholders in the
preparation and dissemination of the economic and sector work that it conducts. The recent
experience of the Jobs and Prosperity Report and the Public Expenditure Review shows that early
engagement of different stakeholders in the design of the issues to be tackled, as well as in the
development of the economic work, increases significantly the policy impact by producing “champions”
in the government or in the private sector, or, better yet, in both. The Bank intends to build on this
experience and deepen this engagement (see additional discussion on Partnerships below) especially since
the impact of analytical work is increased when more efforts are put into an adequate dissemination
strategy including not only intensive discussions with government, but also incorporating civil society,
and the private sector. Clear and well focused policy messages, following a well managed process of
discussions, have shown to have a higher effect, when they are assumed by other stakeholders, beyond the
World Bank and other Cooperating Partners.
35. Greater emphasis will be placed to support and partner with Government to engage its
citizens by supporting the demand side for good governance. Supporting good governance for
increased development effectiveness is a central theme that is mainstreamed across the CAS. Significant
support has been provided for supply side interventions at the macro level, such as implementing IFMIS,
PEMFA, and procurement reform, and for sector specific initiatives like the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) and the Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (COST). While this
support will continue, the CAS also recognized the need to respond, on a demand driven basis, to requests
from civil society organizations seeking support for their capacity building efforts to hold Government
accountable for the provision of service delivery. Such initiatives have not really taken off so far. It is
therefore proposed that greater emphasis be placed on supporting demand for good governance through a
series of pilot initiatives whose objective would be to strengthen the links that Government has with its
citizens and improve public accountability in selected districts/sectors, complementing ongoing supply
side initiatives such as the ongoing support for Freedom of Information legislation, decentralization and

9

the technical assistance for public sector reform and selected PEMFA components.
36. Informed by political economy diagnostics, these “demand for good governance” pilots will
encompass various activities. These include supporting the development of informed journalism;
supporting information dissemination using cellular technology and community radio with the
involvement of local MPs and service providers; strengthening consumer voice in the water and sanitation
sector by assisting in the development of scorecards by water watch groups which already exist in major
towns; and mainstreaming demand side interventions across the entire World Bank Zambia portfolio
through the preparation of independent feedback reports which would be linked to the preparation of the
Implementation Status Reports as well as a comprehensive review of World Bank supported interventions
related to the demand for good governance. Sector specific interventions will include support for third
party monitoring in the roads sector and the transfer of knowledge on mining taxation issues to interested
civil society groups, which could establish a “mining watch” forum. Actively engaging in a dialogue with
rural communities and women‟s groups in Zambia will be increasingly sought through these pilots.
37. The Bank will continue to leverage its engagement to augment financial support. Zambia‟s
financing requirements are significant and can only partially be met by the country‟s annual IDA
allocation. The Bank, together with other cooperating partners, is helping build capacity within
organizations like the Zambia Revenue Authority so that an increasing share of development finance can
be generated from the country‟s own resources, especially from the mining sector, and the prospects for
this look encouraging. The Bank has been successful in leveraging scarce IDA resources and attracting
complementary financing from other cooperating partners, especially to support interventions in the roads
and energy sectors. This will continue and the Bank will explore opportunities to leverage IDA resources
including IDA regional financing, as was the case for the recently appraised Kafue-Livingstone
Transmission line project. In addition, investment lending reforms within the Bank are expected to further
energize the results focus of the Bank‟s interventions in the country. Upgrading the Bank‟s country office
in Lusaka via the placement of a Country Director will provide additional opportunity to develop
partnerships and push the broader sub-regional development agenda, which is crucial given Zambia‟s
strategic location in the region.
38. In line with the Sixth National Development Plan, adaptation to climate change will be
mainstreamed across the Bank’s portfolio. The second phase of the Pilot Program for Climate
Resilience, called Strategic Program for Climate Resilience, expected to be approved in FY13, would
amount to US$110 million, with US$60 million in grant and US$50 million in concessionary credit. The
Program involves the World Bank as well as AfDB, IFC, and a large number of cooperating partners and
NGOs. It will provide overall assistance to the government‟s Climate Change Program; invest in highly
visible climate-proof infrastructure; and pilot participatory adaptation in two sub-basins on the Zambezi
River. It builds upon the SNDP principles of decentralized planning, climate-resilient infrastructure,
sustainable agriculture, and promotion of ICT technologies as ways to provide better climate information
to end-users, in turn strengthening early warning systems in highly vulnerable areas.

V.

IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND PARTNERSHIPS
A.

Implementation Issues

39. Total external assistance to Zambia annually averages at about 25 percent of the budget or
about 6 percent of GDP. The World Bank accounts for about 10 percent of the assistance and thus the
financial support provided to Zambia is relatively small. As of October 2011, IDA‟s net commitments to
Zambia totaled about US$520 million for nine active projects and two Global Environment Facilities
(GEFs), in addition to a budget support series. These projects support programs in infrastructure,
environment, agriculture, finance and private sector development, public sector, and human development.

10

The Bank‟s lending program is dominated by infrastructure which accounts for about half of the portfolio,
compared to slightly less than 40 percent at the commencement of the CAS period. The Bank‟s FY11
lending program was about US$210 million, which is the highest it has been in the post HIPC/MDRI
period and significantly above the country‟s annual IDA allocation. The additional financing has been
made possible by accessing resources under the Crisis Response Window and the special malaria facility.
The IDA 15 indicative allocation for Zambia was SDR174 million (about US $264 million).
40. Portfolio quality has been impacted by fiduciary issues. Steady improvements in auditing
uncovered major misappropriation of resources in the health and roads sector, thanks to a proficient
Office of the Auditor General. These findings, supplemented by the in-depth reviews conducted by the
Bank‟s teams resulted in Government having to reimburse ineligible expenditures in both sectors. Good
progress has been made in developing governance action plans in these sectors and these are being closely
monitored, in close coordination with cooperation partners. Disbursement rates which were adversely
impacted by the governance issues in the roads and health sectors, are presently estimated at about 10
percent; they remain low but are expected to pick up due to the implementation of the governance action
plans in these sectors. Implementation remains a challenge and the performance of most of the projects in
the portfolio is rated as marginally satisfactory (Annex Tables 7 and 8). Based on implementation
progress and available data, the CAS indicators have been updated (Annex Table 4)12. At a recent review
of portfolio performance, Government counterparts identified the need to increase their familiarity with
Bank supported projects and Bank procedures for procurement, financial management and disbursement
in order to improve project implementation. Government agencies find it difficult to provide adequate
supporting documents and have problems of non-compliance with stipulated rules and regulations. Delays
are also encountered as project staff are often unfamiliar with eligibility provisions of project
expenditures, resulting in protracted delays in their interactions with the Bank. There are also concerns
about the high turnover of project staff as well as multiple layers for reviewing and decision making and
the consequent delays, both within Government and the Bank.
41. Annex Table 5 summarizes the planned and actual lending and AAA program to Zambia over
the CAS period. As shown, the Bank‟s program was impacted by the death of President Mwanawasa in
FY09 and the period of national elections that followed, resulting in some tasks, especially lending
operations, slipping into the following year and having a cascading effect.
B.

Partnerships

42. Partnerships are central for the effective implementation of the World Bank’s strategy in
Zambia – partnerships with the Zambian government, other cooperating partners and with private
sector and civil society. The World Bank has developed an excellent working relationship with
Government and has played a central role in defining Government‟s engagement with its cooperating
partners. The Bank is a signatory to the Joint Assistance Strategy for Zambia (JASZ), which was prepared
in April 2007 and signed by 16 cooperating partners, including 12 bilateral and 4 multilateral agencies.
An evaluation of the JASZ, conducted by the cooperating partners in 2010, determined that the JASZ had
contributed to improvements in the alignment of programs supported by cooperating partners with
Government strategies, institutions and systems. It also found that the cooperating partners had made
considerable progress on harmonization through improved division of labor at the sector level and
increased use of joint arrangements and procedures. It observed that Zambia‟s cooperating partners had
progressed further than most other countries in the region in implementing a Division of Labor matrix,
which had helped to decongest and consolidate support in several sectors. There have also been

12

Targets were not revised at this point but are expected to progress according to implementation schedule.

11

improvements in the use of shared analysis, joint evaluations, reviews and monitoring. Areas where the
Bank has worked in very close partnership with other cooperating partners over the CAS period include
the preparation of the Public Expenditure Review, the Jobs and Prosperity Initiative, the preparation of
the Poverty Reduction Support Credit through participation in the Poverty Reduction Budget Support
(PRBS) Group and the development of the Governance Actions Plans in the health and roads sectors.
43. The JASZ review however determined that there had been insufficient progress among the
cooperating partners in the use of joint missions and pointed to several uncoordinated missions
involving especially the Ministry of Finance and National Planning. It noted that further progress
could be achieved in the division of labor through greater clarity on the distinction between lead, active
and background donors. Several “popular” sectors such as health and education were congested while
others such as housing and vocational training remained undersubscribed, often having more to do with
donor preferences rather than Zambian priorities. More progress needed to be made to ensure mutual
accountability and although a Mutual Accountability Group to monitor Government and cooperating
partner performance had been established in 2007, the general consensus among both Government and
CPs was that mutual accountability remained weak. It is intended that these challenges be addressed
during the implementation of JASZ II, which is presently under preparation and is expected to be
finalized based on the SNDP.
44. There has been increased emphasis during the CAS period to engage local media, civil society
organizations and citizens in rural areas in Zambia, which will be reinforced further. In particular,
efforts are being made to support NGOs that will implement citizen oversight/monitoring of service
delivery. NGO attempts to do so have so far not yielded significant results due to insufficient incentives
on the part of the service providers to heed them and with low overall accountability for service delivery.
The accountability mechanisms that do exist tend to be informal and inconsistently applied across sectors.
The demand-side interventions that do exist, although often well-implemented, have struggled to secure
necessary linkages with the supply-side. However, it is worth mentioning the role of the Parliament and of
a few MPs, who increasingly strive to improve public spending efficiency and find ways to increase
public accountability at the local level13. There is also active discussion underway among cooperating
partners about strategies for mainstreaming the gender agenda including increased dialogue and
coordination with a revamped Gender Forum, convened under the Gender in Development Division, and
for strengthening the women‟s movement with a view to influence the legal and policy framework and the
development of a revised national gender policy14.

VI.

IFC, MIGA and WBI

45.
IFC is increasing its investments and advisory programs in Zambia. IFC‟s five part strategy
in Zambia provides finance and technical assistance to support growth through: (1) helping improve the
investment climate; (2) infrastructure development (3) investment in power and telecommunications; (4)
diversification of the economy by increasing the competitiveness of agricultural and services sector; and
(5) increasing access to finance to underserved market segments, including MSMEs and low-income
individuals. Reflecting Zambia‟s increasing regional importance, IFC placed an investment officer in
Lusaka in 2010, collocated with the Bank. As of June 30, 2011, IFC‟s committed portfolio in Zambia
was US$51.2 million, with 2 active advisory services programs (Emergent Farmer Finance and Support
Program and SME development). Having concluded its first Zambia Investment Climate Program in

13

In this regard, Itezhi-Tezhi district in Zambia (Southern province) has been awarded several international awards for
innovative and pragmatic initiatives to improve service delivery in the health/justice and agriculture sectors.
14
Gender Sector Analysis and Mapping of Civil Society and Cooperating Partners Initiatives. UKAID and Irish Aid, April 2011.

12

December 2010, which focused on business licensing reform and Doing Business reform, IFC is
developing a successor program with an expanded focus at the request of the Zambian government.
46.
IFC launched the Zambia Emergent Farmers Program in June 2008 in partnership with
Zambia National Commercial Bank (ZANACO), Rabobank and Zambia National Farmers Union.
An example of IFC‟s programmatic approach to improving competitiveness and expanding access to
finance, this initiative is now followed up with an expansion phase. The expanded project will involve
the development of an advisory services implementation unit that will act as a platform for the provision
of advisory services to IFC agricultural investments in Zambia with the objective of enabling access to
finance and support provision to small-holder farmers. The platform will also coordinate efforts by both
private and public sectors and the donor community. US$25 million loan facility was committed in June
2010 by IFC to support ZANACO‟s increased financing for its agribusiness portfolio clients, SMEs, and
other sectors including telecom, tourism and manufacturing. IFC is working with local banks to expand
financing options and is pioneering a program to support small-holders emerging farmers to improve their
productivity and access to market. This is intended to help develop a class of farmers who would then
scale up their operations to large commercial farming in Zambia. Other recent commitments include: in
FY10, a US$9 million equity investment in a mining company to assist with further exploration work and
initiate feasibility studies; and in FY11, a $0.7 million equity investment in a greenfield microfinance
institution that will provide financial services to urban and semi-urban MSMEs and individuals.
47.
Looking forward, IFC expects to expand significantly investments and advisory programs
with the private sector in Zambia. The government has requested IFC support for the investment
climate reform agenda, especially to assist in (i) implementing the e-registry and one-stop shop; (ii)
improving the country's competitiveness in livestock, tourism and mining; and (iii) improving cross
border trade by strengthening customs policies and procedures. Scaling up agribusiness in Zambia by
establishing long-term partnerships with key agribusiness companies and financial institutions remains a
priority and IFC will continue to engage in this sector through wholesaling operations with bank and
other intermediaries who can better address the needs of cooperatives and subsidence farmers. Related
initiatives include promoting sustainable development while stimulating increased and productive
utilization of land; supporting south-south investments through strong agribusiness players to establish
operations that could potentially stimulate other investments in the region; and supporting the food supply
and value chain.
48. MIGA (Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency) for the first time issued guarantees for
$18.64 million in support of investments in the manufacturing and agribusiness sectors in Zambia
during FY11.
49. WBI continued to be active in Zambia the CAS Period. Following the Africa Regional
Development Debate in April 2010 on “How to Achieve Competitiveness”, WBI's Growth and
Competitiveness (WBIGC) Practice has been working with Government and the Bank‟s Zambia team to
develop a series of initiatives aimed at enhancing competitiveness and diversifying the economy in the
areas of light manufacturing, agro-processing, dairy and meat processing. In November 2010, WBI
facilitated the participation of a high level delegation from Zambia to the WBI-organized Conference on
Strengthening Responsible Business & Good Governance in Africa in Brussels, where the Zambian
delegation were able to exchange their experience with other participants as well as network and establish
links with large multinational corporations. WBI also initiated a series of South-South Knowledge
exchanges by identifying relevant international experiences and distilling lessons that may be applicable
to the Zambian case. In December 2010, for instance, a former Minister of Public Works discussed the
Chilean experience with their copper industry. During the session, participants explored how the copper
sector fits within the broader development strategy, how it could be leveraged to promote diversification
and competitiveness in the rest of the economy, and the prospects for value-addition in the copper sector.

13

VII.

RISKS AND MITIGATION

50. The risks highlighted in the FY2008-2011 CAS remain valid, and mitigation efforts continue
to be supported by the Bank’s program:
 Political Risk. There is uncertainty about how the newly elected Government will address issues
such as the significant subsidies in the agriculture sector; mobilizing additional revenues from
the mining sector; land administration reform; reform of the labor market; and continued reforms
in the telecommunications and energy sectors. Reforms in these sectors are critical as structural
constraints in these areas are contributing to the continued high cost of doing business and are
adversely impacting the productivity and competitiveness of the economy. The Bank is ramping
up its ongoing dialogue with the new Government and it has been providing technical assistance
to Government, together with other cooperating partners, in these areas.


Implementation Capacity Risk. One of the most significant risks confronting the sustainability
and deepening of the reform process in Zambia is that of limited implementation capacity, which
adversely impacts Government programs across the board. Large capacity gaps are particularly
noticeable in the area of public sector reform, as evidenced by significant delays in implementing
the new pay policy, weak public finance management, delays in implementing the Integrated
Financial Management System (IFMIS) and the broader PEMFA program. At the same time,
sustained technical assistance support provided by cooperating partners has seen the emergence
of some centers of excellence, such as the Office of the Auditor General, which has done a
commendable job in identifying poor financial management and corruption, especially in the
health and roads sectors. To mitigate this risk the Bank, in collaboration with other CPs, will
continue to support capacity building within Government through the Public Sector Reform
Program and PEMFA, which aims at improving the analytical and implementation capacity
within the government. The Bank will also provide hand holding support to project teams,
especially where country financial management systems are being used.

 Governance risk. The instances of corruption uncovered by the Office of the Auditor General
(OAG) in the health and roads sectors and the findings of the in-depth reviews conducted by the
Bank have highlighted the need for improved procurement, financial management, internal audit
and generally improved governance. Government has responded to the finding of the OAG by
disciplining the officials in the health and roads sectors and by developing governance action
plans in the impacted sectors, which are being regularly monitored by the Bank and other
cooperating partners. The Bank is also following up on the findings of the in-depth reviews to
address generic issues across the portfolio. More generally, Government has developed a new
anti-corruption policy, passed a new procurement law, increased the budget for the OAG, and
established a Financial Intelligence Unit and a Serious Fraud Unit. The Bank, together with other
CPs, has provided support for these actions and intends to continue doing so under the next
phase of the public sector reform program. Cooperating Partners are also working with the
Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee and other oversight institutions to strengthen the
oversight role played by them. In addition, rent generation in the absence of strong transparency
and accountability presents a risk of rent diversion and capture. The Bank undertook an
extractive industries value chain assessment to examine governance risks and is supporting the
implementation of the EITI initiative and modernization of the mining cadastre.
 External Shock Risk. Zambia‟s high dependence on copper (especially now when international
price of copper exceeds US$9,000 per ton) makes it vulnerable to fluctuations in the
international price of the commodity, which can then negatively affect the economy by

14

compressing exports and government revenues and result in lower growth and employment. In
addition, Zambia is also at risk from rising fuel prices, which can affect macroeconomic stability
resulting in higher inflation, lower growth, and external balance deterioration. There is also the
risk of climate shocks such as heavy rains causing extensive flooding, reduced harvest, and
destroying roads and bridges. To mitigate these risks the Bank has assisted authorities in
promoting more effective use of public resources leading to increase diversification and
competitiveness, including the ability to better adapt to external shocks. In addition the
government, through the ongoing IMF program, is committed to ensuring that its monetary and
fiscal programs maintain macroeconomic stability and keep inflation in check.
 Health Risk. HIV/AIDS remains a significant health threat to Zambia‟s population and the
prevalence rate remains high at about 14 percent for adults between the ages of 15-49 years. The
fall in productivity and rising economic costs associated with loss of labor from deaths due to
AIDS is estimated to account for a 3 percent reduction in GDP. Similarly, although there have
been significant improvements, Malaria continues to be the number one cause of high morbidity
and mortality in Zambia, contributing to a reduction in GDP by 1.5 percent. In addition,
widespread under nutrition adversely impacts cognitive development, resulting in a 5 to 18 point
loss in IQ, with related effects on productivity and adult wages. At the aggregate level,
widespread under nutrition can knock about 2-3 percentage points off national GDP. On account
of the governance issues in the sector, there is increasing fragmentation and lack of reliability of
donor funding to the health sector. This has caused a dramatic decline in district allocations
which is severely compromising the district‟s ability to deliver services. With the recent success
that has been achieved under the National Malaria Control Program, the government and partners
are now focusing on eliminating malaria in Zambia. There is a lot of interest from both
Government and partners to address under nutrition as a major hindrance to economic
development. A National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy is being developed and efforts are
being made to strengthen the institutional capacity of the National Food and Nutrition
Commission to coordinate and monitor the multi-sectoral response to malnutrition in Zambia.

15

Annex Table 1: Zambia: Key Macroeconomic Results during CAS Period
2006
Output and Prices
Real GDP growth (% changes)
CPI (end of period, %)
Central Government Accounts
Total Revenue
Tax
Mining Taxes
Grants
Total Expenditures
Current
Capital
Overall Balance incl. grants (cash basis)
External Sector
Trade Balance
Exports
of which Copper Exports
Imports
Current account balance incl. grants (% of GDP)
International Reserves (months of imports)
Public Debt
Total public debt
External
Domestic

2009

2010

6.2
5.7
6.3
8.9
16.6
9.9
Percent of GDP
17.2
18.4
18.6
16.0
16.4
17.9
17.5
15.0
1.4
1.4
1.0
4.6
3.8
4.0
23.5
24.5
23.8
23.2
19.8
19.1
18.5
4.0
3.6
4.3
-0.2
-2.2
-2.7
US$ million, unless otherwise indicated
899
404
906
3,929 4,510
4,959
4,319
3,029 3,407
3,684
3,179
-4,554
-3,413
3.0 3,611
-2.5
-7.1
-3.2
2.2
2.5
2.1
3.8
Percent of GDP
27.2
25.8
26.5
24.9
11.0
9.4
11.5
10.6
16.2
16.4
15.0
14.3

7.1
7.9

6.2
8.2

2007

2008

17.9
16.9
2.3
2.8
23.9
19.4
4.2
-3.3
1,313
5,982
4,612
-4,668
-2.0
3.4
24.6
10.2
14.4

Source: Bank of Zambia, Central Statistical Office and IMF.

16

Annex Table 2: Zambia: Social Sector Results During the CAS Period
Latest single year

1998-2001

2002-2005

2006-2009

Primary school enrollment (% net)

68.2

92.3

95.2

Secondary school enrollment (% gross)

25.6

33.5

45.6

Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

69.5

69.1

74.8

Life expectancy at birth (years)

41.7

42.8

45.4

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

165.7

155.3

141.3

Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live births)

600.0

560.0

470.0

Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)

15.4

15.0

15.2

Headcount Poverty ratio (% of population)

66.8

58.4

59.3

Source: World Bank World Development Indicators and Central Statistics Office (CSO).

17

Annex Table 3: CAS Progress Report – Results Framework
CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date

Pillar I

Macroeconomic and Expenditure Management

Outcome
1.1

Macroeconomic stability and support the growth and diversification of the economy

Indicator 1.1.1

Public expenditure allocation to pro-poor sectors (e.g.
agriculture, tourism, rural infrastructure) shows real
increase. Budget 2008 allocation (ZKW billion) for
Agriculture, Tourism and Roads: 1,964.2

Achieved

Indicator 1.1.2

Clear GRZ guidelines for allocation of additional
resource flows from mining

On track

Indicator 1.1.3

Budget presentation includes reporting on donor
funding and revenues and expenditures of quasi-fiscal
institutions (Bank of Zambia, the Public Service
Pension Fund and state owned enterprises (SOEs),
especially ZESCO)

On track

Milestone 1.1.1

ZRA submits reports for MTEF and annual budget
based on corporate fiscal models to (a) audit mining
returns and (b) to predict and collect taxes from mining

On track

Milestone 1.1.2

MoFNP consults stakeholders annually on the
performance of the country‟s development programs
under the FNDP

Achieved

Budget allocation (constant 2008 billion ZKW) for
Agriculture, Tourism and Roads:
2009: 2,292.39
2010: 2,235.09
2011: 3,352.7
The increase is reflected in agriculture and roads
sectors, while tourism is stagnant.
Source: Own calculation based on MoFNP data
Mining revenues (% of GDP): 2008: 1.4%; 2009:
1%; 2010 (est.): 2.3%
Audit of mining companies has commenced.
Reconciliation of mining taxes paid and mining
taxes received underway.
EITI++ Value Chain diagnostic done.
Mining & Minerals Act is being revised.
Source: MoFNP
Reporting on donor funding initiated; loans and
grants are reported. The Development Cooperation
Report (the first report completed in 2009) and the
Zambia Development Aid Data base (which is being
improved) are likely to facilitate reporting on donors
funding.
Source: Development Cooperation Report
Audit program undertaken by ZRA. Fiscal models
delivered and in use by ZRA.
Source: MoFNP

Instruments & Partners

Ongoing lending:
 P082452 ZM – Public Sector Management
Program Support
Proposed lending:
 EMCG II
 PRSC
Proposed AAA:
 PER
 TA Commodity Risk Management
 Development Policy Review
 EITI++ Implementation
 NLTA Energy Sector
Main Development Partners:
DFID, EU, IMF, Denmark, Netherlands/Ireland,
Finland, Sweden, Norway, UNDP, GTZ

Government carried out a mid-term review of the
FNDP and presented the report to various
stakeholders. Government held annual consultations
through the life of the FNDP such as SAGs, PRSC
annual reviews with donors.
Source: MoFNP

18

CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date
All Ministries and Provinces utilize MTEF and ABB
Training manuals for MTEF and ABB are being
finalized by Budget office and the Ministry of Local
Government and Housing. GRZ has included
provision for SOEs to adopt MTEF and ABB in the
draft Planning & Budget Bill.
Source: SNDP, Budget 2010/2011
Individual data bases for domestic and external debt
established. In the process of implementing DMFAS
6.0 which will centrally record both data bases.
Source: MoFNP
A Mining Resource Account (MRA) created in
2008. Staff from MoFNP have undertaken field visit
to multiple countries to study sovereign wealth
funds; a paper is presently under consideration.
Source: MoFNP
Public Procurement Act enacted in October 2008;
Procurement regulations which should enable to
operationalize the new Procurement Law were
delayed. Accountants Act, Loans & Guarantees Act
and Public Finance Act in draft form.
Source: Public Procurement Act No 12 of December
2008; Discussions with Government

Milestone 1.1.3

MTEF Framework and ABB rolled out to Bank of
Zambia, the Public Service Pension Fund and SOEs,
especially ZESCO

Achieved

Milestone 1.1.4

Development of a centralized data base of domestic
and external debt in MoFNP

On track

Milestone 1.1.5

GRZ agrees on instruments for managing the
uncertainty and volatility of revenue flows from
mining and puts in place an appropriate mechanism to
harness the flows (such as a sovereign wealth fund)

On track

Milestone 1.1.6

Enactment of public expenditure management
legislation: Public Procurement Act, Accountants Act,
Loans & Guarantees Act, Public Finance Act
(Amendment)

On track

Pillar II

Institutional Capacity

Outcome
2.1

Strengthened public financial management, procurement and oversight capacity

Indicator 2.1.1

Time for production of financial statements after the
end of financial year for institutions where IFMIS is
operational decreases from 9 months (2007) to 6
months by 2010

On track

IFMIS is currently operational in MoFNP (since
2010) and 7 other Ministries, Provinces, and
Spending Agencies (since January 2011).
For the 8 sites where IFMIS the information is
available on a real time basis. The time for the
preparation of financial statements can improve only
if IFMIS is rolled out to all sites.
Source: ISR - P082452

Instruments & Partners

Ongoing Lending:
 P082452 ZM – Public Sector Management
Program Support
Proposed AAA:
 PER
Main development partners:
UK, Denmark, Netherlands/Ireland, Finland,
Sweden, Norway, EC, UNDP, Germany

19

CAS Progress Report
Status
Indicator 2.1.2

Procurement processing time for national competitive
bidding is maintained at 8 weeks and for international
competitive bidding at 12 weeks (2007 levels) in 90%
of PSUs

Off track

Indicator 2.1.3

Percentage of entities (48 entities: 22 ministries, 9
provinces and 17 spending agencies) covered by
annual audit increases from 50% in 2006 to 60% by
2010
National Appeals Tribunal established and operational
by 2010

Achieved

Milestone 2.1.2

New payroll system in place; no discrepancies between
clean payroll and staff establishment

Achieved

Milestone 2.1.3

IFMIS fully implemented and integrated with PMEC in
at least 5 key ministries and piloted in at least 2
provinces (North Western, Eastern) by 2010

Achieved

Milestone 2.1.4

By 2010, Zambia National Tender Board (ZNTB)
established as regulatory authority

Achieved

Milestone 2.1.5

PSUs established in all MPSAs and 500 staff trained

Achieved

Milestone 2.1.6

All provincial offices to be handed over to Auditor
General by September 2008

Achieved

Milestone 2.1.1

Off track

Progress to date

Instruments & Partners

Decentralization of procurement of PE‟s done but
procurement processing efficiency negatively
affected by the Circular No. 1 of January 2011
which requires procurement above 50 million
kwacha to be approved by Zambia Public
Procurement Authority (ZPPA).
Source: Circular No. 1 of January 2011.
By December 2010 the percentage of entities
covered by annual audit was 79%.
Source: Office of Auditor General
Public Procurement Act does not include the
establishment of National Appeals Tribunal. It only
includes provision under Part VIII for Dispute
Resolution by Arbitration.
Source: Public Procurement Act No 12 of December
2008
Payroll system in place and decentralized to all nine
provinces. Payroll audits instituted and cleaning of
payroll ongoing based on the audits.
Source: ISR - P082452
IFMIS implemented in MoFNP (2010 Budget
prepared using IFMIS) and expanded to 7 other sites
January 2011, to other 7 by July 2011, and 40 by
2013.
Source: Status Report as at 27th January 2011
ZNTB transformed into the Zambia Public
Procurement Authority (ZPPA).
Source: Public Procurement Act No 12 of December
2008
PSUs have been established, certified and
operational in all public spending units and 500 staff
training is ongoing.
Source: ZPPA Procurement Reforms Progress
Report
All nine provincial offices constructed for OAG
handed over and in operation (by the end of 2009)
Source: ISR - P082452

20

CAS Progress Report
Status

Instruments & Partners

Milestone 2.1.7

At least 18 professional audit staff based in provincial
audit offices with minimum of one auditor per
provincial office

Outcome
2.2

Improved public management and transparency of the mining sector and natural resources sector

Indicator 2.2.1

EITI report published (making all financial flows of
mining operations to GRZ transparent and available to
the public)

On track

Indicator 2.2.2

Percentage of mining companies in compliance with
Environmental Management Plans for the identified
priority environmental liabilities increases to 85% by
2010 (from 35% in 2005)

Partially
achieved

Indicator 2.2.3

WB/WWF management effectiveness score for 3
National Parks increases from 2007 by end of 2011 for:
- Kafue NP from 41 to 64; - Kasanka NP from 61 to
76; - Lavushi Manda NP from 9 to 55

On track

Milestone 2.2.1

Consolidated environmental management plans
(CEMP) submitted to EMF Steering Committee

Achieved

Milestone 2.2.2

Zambia EITI Council formed as multi-stakeholder
group of government, civil society, and companies

Achieved

Milestone 2.2.3

Multi-Stakeholder EITI Council has agreed on auditing
templates

On track

15
16

On track

Progress to date
There is a minimum of one provincial officer per
province in place.
Source: ISR - P082452

EITI Secretariat established.
EITI Revenue Reconciliation Report published.
Validation in progre
Source: BTOR - P102422
All the major mines namely Konkola Copper Mines,
Mopani Copper Mines, Chambeshi and Kansanshi
submitted their EMPs. The audit to these Mines
carried out in 2007, a follow-up in 2009 and 2010
reviewed that compliance levels to EMPs had
increased on average to 60% in 2010.
Source: Mr Solomon Phiri, Manager, Environmental
Management Facility
Actual: for Kafue NP 2010: 58.5
Delays for Kasanka NP and Lavushi Manda NP:
approved in 2010, should end by 2013. Revised
2013 targets: Kasanka: 66; Lavushi: 39.
Source: ISR, GEF project endorsement document
CEMP 2 completed.
Source: ISR - P070962
EITI Council formed - 15 members from
government, companies and civil society (5 each)
and supported by EITI Secretariat.
Source: BTOR - P102422
Auditing template approved in 2010.
Source: BTOR - P102422

Ongoing Lending:
 P070962 ZM - Copperbelt Environment
Project
 P071407 ZM - SEED
 P074258 ZM - GEF SEED Biodiversity
 GEF MSP OASNTC (regional with Namibia)
 GEF FSP: "Sustainable Management of Nyika
Trans-frontier Conservation Area" TFCA
(regional with Malawi)
 GEF MSP Extension of Kasanka Management
System to Lavushi Manda National Park
Ongoing AAA:
 Zambia Country Water Resources Assistance
Strategy
 EITI++ scoping study
 Zambia Business Survey15 (Delivered in 2010)
 Competitiveness NL TA
 Jobs and Prosperity: Building Zambia‟s
Competitiveness (JPC)16 (ESW delivered in
2010; pilot underway)
Proposed AAA/ TF:
 EITI++ Implementation
Proposed Lending:
 PRSC
 Follow up Copperbelt Environment Project
Main Development Partners:

Zambia Business Survey is the old Rural Competitiveness Survey (which was broadened in scope).
Jobs and Prosperity: Building Zambia‟s Competitiveness is the old Micro Foundations of Growth.

21

CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date
Monitoring system for CEMPs migrated to
Environmental Management Information System
and made available to the public, ECZ did not
complete the LIS, and such statutory Returns could
not be digitalized. However, all new EIS and EMPs
commitments were made public through the use of
ECZ websites.
Source: Mr Solomon Phiri, Manager, Environmental
Management Facility
The award of licenses has been delayed since the
Mines & Mineral Act is being revised to include the
current provision (Mining Advisory Committee).
The Cadastre is functioning, but concerns with
regard to its efficiency and transparency have been
studied (independent diagnostic) and raised with the
GRZ.
Source: Ministry of Mines
One air strip completed by November 2010, the
other expected to be completed by second half of
2011
Construction of the 200 km of all season accessible
roads cancelled, the funds will be used for the
rehabilitation of 112 all weather river crossings in
Kafue National Park (6 finished) which will increase
seasonal access to tourism area of the park.
Source: ISR - P074258 and Kafue NP Quarterly
Report
Actual 2009: 42.8%; 2010: 57%
Source: ISR - P074258 and Kafue NP Quarterly
Report

Instruments & Partners

Milestone 2.2.4

Monitoring system for CEMPs migrated to
Environmental Management Information System and
made available to the public

Achieved

Milestone 2.2.5

Gemstone mining license application processing time
reduced by 50% (from 30 days to 15 for small scale
and from 60 days to 30 days for large scale mining
licenses

Delayed

Milestone 2.2.6

2 air strips and 200 km all season accessible roads built
in Kafue NP

Delayed

Milestone 2.2.7

Percentage of lodges accessible all year in Kafue
National Park increases from 10% to 60% by 2011

On track

Outcome
2.3

Improved business environment, especially for micro-, small- and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs)

Indicator 2.3.1

Average number of total days to process MTENR
tourism licenses issued at Livingstone‟s new “one stop
shop” decreases to 60 days in 2010 (from 90 days in
2004)

Delayed

Establishment of the “one stop shop” postponed due
to limitations in the legal/regulatory environment,
which are currently being addressed in the proposed
Tourism & Hospitality Act. The Act (if approved in
its current version) will dramatically reduces
licensing requirements.
Source: MTENR

MDTF, AU, IMF, EU, Norway, DFID

Ongoing Lending:
 P071407 ZM - SEED
Ongoing AAA:
 Licensing & Regulatory Reform (IFC)
 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) - ESW
delivered in 2009
 Zambia Business Survey

22

CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date

Indicator 2.3.2

Proportion of adult population with access to
affordable financial services increases from 37.7% in
2007 to 45% by 2011

Off track

Actual 2008: 38%; 2009: 34%
Source: Operations portal

Milestone 2.3.1

Implementation of Phase II of the Financial Sector
Development Plan (FSDP) leads to the introduction of
new financial products

On track

Milestone 2.3.2

Statutory Instruments (such as license fees) for tourism
and gemstone sectors are submitted for legislative
action
Livingstone‟s one-stop-shop is established and
operating

Delayed

FSDP II completed and approved by Government in
January 2010. The financial sector contingency
planning work completed in 2010.
Source: Bank of Zambia
Tourism & Hospitality Act has been revised and is
expected to be enacted in 2011.
Source: MTENR
Construction of Livingstone‟s “one stop shop” has
been approved since the proposed Tourism &
Hospitality Act would allow decentralized licensing.
Procurement on the contractor has begun.
Source: MTENR, ISR - P071407
Licensing audit delivered and Cabinet approved
licensing reform program (2010).
Source: MCTI
Business/Government consultations on industry
competitiveness completed.
Source: MoFNP

Milestone 2.3.3

On track

Milestone 2.3.4

Licensing audit completed

Achieved

Milestone 2.3.5

Completed consultations with private sector and GRZ
to generate competitiveness program

Achieved

Outcome
2.4

Improved agricultural productivity and marketing schemes for smallholders

Indicator 2.4.1

Value of agricultural exports for target value chains
(cotton lint) from US$43.4 million in 2006 to US$ 65
million by 2011
Value of agricultural exports for target value chains
(cotton lint) is US$ 57 mill in 2009

Off track

Volume of commodities produced by out-grower
schemes for cotton increases from 170,000 tons in
2006 to 180,000 tons in 2009 to 205,000 tons by 2011

Off track

Milestone 2.4.1
Milestone 2.4.2

Off track

Actual: 2008: US$62.4 million; 2009: US$33.6
million, 2010: US$45.7 million
Source: ISR - P070063
Actual: 2009: US$33.6 million
Source: ISR - P070063
Cotton production by out-grower schemes has decreased
during the period.
Actual: 2008: 71,820 tons; 2009: 87,018 tons; 2010:
72,482 tons
Cotton Development Trust small dam/weir and on farm
irrigation system has been constructed and in use for
supplemental irrigation of 80ha for improved cotton seed
production (the irrigation system became operational in
the season 2009/2010).
Source: ISR - P070063

Instruments & Partners
 Competitiveness NL TA
 Jobs and Prosperity: Building Zambia‟s
Competitiveness
Proposed Lending:
 PRSC
 Regional Communications Infrastructure
Program
 Competitiveness DPL
Proposed AAA:
 Financial Sector Assessment Program
Main Development Partners:
IFC, GEF, Norway & Nordic Fund, FSDP:
Sweden and SIDA (partners under Phase I),
Finland, Netherlands

Ongoing Lending:
 P070063 ZM - Agricultural Development
Support Program
Ongoing AAA:
 Agriculture P. Value Chain Analysis
(Completed)
Proposed Lending:
 PRSC
 Irrigation Development and Support Project
Proposed AAA:
 TA Commodity Risk Mgmt
 Impact Evaluation Fertilizer SP (Completed)
Main Development Partners
GEF, IFAD, AfDB, SIDA, USAID

23

CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date

Pillar III

Infrastructure Development

Outcome
3.1

Improved transport infrastructure

Indicator 3.1.1

Percentage of rural population with access to an (reinstated) all weather river crossing in target provinces
(Luapula, Northern, Copperbelt provinces) increases
from 40% in 2007 to 80% in 2010

Achieved

By 2010 80% of rural population has access to all
weather river crossing.
Source: RDA Report

Indicator 3.1.2

Improved links between producers and agricultural
markets in target project areas to be added after
assessment in august 2008

Achieved

Milestone 3.1.1

By 2010, all weather river crossings built/rehabilitated
in 3 provinces: Luapula: 33, Northern: 31, Copperbelt:
40, and four national parks: 39

Partially
achieved

Milestone 3.1.2

636 km rural roads rehabilitated and OPRC contracts
under implementation in targeted areas

On track

Baseline data has been collected for relevant
indicators: average vehicle traffic in improved roads,
kilometers of rural roads rehabilitated. First impact
survey started in mid- 2011.
Source: ISR - P070063
Weather river crossings built/rehabilitated in Luapula,
Northern provinces and the four national parks by the
end of 2009. The construction of structures in
Copperbelt was cancelled; these funds (together with
others) were reallocated to the construction of the
Chiawa bridge over Kafue river ( 2011).
Source: RDA Progress Report
5 OPRC contracts work on 583 km rural roads (both
district and feeder roads). Rehabilitation and
maintenance are ongoing in Choma, Chipata, Katete,
Chongwe, and Lundazi. About 20% increase in
vehicle traffic is expected and progress is being
monitored.
Source: ISR - P070063

Outcome
3.2

Improved access to water, energy services and irrigation systems

Indicator 3.2.1

Water storage and regulation established in 20 target
rural communities by 2011 (final determination by
project effectiveness)

Off track

Project preparation delayed

Indicator 3.2.2

25,000 additional people have access to safe water in
Lusaka peri-urban area (250/new installed water kiosk)
by 2011

On track

3,700 people have access to clean water (current rate
of utilization approximately 50 people/kiosks)
1,300 additional people expected to have access
when the rest of constructed kiosks will be
functioning.

Instruments & Partners

Ongoing Lending:
 P106596 ZM - RRMP-APL I
 P070063 ZM - Agricultural Development
Support Project
Proposed Lending:
 RRMP-APL II
 E & S Africa TA (Regional)
 Nacala Development Corridor (Regional)
Ongoing AAA:
 International Review Study
 Review of the RoadSIP II
Main Development Partners:
EU, KFW, DANIDA, Japan, AfDB, BADEA,
GEF, PPIAF

Ongoing Lending:
 P071259 ZM - Water Sector Performance
Improvement Project
 P077452 ZM - Increased Access to Electricity
Proposed Lending:
 Water Resources Dev. Project
 Small Towns WSS Dev. Project
 Energy Efficiency & Access Project

24

CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date
Source: ISR - P071259

Indicator 3.2.3

Number of people provided with access to electricity
under the project by household connections

On track

Indicator 3.2.4

6200 ha of newly irrigated land under PPP
management

On track

Milestone 3.2.1

Sites for 3 medium and 30 small dams identified and
construction designs completed by end of 2009

On track

Milestone 3.2.2

60% of total new water kiosks installed and operational
by end of 2009

Achieved

Milestone 3.2.3

Number of projects implemented by REA is 7 by end
of 2009

Delayed

Milestone 3.2.4

PPPs of smallholders and commercial farmers/agroentrepreneurs for use of irrigation systems are
established in selected project areas

Delayed

Pillar IV

Human Capital Development

Outcome
4.1

Improved health programming

Indicator 4.1.1

Percentage of institutional deliveries increases from
43% in 2006 to 50% in 2011

On track

By end 2012: (i) in urban areas 90,000, (ii) in rural
areas 22,800
Source: ISR - P077452
Completed: 80ha at Magoye; 220ha of sugar cane at
Kaleya; 259 ha at Chayanya
ID funding: expected in the next two years: 2,770
ha, and 1,600 ha in subsequent years at Mwombashi,
Lusitu, Musakashi
In collaboration with IFC: expected in the next two
years 280 ha at Megoba, and 543 ha at Chikupi
Source: Ministry of Agriculture Report
The sites for 3 medium and 30 small dams have
been identified. The construction designs are under
preparation.
Source: Department of Water Affaires Report
By April 2011, 99 kiosks constructed or
rehabilitated in 12 areas, with 56 currently supplying
water. The rest expected to be connected to the
distribution system in 2011.
Source: ISR - P071259
2 projects implemented by REA with WB funding.
6 projects under preparation.
Source: REA Annual Work Plan
3 PPPs established by 2010. The number of PPPs is
expected to increase by 2012.
Source: Mission Aide-memoire

Actual 2007: 43%, 2008: 45%, 2009: N/A; 2010:
N/A
Source: HMIS

Instruments & Partners
 Irrigation Development Project
 Hydro Energy Generation Project
 S-A Africa Power Market Program
Ongoing AAA:
 Country Water Resources Strategy
 Zambezi Multi-Sector Investment Opportunity
Analysis
Proposed AAA:
 NL TA Energy Sector
 Water Pollution & Supply Solutions Study
Main Development Partners:
GEF, EU, SIDA, JBIC/JICA, USAID

Ongoing Lending:
 P096131 ZM - Malaria Health Booster +

25

CAS Progress Report
Status

Progress to date

Indicator 4.1.2

Percentage of children under 5 years of age who sleep
under a treated bed net increases from 30% in 2006 to
60% by 2011

On track

Actual: 2008: 45.9%; 2010: 52.3%
Source: MIS17

Indicator 4.1.3

Percentage of people in indoor residual spraying (IRS)
eligible districts areas who sleep in appropriately
sprayed structures from 40% in 2006 to 80% by 2011

Achieved

Actual: 2008: 85%; 2010: 93%
Source: MIS

Milestone 4.1.1

Results-based financing implemented (based on 8
indicators) in 9 districts (yr 1) 18 districts (yr 2) after
TF effectiveness

Delayed

Milestone 4.1.2

Scale up of IRS campaign from 15 districts in 2007 to
36 districts in 2010

Achieved

The TF Grant for RBF became effective on February
22, 2011 after issues in the broader health portfolio
were rectified. The MOH has been working with the
Bank on preparations for roll-out to the pilot districts
which will begin second half of 2011
Source: Aide-memoire P096131
Actual: 2008: 15; 2010: 36
Source: MIS

Milestone 4.1.3

HR retention scheme implemented

Achieved

Outcome
4.2

Strengthened skills and education for the formal and informal sectors

Indicator 4.2.1

> 90% of the 2004 and 2005 TEVET graduates find
employment within 12 months and > 70% within 6
months of graduation (intermediary result in 2005:
89% within 12 months and 72% within 6 months)

Achieved

Actual 2008: 90% of the TEVET graduates found
employment within 12 months of graduation, and
55.1% within 6 months.
Source: MoE's Annual Report (2009)

Indicator 4.2.2

Increased primary completion rate towards reaching
MDG

On track

No quantitative target specified
Completion rate at Grade 7 steadily increasing

17

HR implementation scheme is being implemented
and has been successful to improve access to skilled
attendants.
By 2010, 858 health workers have been retained
under the scheme in rural areas as follows: 137
medical officers, 6 medical consultants, 44 medical
licentiates, 40 clinical officers, 203 nurses and other
health tutors, 3309 nurses and midwives and 119
environmental health technologists.
Source: HR Information System

Instruments & Partners
Russian TF
 ZANARA (Completed)
Ongoing AAA:
 Country Sector Health Report (Completed)
Proposed Lending:
 Southern Africa Transport Corridors
HIV/AIDS Program (regional)
Proposed TFs and other grants:
 Norwegian TF Maternal Mortality
 Russian Debt swap
Main Development Partners:
Health SWAp incl. Roll Back Malaria (RBM),
HIV/AIDS and Partnerships: UN Family,
MACEPA. DFID, Global Fund, USG/PEPFAR,
NORAD, USAID, JICA, RNE, EU, SIDA,
DANIDA, JICA, CIDA, Ireland Aid

Ongoing Lending:
 P057167 ZM - TEVET (Closed)
Ongoing AAA:
 PETS basic education
Proposed Lending & TF:
 “Education for All” Catalytic TF

The Malaria indicator survey (MIS) is only done every two years. The reports are only available for 2008 for data collected in 2007 and 2010 for data collected in 2009.

26

CAS Progress Report
Status

Milestone 4.2.1

Percentage of national training courses whose curricula
are reviewed per annum in response to market demands
increases from 4 % in 2002

Achieved

Milestone 4.2.2

National education sector plan endorsed by GRZ and
donors

Achieved

Milestone 4.2.3

Policy for expanded access to post-basic education
formulated

Achieved

18

Progress to date

Instruments & Partners

Actual 2009: 93.2%. It surpassed its target, 90%18,
but delays for the other Grades.
Source: MoE's Annual Report (2009)
80 national courses were reviewed during the life of
TEVET project (2002-2008).
Source: ICR - P057167

Proposed AAA:
 Strategy post-basic education
 PVU
Main Development Partners:
GTZ, DANIDA, NL; Multi-donor (FTI) Catalytic
Trust Fund, READ

The National Implementation Framework (NIF II)
was endorsed by donors to support GRZ application
for the FTI funds. NIF II is extended to June 2011 to
allow for the finalization of the next phase under
NIF III; this is under development and there was a
joint donor appraisal of the NIF III. GRZ is in the
processing of revising the draft NIF III on the basis
of the joint appraisal recommendations after which
the CPs will reassess the document before
endorsement decision can be undertaken.
Source: Netherlands Embassy
The NIF II was about increasing access especially at
basic education level and under the NIF III there is a
shift to increasing access to post-basic education
levels. The policy for expanding access to post-basic
education is included in the SNDP and the new NIF
III (under development). There are also other
policies in support of post-basic education: abolition
of grade 10 cut-off points; abolition of the APU
(Afternoon Production Units) system and integration
of these into the regular school system; provision of
bursaries to Orphans and Vulnerable Children
(OVCs), especially girls.
Source: Netherlands Embassy

Government education sector target.

27

Annex Table 4: Updated and Revised CAS Indicators
Original CAS Indicators

Updated and Revised Indicators

CAS Outcome 2.2 Improved public management and transparency of the mining sector
and natural resources sector
Indicator 2.2.3: WB/WWF management effectiveness score
for 3 National Parks increases from 2007 by end of 2011 for: Kafue NP from 41 to 64; - Kasanka NP from 61 to 76; Lavushi Manda NP from 9 to 55

Revised: WB/WWF management effectiveness score for 3
National Parks increases from 2007 by end of 2011 for: Kafue NP from 41 to 64; by the end of 2013 for Kasanka NP
from 61 to 66; - Lavushi Manda NP from 9 to 39

Milestone 2.2.5: Gemstone mining license application
processing time reduced by 50% (from 30 days to 15 for small
scale and from 60 days to 30 days for large scale mining
licenses)
Milestone 2.2.6: 2 air strips and 200 km all season accessible
roads built in Kafue NP

Dropped

Revised: 3 air strips and 112 all weather river crossings
rehabilitated in Kafue National Park.

CAS Outcome 2.3 Improved business environment, especially for micro-, small- and
medium-size enterprises
Indicator 2.3.3: Proportion of adult population with access to
affordable financial services increases from 37.7% in 2007 to
45% by 2011

Dropped

CAS Outcome 2.4. Improved agricultural productivity and marketing schemes for
smallholders
Indicator 2.4.1: Value of agricultural exports for target value
chains (cotton lint) from US$43.4 million in 2006 to US$ 65
million by 2011

Milestone 2.4.1: Value of agricultural exports for target value
chains (cotton lint) is US$ 57 mill in 2009
Milestone 2.4.2: Volume of commodities produced by outgrower schemes for cotton increases from 170,000 tons in
2006 to 180,000 tons in 2009 to 205,000 tons by 2011

Revised: Volume of agricultural exports for target value
chains (t/year) [from 50,000 in 2010 to 51,900 by 2012]
cotton from 30,000 in 2010 to 35,000 t/ha
sunflower 65 to 75
groundnuts 440 to 835
paprika/chilli 2 to 3
- soybean 2,050 to 16,000
Dropped
Revised: Volume of commodities produced by out-grower
schemes increases from 2006 to 2011 for:
- cotton from 30,000 tons to 71,000 tons
- maize from 1,424,439 tons to 2,008,455 tons
- paprika from 775 tons to 1300 tons
- chili from 2 tons to 11 tons
- soya beans from 89,600 to 120,000 tons

CAS Outcome 3.1. Improved transport infrastructure
Indicator 3.1.1: Percentage of rural population with access to
an (re-instated) all weather river crossing in target provinces
(Luapula, Northern, Copperbelt provinces) increases from 40%
in 2007 to 80% in 2010
Indicator 3.1.2: Improved links between producers and
agricultural markets in target project areas to be added after
assessment in august 2008
Milestone 3.1.1: By 2010, all weather river crossings
built/rehabilitated in 3 provinces: Luapula: 33, Northern: 31,
Copperbelt: 40, and four national parks: 39

Replaced: Number of rural population with access to reinstated river crossings increases from 0 in 2007 to 502,000 in
2012
Replaced: Average vehicle traffic in improved roads from
3,480 in 2009 to 4,176 in 2010 to 5,046 in 2011.
Revised: By 2012, all weather river crossings
built/rehabilitated in 2 provinces: Luapula: 33, Northern: 31,
and four national parks: 39; and construction of the Chiawa
Bridge over Kafue river

CAS Outcome 3.2. Improved access to water, energy services and irrigation systems
Milestone 3.2.3: Number of projects implemented by REA is
7 by end of 2009

Revised: Number of projects implemented by REA is 7 by end
of 2011.

28

Original CAS Indicators

Updated and Revised Indicators

CAS Outcome 4.2. Strengthened skills and education for the formal and informal sectors
Milestone 4.2.1: Percentage of national training courses whose
curricula are reviewed per annum in response to market
demands increases from 4 % in 2002
Milestone 4.2.2: National education sector plan endorsed by
GRZ and donors
Milestone 4.2.3: Policy for expanded access to post-basic
education formulated

Dropped

Dropped
Dropped

29

Annex Table 5: Comparison of Indicative and Actual Bank Program (Lending
and Non Lending)
Indicative

Actual

FY08

FY08

Lending
Economic Management and Growth Credit II
Energy Efficiency Improvement and Access Project
AAA
Economic Impact of Tourism Study
Investment Climate Assessment
Citizens Empowerment Policy Note
Public-Private partnership Policy Note
Education Expenditure tracking Survey

Lending
Economic Management and Growth Credit II - $10m
Increased Access to Electricity Services SIL - $33m
Increased Access to Electricity (GEF Funded) - $4.5m
AAA

FY09
Lending
Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project II
Competitiveness DPL
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I
AAA
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy
Financial Sector Assessment
Agriculture Value Chain Analysis
Rural Competitiveness Study
Growth – Value Chain Analysis

Economic Impact of Tourism Study
Investment Climate Assessment
Citizens Empowerment Policy Note
Public-Private Partnership Policy Note
Education Public Expenditure Tracking
FY09 (Bank program impacted by the death of President
Mwanawasa and national elections that followed)
Lending
Water Sector Performance Improvement Project –
Additional Financing - $10m
AAA
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy
Financial Sector Assessment
Agriculture Value Chain Analysis
Policy Notes for New Government
Investment Climate Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment Update
Constraints to Inclusive Growth

FY10

FY10

Lending
Water Resources Development Project
Irrigation Development Project
Poverty Reduction Support Credit II
AAA
Public Expenditure Review
Transport Cost Analysis
Impact Evaluation of the Fertilizer Support Program
Health Sector Report
Strategy for Post Basic Education

Lending
Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project II - $75m
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I - $20m
AAA
Public Expenditure Review
Jobs and Prosperity Initiative
Impact Assessment of Fertilizer Program
Country Status Report on Health
EITI++ Scoping Study

FY11

FY11

Lending
Hydro Energy Generation Project
Small Towns Water and Sanitation Project
Poverty Reduction Support Credit III
AAA
Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment
Commodity Risk Assessment
Development Policy Review
Water Pollution and Supply Solutions Study

Lending
RRMP II – Additional Financing - $15m
IAES – Additional Financing - $20m
Malaria Booster Program – Additional Financing - $30m
Irrigation Development and Support Project - $115m
Poverty Reduction Support Credit II - $30m
Kafue-Livingstone Transmission Upgrade Project - $30m
AAA
Zambia Business Survey
Investment Climate Assessment
ESW – Improving Access to ACT

FY12

FY12

Actual

Lending
Livestock Development Project
Water Resources Management Project
Poverty Reduction Support Credit III
AAA
Poverty Assessment

30

Annex Table 6: Global Programs and Bilateral Grants Under Implementation
Actual
FY08
Russian Trust Fund for Malaria Control -$6.8 m

FY09
Results Based Financing Pilot Activities and Impact Evaluation - $ 1.2m
Extension of Kasanka Management System to Lavushi Manda National Park - $0.9 m
Avian Influenza Prevention and Control FY09 -$ 1.0m
GER Sustainable Land Management Nuimvi Wiidkabd Ecosystem - $0.75m
Regional COMESA: TA, Africa Agricultural Market Program - $2.7m

FY10
Governance Partnership Facility - $2.0 m
Co-financing of IDA financed Increased Access to Electricity Services Project - $2.38 m
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience Phase I - $1.5 m
TA: Investing in Women Producers to Respond to Food Price Crisis – Operationalizing Gender in Agriculture
Sourcebook - $0.02m

FY11
Catalytic Fund Grant Education For All – Fast Track Initiative - $60.2 m
READ Zambia II - $2.1 m
Regional COMESA: Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Grant - $4.5m
TA Gender in Irrigation GENTF Project - $0.05m
TA Statistical capacity building of the livestock sector TF Project - $0.35m

31

Annex Table 7: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of October 2011
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2009

2010

2011

2012

8
4.6
12.5
9.8
25.0
20.4
24.5

10
4.8
0.0
0.0
20.0
29.8
19.0

9
5.6
11.1
5.4
22.2
22.7
18.3

9
5.9
11.1
5.4
22.2
22.7
1.1

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
67
3
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
2,946.3
73.7
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
46.3
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
39.1
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

32

Annex Table 8: IDA and Grants Operations Portfolio, Regional Projects and Trust Funds
As of October 12, 2011
Clos e d Proje cts

84

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

192.19
0.00
517.24
117.19
709.43
117.19

Total Undisbursed (Active)

337.25

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

337.25

Active Proje cts

Diffe re nce Be tw e e n
Las t PSR

Expe cte d and Actual

Supe rvis ion Rating

Dis burs e m e nts

De ve lopm e nt
Obje ctive s

Im ple m e ntation
Progre s s

Fis cal Ye ar

IDA

MS
S
MS
S
MS
S
MS
MS
S
MU
MS

MS
S
MS
MS
MS
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS

2011
2006
2008
2005
2008
2006
2006
2004
2010
2005
2007

115
37.2

Proje ct ID

Proje ct Nam e

P102459
P070063
P076320
P074258
P077452
P096131
P082452
P071985
P106596
P071407
P071259
Ove rall Re s ult
Re gional Proje cts
P069258
P070547
Ove rall Re s ult

ZM- Irrigation Development Project(FY10)
ZM-Agr Dev Support Program (FY06)
ZM-GEF Increased Access to Elec (FY08)
ZM-GEF SEED Biodiversity SIL (FY05)
ZM-Incr.Ef f .&Access to Elec SIL (FY08)
ZM-Malaria Health Booster SIL (FY06)
ZM-Pub Service Mgmnt Prog - Support Proj
ZM-Road Rehab Maintenance Prj (FY04)
ZM-RRMP PHASE II APL
ZM-SEED (FY05)
ZM-Water Sector Perf ormance Improv (FY07

Trus t Funds
TF010148
TF010166
TF010435
TF053349
TF071194
TF080917
TF091376
TF092134
TF092281
TF092315
TF092762
TF094352
TF094423
TF094524
TF095228
TF095772
TF096208
TF096360
TF096361
TF096485
TF096931
TF096943
TF097260
TF097552
TF097817
TF097982
TF099158
TF099384
Ove rall Re s ult

TF Nam e
Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase II)
Zambia: 10084 Risk Based Supervision
Zambia # 10107 Regulatory and Supervisory Framew ork f or Microinsurance and Insurance Intermediaries
GEF3 FSP-ZAMBIA:SUPPORT TO ECONOMIC EXPANSION AND DIVERSIFICATION PROJECT
Co-f inancing of IDA-f inanced Increased Access to Electricity Services Project in Zambia
INCREASED ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY SERVICES
ZAMBIA BOOSTER PROGRAM FOR MALARIA CONTROL
ZAMBIA SUPERVISION: RUSSIAN FEDERATION GRANT TO THE BOOSTER PROGRAM FOR MALARIA CONTROL IN AF
ZAMBIA HRBF DESIGN - BANK EXECUTED
GEF FSP - REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA: INCREASED ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY SERVICES PROJECT
ZAMBIA HRBF IMPACT EVALUATION - BANK EXECUTED
GAVI PROPOSAL FOR AFRICA HSS WORK IN ZAMBIA
ZM:RESULTS ORIENTED MONITORING & EVALUATION
READ-ZAMBIA
IDF: Zambia-Capacity Buiding f or Public Expenditure Tracking(PET) through HIV/AIDS PET Survey
Zambia HRBF Results Based Financing Project
Support to EITI Implementation
Technical Assistance to Support the Ef f iciency of Mineral Revenues Collection and Investment in Zambia
Support to increased accountability
Zambia: Institutionalizing Livestock Data Collection and Analysis in Zambia
Sustainable Intensif ication of Agricultural Production and Marketing: The Role of Gender in Irrigation Development
Zambia: Pilot Program f or Climate Resilience - Phase I
EC Grant f or the Co-f inancing of Increased Access to Electricity Services Project
Extension of Kasanka Management System to Lavushi Manda National Park
Zambia PPCR
READ Zambia II
Support to Increase Demand f or Good Governance in Zambia
Zambia HRBF-Supervision and Monitoring

3A- Southern Af r Pow er Mrkt APL 1 (FY04)
3A- GEF Grndw tr & Drght Mgmt TAL (FY05)

MS
MS

MS
MS

2004
2005

GRANT

4.5
4
53
50
30
90
75
28.15
33
511.35
359.2
7
366.2

8.5
0.4
0.4
Grant
Am ount
0.5
0.4
0.3
4.0
0.0
0.0
6.9
0.1
0.5
4.5
1.0
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.5
16.8
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.1
1.5
13.0
0.8
0.2
2.1
0.5
0.2
55.9

Cance l.

a/

Undis b.

Orig.

Frm Re v'd

117.964746
19.5314552

0.00000016
16.3410943

-20.858881

0.27962469
50.3817445
24.6984754
4.84386099
33.0431287
65.669107
3.76717344
17.3509933
337.530309

0.27962469
21.4553553
-6.3081193
2.64740597
-10.379401
0.42476191
2.43856646
5.44452924
32.3438174

4.3886886
2.8041603
4.6666667
2.4385664
3.8157403
-2.7450589

288.7
0.95
289.65
Undis b.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.0
0.0
2.2
0.1
0.1
4.3
0.6
0.0
0.3
0.1
0.1
7.5
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
1.1
2.5
0.6
0.0
1.3
0.1
0.1
22.8

33

Annex Table 9A: IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of October 2011
2009

2010

2011

2012*

6.00
6.00

41.05
41.05

1.70
1.70

0.02
0.02

100

100

100
100

17.05
61.02
21.92
99.99

100

100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
100
Guarantee
Loan
Total
100

21.92
0.12
77.95
99.99

43.18
56.82

100

100

100

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY
FINANCE & INSURANCE
OIL, GAS AND MINING
Total

* Data as of October 01,2011

34

Annex Table 9B: IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 10/12/11 (Amounts in US$ millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2010
2007

Access zambia
Aef protea hotel
Letshego zambia
Madison group
Stanbic bank
Zambeef
Zanaco

2008
2010
2010

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Loan

Equity

0
0.83
1.25
2.79
0
7
25

0.77
0
0
2
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
11
0
0

36.87

2.77

11

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0.83
1.25
2.79
0
7
25

0.39
0
0
2
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
11
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

36.87

2.39

11

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

35

Annex Table 10: Zambia at a Glance
Zambia at a glance

10/26/11

Zambia

SubSaharan
A frica

Lo w
inco me

12.9
753
1.6
36

840
24,242
2.5
37

846
17,838
2.2
29

13.5
1,070
1,280

944
1,125
2,051

431
509
1,220

7.6
5.9

1.7
-0.7

4.6
2.4

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

64
82
48
69
15

51
73
53
81
25

..
..
57
76
28

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

81
61
113
112

71
54
105
95

69
55
107
100

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

60
49

60
31

64
35

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2009

( 2 0 10 )

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 4 – 2 0 10 )
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1990

Zambia

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
United States
Euro pean Unio n Institutio ns
United Kingdo m

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2 0 10

317

475

795

1,269

41
20
43

12
26
43

46
26
111

232
152
74

8.8
55

15.8
60

25.8
78

11.1
100

1995

2000

2009

Sub-Saharan Africa

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
5
0

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

-5
-10

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-15
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

..
11.8

137.0
106.4

26.0
30.0

8.5
11.7

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

0.8
..

34.5
147

3,110.8
100

4,797.1
219

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 10
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

5.8
3,884

7.9
3,288

10.2
3,238

12.9
16,193

3.1
1.0

2.6
0.5

2.4
5.6

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

15.1
42.1
18.3
42.8

20.6
51.3
36.1
28.1

22.3
25.3
11.4
52.4

9.2
37.2
9.2
53.6

3.6
1.0
4.1
-0.2

4.2
-4.2
0.8
2.5

1.1
9.4
5.1
5.5

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

55.2
25.5
23.3

64.4
19.0
17.3

87.4
9.5
17.4

55.2
13.3
22.4

3.6
-3.4
-4.3

7.6
-8.1
3.9

4.3
24.9
6.6

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

41.4
45.4
7.3

35.9
36.6
6.7

27.1
41.5
-1.3

44.1
35.0
20.8

-3.3
-2.0

6.7
15.5

21.9
15.6

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Gro up data are fo r 2009. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2009.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

36

Zambia
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2 0 10

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

757
978
-446

4,564
4,105
1,470

Voice and accountability

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-588
-18.2

-258
-1.6

Regulatory quality

36

41

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

Political stability

Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)
Reserves, including go ld

114

Control of corruption

1,886

0
2009

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

19.4
17.3
20.9

20.1
16.5
19.3

Overall surplus/deficit

-11.6

-3.3

25

50

30
35

..
35

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

2000

2009

22.0

..
2

35

0.3

1.6

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

5,722
185
3,672

3,689
147
1,962

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

176.7
20.7

22.8
2.1

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

122
6

699
-13

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)
CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)
GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

29
68.8
..

30
66.5

7,309
1.7

6,513

0.17

0.22

1.7

2.1

595

583

..

..

Composition of total external debt, 2009
Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)
IDA, 0407
IBRD,

Short-term, 474

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

2000

2009

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

25
0
8
3

0
–
–
–

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

1,823
210
17

407
33
4

22
22
16

18
18
5

1

0

31
30

0
0

IMF, 345

(US$ millio ns)

Other multilateral, 464

Private, 1,062

Bilateral, 287

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt

2000

2 0 10

–
–
–

18
27.9
40

2000

2 0 10

Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
A ccess to /co st o f financing
Tax rates
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

84.5
57.5
7.3
..

..
..
17.4
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2010 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.

10/18/11

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

37

Millennium Development Goals

Zambia

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

Z a m bia

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
62.8
69.7
0.7
21.2

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

19 9 5
62.1
68.1
4.2
19.6

84
..
21
66

2000
55.4
66.8
3.4
19.6

2009
..
59.3
..
14.9

75
..
21
..

69
61
24
69

91
87
49
75

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

87
17
7

..
..
10

91
22
10

96
..
14

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

183
109
90

177
105
86

157
94
85

111
69
85

G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

390
51
15

490
47
26

600
47
22

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
12.7
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
297
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
72

15.0
536
74

14.4
602
79

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
49
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
46
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
71.0
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.3
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
1.8

51
47
..
..
0.2
1.6

54
47
68.8
..
0.2
1.7

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

0.8
0.0
0.0
..

0.8
0.9
0.2
0.7

0.8
0.0
0.0
..

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

100

40

75

30

50

20

25

10

470
47
41

13.5
433
80

60
49
66.5
..
0.2
2.1

0.7
34.1
6.3
1.1

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100
75

50
25
0
2000

2005

2009

0

0

1990

1995

2000

2009

2000

2005

2009

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Zambia

Sub-Saharan Africa

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.

Fixed + mobile subscribers Internet users

10/18/11

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

38

22°E

26°E

30°E

Lake
Tanganyika

8°S

Mbala

Lake
Mweru
Wantipa

To
Mbeya

Mporokoso

Nchelenge

D EMO CRAT IC REPUBLIC
O F CO NGO

TAN ZAN I A

Mpulungu

Lake
Mweru

ZAMBIA

To
Sumbawanga

Sumbu

Kaputa

Mwenzo

Kawambwa

Mafinga Hills
(2301 m)

LA

NORTHERN

LU
To
Caianda

To
Karonga

Kasama

Luwingu

A

P

U

Lake
Bangwelu

Mansa

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

To
Mzuzu

Chambeshi

Lake
Malawi

Samfya
Mwinilunga

Manyinga

ts
Ka

To
Chiume

Mulonga
Plain

Kaema

WESTERN

Shangombo

Sitoti

Kataba

Choma

C
n
ua

Mulobezi

do

Bowwood

Kalomo

Petauke
Nyimba

Kafue

LUS

A
AK

Kaulishishi
(1420 m)

To
Cahora Bassa

Luangwa

22°E

To
Mpandamatenga

BOTSWANA

To
Matetsi

26°E

To
Lilongwe
To
Furancungo

MOZAMBIQUE

ZAM BIA
PROVINCE CAPITALS

Kariba
Pemba

NATIONAL CAPITAL

ZIMBA BW E

Lake
Kariba

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS

0

0

50

100

150

50

100
30°E

200 Kilometers

150 Miles

RAILROADS
PROVINCE BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

IBRD 33514

OCTOBER 2004

NAMIBIA

Senkobo

Livingstone Pokuma

Katete

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

To
Harare

Sesheke
To
Ngoma

Chipata

Rufunsa

Chirundu

SOUTHERN

Malundano

Old Mkushi

Machechete
(1488 m)

LUSAKA

ue
Kaf

Namwala

M AL AW I

EASTERN

CENTRAL

Mumbwa

Luampa

Senanga

Chisomo

L u k a n g a Kabwe
Swamp

Lubungu

12°S

Mwanya

Mfuwe

Kapiri Mposhi

Mazabuka
16°S

h

M

Serenje

fue

Mongu
Mavua

uc

a

Mkushi

Busanga
Swamp

Zamb
ezi

Kalabo

M

COPPERBELT

Kasempa

Kabompo

Lukulu

To Mokambo

g
in

Luns
emf
wa

Zambezi

Mufulira

Ndola

L un
ga

gw
eb
u

Chingola

Kawana

u
ng

To
Lutembo

Lun

Mutanda

NORTHWESTERN

Chavuma

A NG OLA

Mpika

Chembe

.

Chisasa
To
Lumbala

To
Lubumbashi

Solwezi

MOZAMBIQUE

12°S

Luan
gw
a

Kope

