Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 59222-AR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
FOR THE PERIOD 2010-2012

February 24, 2011

Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay
Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Country Partnership Strategy for Argentina was discussed by the Executive Directors on
June 9, 2009 (Report No. 48476-AR)

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS
(As of February 24, 2011)
Currency Unit = Argentine Peso
US$1 = 4.06 Argentine Peso
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ACUMAR
ANSES
ARI
CAS
CPI
CPS
CPSPR
CREMA
FBS
GHG
GDP
IA
IDF
IFC
IMF
INDEC
IT
PAE
SEPA
SME
SWAp
TRP
UNFCC

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leaders:

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Matanza-Riachuelo River Basin Authority
Social Security Administration
Support for an Egalitarian Republic Party
Country Assistance Strategy
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
Contrato de Recuperación y Mantenimiento
Fee Based Service
Greenhouse Gas
Gross Domestic Product
Implementing Agency
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
National Institute of Statistics and Census of Argentina
Information Technology
Pan American Energy
Procurement Plan Execution System
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Terminales Rio de la Plata
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
IBRD
Pamela Cox
Penelope Brook
Tatiana Proskuryakova

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Paolo Martelli
John Barham

The CPSPR was prepared under the guidance of Penelope Brook, Country Director, LCC7C by Tatiana
Proskuryakova (TTL), Alejandro Alcala, Yanina Budkin, Norbert Fiess, Andrew Follmer, Michel Kerf, Milagros
Mosteirin, Rafael Rofman, Felipe Saez, Veronica Salatino, Cecilia Simkievich and John Barham. Contributions are
gratefully acknowledged from Elizabeth Adu, Bruce Courtney, Barbara H. Mierau-Klein, Rakesh Nangia, Reynaldo
Pastor, Alejandro Solanot and Laura Tuck who provided written comments and to Marcelo Acerbi, Cristian Aedo,
Diego Ambasz, Alexandre Arrobbio, Ana Bellver, Vanina Camporeale, Rafael Cortez, Michael Crawford, Robert
Davis, Ana Grofsmacht, Theresa Jones, Fernando Lavadenz, Chingboon Lee, Patricia Lopez, Catalina Marulanda,
Renato Nardello, Andres Pizarro, Renan Poveda, Veronica Raffo, Daniela Romero, Marcela Salvador, Maria Marcel
Silva, Alvaro Soler, Lucia Spinelli, Carlos Velez and Xiaoping Wang for th eir valuable inputs. Administrative support
was provided by Mariela Alvarez, Carla Cutolo and Geraldine Garcia.The World Bank Group thanks Gabriela Costa,
National Director for Projects with International Credit Institutions, Ministry of Economy and Public Finance of
Argentina, and Aníbal López, Director for Projects with the World Bank, Ministry of Economy and Public Finance of
Argentina, for their contributions to this CPSPR.

Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
Argentina

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................1
II.
A.
B.

COUNTRY CONTEXT ..................................................................................................2
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS ............................................................................................................................ 2
OUTLOOK ......................................................................................................................................................... 3

III. PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES ...................................................................5
A.
B.
C.

PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE..................................................... 5
RESULTS TO DATE .......................................................................................................................................... 7
ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK .......................................................................... 12

IV. FUTURE ENGAGEMENT............................................................................................. 13
V. RISKS ............................................................................................................................... 14
ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: UPDATED RESULTS FRAMEWORK ................................................................ 16
ANNEX 2: SUMMARY OF CHANGES TO CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................ 32
ANNEX 3. ARGENTINA LENDING AND GEF PROGRAM, FY09-12 ................................. 36
ANNEX 4. OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS) .................................. 38
ANNEX 5. AAA PROGRAM FY09-FY11.............................................................................. 40
ANNEX 6. SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND
MANAGEMENT.................................................................................................................... 41
ANNEX 7: SUMMARY OF JOINT GOVERNMENT-BANK WORKSHOP ........................... 42
ANNEX 8. ARGENTINA: SELECTED ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS....... 44
ANNEX 9. ARGENTINA AT A GLANCE ............................................................................. 45

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The Board of Executive Directors discussed the 2010-2012 joint Bank-IFC
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)1 for the Argentine Republic on June 9, 2009. This
Progress Report (CPSPR) assesses the implementation at midpoint of Bank’s Country
Partnership Strategy with Argentina. The CPS provides strategic support to the Argentine
Republic in three key areas: sustainable growth with equity, social inclusion, and improved
governance. The strategy is focused on the implementation of existing portfolio and delivery of
new investment lending and a range of knowledge services to help achieve specific country
development outcomes.
2.
The development goals supported by the strategy remain valid, and there have
been no significant changes in Government priorities since the adoption of the CPS. The
investment partnership between Argentina and the Bank has been stable and consistent since its
adoption in 2004, focusing on the long-term goals of upgrading infrastructure, consolidating
social gains and poverty reduction, and improving public sector capacity. The global economic
crisis, the main source of uncertainty at the start of the CPS period, did not affect Argentina as
strongly as anticipated.
3.
Implementation of the 2010-2012 CPS is on track and yielding tangible results.
The Bank has maintained a dialogue with the authorities in areas that had been the central focus
of the previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), while adding new initiatives, the most
prominent of which is engagement in the cleanup of the Matanza Riachuelo river basin. 14
lending operations for the total amount of US$3,217 million2 have already been approved or are
in advanced stages of preparation, with another 4 projects for about US$200 million indicatively
planned before the end of the CPS period. Outcomes achieved to date are the result of long -term
engagement as well as of new analytical work, policy reforms and investments. IFC
commitments in Argentina totaled $516 million in FY09-10 and mobilized a further $325 million
from participating investors. These resources were invested with 20 clients operating principally
in the oil and gas, trade finance, and mining and processing sectors.
4.
The Bank program for the second half of the CPS period is well defined. The main
challenge for the next 18 months is to implement the large and complex portfolio of investments ,
building on experience and improved implementation capacity, and to implement the ongoing
technical assistance program with high quality and responsiveness to Government needs.
Possible changes in priorities after the upcoming elections will be addressed as part of the next
CPS preparation. For its part, IFC expects no significant changes in its approach for the
1

Report No. 48476-AR

2

The total takes into account cancellation of US$88 million from the Prevention and Management of Influenza Type
Illness and Strengthening of Argentina's Epidemiological System Project, Loan 7843-AR. Note also that Matanza
Riachuelo project is not part of this total as it was approved under the previous CPS, although its implementation
began during the current CPS period.

1

remainder of the CPS period. However, it does hope to support cross-border investments by
Argentine clients, and to finance emerging IT companies.
5.
Consistent with the results-based approach, this Progress Report focuses on the
main achievements to date and proposes some minor course adjustments. Section II of the
Report provides a summary of recent country developments. Section III describes progre ss
towards CPS outcomes and proposes changes to the results framework in light of implementation
experience. Section IV sets out the program for the rest of the CPS period, and Section V
contains a brief summary of key risks.

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
6.
The effects of the recent economic crisis have been less severe than anticipated. As
Argentina recovered from the profound crisis of 2001, its real Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
grew on average 8.5 percent per year between 2002 and 2008. Economic activity started to slow
in 2008 with a conflict over agricultural export duties during the first semester and the impact of
the global financial crisis in September. Real GDP growth declined to 6.8 percent in 2008 from
8.7 percent in 2007, according to official statistics. Economic activity declined further in 2009
due to a drop in external demand, declining commodity prices, continued deterioration in
investor confidence and a severe drought that weighed on agricultural production. Fiscal
performance deteriorated considerably in 2009 due to a decline in revenue stemming from lower
economic activity, counter-cyclical stimulus and the sharp decline in trade and related tax
revenue (the primary fiscal surplus fell from 3.1 percent of GDP in 2008 to 1.5 percent of GDP
in 2009). Increased economic uncertainty prompted an increase in capital outflows that offset
improvements in the current account due to reduced domestic demand. Gross international
reserves declined from a record of US$50.5 billion in April 2008 to US$47.9 billion at the end of
2009. Foreign currency sales allowed the Central Bank to m aintain relative exchange rate
stability. Gross public debt declined from 66.4 percent of GDP (US$153.0 billion) in 2002 to
47.1 percent of GDP (US$160.9 billion) by end-September 2010.
7.
The economy rebounded strongly in 2010, fueled by fast growth in internal
absorption, strong external demand (mainly Brazil and China), and commodity price
improvements. A significant revitalization of industrial activity in automobiles, basic metals and
textiles, and a normalization of agricultural production following the previous year’s severe
drought have contributed to the economy’s dynamism. Internal absorption has been boosted by
consumption, investment and an expansion of public spending. Real GDP is estimated to have
grown by 9.1 percent in 2010.

2

8.
Poverty is declining. According to official statistics, poverty has declined from 13.9
percent in June 2009 to 12.0 percent in June 2010 3. Unemployment is also falling, reaching 7.5
percent in September 2010, from a peak of 9.1 percent in September 2009. Early indications o f
trends in other social indicators (i.e., infant mortality and school enrollment) are also positive.
9.
Since December 2010, the Government has been actively seeking an agreement
with the Paris Club to restructure the official debt that has remained in default since 2001, and
an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has also been reached to conduct a
technical mission to Argentina to help design a new nationwide consumer price inflation index.
In addition, the Government has been calling for a social pact between unions and employers to
help anchor inflationary expectations.
10.
A long-standing delegation of legislative powers to the Executive branch expired in
August 2010. For decades many of the powers that in other countries are typically vested in the
Legislative branch in Argentina had been within the authority of the Executive. In 1994
Constitutional reform restored these powers to the Legislative branch, including, among others,
the authority to impose duties on trade and introduce changes to the public budget. The reform
however did not take effect immediately and included a transitory clause granting a five-year
period during which these powers would continue to be delegated to the Executive. This period
was extended by Congress several times over the years until August 24, 2010, when Congress
decided that such delegation to the Executive branch would no longer be authorized, thus
recouping its full authority as set forth by the Constitution and restoring the balance of power
between the branches of government.

B. OUTLOOK
11.
The political agenda for 2011 will be dominated by the upcoming presidential
elections. While their outcome remains uncertain, no fundamental changes in policies are
expected. Within the Peronist Party, there is an agreement that the state should maintain an
active role in the economy, providing substantial investments in social programs and
infrastructure. Representatives of the opposition Radical party and Support for an Egalitarian
Republic (ARI) party tend to share this view, although they may differ on mechanisms for
implementing such investments.
12.
Growth is expected to continue in the near term. Real GDP is projected to expand
by 9.1 percent in 2010 and by 5.8 in 2011; growth is likely to decelerate in 2011 due to an
expected moderation in external demand, continued high inflation that will take its toll on

3

Data based on official inflation figures, which are contested by market analysts.

3

consumer confidence and real incomes, and the possibility that firms will hold off investments
ahead of the 2011 presidential elections.
13.
Inflation is accelerating. Fiscal stimulus, bottlenecks in production, energy shortages
and a more relaxed monetary policy during the second half of 2010 are fueling inflationary
pressures. The gap between private and official inflation estimates remains w ide. According to
INDEC, inflation in December 2010 reached 11.0 percent compared to estimates of around 25.0
percent by market analysts for year-end. Some analysts expect inflation to accelerate further in
2011 (29 percent) as an expansionary fiscal and monetary stance will likely be maintained in the
run-up to October presidential elections.
14.
Fiscal accounts are stable. The primary balance is expected to post a surplus of 1.7
percent of GDP and the overall balance a surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP in 2010. Fiscal revenues
have increased strongly during 2010 due to economic recovery, inflation gains and greater export
tax revenue. Total revenue grew by 34.7 percent in 2010 compared to 18.7 percent the previous
year. Strong revenue performance has allowed the Government to maintain an expansionary
stance without endangering the primary balance; although expenditures have grown by 33.9
percent, the primary fiscal result has remained positive at AR$25.1billion. Fiscal accounts are
expected to deteriorate somewhat in 2011, as expenditures are likely to increase in the run-up to
the October presidential elections. The primary balance is expected to remain positive at 0.8
percent of GDP whereas the overall balance is likely to post a deficit of about 1.0 percent of
GDP in 2011.
15.
The financing gap is manageable. Argentina’s gross financing needs for 2010
(US$12.8 billion) have been covered by the primary surplus and the US$6.6 billion fund created
with Central Bank reserves in March 2010. Gross financing needs for 2011 (US$14.4 billion)
and 2012 (US$11.8 billion) are high, but also manageable. The successful debt exchange in June
2010 has opened the possibility for fresh financing from international capital markets 4. However,
the Government will likely continue to rely on inter-public sector borrowing (from the Social
Security Administration (ANSES) and Banco de la Nación Argentina) and the Central Bank
(through the issuance of local currency and the renewed use of international reserves 5) to cover
its financing needs.
16.
External accounts are deteriorating. During 2010, the trade balance posted a surplus
of US$12.1 billion, equivalent to 3.8 percent of GDP – a 28.9 percent decline relative to 2009.
The decline in the trade surplus occurred despite record soybean exports and dynamic
manufactured exports to Brazil, as imports grew even stronger due to the economic recovery:
4

In December 2010, the Government launched another attempt to swap the remainingUS$6.1bn of defaulted debt
that was not tendered during the two previous debt restructurings (2005 and June 2010). According to official
preliminary estimates, with the three debt restructuring initiatives 93% of defaulted debt has been restructured.
5

The decree ruling the extension of the 2010 Budget to 2011 also creates a US$7.5billion fund furnished with
Central Bank reserves to service debt with p rivate investors during 2011.

4

exports grew by 23.0 percent, while imports expanded by 45.5 percent. The current account
surplus is expected to narrow to 1.7 percent of GDP in 2010 (from 3.9 percent in 2009) and to
decline further in 2011.
17.
Monetary accounts. Strong dollar inflows from trade surpluses and a commitment to a
stable nominal exchange rate have led to record reserve accumulation, reaching US$52.2 billion
at the end of December 2010. Net international reserves amounted to US$41.9 billion, equivalent
to 78.0 percent of private M2, or 7.8 months of imports. At the same time, the nominal exchange
rate has appreciated by only 4.2 percent relative to 2009, trading at AR$3.98 per US$ at the end
of December. Continued sterilization of dollar inflows and transfers f rom Central Bank’s profits
to the Treasury have fueled a monetary expansion well beyond the recently updated monetary
target for 2010 – private M2 closed the year with a rate of growth of 31.5 percent, exceeding the
29.9 percent target for December 2010. In spite of high inflation, the nominal exchange rate is
expected to remain relatively stable in 2011. As long as Argentina’s terms of trade remain
favorable and the Brazilian Real, the currency of Argentina’s main trading partner, remains
strong, the economy is expected to absorb the loss in competitiveness associated with a moderate
real appreciation.
18.
Financial sector remains stable. During 2010, the financial system has remained
stable characterized by strong liquidity and capital adequacy figures. In addition, credit growth is
picking up while asset quality has reversed its negative trend in response to a more benign
economic environment. Financial stability is likely to be maintained in 2011.

III. PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES

A. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
19.
New lending commitments since the start of the CPS period include 12 investment
operations for US$2,617 million6, with another 6 projects for about US$800 million planned in
end of FY11 and FY12 (see Annex 3). Infrastructure investments account for the largest share of
new lending (36 percent), followed by health (29 percent) and social protection (27 percent).
Across the board, new lending is focused on assistance to provinces: 10 projects approved so far
under the CPS, accounting for 72 percent of the total lending amount, are funding expenditures
at the provincial level either through direct sub-national lending, or by supporting Government
transfers to the provinces. The new portfolio continues the traditional strong focus on results,
with 8 out 14 new operations including results based financing. Ten recently approved projects
have an explicit poverty focus, targeting disadvantaged social groups or regions.
6

This is based on current assumptions with respect to the schedule of Board presentation of pipeline operations and
this Progress Report. Basic Protection Board date as of 02/23/2011 is 03/10/2011.

5

20.
Portfolio performance during the first half of the CPS period has been strong.
The disbursement ratio in FY09 and FY10 has significantly increased from the FY08 levels
(from 12.2 percent to 29.1 and 23.4 percent respectively), particularly reflecting progress under
the infrastructure portfolio. There are 4 problem projects representing 10.5 percent of projects
by number, not including GEF.
21.
The focus on portfolio management and intensive dialogue with the Government
to address issues affecting the portfolio has continued and strengthened. Through the
Improving Investment Portfolio Management: Building Up Institutions, Systems and Human
Capital Project funded by an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) Grant, the Bank is
contributing to Government’s efforts to improve the design, preparation and approval of loans at
the national and provincial levels, procurement capacity, and portfolio monitoring. As an input
to the mid-point evaluation of the CPS, the Government and the Bank carried out a workshop on
challenges and risks faced in the preparation and implementation of investment projects,
focusing on the areas of procurement, safeguards and financial management. A joint action plan
defined at the workshop is now in implementation (see Annex 7).
22.
Analytical and technical assistance activities are also focused on infrastructure,
environment, social protection and health, sectors where the Bank has operational presence and
active dialogue (see Annex 5). There has been an increase in demand for Bank analytical
services at the sub-national level, including a number of requests for Fee Based Services (FBS)
for provinces in areas of public sector management and strategies for productive sectors. There
are currently three such operations underway in the provinces of Corrientes, Chaco and Cordoba.
23.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) program in Argentina during the
past few years has been geared toward export-oriented sectors with clients with a solid track
record, in sectors such as agribusiness, oil and gas, and information technology. Most recently,
the strategy has been expanded and, on a selective basis, IFC has started to invest in new clients
in strategic sectors such as ports, and in new sectors such as information technology. Although
the Corporation remains closely engaged with Argentina, market conditions have presented fresh
challenges to investment teams in the country. A combination of relatively low investment levels
by highly rated corporations and substantial liquidity in the local financial system has led to a
steady reduction in IFC commitments. Still with commitments totaling $516 million in FY09FY10 and an outstanding balance of $972.8 million for its own account and $861.6 million in
investments by participants at the end of June 2010, Argentina was IFC’s fourth largest ma rket
worldwide in terms of outstanding balance and the second largest in the region after Brazil.

6

B. RESULTS TO DATE
24.
Overall progress towards expected CPS outcomes has been strong, particularly
under the Sustainable Growth and Social Inclusion pillars. Consistency over time in the
strategic areas and priorities of Bank engagement means that some long-term programs are now
bearing fruit and translating into country level outcomes. In three specific areas – transport,
health, and social protection – it is possible to report that CPS outcomes have made a significant
contribution to Argentina’s development goals. Likewise, in areas such as water and sanitation,
rural education, agriculture and rural electricity, important achievements can be reported at the
regional and local level. The main results under the Improved Governance pillar have occurred
in the area of efficiency of public institutions, with a more recent shift in client demand towards
customized assistance to provinces in addressing their priority governance challenges, such as
fiscal performance or social services delivery.

Pillar I: Sustainable Growth with Equity
25.
In line with the country’s goal of improving competitiveness and addressing resource
degradation, the first pillar of the CPS emphasizes upgrading infrastructure in key sectors,
improving competitiveness in agriculture and addressing selected issues of resource degradation.
The most significant results achieved to date are as follows.
26.
Improved condition of national and selected provincial highway networks. A
major focus of Bank assistance in the infrastructure sector has been ensuring that the national
highway network reaches the target of over 90 percent of roads in good condition. The Bank’s
contribution to this outcome has been through the introduction and partial financing of outcomebased rehabilitation and maintenance contracts (Contrato de Recuperación y Mantenimiento, or
CREMA contracts) that currently cover over 70 percent of the national highway system of
34,000 kilometers, and are also used as a network management tool in seven provinces. Based on
the efforts since the late 1990s, in the course of 2009-2010 the national road network achieved a
steady state, that is, fully removed the backlog of deferred maintenance and now boasts over 98
percent of roads in good condition, surpassing the CPS target. Seven provinces using the
CREMA system also achieved the same level of road quality, confirming the effectiveness of the
model, which has now been adopted by other countries of the region including Brazil and Peru.
27.
Improved urban transport services. The Bank has been supporting investments and
institutional strengthening reforms in the urban transport subsector through a large program of
lending (PTUBA, PTUMA) and GEF (Sustainable Transport and Air Quality) operations. Bank
support is focused on improving the quality and sustainability of urban transport systems in
Metropolitan Areas of Argentina, through the improvement of sectoral decision making and by
giving priority to public transport modes and projects that have lower carbon-footprint and lower
7

impact on climate change. While it is too early to assess overall outcomes, Bank-financed
interventions include the rehabilitation of metro line A, urban transport transfer centers, and
road/rail underpasses in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area, as well as enhanced decision
making tools (surveys, transport models, strategic plans, feasibility and design studies) and
setting up permanent statistical data gathering and results monitoring systems in Buenos Aires
and in five medium size metropolitan areas. The Bank is also supporting the Government’s
efforts to improve road safety through an ongoing Road Safety Project.
28.
Improved water and sanitation services to the poor have been a major focus of the
Bank’s partnership with the Province of Buenos Aires. A series of three operations (including
one Additional Financing) for an aggregate amount of US$470 million have been approved since
2004 to support infrastructure investments in the province, including in water and sanitation with
the objective of expanding access to these services to 128,000 poor residents in areas with high
sanitary or environmental vulnerability.
29.
Among the new water sector operations particularly notable are the Matanza
Riachuelo project and two projects in the Norte Grande provinces, a region that suffers from low
coverage and poor quality of services in both water and sanitation. The Matanza Riachuelo
Program (US$840 million) began implementation in recent months, after initial delays reflecting
the program’s complexity and high profile. When completed, the project will directly benefit 2.1
million people through the expansion of sanitation services and 5.7 million people through the
protection of the water intake. Although it is too early to measure results, progress achieved so
far in building institutional capacity of the Matanza Riachuelo River Basin Authority
(ACUMAR) and in advancing the prequalification process for the large sanitation works, as well
as the high priority assigned to the program by the national and sub-national authorities suggest
that this program is likely to achieve its objectives. The two Norte Grande operations are
expected to provide new coverage to 32,000 low income residents. However it will take longer
than the remainder of the CPS period for these recent operations to achieve intended results.
30.
Addressing the challenge of resource degradation. Activities are underway in four
critical areas. The Matanza Richuelo Program, mentioned above, supports the cleanup of the
Matanza Richuelo urban river basin. Through the Sustainable Natural Resources Management
Project as well as GEF operations supporting biodiversity conservation, steps have been taken to
control illegal logging in Chaco, set up monitoring units for forest and deforestation assessments
and build critical infrastructure to better protect national parks. Under the Mining Environmental
Restoration Project, a containment and monitoring system for uranium mining tailings has been
put in place at Malargue site. Finally, Clean Development Mechanisms (CDM) projects have
enabled the elimination of a total of 2,778 tons of Ozone Depleting Substance, far above the
targets originally set.

8

31.
Increased production diversification and poverty alleviation in the agricultural
sector. The World Bank is supporting Argentina’s agricultural sector through a two-pronged
approach: (i) production diversification in the non-pampean region through infrastructure
investments geared towards commercial-scale agriculture, and (ii) improved productivity and
sustainability of small scale production through the financing of investments and working
capital. The first phase of this approach supported by the Provincial Agricultural Development
Project has already produced results: cultivation in project areas increased by 55,000 ha;
agricultural production grew by 210,000 tons, including a 109 percent aggregate production
increase achieved by irrigation subprojects in Mendoza and Tucumán Provinces fueled, among
others, by agricultural productivity increases of 80 percent in grapes, 188 percent in fruits and
198 percent in vegetable yields (kg/ha); and export volumes of fruit (apples, pears, peac hes and
cherries) in Mendoza, and strawberries in Tucumán, also grew by 47 percent and 1.173 percent
respectively. The small-scale producers segment of the Bank agriculture sector strategy has
focused mostly on the sustainability and improved income generation capacity of the rural poor.
So far 10,306 productive subprojects have been completed benefitting 73,926 people.
32.
Improved access to rural electricity supply. Through the Renewable Energy in Rural
Markets project7 the Bank is supporting the implementation of a major initiative to improve
access to electricity in rural communities with a particular emphasis on the electrification of rural
households and schools using renewable sources such as wind and solar energy. Proposed
outputs such as the electrification of 25,000 households and 2,000 rural schools are on track to be
met during this CPS period.
33.
IFC engagements in Argentina have been strongly centered on projects that
support this pillar. In the area of infrastructure, IFC has financed several clients to upgrade port
installations. IFC provided a loan to Noble Argentina SA, an existing client, to support the
construction and operation of a soybean crushing plant near Rosario. As well as raising export
volumes, this project allowed Noble to expand and upgrade its environmental and social
practices. IFC provided long term loans to Buenos Aires port operators TRP and Exolgan to
increase trade volumes and cruise ship traffic.
34.
Supporting job creation and small and medium-sized enterprises. An important
component of IFC’S strategy in Argentina has been to support job creation and meet the needs of
low-income populations. Overall, the 20 investees in Argentina that currently report employment
to IFC provided about 67,000 jobs in 2009, compared with 39,000 jobs provided by 12 investees
four years earlier. IFC has worked to channel financing to small companies and farms that often
struggle to find reasonably priced working capital lines. Local banks tend to favor larger and less
risky corporate clients. However, key partner Banco Galicia used IFC credit lines to provide
direct financing to export-oriented SMEs and small farms, making over 12,000 SME loans in

7

Approved in 1999 but still ongoing with Additional Financing approved in 2008.

9

calendar year 2009 for a total $719 million. IFC also worked with Banco Galicia to increase the
availability of financial services in Argentina's poorest and most underserved regions.
35.
Argentina’s strong human development level has enabled the emergence of a small
but dynamic IT sector. In FY09, IFC provided quasi-equity financing to Grupo ASSA, a small
IT company that faced difficulties funding growth plans due to the limited availability of long term capital.
36.
While Argentina is a relatively small source of GHGs, IFC has sought wherever
possible to improve clients’ emissions profiles. In FY10 it provided $25 million in equity
financing for Aluar Aluminio Argentino to complete expansion of its plant in the province of
Chubut that set a benchmark for energy efficiency and environmental best practices in the
region. Aluar expects to raise annual exports by almost 25 percent to $730 million, as well as
generate certified emission reduction credits under the UNFCC’s Clean Development
Mechanism.
37.
The country’s strategic oil and gas industry has relied on IFC for long term
financing. The Corporation provided financing for Argentina-based oil producers Diadema and
PAE for a total $205 million during the CPS period. These clients have also provided a key flow
of resources for local and federal governments through the $1.4 billion in annual royalty and tax
payments, as well as reducing Argentina’s energy imports. Both operators adopted community
development programs as well as complying with IFC Performance Standards, as have other IFC
investees in this sector.

Pillar II: Social Inclusion
38.
In line with the country’s goal of poverty reduction and consolidation of gains in health
and education, the second pillar of the CPS is focused on improving the country’s social safety
net and consolidating progress on selected health outcomes. Key achievements to date under this
pillar include the following.
39.
Transformation of the social protection system. Supported by a highly productive
dialogue and focused lending and analytical contributions by the Bank, a prominent outcome
proposed under the CPS – the move from crisis-time emergency support to a long-term social
protection system with expanded income coverage for vulnerable children—has been achieved.
In November 2009 the Government introduced a universal child allowance, which provides
about US$45 per month to 3.7 million poor children and youth under age 18 subject to school
attendance and health check-ups. The implementation of the new program was facilitated by the
close collaboration between ANSES and the Ministry of Health. By integrating and crosschecking the information on their databases, ANSES was able to register 230 thousand children
10

that were already enrolled in Plan Nacer, an ambitious Government program aiming to increase
access to health services for uninsured women and children through a results-based approach.
Plan Nacer in its turn increased coverage by 71 percent because enrollment in the Plan is a
condition of receiving the child allowance.
40.
Improved maternal and child health results. Reducing infant and maternal mortality
represents a key development goal for Argentina. Plan Nacer is the instrument to ensure the
sustainability of the gains achieved in this indicator during recent years. The Bank has been
supporting this program since its inception both through analytic work and a series of investment
projects. The program has already yielded important results. As of September 2010, 1.47 million
previously uninsured pregnant women and children have gained access to a defined package of
essential health services. The share of expectant mothers in the poorest Northern provinces who
receive pre-natal consultations by week 20 has risen to 52 percent from the baseline of only 3
percent 8. National immunization rates have reached 98.6 percent (children under age 18 months
receiving measles vaccine or triple viral coverage).
41.
Improved access and quality of education in the rural sector. Argentina’s high
levels of school attendance mask high rates of dropout and repetition and large differences in
educational attainment by region, gender and socioeconomic status. The Bank’s dialogue in the
education sector focuses mostly in the rural areas where these issues are particularly relevant.
Through the Rural Education Improvement Project the Bank is supporting selected investments
in rural educational establishments ranging from improved teaching materials and training to the
refurbishing of basic school infrastructure. The solid progress in implementation of the project
has generated improved teaching and student learning conditions as more than 95 percent of the
schools in the rural areas have benefited from at least one activity included in the project. This
has also translated into improved coverage, namely, a 5.6 percentage point increase (to 76.8
percent) in transition between the 7th and 8th grade and promotion rates in grades 1 to 3 has
improved from 76 percent to 83.2 percent.

Pillar III: Improved Governance
42.
The CPS envisioned supporting country goals of expanding performance based
management and improving the quality of public expenditures, enhancing service delivery
outcomes and trust in institutions; and strengthening public sector capacity to spur investme nt
and growth. While these goals remain relevant, the Government has chosen not to seek Bank
financing in support of performance based budgeting, and instead has asked the Bank to focus its
efforts on improving the efficiency of national and sub-national public institutions. The Bank’s

8

This improvement includes two different effects: a clear health outcome improvement and an improvement in the
health information systems and registration processes.

11

program has been adjusted to respond to this changing demand, requiring a corresponding
adjustment in the CPS results framework.
43.
Improved efficiency of public institutions. The Bank has supported a number of
initiatives aimed at greater efficiency of public services. Assisted by the Institutional
Strengthening of the National Social Security Administration Project, the percent of people who
report satisfaction by ANSES services grew from 45 percent to 78 percent between 2005 and
2010. Investments and technical assistance financed by the Social and Fiscal National
Identification System Project (APL 2) allowed the agency to bring the share of correctly
registered and identified population to 92 percent (up from 31 percent in 2008). 16 Government
agencies and programs are using consistent common processes to identify entities and assets, and
this number is likely to increase to 18 by the end of the CPS period. This is expected to
contribute to the improvement of the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of social services and
fiscal programs at all levels of government.
44.
Improved governance at sub-national level. In response to demand from subnational administrations, the Government and the Bank have agreed to devote a share of B ank
assistance to addressing priority development challenges of several provinces, including some
structural service delivery vulnerabilities. Ongoing and new projects in support of this agenda
include the San Juan and La Rioja SWAps and a new operation in the Salta province currently
under preparation. Results of these projects are likely to be seen in the next CPS period.
45.
Governance and fiduciary issues are a cross-cutting theme in Bank program.
Preparation and implementation support to all projects includes a strong governance focus.
Fiduciary considerations have been an important aspect of Bank’s program in Argentina since
the 2006 CAS introduced a Fiduciary Action Plan as an essential complement to the
implementation of a full investment partnership in the context of relative fiduciary fragility. Over
the years, a number of instruments developed to reinforce fiduciary monitoring and evaluation –
including the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA), audit compliance monitoring, and
concurrent audits—have shown their effectiveness in ensuring the fiduciary integrity of the
Argentina investment portfolio. In addition, a Governance and Accountability Action Plan has
been agreed for projects in the health sector, and its implementation is jointly reviewed by the
Government and the Bank once a year. The Government and the Bank are collaborating on a
series of capacity building initiatives in the governance area, including workshops on
procurement, safeguards and fiduciary aspects of project implementation for agencies in all
sectors.
C. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK
46.
The main elements of the 2010-2012 CPS results framework remain relevant, and
the achievement of most intended results is on track. The following adjustments are proposed
in light of changes in priorities and implementation experience discussed above (see Annex 2).
12

47.
First, some originally envisaged areas of Bank assistance have been replaced with
new areas that emerged as higher priority during implementation. For example, operations
in power transmission, environmental management of extractive industries and public
expenditure management did not materialize, and instead Bank resources were shifted to
improving road safety and customized assistance to provinces, including the new focus on
transport and water infrastructure in the Norte Grande region. Under the Governance Pillar, the
Government decided not to seek Bank assistance for performance based budgeting, and instead
asked to focus the efforts on improving the quality of public instit utions, including at the
provincial level.
48.
Second, the results framework has been adjusted to improve clarity and ensure
better alignment between Bank activities and expected outcomes. For example, result
indicators for the education sector have been clarified to focus on rural education, which reflects
the scope of Bank involvement in the sector. Indicators for public transport, natural forest
management and solid waste management sectors, as well as for most of the Governance pillar,
have been reformulated in line with the actual scale of Bank’s contribution. Similarly, indicators
of portfolio performance have been clarified (e.g., by defining disbursement targets), and new
expected outcomes have been introduced to reflect the results of joint Government/ Bank
implementation workshop (see Annex 7), such as improvement of fiduciary and safeguards
capacity of Government agencies implementing investment projects, improvement of dialogue
between the Government and the Bank on safeguards and fiduciary issues, and strengthening the
coordination role of the Government.

IV. FUTURE ENGAGEMENT
49.
The main focus of Bank’s engagement with Argentina for the remainder of the
CPS period is implementation support for the large and complex portfolio of investments
(see Annex 4). The Bank will work closely with the client to ensure that projects currently under
implementation are executed in a smooth and efficient manner and produce the intended
development results.
50.
The indicative Bank lending program for the remainder of the CPS period is well
defined and project preparation has been advanced, taking into account expected difficulties
in progressing new operations in the run-up to October 2011 elections. Four new lending
operations are envisaged in the last year of the CPS (FY12). Additional Financing to Cordoba
Roads (US$30 million) would allow for the expansion of this successful ongoing project. Social
Inclusion Project (US$53 million) is focused on rural poverty alleviation. Sustainable Industrial
Development Project (US$40 million) would support small and medium enterprises in Argentina
with inadequate access to credit to improve their compliance with environmental regulations,
while simultaneously boosting their industrial competitiveness. Finally, a SWAp to the Province
13

of Salta (US$60 million) would continue building on the experience of other sub-national
SWAps to address the key development challenges of the province.
51.
Country dialogue and non-lending work in the final part of the CPS period will
focus on implementing the ongoing program as well as on laying the foundations for the
new CPS. The Bank will continue analyzing emerging issues and policy priorities that could
serve as a basis for the new Country Partnership Strategy.
52.
IFC’s strategy during the remainder of this CPS period is expected to remain
substantially unchanged. Its focus will remain on export-oriented industries with a record of
strong management and sound financial performance. It will continue to focus on job creation
and on low-income groups. IFC remains committed to seeking more investments in ―Frontier‖
regions in the north of Argentina. However, wherever appropriate, IFC could also engage with
corporate clients making cross-border investments in the region or in emerging countries beyond
Latin America. IFC also hopes to maintain its selective support for Argentina’s emerging IT
industry.

V. RISKS
53.
Notwithstanding upcoming presidential elections, political risk for the Bank’s
lending program in the near future is assessed as low. As discussed in paragraph 11, the
major political parties share broadly common core policy goals, with which the Bank’s current
investment program is broadly consistent. Two further factors provide substantial mitigation of
the political risk. First, the bulk of the program will be in the implementation phase at the time of
the upcoming political transition, and thus is unlikely to be affected in the absence of substantial
changes in direction. Second, and more important, projects supported under the current CPS are
focused on the areas of broad consensus and long term engagement.
54.
Macroeconomic risks are moderate. In the medium term, accelerating inflation, due
to continued expansionary macroeconomic policies, higher wage demands and global
inflationary pressures is likely to fuel uncertainty and threaten competitiveness. Fiscal
expenditures will need to be adjusted and other measures may need to be adopted to rein in
inflation and to ensure medium-term macro sustainability.
55.
Implementation risks for the portfolio are substantial. The Bank’s portfolio includes
many complex, large and high profile operations, particularly in the area of infrastructure, which
are subject to a range of implementation risks. In particular, portfolio includes several Category
A projects triggering a range of Bank safeguard policies. At the sub-national level, projects are
subject to additional risks due to lower implementation capacity in some provinces, and to
changing political relations with the national level. Furthermore, upcoming elections may lead to
additional implementation challenges due to possible staff turnover. These risks are mitigated at
14

the level of specific projects through close supervision/ implementation support of the portfolio
as well as at the country level through capacity building efforts in safeguards and procurement.
56.
Fiduciary risks are moderate. Public Financial Management (PFM) system in
Argentina is well designed, has adequate legal basis and human resources have the required
technical skills and qualifications. However, the PFM system has been operating below
expectations. Major factors that have affected PFM are: (i) the incomplete budget coverage; and
(ii) the control environment (sub-optimal level of rule enforcement and attitude towards
internal/external audit recommendations). Incompatibilities between procurement requirements
under the World Bank guidelines and national procurement regulations may also have impacted
implementation of some projects. The Bank team is committed to working closely with the client
to build better understanding of the Bank's policies and guidelines. Capacity to implement
procurement processes and implement public financial management is weaker at the provincial
level, although there is variation across provinces. This may present additional challenges for
projects implemented by provinces. The Bank is addressing these risks both through attention to
fiduciary concerns in project design and supervision, and through a program of capacity building
activities that was designed and is implemented in close collaboration with the client.
57.
The risk of external or domestic shocks is also moderate. Like other countries,
Argentina is vulnerable to natural disasters, changes in the external economic environment and
domestic political tensions. The Bank portfolio includes several elements that seek to mitigate
some of such risks, including a series of flood protection projects and operations in the area of
environment, as well as socially targeted programs such as Plan Nacer and Basic Social
Protection that could be used quickly to respond to an adverse event.

15

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework
Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

1. Infrastructure Development
Upgrade Argentina’s
infrastructure to address
constraints on
competitiveness, and
underpin medium-term
growth and poverty
alleviation.

Rate of infrastructure
investment has been highly
variable, declining from 3% of
GDP in the 1980s to 1.7% in
the 1990s to less than 0.5% in
1995-2003.

Transport Network Improved
achieving a steady state as
indicated by at least 90% of
national and provincial18
paved non-concessioned roads
in good condition and no
deferred maintenance factors
affecting the network.

16,700 km of the national
network managed though
CREMA.
2,104 km of the provincial
network managed through
CREMA.

98% of roads in good or fair
condition as a share of total
classified roads (13,416 km
managed through CREMA as
of November 2010)

National Highway Asset
Management APL I and II
(approved FY04 and FY07,
respectively) (LEN)
Provincial Road II (approved
FY05) (LEN)
Córdoba Road Infrastructure
+ AF
(approved FY07 and LEN,
respectively)
Infrastructure Project for the
Province of Buenos Aires
Infrastructure (APL1, II and
AF) (approved FY05, FY07
and FY11) (LEN)
Norte Grande Transport
(approved FY11) (LEN)

Increase capacity in key
segments of the network.

136 km of dual carriage ways
constructed.

Construction of dual carriage
roads underway with an
estimate 6 months delay from
the original 5 years
construction contract. Cost
overruns may lead to increased
budgetary contribution from
the provincial government.

Santa Fe Road Infrastructure
Project
(approved FY07) (LEN)

16

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

1. Infrastructure Development
Upgrade Argentina’s
infrastructure to address
constraints on
competitiveness, and
underpin medium-term
growth and poverty
alleviation.

Argentina has a high index of
road fatalities due to
accelerated motorization in the
absence of substantial public
policy intervention.

Improvements in infrastructure
and services has not kept up
with increase in public
transport demand. Operational
subsidies absorb an increasing
share of public resources and
lower incentives to operational
efficiencies.

Help build institutional
capacity of the National Road
Safety agency on the first
phase in a longer term national
objectives of reducing the
severity and number of road
accidents in Argentina.

Establishment of a National
Driver License Registry.
Establishment of National
Traffic Records and Infractions
Registry System
National Road Safety
Observatory in operation.

National Driver License
established and operational in 1
province and 7 municipalities.
National traffic records in
testing phase.

Road Safety (approved FY10)
(LEN)

Contribute to increased
investments in public transport
together with a rationalization
of the current subsidy scheme.

Transport infrastructure
investments in medium size
metropolitan areas (Tucuman,
Mendoza and Posadas) lead to
significant service
improvements.

Investments are at design stage.

Argentina Metropolitan
Areas Urban
Transport Project (PTUMA)
(approved FY10) (LEN)

Strengthening of institutional
planning capacities in the
Buenos Aires Metropolitan
Region and selected medium
size cities.

Buenos Aires Urban
Transport Project
(PTUBA) and Additional
Financing
(approved FY97 and FY07)
(LEN)

Establishment and initial
operation of a Public Transport
Agency in the Buenos Aires
metropolitan area.
4 medium sized metropolitan
areas have updated their origindestination household survey

4% of population (mainly
rural) lack access to electricity.
There is always room for
improving energy efficiency on
the demand side.

Increase rural access to
electricity supply and promote
energy efficiency while
contributing to address climate
change issues.

GEF Transport and Air
Quality (FY09)

25,600 households electrified
with sustainable electricity
services by 2012

7,777 households have been
electrified with the expectation
that the full target will be
achieved.

2,000 rural schools electrified
with reliable, renewable
electricity supply by 2012

1,870 are expected to be
electrified by 2012 (currently:
1,377)

PERMER + Additional
Financing
(approved FY99 and FY09)

Contracts to equip another 400
households with wind power
systems, 36 schools with solar
power, 314 public buildings

17

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

1. Infrastructure Development
and 59 solar water heating
systems have been signed.
Another 7 mini-grids which
would serve a total of over
1200 users are also being built.

Upgrade Argentina’s
infrastructure to address
constraints on
competitiveness, and
underpin medium-term
growth and poverty
alleviation.

24.5 million CFL have been
purchased using counterpart
financing.

GEF Energy Efficiency
(Approved FY08)

Matanza-Riachuelo Basin
Sustainable
Development Project (APL-1)
(approved FY09) (LEN)

Matanza Riachuelo River Basin
is the most contaminated river
basin in Argentina and
represents a case of critical
social and environmental
degradation.

Integrated clean up of the
Matanza Riachuelo River Basin
consisting of sanitation,
industrial pollution abatement,
rehabilitation of low income
neighborhoods and flood risk
reduction.

Establishment and operation of
a multijurisdictional River
Basin Authority.

ACUMAR is fully operational
and in charge of the CMR
program.

Initiate construction of trunk
collection, transmission,
treatment and disposal
infrastructure for Matanza
Riachuelo River Basin.

Prequalification process for the
construction of the left bank
infrastructure is underway.
Bidding expected to start in
first quarter of Calendar 2011.

Limited access by poor
population to water and
sanitation services.

Expand water and sewage
coverage for poor residents in
selected areas of BA Province.

Initiate pilot plans for the
rehabilitation of low income
neighborhoods.

Initial implementation of pilot
plans in at least 2
neighborhoods.

Expand water and sewage
coverage for 128,000 poor
residents in areas of BA
Province with high sanitary
or environmental vulnerability.

107,622 people with water and
sewage coverage, from which
85,219 have access to
improved water resources and
22,403 have new piped
household water connections.

Buenos Aires Province
Infrastructure (APL-I, II and
AF)
(approved FY05, FY07 and
FY11) (LEN)

18

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

1. Infrastructure Development
Upgrade Argentina’s
infrastructure to address
constraints on
competitiveness, and
underpin medium-term
growth and poverty
alleviation.

Poor urban and productive
rural areas affected by
significant flood risk.

Reduced flooding vulnerability
in selected urban and rural
areas.

Initiate a program for
strengthening water service
providers in the Northern
region of Argentina with the
expectation of increasing water
coverage for about 32,000
additional beneficiaries in the
medium term.

Project at initial stage.

Norte Grande Water
Infrastructure (approved
FY11) and Second Norte
Grande Water Infrastructure
(pipeline FY11) (LEN)

City of BA: Reduce flood risk
from biannual events to once
every 10 years events for a
population of about 100,000
people living in the most
critically flooded areas in the
Maldonado Basin.

City of BA: Short drainage
tunnel completed. 18 months
extension approved to allow
full contract implementation.

Urban Flood Prevention and
Drainage (APL1)
(approved FY05) (LEN)

Reduce flood risk for a
population in selected
provinces (Chaco, Corrientes
and Santa Fe) of about 150,000
and covering an area of about
8,500 ha.

PIDU: Slow implementation
pace with only US$35 million
in contracts signed and delays
in contract implementation.
Two year extension in process.

Urban Flood Prevention and
Drainage (PIDU) (APL2)
(approved FY06) (LEN)

19

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Improve competitiveness,
quality, and exports of
agriculture and livestock
production

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Status
Program Expects to
Influence
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management
Building an even more
competitive, diversified and
inclusive agricultural sector
will require strengthened
national and provincial
institutions.

Low priority assigned to rural
poverty despite representing
28% of Argentina’s poor and
2.5times the poverty rate
prevailing in urban areas.

Contribute to increasing
beneficiaries household
incomes through improvements
in farm productivity, expanded
output and diversification to
crops with higher added value.

Support a strategy for poor
rural communities that may
lead to improved infrastructure,
increased production of
agricultural products for family
consumption and increase value
added and diversification of
production.

Provincial Agricultural Devt
strategies designed and under
implementation in at least 12
provinces.

Completed

55,000 ha of increased land
area under cultivation in project
irrigation areas, achieved
through six subprojects (66%
increase from baseline) in CH,
ER, MZ and TM.

Completed

210,000 tons of additional
aggregate production achieved
through four subprojects (109%
increase from baseline) in MZ
and TM

Completed

Increased agricultural
productivity in project areas:
80% (grapes) to 198%
(vegetables) yield (kg/ha),
increases achieved by irrigation
subprojects in Mendoza.

Completed

Increased agrifood exports
value and its participation in
national exports

Completed (agrifood exports
value grew 38% from 2006 to
2010, representing 56% of
national exports)

Satisfactory outcomes for
72,000 beneficiaries
Satisfactory subprojects
completions for a target of
12,000 subprojects.
No specific outcomes were
defined for subprojects.

Completed

Bank Program
Instruments

PROSAP I and II
(approved FY07 and FY09)
(LEN)

PROINDER and AF
(approved FY98 and FY08)
(LEN)

20

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Address a growing
problem of resource
degradation.

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Status
Program Expects to
Influence
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management
Increased contamination and
resource degradation derived
from disposal and poor
management of solid waste.

Policy and incentive framework
to engage landowners in
sustainable forestry
management (SFM) is not yet
in place and the control
framework is weak.

National Parks facing
infrastructure and human
resources deficits to maintain
adequate protection levels in
light of heightened tourism
activity.

Increase
investments
in
integrated urban solid waste
management.

Improving the policy and
planning frameworks for the
management of forest
resources.

Upgrading park management
infrastructure and sustainable
development opportunities in
and around parks.

11 provincial and municipal
solid waste management plans
completed by 2012.

9 plans completed (4 Provincial
and 5 Municipal). 2 provincial
under preparation.

At least 3 sanitary landfills
built.

2 large landfills contracts in
process and 2 underway.

At least 40 dumpsites closed by
2012.

Closing about 51 microdumpsites in Cordoba.

At least 3 solid waste recovery
and transfer plants.

Transfer station already built in
Rosario.4 more plants planned
to be built by 2012.

Policy and incentive framework
for sustainable forestry
management in place, including
funds available to small
producers for conservation, tree
planting and SFM.

Development of a system to
control illegal logging in the
Chaco is underway, and 4
regional monitoring units for
forest and deforestation
assessments are being installed.
A plan for reform of the
Direccion de Bosques has been
completed and under review by
SAyDS. Work with Plantation
Forests is gaining momentum
but still behind schedule.

Increased financial and
institutional capacity of the
National Parks authority in
ensuring the protection of parks
in a context of growing tourism
activities.

Major Infrastructure for Las
Quijadas National Park is 95%
complete. A contract for
infrastructure works has been
made for Talampaya Park, and
procurement has advanced for
infrastructure in Bosques
Petrificados and Los Alisos
Parks, Sustainable development
projects are underway around
Talampaya park.

Bank Program
Instruments

Solid Waste Management
Project
(approved FY06)(LEN)

IBRD Sustainable Natural
Resources
Management Project.
(approved FY08) (LEN)
GEF Biodiversity
Conservation in Productive
Forestry Landscapes
(approved FY07) (LEN)
GEF Rural Corridors and
Biodiversity
Conservation
(approved FY10) (LEN)

21

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Address a growing
problem of resource
degradation.

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Status
Program Expects to
Influence
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management
Low priority assigned to
environmental risk
management in mining sector.

Environmental plans for
containment uranium mining
tailings, developed

Mining sector environmental
risk management policies of
CNEA, and of the Secretaries
of Mining and Environment
strengthened. Containment
system for uranium mining
tailings completed and
monitoring in place at
Malargue site; environmental
management plans
(remediation, monitoring and
consultation) prepared for 7
other CNEA sites (closed
uranium mines and/or
processing plants)

Increase access to
international carbon markets

Argentine Carbon Facility in
SAyDS strengthened and in
capacity to advise and process
CDM Project

80% of planned site
remediation works completed
in accordance with best
international practices. Only
one (Malargue)
CNEA site has environmental
management plans applied in
accordance with best
international practices.

Mining Environmental
Restoration Project
(approved FY09) (LEN)

Petrobras Gas Transport
System Project
(approved FY10), Salta
Landfill Gas Capture Project
(approved FY08), Olavarría
Methane Capture Project
(approved FY05)
Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (approved FY09)

CDM projects contribution to
CO2 reductions of about
300,000 tons per annum.
Eliminate an additional 109
tons of Ozone Depleting
Substances (ODS).

Bank Program
Instruments

The original PDO target has
been achieved, with a total of
2,778 tons of ODS eliminated.
With the additional subproject,
a total of 2,887 will be
eliminated

Montreal Protocol Ozone
Depleting Substances
GEF Third National
Communication to UNFCCC
Project (pipeline FY10) and
Kyoto Protocol Adaptation
Fund

22

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Reduction in poverty by
supporting the government in
a long term strategy for
Social Protection

PILLAR 2-SOCIAL INCLUSION
Issues and Obstacles
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Status
Program Expects to
Influence
1.Supporting Progress Towards Permanent Safety Nets and Fostering Employment
Limited coverage of social
protection system, including
key vulnerable groups, benefits
in some programs inadequate to
meet intended objectives, and
issues of fiscal sustainability.

Limited educational and
employment service initiatives
for the integration of the
unemployed into the productive
market place.

Supporting the government’s
efforts in developing and
implementing a Universal
Social Protection Strategy for
the most vulnerable groups.

Integrating marginalized
groups into the productive
marketplace

Bank Program
Instruments

Establishment of a universal
allowance for vulnerable
children (UAVC) under 18
years old conditioned on
compliance with education and
health requirements.

UAVC:3.8 million
beneficiaries

Basic Protection Project
(approved) (LEN)
Basic Protection AF (pipeline
FY11) (LEN)
Argentina Social Protection
AAA

Coverage under the UAVC
benefits at least 90% of eligible
population.

Coverage under the UAVC
benefits about 70% of eligible
population.

Social Programs towards the
Bicentennial
AAA (FY09)

Award of 100,000 secondary
and primary education
certificates of adult education.

14,481 received certification.

Heads of Household
Transition Project
(approved FY06)

Participation of 250,000
workers in competency based
training courses.

155,000 workers have
benefited from competency
based courses.

Life Long Learning Project
(approved FY07)

Certification of 70,000 workers
based on competency based
occupational standards.

31,506 workers certified

Employment Inequality AAA
(FY10

Beneficiaries by end of
September 2010: 1.47 million
covering about 70% of the
eligible population. In Centro,
Patagonia and Cuyo Regions
coverage was 66% on average
with more than 916,000 active
beneficiaries, while in the
Northern Region was 83% with
more than 559,000 enrollees.

Provincial Maternal-Child
Health APL1&2
(approved FY 04 and FY07)

2. Improving Selected Health and Education Outcomes
Consolidate improvements in
health indicators and
improve quality.

Population without health
coverage is 35-39%

Provision of provincial health
insurance coverage for
maternal child health
beneficiaries (mothers up to 45
days after delivery and children
up to 6).

Beneficiaries by end of
December 2011: 1.7 million,
corresponding to about 80% of
the eligible population.

23

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Consolidate improvements in
health indicators and
improve quality.

Issues and Obstacles

Population without health
coverage is 35-39%

Disparity in the provision of
priority health programs rates
across regions.

PILLAR 2-SOCIAL INCLUSION
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
Provision of selective insurance
coverage for vulnerable groups
(children up to 19 years,
women up to 65 years)
Improve effectiveness of
Federal Public Health system in
delivering results under seven
priority health programs
including breast and cervix
cancer, diabetes, vaccine
preventable diseases,
HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis.

Strengthen leadership of MoH
and health sector governance.

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

Pending project approval.

Provincial Health Insurance
(pipeline FY11) (LEN)

Autochthonous measles cases
are maintained at zero.
Congenital rubella cases
decrease to zero at the end of
the project.
Prevalence of smoking has
decreased by 6%
Argentina has certified in 90%
of its Provinces with Chagas
disease (17 out of 19
Provinces), the interruption of
vectorial transmission.
85% of Provinces are
accredited for public health
functions and programs
developed with a minimum
standards and norms for all 10
prioritized programs.

3 cases (all imported)

Essential Public Health
Functions Project (approved
FY07)

Establishment of a National
Health Policy Observatory
aimed at improving the quality
and access to information
related to the performance and
results attained by the health
system in Argentina.
Governance and Accountability
Action Plan (GAPP) agreed
and under implementation by
the Ministry of Health.

Observatory at pre design
stage.
GAAP agreed and under
implementation. Reviewed
jointly by the Bank and
Government once a year.

1 case (imported)

2nd Essential Public Health
Functions Project (LEN)
(Pipeline FY11)
5 provinces certified

6 out of 10 Programs
accredited in Tucuman

GPF Strengthening
Governance in Argentina’s
Health Sector
Hospital Performance
Assessment ( AAA) (FY11)

24

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators
Reduce disparity in
educational attainment
between the urban and the
rural sector.

Realign (better alignment of)
educational policy and
practices with emerging
challenges.

Issues and Obstacles

Argentina’s high levels of
school attendance rates in rural
areas masks high rates of dropouts and repetition in addition
to quality issues.

PILLAR 2-SOCIAL INCLUSION
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
Improve completion rates for
students in lower secondary
rural education (grades7-9).

Status

Increased school enrollment for
children age 5

On track to meet project target.

Improve promotion rate in rural
areas from EGB1 (grades1-3)
to EGB2 (grades 4-6) from
76% to 85% by April 2011.

Target accomplished.
Promotion rate in EGB1 in
rural areas of 86 percent in
November 2010.

Increase the access of students
completing the 7th grade to the
8th grade of schooling in rural
areas from 73% to 85% by
April 2011

The country presents advances
in this indicator and the target
is within reach. As of
November 2010 the value of
the indicator was 81 percent.

Bank Program
Instruments

Rural Education
Improvement Project
(approved FY06)
Effective usage of Laptops in
a school setting AAA

Threat to the country’s
traditional regional leadership
role in education attainment
and quality.

Existence of critical mass of
policy and school-based
innovations.

At least one school-based
innovation fully assessed and
mainstreamed by 2015.

Policy dialogue to be initiated
in FY11/12.

Lending and Policy Dialogue
(FY12/13).

Limited effectiveness of
tertiary study programs in
enabling access to labor
markets.

Increase understanding of
linkages between tertiary
education and labor markets

Dissemination event to discuss
with key stakeholders the main
findings of the study.

In preparation to be delivered
in FY11.

Tertiary Education AAA

25

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Expand performance
management and improve
the quality of public
expenditure, enhance
service delivery outcomes
and build trust in institutions.

Issues and Obstacles

PILLAR 3-IMPROVED GOVERNANCE
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
1. Strengthening Public Institutions

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

Customer satisfaction grew
from 45% to 78% between 2005
and 2010.
Reduction of average time in
the provision of new benefits.
(Baseline:140, Current:88,
Target: 90)
Level of quantitative error in
pension reports: (Current: 4.7,
Target: 7)
Project Extended up to
September 2012).

Institutional Strengthening of
the National Social Security
Administration Project
(approved FY06)(ANSES II)

The percentage of physical
persons that can be identified
univocally by SINTyS has
increased to 92%.

92%already achieved.

SINTyS APL 2
(approved FY09)

The number of government
agencies and programs using
consistent common processes to
identify entities and assets has
increased.

The number of government
agencies and programs using
consistent common processes to
identify entities and assets has
increased from 16 in 2008 to 22
in 2010.

Key challenges include:
At National Level:
Improving service delivery
outcomes and build trust in
Government.
Making the public sector
more accountable and
responsive to the needs of
citizens and the private sector.

At National Level
More transparent government
decision-making processes,
increased access to
government-related
information and improved
service delivery, by
strengthening the efficiency,
effectiveness and
transparency of the following
institutions:
ANSES

SYNTyS


 Consolidate and expand
organizational reform of ANSES
aimed at improving customer
satisfaction in service delivery,
including increased
decentralization, timely
determination of benefits and
reduced claims against ANSES
benefit determination.

26

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Issues and Obstacles

PILLAR 3-IMPROVED GOVERNANCE
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
1. Strengthening Public Institutions

Chief of Cabinet Office

Expand performance
management and improve
the quality of public
expenditure, enhance
service delivery outcomes
and build trust in institutions.

At Sub-National level:

At Sub-National level:

Strengthening Public Sector
Capacity, which is facing
significant limitations due to
low provincial revenues and
capacity in public sector
management.

Provide customized support
and capacity building to subnational governments on
public expenditure
management, tax
administration and public
service delivery.

Strengthening the efficiency,
effectiveness and transparency
of public expenditure
management.

Status

Bank Program
Instruments


SINFO covers 90 percent of
civilian national executive
branch employees. Personnel
data that appears in both the
SINFO and LUPI systems are
consistent.


SINFO covers 56% percent of
civilian national executive
branch employees. LUPI still in
development process.

Electronic directory of
Government procedures includes
20 % of procedures that have
been simplified and can be
electronically processed.
Progress is made towards
offering transactional services.

Electronic directory of
Government procedures
includes over 900 procedures
and has over 2 million visitors
per year. Two transactional
services have been implemented
and two more are in process.

User surveys showing improved
service delivery in the agencies
that have implemented the
Citizens Charter

User surveys show over 20%
increase in service delivery
satisfaction in the agencies
implementing the Citizens
Charter. The methodology is
currently being revised.

In at least one province the time
for key services and
administrative processes has
been reduced from 15 to 10 days.

Project Restructured: extended
up to March 2012; change in
PDO indicators. Contracting
period up to March 2011.
Implementation at initial stage.

Subnational Governments
Public Sector Modernization
Project (LEN) (approved
FY06)

Project not yet effective.

San Juan SWAp
(LEN)

State Modernization II
Project (LEN)
(approved FY07)

In at least one province , % of
public employees included in the
integrated personnel information
and pay systems has increased
from 0 to 30%
Project launched.

27

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Expand performance
management and improve
the quality of public
expenditure, enhance
service delivery outcomes
and build trust in institutions.

Issues and Obstacles

At Sub-National level:

Strengthening Public Sector
Capacity, which is facing
significant limitations due to
low provincial revenues and
capacity in public sector
management.
Strengthening the efficiency,
effectiveness and transparency
of public expenditure
management.

PILLAR 3-IMPROVED GOVERNANCE
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
1. Strengthening Public Institutions
At Sub-National level:
Provide customized support
and capacity building to subnational governments on
public expenditure
management, tax
administration and public
service delivery.

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

Province of La Rioja: (i)
Increased local tax revenue; (ii)
Increased share of budgeted
primary expenditures executed;
(iii) Higher share of budgeted
Projects which are drawn from
the provincial development plan;
(iv) Increased proportion of
competitive bidding; (v)
Increased efficiency in the
management of irrigation water
supply systems.

Project not yet effective.

La Rioja SWAp (LEN)

Province of La Rioja:
Diagnostic in Tax
Administration, PFM, Public
Expenditure Management and
Procurement.

To be delivered in FY11 Q4.

La Rioja Governance
Assessment & Public
Financial Management
Assessment (PFMA) (ESW)

Province of La Rioja: Draft
Public Procurement Law
prepared.

To be delivered in FY11 Q4.

La Rioja Procurement
Reform TA (NLTA)

Provinces of Buenos Aires,
Cordoba, San Juan, Santa Fe:
Diagnostic in PFM.

To be delivered in FY11 Q3.

Sub-national Public
Financial Management
Assessment (PFMA): Buenos
Aires, Cordoba, San Juan,
Santa Fe (ESW)
Province of Corrientes –
Strategic Plan (FFS)

28

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators

Issues and Obstacles

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
 Time of approval of loans by

Strengthen the capacity of the
Government to prepare,
approve and implement
investment projects in line
with the requirements of a
medium-term investment
partnership.

Delays in approval of projects
at the national level.

Improved approval procedures
of projects at the national level.
Improved design, preparation
and approval procedures of
projects at the subnational level.

the Government is reduced
to a maximum period of 4
months, aligning it with the
approval of the loan by the
Bank.
 Time for approval of loans at
the subnational level is
reduced to a maximum of 6
months, aligning it with
approval by the Bank and at
the national level.

 80% PPRs rated S;
 80% PPRs confirming
Improved procurement capacity
of agencies implementing
investment projects.

qualified procurement staff
have been appointed;

 60% of procurement
processes contracted as
planned.

Delays in processing large
procurement contracts.

 50% of projects provide

Improved monitoring capacity
of central coordinating agencies
(Ministry of Economy and
Public Finance).

reliable information on
contracts and financial
transactions, and this
information is available in a
consolidated system to be
used by implementing
agencies, and the
Government and the IFIs for
monitoring purposes.

Status

Bank Program
Instruments

Average time between Bank
approval and effectiveness of
loans has been reduced from 12
months (FY07-FY09) to 6
months (FY10-FY11).

IDF: Improving Investment
Portfolio Management –
Building Up Institutions,
Systems and Human Capital.
(approved 2008)

 33% PPRs reflect an S rating

Strengthening and enhanced
coordination of fiduciary
team based in Buenos Aires.

and 55.5% reflect an MS
rating in FY10.
 58% of reviewed projects
have procurement staff
issues (appointment, lack of
capacity, etc).
 68%* of procurement
processes contracted as
planned by end of CY 2009.

Training Program for
implementing agencies and
central coordination agencies
supported by the Bank.

 Pilot including 32% of
projects implementing
interface between SEPA and
UEPEX systems, which
implies real time information
on contracts and payments.

29

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators
Strengthen the capacity of the
Government to prepare,
approve and implement
investment projects in line
with the requirements of a
medium-term investment
partnership.

Issues and Obstacles
Fiduciary risk.

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
Improved fiduciary risk
monitoring systems.

Status

 Adjustment of existing risk

 Price Monitoring Mechanism

assessment tools to ensure
strategic focus on project
fiduciary risks and results.

in place. Applied by PIUs in
their Procurement Plans and
by the Bank in PPRs and
bidding evaluation forms
gradually since 2007.
 Governance and
Accountability Action Plan
designed for health projects
and ready to be applied to
other projects if required.

Bank Program
Instruments

 Being applied for new

 Framework Agreement for
Phasing out PIUs

Difficulties in compliance with
safeguards and sustainability
policies

Improved safeguards capacity
of agencies implementing
investment projects.
Improved dialogue between
central agencies and the Bank
on safeguards, and
strengthening of coordination
role by central agencies.

 High level government
officials, project
coordinators and safeguard
specialists in implementing
agencies trained.

 Gap analysis between
country systems and Bank
policies carried out.
 Model documents for
environmental and social
safeguard compliance
adopted.

projects. Action Plans for
reduction in the use of
individual consultants in
place in certain operations
(i.e. State Modernization
Project)

 Series of training events
launched in March 2011.

 Gap analysis underway,
jointly with Government.

 Model documents under
preparation.

Training Program for
implementing agencies and
central coordination agencies
supported by the Bank.
Gap Analysis between
environmental and social
country systems and
safeguards and sustainability
policies of the Bank.

30

Country Strategic Goals
and Indicators
Strengthen the capacity of the
Government to prepare,
approve and implement
investment projects in line
with the requirements of a
medium-term investment
partnership.

Issues and Obstacles
Portfolio riskiness

Slow disbursements

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
Outcomes the Bank
Milestones
Program Expects to
Influence
Reduce portfolio riskiness

Maintain adequate levels of
project execution (i.e. 30% ratio
of disbursements over signed
contracts for infrastructure
portfolio) and zero net transfers.

Status

Reduce APPs to 5% in number
and 14% in amount.

 APPs** : 12% in number and

 Achieve disbursement targets

 FY10:
o Disbursements of $869
Disbursement ratio of
23.4%
o Net transfers of -$45
 FY11 (projected):
o Disbursements of $900
o Disbursement ratio of 26%
o Net transfers of $140.
 FY12 (projected)
 Disbursements of $850
 Disbursement ratio of 23%
 Net Transfers of $20.

of around $ 800 million and
25% disbursement ratio
average during CPS period
 Do not exceed -50 million
net transfers in CPS FYs.

Bank Program
Instruments

17% in amount (Basic
Municipal Services,
Subnational Government
Public Sector
Modernization, Matanza
Riachuelo, Natural
Resources)
 PPPs **: 10% in number and
9% in amount (Mining
Restoration, National
Highway Asset
Management, Natural
Resources)
 Risk flags: 29% projects
have slow disbursement
flags and 26% projects have
procurement flags.

*Target is based on Procurement Plans presented by projects taking exclusively those processes planned to be contracted during the corresponding calendar year. This figure includes 20 projects from which we were able to
collect appropriate data.
**APPs (Actual Problem Projects): Projects graded MU or U in Development Objectives or Implementation. PPPs (Potential Problem Projects): Projects with at least three risk flags.

31

Annex 2: Summary of Changes to CPS Results Framework
Pillar 1: Sustainable Growth with Equity

Issues and obstacles

Deleted

Added

•Reference to power and
transmission of electricity.
•Reference to improved
environmental
management capacity in
extractive industries.
•Reference to food quality
& safety as there is a
marginal contribution
from the Bank.

•Road Safety issues.
•Public Transport issue.
•Specific issue for
PROINDER (Low priority

Reduced/Reformulated

assigned to rural poverty) which
used to be merged with
PROSAP although being
different,

•Specific issue for Matanza,
most contaminated river
basin in Argentina.

In all these cases no Bank
intervention is envisaged.

Outcomes the Bank
expects to influence

•Road safety outcomes.
•Flood protection outcomes.
•Specific outcomes for
PROINDER, which were
missing in previous
framework (Support a
production oriented investment
strategy for poor rural
communities).

•Specific detailed outcomes
for Matanza which were
missing and are achievable
during CPS period.

Milestones

Bank Program
Instruments

•Road Safety milestones.
•Flood protection milestones
for the two APLs which were
missing.
•Specific milestones for
PROINDER,which were
missing before (number of
satisfactory beneficiaries,
etc).

•Public transport outcomes
reduced in line with project
outputs. Deleted reference
to increases in public
transport ridership.
•Modified outcomes for
natural forest management
in line with project
outcomes.
•Solid Waste Management
targets reduced.
•Modified PROSAP
outcomes to align with
project’s objectives.
•Modified milestones to
reflect actual project
indicators for solid waste
management, natural forest
management, national
parks management, flood
protection and public
transport which were very
ambitious or did not reflect
the actual contribution of
these projects.

•Road Safety Loan
•Norte Grande Transport
•Norte Grande Water
•GEF Decentralized Medium
Size Grants Program.
•GEF Third National
Communications to
UNFCCC Project and Kyoto
Protocol Adaptation Fund.

32

Pillar 2: Social Inclusion
Deleted

Added

•Safety nets goal
reformulated for simplicity
and to be more aligned
with bank program
outcomes.
•Reformulated to show the
issue of limited coverage
of social protection system.

Country
strategic goals
and indicators
Issues and
obstacles
Outcomes the
Bank expects to
influence

Milestones

•Reference to decreases in
mortality rates due to
attribution issues.
•Reference to new purchasing
procedures..
•Hospital access milestones.
Because there wasn’t a clear
bank involvement in these
areas.

Bank Program
Instruments

Reformulated/Reduced

•Health sector governance
Project
•Health sector Support Project

•Reference to Universal
allowance for vulnerable
children (UAVC) as an
accomplishment .
•Specific outcome for
Lifelong Learning.
•Specific outcomes for
child health insurance
coverage, and other
groups’ insurance
coverage.
•FESP specific outcomes.
•Specific target for
UAVC.
•FESP specific milestones
in more detail.
•Reference to National
Health Policy
Observatory.
•Reference to Governance
and Accountability Action
Plan.

•Changed milestones for
Lifelong Learning in line
with project indicators.
•Reformulated milestones
on health insurance
coverage to reflect
contribution of Bank
programs.
•Limited milestones of
education to rural
education.
•Limited contribution in
higher education to the
dissemination of AAA.

•GPF Strengthening
Governance in
Argentina’s Health
Sector.

33

Pillar 3: Improved Governance
Deleted

Added

Country strategic
goals and indicators
Issues and obstacles

Outcomes the Bank
expects to influence

Milestones

Bank Program
Instruments

•Eliminated issue related to
public expenditure
management because the
previously planned
budgeting activity was not
done.
•Issues related to
performance informed
budgeting and compliance
with the Fiscal
Responsibility Law.
In both cases there was no
Bank intervention.
•All previous milestones
(some related to
performance budgeting).

•Foundations for
Performance Informed
Budgeting Project

•Focus on strengthening
efficiency and transparency
of National Agencies.
•Provision of customized
assistance to provinces.

•Focus on specific
activities undertaken at the
national and subnational
level (SWAPs).
•Milestones for National
Agencies reformulated in
line with outcomes.

•San Juan SWAP
•La Rioja SWAP
•Salta SWAP

34

Portfolio Performance Pillar
Deleted
Issues and
obstacles
Outcomes the
Bank expects to
influence

Milestones

Bank Program
Instruments
Miscellaneous

•Fiduciary Action Plan
since it was done under
previous CPS.
•Semi-Annual portfolio
reviews because it
wasn’t strongly linked
to any outcome.

Added

Reformulated

•Fiduciary risk.
•Difficulties in compliance with
safeguards and sustainability
policies.
•Improved monitoring capacity of
central coordinating agencies
(Ministry of Economy and Public
Finance)
•Improved safeguards capacity of
agencies implementing
investment projects.
•Improved dialogue between
central agencies and the Bank on
safeguards, and strengthening of
coordination role by central
agencies.
•Maintain adequate levels of
project execution (i.e. 30% of
ratio of disbursements over signed
contracts for infrastructure
portfolio) and zero net transfers.
•High level government officials,
project coordinators and
safeguard specialists in
implementing agencies trained.
•Gap analysis between country
systems and Bank policies carried
out.
•Model documents for
environmental and social
safeguard compliance adopted.
•Reduce APPs to 5% in number
and 14% in amount.
•Achieve disbursement targets of
around $ 800 million and 25%
disbursement ratio average during
CPS period.
•Do not exceed -50 million net
transfers in CPS FYs.
•Training Program for
implementing agencies and
central coordination agencies
supported by the Bank.
•Complete column on current
status of milestones.

•Overall portfolio
performance was replaced
by ―portfolio riskiness‖
which is more accurate.

•Strengthening and
enhanced coordination of
fiduciary team based in
Buenos Aires.

35

Annex 3. Argentina Lending and GEF Program, FY09-12
APPROVED

Fiscal
Year

Quarter

Project

Amount
(US$ million)

2009

Q4

Basic Protection Project

450

Q2

Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport

150

Provincial Road infrastructure Project -AF

175

San Juan SWAp

50

Prevention and Management of Influenza

229

Q4

Road Safety

30

Q1

Buenos Aires infrastructure - Additional Financing for APL1

50

Norte Grande Transport

400

Norte Grande Water

200

Second Essential Public Health Functions (FESP II)

461

Partial Cancellation of H1N1 loan

-88

La Rioja SWAp

30

Basic Protection - Additional Financing*

480

TOTAL APPROVED

2617

2010

Q3

Q2
2011

Q3

TO BE APPROVED

Fiscal
Year

Quarter

2011

Q4

Q1

Project

Amount
(US$ million)

Norte Grande Water 2

200

Provincial Health Insurance

400

Cordoba Roads Additional Financing

30

Rural Poverty

52

Sustainable Industrial Development

40

Salta SWAp

60

TOTAL TO BE APPROVED

782

TOTAL PROGRAM FY2009-2012

3399

2012

TBD

*As of 02/23/2011, board date for this project is 03/10/2011.

36

GEF Program in Argentina FY10-FY12

Fiscal
Year

Quarter

Amount
(US$ million)

Project
APPROVED

Q2
2010
Q4
2011

Q3

Energy Efficiency Project
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality
Third National Communication UNFCCC

15.15
3.99
2.4
21.54

TOTAL APPROVED

TO BE APPROVED
2011

Q4

Rural Corridors and Biodiversity
TOTAL GEFs APPROVED AND TO BE APROVED FY10-FY12

6.3
27.84

37

Annex 4. Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 2/23/2011

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project
ID

Project Name

P105288
P088220
P095515

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

AR APL2 Buenos Aires Infrastructure

S

S

2007

270

AR (APL1)Urban Flood Preven&Drainage

S

S

2005

130

AR (APL2) Prov Maternal-Child Health

MS

MS

2007

300

135.952591

135.952591

P093491

AR (APL2)Urban Flood Prev.&Drainage

MS

MS

2006

70

52.2036311

52.2036311

P106684

AR 2nd Prov Agric Dev

S

S

2009

300

269.25

70.35

P101170

AR 2nd State Modernization

S

S

2007

20

10.3481614

9.21482807

P116974

AR 3rd Natl Communication UNFCCC

#

#

2011

P095569

AR APL2 National Highway Asset Mgt

S

MS

2007

400

224.113769

219.780436

P039584

AR B.A.URB.TSP

S

MS

1997

300

P060484

AR Basic Municipal Services Project

MU

MU

2006

P115183

AR Basic Protection Project

S

S

2009

P090119

AR Energy Efficiency Project

S

S

2008

P110599

AR Essential Public Health Functions II

S

S

2011

P094425

AR GEF Biod.Conserv in Prod. Forestry

MU

MU

2007

P092836

AR Inst. Strengthening - ANSES II TA

S

S

2006

25

16.3493286

16.3493286

P095514

AR Lifelong Learning Project

S

MS

2007

200

111.187272

6.18727178

P095485

AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport

P110462

AR Mining Environmental Restoration Proj

P120198

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.
5.9

Undisb.

Orig.

112.15569

66.0556901

47.4059367

44.8171277

Frm
Rev'd

2.43921
0.043537

12.6831208

-87.273342

110

91.1591151

82.5657817

450

3.0815

1.0815

15.155
461
7

14.655

9.5675

461

88.6111111

1.3953244

6.65

S

S

2010

150

149.625

MS

MS

2009

30

27.0307274

17.7507274

AR Norte Grande Road Infrastructure

S

S

2011

400

400

0.000002

P120211

AR Norte Grande Water Infrastructure

#

#

2011

200

200

P117377

AR Prevention & Management of Influenza

S

S

2010

229

98.6200058

79.0200058

38

P006043

AR RENEW.ENERGY R.MKTS

S

MS

1999

80

38.7469602

-11.25304

AR Rural Education Improvement Project

MS

MS

2006

150

70.4276114

70.4276114

25.049077
79.422389

P070963
P006041

AR SMALL FARMER DV.

MS

S

1998

120

14.6040564

P101171

-30.395944

9.6040564

AR SOC&FISC NTL ID SYS II

S

S

2009

20

12.0265068

1.45984011

P113896

AR San Juan SWAP

S

S

2010

50

50

P089926

AR Solid Waste Management Project

MS

MS

2006

40

30.8963942

25.2963942

P070448

AR Subnational Gov Public Sec Modernizat

U

MU

2006

40

30.5475443

30.5475443

P100806

AR Sustainable Natural Res Mgt

MU

MU

2008

60

54.5995397

25.5995397

P106752

AR Unleashing Productive Innovation

MS

MS

2009

150

133.714302

16.0476356

P105680

AR(APL1) Matanza-Riachuelo Development

MU

MU

2009

840

835.9

79.2333333

P088032

AR(CRL1)Buenos Aires Infrastr SIDP(1APL)

S

S

2005

250

50.0648824

0.06488237

P099051

AR- SANTA FE ROAD Infrastructure

S

S

2007

126.7

26.9526454

26.9526454

P099585

AR-Cordoba-Road Infrastructure

S

S

2007

75

5.31254712

3.97921378

P090993

AR-Essential Public Health Functions

MS

MS

2007

220

P114008

AR-GEF Sustain. Transp. and Air Quality

MS

MS

2009

P070628

AR-Provincial Road InfrastructureProject

S

MS

2005

P116989

AR-Road Safety

S

S

2010

P005920

MP/AR-REDUCTION OF OZONE D

S

S

1997

Overall Result

0.121267

53.610573

53.73184

3.987

2.33333334

325

209.499415

30.2594146

30

25.35858

-4.6414167

0.45020056

-3.4637994

4090.16961

1127.68822

3.987

25
6621.7

53.58121

6.064804

0.4949305

0.0648824

0.6666667

3.4637994
46.601112

39

Annex 5. AAA Program FY09-FY11

Approval FY

Project Name

Theme

Output Type

Corrientes FFS: Technical Assistance for the
design of an Strategic Plan

Public Sector
Governance

Non Lending - Technical
Assistance

Integrated Financial System of Province of
Buenos Aires

Public Sector
Governance

Institutional Development Plan
(Non Lending - Technical
Assistance)

Provincial Economic Memorandum Buenos
Aires

Public Sector

Report - Public Sector study

Logistics II: A Deep Study of Selected Logistics
Issues in Argentina

Infrastructure

Report - Infrastructure Study

Provincial Performance Informed Budgeting

Public Sector
Governance

Institutional Development Plan
(Non Lending - Technical
Assistance)

Gender Equity in the Private Sector

Social
Development

Non Lending - Technical
Assistance

Delivered to Client

FY09

FY10

Currently Underway**

FY11

Higher Education

Education

Report - Education Sector Review

AR Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (CFAA) Provincial Level

Financial
Management

Report

Cordoba Introduction of Performance Informed
Budget

Public Sector
Governance

Non Lending - Technical
Assistance (FBS*)

Access to Long Term Credit

Financial and
Private Sector
Development

Financial Sector Workshops

AR Country Environmental Assessment

Environment

Country Environmental Analysis
(CEA) - Report

*FBS: Fee based services
** The AAA program for FY12 is being designed as part of the Business Planning process.

40

Annex 6. Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 2/24/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years) b

a

2008

2009

2010

2011**

28

34

36

38

4.2

4.2

4.2

4.3

a, c

25.0

2.9

13.9

10.5

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

31.3

0.5

17.9

15.8

a, d

57.1

20.6

25.0

21.1

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d

60.0

25.8

29.3

25.9

12.4

29.1

23.4

21.6

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number

Disbursement Ratio (%)

e

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
**Disbursement Ratio for FY11 has been annualized in base of disbursements as of 02/24/2011.

41

Annex 7: Summary of Joint Government-Bank Workshop
on Risks and Challenges in Implementation of Investment Projects
In order to strengthen the implementation of Bank-financed investment portfolio in Argentina,
the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance and the World Bank invited a group of
implementing agencies representing a wide range of sectors to participate in a workshop held in
Buenos Aires on November 9-10, 2010. Forty-two participants included project coordinators
and procurement, financial management and safeguard specialists from selected implementing
agencies, as well as Bank teams providing implementation support to the same operations (Task
Team Leaders and procurement, financial management and safeguard specialist s).
The methodology used during the workshop was the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP)
supported by Expert Choice, an effective and proven methodology and software for decision making. The methodology allowed eliciting the opinions from participants of the Government,
the Implementing Agencies and the World Bank through a facilitation process and anonymous
voting. The workshop aimed to: i) identify critical issues, risks and challenges affecting portfolio
execution, including compliance with policy regimes (i.e. financial management, fiduciary
policies and environmental and social safeguards) and monitoring systems, ii) carry out a
collaborative and participatory decision-making process in the creation of a working agenda to
enhance project portfolio execution, and iii) foster a trusting and collaborati ve environment,
strengthen the dialogue between the parties and generate creative and effective solutions.
The workshop provided a platform for frank discussion and allowed participants to work as one
team, committed to the joint goal of implementing the investment portfolio smoothly and
efficiently, with the focus on development results. Procurement and safeguards related questions
received the highest prominence in the discussion. In particular, participants agreed that capacity
constraints in the implementing agencies need to be addressed through improved training and
recruitment procedures, and that the Bank would support these efforts by providing customized
capacity building program in procurement and safeguards. A detailed analysis on procurement
post reviews of Bank portfolio in Argentina has been completed and used as a guide to inform
the ongoing preparation of procurement training for the implementing agencies. In parallel, the
Bank recruited additional procurement staff in Buenos Aires office, and both Government and
the Bank are working on expanding the SEPA platform to include a secure information space for
exchange of experience on procurement issues.
On the safeguards side, following the workshop the Government and the Bank launched a
detailed analysis of overlaps and gaps between Argentina’s legal framework and the Bank’s
safeguards policies, which would serve as a basis for developing clear guidance and sample
standard documents facilitating the compliance with Bank safeguards in Argentina portfolio, as
well as inform capacity building efforts.

42

With respect to financial management, workshop participants agreed that this area represents the
fewest concerns for the portfolio. The main challenges are to improve internal controls in
operations implemented at sub-national levels, and to create an automatic link between SEPA,
procurement information system and UEPEX, the Government's FM system for external funding,
which would allow the Government and the Bank have real time information on financ ial
execution of projects.
The Government and the Bank will evaluate progress in implementing the Action Plan
developed at the workshop (see below) twice a year, at the time of each country portfolio review.
Workshop on Risks and Challenges in Implementation of Investment Projects: Action Plan
Action

Primary
Responsibility

Component 1: Improvement of procurement performance
Create space for exchange of knowledge and experience among implementing agencies (IA),
and between them and the Bank
Develop a procurement training program offered by an academic institution, to build capacity
in implementing agencies

Bank

Review contracting procedures for consultants by IA to improve the conditions to attract and
retain qualified procurement staff

Government

Ensure active participation of Bank procurement team in project preparation from early stages
of design
Strengthen the procurement team in the Bank to ensure timely and effective response to the
client and support project objectives

Bank

Government

Bank

Component 2: Improvement of capacity to effectively address safeguards and sustainability
aspects of operations
Establish and communicate to the client clear structure of the Bank's local safeguards team to
ensure that the client has an easy point of contact and receives consistent messages on
safeguards issues

Bank

Strengthen DNPOIC's lead coordination role in safeguards and sustainability issues of
operations

Government

Establish clear criteria and models for application of Bank safeguards policies to projects in
Argentina

Bank

Component 3: Improvement of internal control in financial management
Review IA structure to adapt financial management teams to the new challenges
Improve capacity of units at the national level to supervise units at the provincial level

Government
Government

Strengthen the Government's team currently managing UEPEX, the Government's FM system
for external funding

Government

Improve General Audit Office capacity to perform technical audits given the increase of
results based components in operations

Government

43

Annex 8. Argentina: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010*
estimate

2011*
forecast

9.2

8.5

8.7

6.8

0.9

9.1 ²

5.8 ²

Real GDP and aggregate demand 1/
GDP (annual %)
Exports (annual %)

13.5

7.3

9.1

1.2

-6.4

-

-

Imports (annual %)

20.1

15.4

20.5

14.1

-19.0

-

-

National Government Primary Balance (% of GDP)

3.7

3.5

3.2

3.1

1.5

1.7 ⁵

0.8 ⁵

National Government Overall Balance (% of GDP)

1.8

1.8

1.1

1.4

-0.6

0.2 ⁵

-

85.3

76.6

67.2

56.4

58.9

-

-

Trade balance (current US$ billions)

13.1

14.0

13.5

15.4

17.0

12.1

10.2 ⁶

Merchandise exports (current US$ billions)

40.4

46.5

56.0

70.0

55.7

68.5

77.6

Merchandise imports (current US$ billions)

Public Sector 4/

Total Gross Public Debt (% of GDP)

External Sector

27.3

32.6

42.5

54.6

38.7

56.4

67.4

Current account balance (current US$ billions)

5.4

7.9

7.5

7.0

11.5

4.7

3.2

Current account balance (% of GDP)

3.0

3.7

2.9

2.2

3.9

-

-

28.1

32.0

46.2

46.4

47.9

52.2

52.5

Gross international reserves (US$ billions, end of period)

Prices, money and exchange rate

12.3

9.8

8.5

7.2

7.7

10.9

14.4 ⁷

8.8

13.4

14.3

19.1

10.0

17.1 ⁸

19.8 ⁸

M2 (annual %, monthly average)

23.8

22.6

21.1

17.3

11.5

22.1

27.9 ⁹

Nominal Exchange Rate (AR$ per US$, end of period)

3.03

3.07

3.15

3.45

3.79

3.98

4.29

Population, total (millions)

38.7

39.1

39.5

39.9

40.3

-

-

Unemployment rate (%)

10.1

8.7

7.5

7.3

8.4

7.7

7.4

CPI (annual %, end of period)
GDP deflator (annual %)

Population, Employment and Poverty

Urban poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
36.4
29.2
22.0
16.6
13.6
* Unless otherwise indicated, 2010 estimates and 2011 forecasts correspond to REM (Relevamiento de Expectativas de Mercado) survey published by the Central Bank of
Argentina.
1/ 1993 AR$.
2/ The 2011 draft Budget Law assumes annual growth of 8.9% in 2010 and of 4.3% in 2011.
3/ Including inventory and statistical discrepancy.
4/ Accounts on a cash basis.
5/ Own calculations based on actual fiscal data from Ministry of Finance and nominal GDP projections from REM survey.

44

Annex 9. Argentina at a glance

Argentina at a glance

2/23/11

Argentina

Latin
America
& Carib.

Upper
middle
income

40.3
2,780
1.0
92

566
20,422
1.1
79

993
48,659
0.9
75

304.1
7,550
14,120

3,865
6,826
10,496

7,352
7,405
12,763

0.9
-0.1

4.3
3.1

4.1
3.2

3
7
75
15
2

8
17
73
20
4

..
..
71
20
..

98
98
116
114

92
90
118
114

95
92
111
110

96
91

93
79

95
84

Key Development Indicators
(2009)
Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

15-19
0-4
6

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

1995

Argentina

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
Spain
Germany
European Commission

1980

1990

2000

2009

19

169

52

131

0
18
0

12
41
2

-6
7
10

30
22
17

0.0
1

0.1
5

0.0
1

0.0
3

2000

2007

Latin America & the Caribbean

a

15
10
5

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

0
-5
-10

Long-Term Economic Trends

-15
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

100.8
90.8

2314.0
2,076.8

-0.7
1.0

7.7
10.0

0.0
..

0.5
85

1.0
100

3.7
133

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–09
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

28.2
76,962

32.5
141,352

36.9
284,204

40.3
307,155

1.4
-0.7

1.3
4.3

1.0
5.4

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

6.4
41.2
29.5
52.4

8.1
36.0
26.8
55.9

5.0
27.6
17.5
67.4

7.5
31.8
21.2
60.7

0.7
-1.3
-0.8
0.0

3.5
3.8
2.7
4.5

2.5
6.1
5.8
4.8

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

63.0
11.0
25.3

77.1
3.1
14.0

70.7
13.8
16.2

58.3
15.2
20.9

..
..
-5.2

2.8
2.2
7.4

4.7
3.6
11.1

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

5.1
6.5
22.8

10.4
4.6
13.4

10.9
11.5
13.0

21.4
16.0
24.4

3.8
-5.8

8.7
15.6

6.3
9.2

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2008.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

45

Argentina
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

26,341
25,281
-1,832

55,669
38,771
17,825

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-8,981
-3.2

11,515
3.7

Regulatory quality

86

660

25,147

47,967

Political stability

Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves, including gold

Control of corruption
0

Central Government Finance

2009

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

19.4
14.1
20.9

22.7
20.0
20.2

Overall surplus/deficit

-2.4

-0.6

2000

25

..
35

35
35

75

100

higher values imply better ratings

Technology and Infrastructure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

50

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

2008

29.4

30.0

39

141

9.1

9.0

47
12.3
..

49
12.0
6.5

7,326
29.2

6,920
..

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

3.8

4.6

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

6.2

6.8

1,650

1,850

2000

2009

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

8,789
1,019
538
701

5,305
1,028
793
169

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

–
–
–

–
–
–

2,305
1,196
252

1,738
850
153

74

80

491
127

35
0

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

140,914
26,843
–

120,184
12,127
–

49.6
69.4

39.1
17.3

10,418
-3,227

4,009
-212

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

IDA,
IMF,00
IBRD,

Short-term,
19,977

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)
Other multi5,069
lateral, 9,711

World Bank Group portfolio

Bilateral, 5,794

(US$ millions)

Private, 78,350

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty
Access to/cost of financing
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–

27
11.0
52

2000

2009

..
..

16.5
15.7

58.4
..

15.9
12.9

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.

2/23/11

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

46

