Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 61307 - ML

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALI
FOR THE PERIOD FY08-FY11

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 28, 2011

Country Department for Mali
AFCW3
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Mali (report No.41746 - ML) was discussed by the
Board on February 5, 2008.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Exchange rate effective on April 21, 2011
Currency Unit = CFA Franc (CFAF)
$1 = CFAF 449
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAA
AFD
AfBD
AMADER

API- Mali

ARV
BHM
BIM
BoA
CAADP
CAS
CASPR
CC
CD
CENA
CFAF
CMDT

CPAR
CSIF
DPL
DPT
DRM
DSA

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Agence Française de Développement
(French Agency for Development)
African Development Bank
Agence Malienne pour le
développement de l’énergie (Malian
Agency for Energy Development)
Agence de Promotion des
Investissements (Malian Investment
Promotion Agency)
Antiretroviral
Banque de l’Habitat du Mali (Malian
Housing Bank)
Banque d’Investissement du Mali
(Malian Investment Bank)
Bank of Africa
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Progress
Report
Climate Change
Capacity Development
Capacity Enhancement Needs
Assessments
CFA Franc
Compagnie Malienne pour le
Développement des Textiles (Malian
Ginning Company)
Country Procurement Assessment
Report
Country Strategic Investment
Framework
Development Policy Loan
Diptheria, Pertussis and Tetanus
Disaster Risk Management
Debt Sustainability Analysis

DTIS
ECF
ECOWAS
EDM
EFA-FTI
ESSD TF
EU
EITI
ESW
EU
FIAS
FSAP
FY
GAC
GBD TA
GDP
GEF
GoM
GPRSF
GSP
ha
HIV/AIDS

ICA
ICT
IDA
IDF

Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
Extended Credit Facility
Economic Community of West
African States
Electricité du Mali (Electricity of
Mali)
Education For All – Fast-Track
Initiative
Trust Fund for Environmentally and
Socially Sustainable Development
European Union
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Governance and Budget
Decentralization TA operation
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund
Government of Mali
Growth and Poverty Reduction
Framework
Growth Support Project
Hectare
Human Immunodeficiency
Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Investment Climate Assessment
Information and Communication
Technologies
International Development Agency
Institutional Development Fund

IFC
IMF
Kg
JAS
JSAN
M&E
MDG
MIGA
MoU
MSME
MTEF
MW
NRM
OHADA

ON
PAGAM
- GFP

PAPAM

PEFA
PEMFAR
PER
PETS
PFM

International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Kilogram
Joint Assistance Strategy
Joint Staff Advisory Note
Monitoring and evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Memorandum of Understanding
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Mid-Term Expenditure Framework
Mega Watt
Natural Resource Management
Organisation pour l’Harmonisation
du Droit des Affaires en Afrique
(Organization for the Harmonization
of Business Law in Africa)
Office du Niger
Plan d’Action Gouvernemental pour la
Modernisation et le Renforcement de la
Gestion des Finances Publiques (Action
Plan for Modernizing and Strengthening
Public Financial Management)
Projet d’appui à la productivité
agricole au Mali (Agriculture
Productivity Project)
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure Management and
Financial Accountability Review
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Public Financial Management

IDA
Vice President: Obiageli K. Ezekwesili (AFRVP)
Acting Country Director: Ousmane Diagana (AFCW3)
Task Team Leader: Sybille Crystal (AFCML)

PHRD

Japan Policy and Human Resources
Development Fund
PIU
Project Implementation Unit
PRODEC
Programme de Développement
Décennal de l’Education (Ten Year
Edcuation Development Program)
PRSC
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
PRSP
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
PSD
Private sector development
RH
Reproductive health
SDR
Special Drawing Rights
SHA
Secrétariat à l’Harmonisation de
l’Aide (Aid Harmonization
Secretariat)
SLM
Sustainable Land Management
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
SREP
Scaling Up Renewable Energy in Low
Income Countries Program
SOTELMA Société des Télécommunications du
Mali (Malian Telecommunication
company)
SSN
Social Safety Net
STEP
Support and Training for
Entrepreneurship Program
SWAp
Sector-Wide Approach
T/ha
Ton per hectare
TA
Technical Assistance
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Program
WAEMU
West African Economic and
Monetary Union
WAPP
West Africa Power Pool
WBG
World Bank Group
WBI
World Bank Institute

IFC
Vice President: Thierry Tanoh (CXAVP)
Director:Yolande Duhem (CAFWO)
Senior Country Officer: Jérôme Cretegny (CAFW3)

The following World Bank Group Staff contributed to the preparation of the CAS Progress Report: Sybille Crystal
(TTL), Christian Eghoff, Fily Bouaré Sissoko, Clara Ana Coutinho de Sousa, Cheick Diop, Simon Davies, Tawfik
Ramlootah, Fabio Galli, Fabrice Bertholet, Olivier Durand, Abdoulaye Touré, Yeyande Sangho, Agadiou Dama,
Taoufiq Bennouna, Pierre Kamano, Aissatou Diack, John May, Setareh Razmara, Zié Coulibaly, Michel Noel, André
Ryba, Fadwa Bennani, Leonardo Iacovone, Maiko Miayke, Michel Rogy, Brigitte Bocoum, Amadou Dem, Jérôme
Crétegny, Deo Ndikumana, Conor Healy, Karima Laouali Ladjo, Mohamed Touré, Ronke Ogunsulire, and Frank
Douamba. The team benefited from advice and guidance from Ousmane Diagana.

MALI
COUNTRY ASSITANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.
II.

III.

IV.
V.

Page
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 1
COUNTRY CONTEXT .............................................................................................................. 1
A. Political and Security Context ............................................................................................... 1
B. Economic Context ................................................................................................................ 2
C. Social and Poverty context .................................................................................................... 3
CAS IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS .................................................................................... 4
A. Progress on CAS Strategic Objective I: Promote rapid and broad-Based Growth ................. 4
B. Progress on CAS Strategic Objective II: Strengthen Public Sector Performance................... 6
C. Implementation Progress ...................................................................................................... 7
D. Partnership and the Aid Effectiveness Agenda...................................................................... 9
STRENGTHENED AND EXTENDED CAS PROGRAM ....................................................... 10
MANAGING RISKS ................................................................................................................ 12

List of Appendixes
Country Specific appendixes
Appendix 1:
Mali CAS Updated Results Matrix
Appendix 2:
IDA Lending and Analytical Program
Appendix 3:
Status of MDGs
Appendix 4:
IFC and MIGA Programs
Appendix 5:
Partnership and Aid Effectiveness
Appendix 6:
Climate Change Effects on Malian Main Development Sectors
Appendix 7:
Mali Country At-A-Glance
Standard CAS Annexes
CAS Annex B2:
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
CAS Annex B3:
IDA Program Summary
CAS Annex B6:
Key Economic Indicators
CAS Annex B7:
Key Exposure Indicators
CAS Annex B8:
Operations Portfolio (IDA and Grants)
CAS Annex B8:
Statements of IFC‟s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Map No. IBRD 33443

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) reviews the relevance of the
Bank’s FY08-11 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Mali. The CAS supports Mali‟s second
poverty reduction strategy, the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework (GPRSF),
designed as the first phase of the 10-year action plan to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). The 2007-2011 GPRSF promotes strong growth of average 7 percent per year and targets a
reduction in poverty incidence from 56 percent in 2007 to 51.2 percent in 2011 through wealth
generation, employment creation and strengthened public sector performance. The GPRSF is
articulated around three strategic pillars: (1) developing infrastructure and strengthening productive
sectors; (2) consolidating the public sector structural reform agenda; and (3) strengthening the social
sector. The CAS selectively assists the Government of Mali (GoM) in achieving its key GPRSF
objectives. This CASPR provides an update on the country context, progress toward achieving the
CAS objectives and outcomes, evolution of key risks, and introduces areas of emphasis in the
framework going forward.
2.
The CASPR confirms that the strategic priorities of the CAS remain relevant and well aligned
with national priorities and the Africa Strategy, and that progress toward CAS outcomes is broadly
on track. The Bank‟s interventions, through its two strategic objectives to promote rapid and broadbased growth and to strengthen public sector performance, remain valid. Given Mali landlocked status,
vulnerability to external shocks, low level of human development, and administrative capacity
constraints, the new Africa Strategy endorsed by the Board of Director on March 1, 2011 provides a
solid framework for moving towards achieving the CAS strategic goals. In that context, the CASPR
emphasizes the need for attention in the key areas of competitiveness and employment, vulnerability
and resilience, as well as governance and public sector capacity while deploying our partnership for
more inclusive growth and social cohesion. Therefore, during the proposed CAS extension period, the
Bank program will be a continuation of activities undertaken to support the GoM to enhance the
regulatory and institutional framework for infrastructure and private investment to improve the
provision of critical production factors as well as economic productivity and diversification, and to
strengthen public sector efficiency for improved access to and delivery of basic social services. In
addition, in order to take into account emerging challenges related to the volatility of commodity
prices and the national and regional security situation and to respond to GoM‟s new priorities, special
emphasis will be devoted to supporting the human development agenda and helping the GoM to
address the population, education, youth, social protection, and urban and peri-urban challenges.
II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. POLITICAL AND SECURITY C ONTEXT
3.
Mali continues to enjoy political stability and is deepening its democratic process in the run
up to the 2012 elections. Presidential and parliamentary elections will take place in April and July
2012 respectively under a democratic system reinforced by the proposed constitutional reform package
that includes the creation of an upper house of Parliament, strengthening of independent media and
election watchdogs, and a new code of conduct for politicians. A referendum on the proposed changes
is scheduled for 2011.
4.
Insecurity in Northern Mali persists. The current situation results from a confluence of illicit
trafficking, global and regional terror networks, and armed groups connected indirectly or directly to
the legacy of armed insurgencies in the region. The area historically depends on trans-border flows of
goods and people, in particular with Algeria, Mauritania and Niger. Mali‟s geographic position
explains al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb‟s presence in Northern Mali, a lightly populated area with
few development solutions and hence susceptible to illicit economic activity. To overcome this
-1-

challenge, Mali emphasizes the need for a regional “Sahelo-Saharan” solution combined with well
targeted development programs tailored to the specific needs of the North of Mali.
5.
Ongoing political crisis in Libya and Côte d’Ivoire makes Mali even more vulnerable to
conflict and insecurity. Libya has a strong presence in Mali and plays a prominent role in the
economy with major investments in several sectors, including banking, tourism, and agriculture.
Furthermore, in the past, Libya‟s mediating role has been key in resolving conflict between Mali‟s
central Government and the Tuareg communities in the northern part of the country. Libya is also
home to thousands of Malian immigrants. In addition to their common membership in WAEMU, Côte
d‟Ivoire and Mali maintain strong economic, social and cultural relationships. Côte d‟Ivoire remains
Mali‟s biggest partner in the sub-region and its corridor still represents the channel for about 40
percent of Mali‟s trade. In addition, there is a significant number of Malians citizens living in Côte
d‟Ivoire.
B. E CONOMIC C ONTEXT
6.
Despite a difficult international environment, Mali’s macroeconomic performance has been
broadly favorable. The very limited integration of Mali with international capital markets insulated its
economy from the direct effects of the global economic slowdown. Remittances dropped somewhat as
labor markets weakened in Europe, but budget support by development partners was maintained. Real
gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 5.1 percent a year in the 2008-2010 period driven by a
strong performance of agriculture boosted by good climatic conditions, supportive policies ( including
GoM‟s input subsidies) and robust prices for gold (75 percent of exports) that more than offset the
decline in gold production. This contributed to the return of average inflation to 2.2 percent and 1.4
percent in 2009 and 2010 respectively, after reaching 9.1 percent in 2008 due to the o il and food crisis.
Year-on-year inflation reached 3.6 percent in January 2011 due to the rise in international commodity
prices and to trade disruptions linked to the turmoil in Côte d‟Ivoire. Favorable terms of trade helped
the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) decrease from 13.9 percent of GDP in
2008 to 9.0 percent of GDP in 2010.
7.
Fiscal performance in the 2008-2010 period was in line with the GoM’s program supported
under the IMF ECF arrangement. Despite the food and fuel crisis of 2008, the basic fiscal deficit
was maintained at the sustainable level of 1.0 percent of GDP. With the implementation of an
extraordinary program of investments financed with resources from the privatization of the telecom
parastatal, SOTELMA, the basic deficit is temporarily unsustainable but the GoM is implementing a
credible plan to return the deficit to sustainable levels by 2013.
8.
While the medium-term macroeconomic outlook is favorable, Mali remains very vulnerable to
exogenous shocks that may hamper its growth. Given the critical importance of agriculture in growth
performance and consumer price trends, the Malian economy is particularly vulnerable to climatic
shocks. The economy is also vulnerable to terms of trade shocks. Uncertainties increased in recent
months with the political crisis in Cote d‟Ivoire and the political turmoil in Libya. Based on the above,
real GDP growth is expected to be 5.3 percent in 2011 and to remain at that level during the 2012-14
period driven by high gold, cotton and grain prices. Agriculture is projected to grow at 8.3 percent in
2011 and 6.3 percent in the medium term. Average growth rate for gold is projected at 10 percent in
2012 and 2013 before gold production starts declining moderately starting in 2014. The recent surge in
commodity prices is expected to cause a moderate increase in inflation to about 4.5 percent in 2011,
returning to below 3 percent from 2012. Buoyant gold and cotton prices are expected to more than
offset high oil and food prices thus helping strengthen the external current account balance in 2011
and beyond. The 2011 Budget Law targets a budget deficit of 2 percent of GDP, which could be
revised to 2.5 percent to account for measures to mitigate the impact of the fuel and oil price increases
on poverty. These could include reducing import taxes on some food items.
-2-

9.
To increase its ability to respond to shocks, Mali needs to accelerate actions to increase
productivity and diversify its economy. This is rendered more urgent by the projected decline of
existing gold production, Mali‟s main source of foreign exchange and an important source of fiscal
revenues, which has already increased debt vulnerabilities. While the effects of rising commodity
prices have been rather positive on Mali on the supply side, with high gold prices mitigating the
decline of production in 2010 and the reinvigoration of cotton production as a result of rising
international cotton prices, there is concern on the demand side with oil prices affecting the balance of
payments and the budget deficit as the GoM is reluctant to pass the increase in international prices to
domestic consumers. In addition, caution should be exercised given the uncertainty of commodity
prices over the medium and long term. In line with the new Africa Strategy, the Bank program is
strengthening Mali‟s efforts to raise agricultural productivity, better link farmers to markets and
increase resilience on the agriculture side through its support to Office du Niger (ON) designed to
improve the management of irrigated agriculture, ongoing analytical work on growth, and policy
dialogue on the need for selectivity in the agriculture subsidy policy. The Bank is also supporting the
establishment of a transparent tariff adjustment mechanism for energy products. In addition, the 2010
Debt Sustainability Analysis upgraded the risk of debt distress from low to moderate due to increased
vulnerabilities related to higher volatility of gold exports.

C. SOCIAL AND P OVERTY CONTEXT
10. Rapid population growth and high levels of fertility pose challenges to economic growth,
poverty reduction, and achievement of MDGs. Preliminary results of the 2009 population census
highlight the urgency in tackling demographic issues. At current net growth rate of 3.6 percent per
year, the population (14.5 million) will double in 23 years. With a total fertility rate of 6.6 children,
unchanged for the last two decades, and a mortality rate for children under five declining steadily,
population in Mali is bound to continue to increase for a long time, given its age structure. With such
population growth, GDP per capita growth is only about 1.5 percent. Mali‟s high population growth
puts excessive pressure on public resources for service delivery. Only 3 MDGs are likely to be
achieved (see Appendix 3).
11. Progress in expanding access to potable water has been made during the last decade, but the
challenge remains to achieve the MDG targets. Access rate to safe drinking water is estimated at 73
percent in 2009 (78 percent of the population served in rural areas and 91 percent in urban areas).
While progress in water supply is remarkable, sanitation remains confronted with major challenges.
Only 32 percent of households have access to improved sanitation services in rural areas and 45
percent in urban areas. To sustain progress toward the MDG achievements, it would be necessary to
provide water services to over 400,000 additional people each year and sanitation services to 720,000
people. This would cost about US$110 million a year for water supply (excluding large water
production investments) and US$30 million a year for sanitation.
12. To reduce poverty, Mali needs to reach a higher level of GDP growth and better target propoor expenditures. GDP growth has not achieved the 7 percent required for rapid poverty reduction.
Projections in the 2009 GPRSF Progress Report estimate poverty at 43.7 percent in 2009 (53.5 percent
in rural areas from 57.6 percent in 2006 against 23.5 percent in urban areas from 25.5 percent in
2006). Actual poverty rates are expected in the coming months based on data from the 2010 household
survey. The positive economic indicators have not translated into much improved human development
outcomes. The country ranks 160 out of 169 countries in UNDP‟s 2010 Human Development Index.
13. Mali’s high vulnerability to a variety of shocks has increased the demand for social safety
nets (SSN) programs. The scope and coverage of the existing SSN system is too limited and most
interventions (mainly food transfers) are small in scale, designed as temporary programs, and financed
-3-

by external and ad hoc resources. Spending on SSN programs only corresponds to 0.5 percent of GDP,
while over 25 percent of the population is food insecure. Given the needs of the chronic poor and the
limited fiscal space available for SSN programs, an expansion of the SSN programs and an allocation
of scarce resources to well targeted and cost-efficient programs are necessary.
III.

CAS IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS

14. Good progress toward CAS milestones and outcomes has been achieved and the CAS program
is generally on track. Notable advances have been made in relation to improved agricultural
productivity, irrigation capacities, competitiveness of selected supply chains, business environment,
efficiency of public expenditure management, immunization coverage, and access to rural
transportation, electricity, and education (in particular primary education). Progress has been
particularly slow in the health sector. Also, further progress will be required during the remainder of
the CAS period, especially on key institutional reforms which have faced delays due to the time
needed to reach a consensual approach rather than a lack of GoM‟s commitment to the reform agenda.
With regard to infrastructure, the key challenges that Mali needs to tackle are in the area of the
institutional and regulatory framework in the energy sector as well as electricity tariff issues, and the
restructuring of the TRANSRAIL concession. Mali needs to further promote private investment with a
regulatory framework for industrial zones and the implementation of the next phase of the investment
climate reform program. Mali also needs to improve fiduciary oversight (especially external control).
Special emphasis should be placed on improving equity and relevance of the education system, the
management of the health sector, and addressing the demand for and use of population and
reproductive health services given the high rate of demographic growth. AAA has been an important
component of the CAS, both in addressing knowledge gaps in emerging country challenges and in
supporting reforms at the sector level. IFC‟s strategy complemented IDA‟s efforts in the development
of the private sector and the private delivery of health services. Details of progress to date and updated
outcome indicators are reflected in the CAS results matrix (see Appendix 1).
A. PROGRESS ON CAS S TRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: PROMOTE RAPID AND BROAD-B ASED GROWTH
15. Agricultural productivity, irrigation capacities, and competitiveness of selected supply chains
improved. The Bank has supported institutional reforms, investments in irrigable lands, and the rice
initiative launched by the GoM as a response to the 2008 food price crisis. Mali adopted a new price
mechanism linking domestic cotton prices to world market prices. The privatization of the four
Compagnie Malienne pour le Développement des Textiles (CMDT) subsidiaries was launched and is
expected to be finalized by mid 2011. The PRSC series has supported the privatization process and the
adoption of the legislative framework establishing the regulatory structure for the cotton sector after
the privatization of CMDT. The development of newly irrigated land developed led to a rice
production increase of 26,000 tons in 2010. Going forward, Mali needs to further exploit its irrigation
and commercial agriculture potential and to diversify its agricultural production beyond cott on and
rice at ON. The Bank will strengthen its support to increase irrigation capacities, facilitate technology
transfer to increase productivity with a particular focus on rice, cowpea and milk yields, and improve
competitiveness of selected supply chains by promoting value addition for agricultural and livestock
products.
16. Work is ongoing to improve natural resources management (NRM) and resilience to climate
change (CC). To help Mali‟s agriculture and natural resource-based economy to adapt to uncertain
climate, the Bank has provided analytical, TA and investment support (cost benefit analysis, public
expenditure review for NRM and sustainable land management - SLM, and a Country Strategic
Framework for Sustainable Land Management) (see Appendix 6). The Bank is helping to strengthen
the disaster risk management (DRM) institutional framework, reinforce key institutions‟ technical
capacities, and implement a pilot project for vulnerable communities‟ protection, given that nearly 30
-4-

percent of Mali‟s population lives in areas at risk. The Agriculture Productivity Project is developing
and disseminating land management tools and good practices for agriculture investments. Mali also
benefits from the Integrated Land and Water Management for Adaptation to Climate Variability and
Change trust fund which supports the establishment of an operational information system for DRM,
CC and SLM. Going forward, the Bank will help strengthen the resilience of agricultural and natural
resources sectors with the preparation of a regional Bank/GEF project in support of the Great Green
Wall initiative. The Urban Environment Analysis could help identify areas of collaboration for
sustainable urban development.
17. There has been good progress on several transport outcomes to increase access. With the
Bank‟s contribution through the Second Transport Project and Transport Corridor Improvement
Project, about 1,450 km of key unpaved rural roads have been either periodically maintained or
rehabilitated and 220 km of key paved roads have been improved. The percentage of main roads in
good condition increased to about 64.8 percent in 2011. Sustainability of road transport infrastructure
has been enhanced by supporting the institutional development of Road Fund and Authority. Also,
Bamako‟s airport safety has improved as a result of the investment in security and safety equipment
financed through the West and Central Africa Aviation Security Project as well as the strengthening of
the regulatory oversight of the airport operations by the Civil Aviation Authority. The restructuring of
the TRANSRAIL concession is still underway but is suffering from a lack of decision making of the
two governments overseeing the concession. TRANSRAIL legal protection from liquidation will
expire before June 2011 and the only credible rescue package would involve an immediate joint
contribution of CFA10 billion from Senegal and Mali ahead of reaching any agreement with the
current or a new primary shareholder on the revised terms of the concession contract. Going forward,
the Bank will focus on increasing all weather rural access, making rural and urban transport
infrastructure more resilient to climate change by focusing on the provision of better drainage, small
structures and culverts, improving the quality and efficiency of urban transport systems, supporting
transport facilitation and road transport infrastructure on key regional corridors, and working with the
governments of Mali and Senegal to ensure the effective restructuring of the TRANSRAIL concession
through direct financial support to TRANSRAIL‟s 2020 investment plan.
18. Access to electricity improved but challenges remain in the sector’s institutional reform and
its sustainability. Bank support to rural electrification contributed to increase access to electricity to
22 percent in 2010 (11 percent in rural areas). Mali is on track regarding the expansion of generation
with the completion of two thermal generation plants. In addition, progress has been made on the
regional power integration side with the 60MW Félou hydropower project expected to be
commissioned by end 2012. The restructuring of EDM-SA has been initiated and the legal unbundling
of the water and electricity sectors is ongoing. However, the implementation of EDM-SA recovery
plan is slow and the company‟s financial viability deteriorated, impairing efforts to improve its
operational performance. In a context of rising oil prices, the financial sustainability of the sector is a
major issue. Following the July 2009 adjustment of electricity tariffs, progress has been slow vis-à-vis
the adoption of the electricity tariff adjustment mechanism. An interim tariff mechanism, which
defines guiding principles and the methodology for tariff adjustments, was adopted in February
2011.The technical work to calibrate the tariff formula should be completed in June 2011. Going
forward, the Bank will support the GoM‟s emphasis on increasing access and pursue technical work
and dialogue on institutional, regulatory and tariff issues, and on enhancing energy efficiency and
demand-side management. In addition, as part of the Scaling Up Renewable Energy in Low Income
Countries Program (SREP), AfDB, IFC and IDA will support the GoM to develop an investment
strategy for renewable rural electrification with private sector involvement.
19. Mali has achieved considerable progress in improving the investment climate. SOTELMA, the
national telecom company, has been privatized. An investment promotion agency has been established
in 2006, and a one-stop shop for investors in 2009. It now takes 72 hours to register a new business in
-5-

Mali. Documentation requirements for trade logistics have been cut, the property transfer tax rate has
been reduced, and tax filing has been consolidated. As a result of the implementation of a joint TA and
partial credit facility by IFC and IDA, the share of short and medium-term small and medium
enterprise (SME) credit in total bank credit has increased significantly. In addition, the IFC and the
Bank implemented several programs to improve SME productivity and skills, including the Support
and Training for Entrepreneurship Program (STEP), the Trickle Up Program and the Grassroots
Business Initiative. Finally, IFC trained more than 250 entrepreneurs in the advantages of leasing, in
partnership with 10 professional associations. Despite this progress, several challenges remain. The
new industrial zone law, approved by the Cabinet, has not been submitted to Parliament. There is no
equipped industrial zone in the country. As a result, access to equipped agro-industrial land is severely
limited. Access to long-term credit remains a severe constraint for enterprises, in particular SMEs. To
address these challenges, the Bank will support: (i) preparation of the regulatory framework for
industrial zones following the adoption of the new law by Parliament; (ii) initial infrastructure
investments in the industrial zone of Bamako-Sénou; and (iii) feasibility studies for agro-processing
zones of Sikasso and Mopti. The Bank will also support phase 2 of the investment climate reform
program and the new wave of reforms in the information and communication technology sector.
B. PROGRESS ON CAS S TRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: S TRENGTHEN P UBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE
20. Reforms are improving public expenditure management. Important steps were taken by the
Government since 2007 in the context of the implementation of the PAGAM-GFP, supported by the
second PRSC series. The budget is prepared with increasing regard to Government policy, reflecting a
larger number of Ministries with rolling MTEFs. Competitiveness, value for money and controls in
procurement has also improved. Procurement controls and regulatory bodies have been established
and in 2010, open bidding procedure corresponded to about 77 percent of the total recorded
Government contracts. The effectiveness of internal controls has also improved, helped by concerted
efforts to increase capacity. Finally, good progress was made in budget reporting practices, as
evidenced by the regular publication of intra-year budget reports and the submission of annual
financial statements to the National Assembly on time for the discussion of the following year budget.
Areas in which progress was unsatisfactory include external audit and intergovernmental fiscal
relations. The framework for scrutiny of public finances and follow up by the executive is weak.
Similarly, the framework for inter-governmental relations is inadequate, resulting in lower than
planned transfers of resources from the central government to the decentralized level. To advance
public finance management (PFM) reform, the Government approved in 2010 the 5-year PAGAM II,
which will benefit from Bank support though PRSCs and the Governance and Budget Decentralization
(GBD) TA operation. Priorities will include strengthening procurement practices, including through
increased transparency and participation, strengthened quality of budget reports and financial
statements, strengthened capacity for fiscal operations in a context of decentralization and enhanced
fiduciary oversight.
21. Mali has made significant progress in expanding access to education, especially basic
education. The Bank has continued its support to the GoM‟s ten-year education program (PRODEC).
Implementation of the PRODEC resulted in increased gross enrollment rates for primary and lower
secondary education. Communities, Medersas and private schools contributed to this increase. Primary
completion rates improved going from 43.5 to 56.5 percent over the past five years and the gap in
completion rates between boys and girls declined from 15 to 8 percent. The GoM performed well in
terms of financing basic education with the share to primary education going from 35 to 40 percent
and the share of non-teaching staff declining thereby improving the quality of education expenditures.
However, there are serious regional and gender disparities, particularly in No rthern Mali. Efforts to
improve quality have been made but equity and relevance of the education system remain problematic.
Training goals were surpassed but only 300 schools have the necessary books. Secondary and post
secondary, including vocational education and training, are particularly affected by the weak quality of
-6-

the system. This translates into low literacy and skill levels, scarce qualified labor, and almost non existent and costly business support services resulting in low labor productivity. Going forward, the
Bank will support the GoM to better define and implement an education program to increase the
output and quality of the education system to improve the overall qualification of the labor force and
to link the sector to the job market.
22. Except for immunization coverage, progress in the health sector is too slow. Immunization
coverage has greatly progressed. The percentage of children under 1 year of age immunized with
DPT3 progressed from 68 percent in 2006 to close to 100 percent in 2009. However, infant mortality
at 103 per 1,000 live births and maternal mortality at 830 per 100,000 live births remain very high.
Reproductive health (RH) indicators are poor with only 57 percent of deliveries attended by skilled
personnel, and 8.2 percent of 15-49 year old women using contraceptives. So far, only 2.9 percent of
Malians have access to health mutuals. Quality of care remains a problem. Human resource reforms
have been implemented but they are limited to the creation of a new directorate that has not yet
achieved its objective to post midwifes and nurses in the rural areas, thus resulting in large inequities
in access to quality health services. Going forward, interventions have to be reinforced in the areas of
RH, family planning, and financial protection of people requiring access to health services. IFC
supports the private delivery of health services through the Health in Africa initiative and is providing
TA to establish a public private dialogue committee and to create a private health sector alliance,
improve the regulatory framework governing the private health sector, and increase access to
financing for the private sector.
23. The national response to the HIV/AIDS and access to HIV/AIDS related services have
improved. Sustained financial contribution to fight HIV/AIDS has enabled the provision of voluntary
counseling and testing to more than 12,000 persons. Out of about 35,000 persons eligible for
antiretroviral treatment, 70 percent have access to the treatment. Twenty-two private centers now offer
testing services and more than 70 enterprises and business associations have implemented an action
plan to fight HIV/AIDS. The GoM allocates about US$4 million every year to fight HIV/AIDS and is
planning to set up a dedicated fund to try to address the unpredictability of development partner
funding. The study to set up this fund is ongoing. The Bank plans to support GoM by strengthening
the system in place to distribute antiretroviral drugs and provide screening services. The proposed
Reproductive Health Project will continue the dialogue on strategic issues related to HIV/AIDS,
including its mainstreaming in the GoM‟s program.
C. IMPLEMENTATION P ROGRESS
24. Delivery of the planned IDA lending program has been on track and lending commitments
exceed the indicative CAS program. Only the Governance and Budget Decentralization TA operation
slipped in order to fully align its design with the 2010 action plan for modernizing and strengthening
PFM. Mali has benefited from increased IDA amount thanks to the pilot crisis response window and
reallocations. The Urban Local Governments Support Project will be delivered as planned. The
grant/loan mix of IDA allocation in FY12 will be determined in June 2011 based on the risk of debt
distress now assessed as moderate. Appendix 2 presents planned and actual deliveries of the CAS
program.
25. While portfolio quality is overall satisfactory, challenges remain especially in procurement,
and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The current IDA portfolio comprises 10 operations, including
one IDA-GEF blended operation, with net commitments of US$568.5 million and an undisbursed
balance of US$334.2 million. The portfolio focuses on agriculture, energy, and institutional reforms.
The Bank relies on annual development policy loans to assist the GoM with key structural reforms.
Weak procurement capacity at project level, procurement delays, and deficiencies in planning
projects‟ activities persist. Efforts are underway to ensure that all projects have a formal M&E
-7-

framework and an operational monitoring system. The weak statistical capacity is a main challenge in
terms of results monitoring. The GoM and the Bank are working closely to address these issues
through joint annual Country Portfolio Performance Reviews, regular project implementation reviews,
and fiduciary trainings. In addition, the decentralization of the management of the Mali program is
progressing steadily, thus providing enhanced and just-in-time support.
26. The Bank has developed sector-based and cross-cutting support in the area of governance.
The Bank is supporting the GoM in strengthening the management capacity of the mining sector and
improving its governance. A governance structure for EITI implementation was established which led
to the designation of Mali as an EITI candidate country that is „close to compliant” in December 2010.
International validation of Mali‟s EITI process is expected to take place during 2011 when the country
achieves Compliant Status. The Bank carried out a governance assessment of the energy and transport
sectors. Identified measures to deal with significant losses at the electricity company, EDM, were
integrated in the design of the Energy Support Project, and discussions took place notably with regards
to tackling the pervasive controls faced by the transport sector. The Bank is also focusing its
governance work on streamlining the bidding process for greater transparency, enhancing the budget
process. Two Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) in education and health uncovered
significant leakages in delivery of key services. Following the suspension of some grants by the
Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria after confirmation that US$4 million (36 percent
of the funds) were embezzled or unjustified, the GoM prepared and shared a report of procurem ent and
internal control breached in the management of these funds. The Bank is conducting a comprehensive
financial management and procurement assessment which will result in the design of a fiduciary
capacity building plan that will cover central, district and local levels, and of a governance
strengthening plan. The Bank‟s work has also started emphasizing the demand side of accountability.
27. Challenges remain to better mainstream governance and anti-corruption actions in Bank’s
operations, implement them at the sector level, and build social accountability. The PRSC series and
the GBD TA operation will emphasize transparency, accountability and governance in public
expenditure management and will build capacity to carry out PETS. The proposed Urban Local
Governments Support Project operation will aim to support strengthened institutional capacity of five
targeted urban local governments for improved service delivery and enhanced governance and
accountability at the local level built around an effective fiscal framework designed to enable
predictable resource transfers to urban local governments. A comprehensive analysis of the
governance agenda is under preparation to review the legal, regulatory, institutional, and policy
frameworks in place and their adequacy. To tackle the emerging challenges and slow implementation
of key structural reforms, strengthened social accountability mechanisms could play a strong part to
improve good governance and service delivery. The slow progress in EDM restructuring, its recovery
plan and the electricity tariff adjustment mechanism is linked to sector governance challenges.
Building political support for the reform by better showing the positive results the reform would bring
would be key in the resolution of the current challenges. A proposal under the demand for good
governance window of the Social Development Civil Society Fund has been accepted in order to carry
out a study on instruments and tools for accountability for civil society representatives.
28. The Bank committed to strengthen capacity development (CD). Using the Capacity
Enhancement Needs Assessment (CENA) approach sponsored by WBI in a few countries, four CD
action forms were prepared on M&E, public procurement, regulatory framework in the energy sector,
and public revenue administration. The financial and human capacity to implement the approach
proved to be an obstacle to implement the approach. It was therefore only implemented through the
IDF to strengthen the GPRSF results framework while the findings of the other CD action forms were
used for procurement training sessions and embedded in the Energy Sector Support Project and two
successfully completed IDFs on PFM. Statistical capacity development was provided through
household survey analysis under the Belgian trust fund. CD needs are now being identified and
-8-

addressed through project preparation and implementation and under various non-lending and trust
fund activities.
29. The Bank has strengthened its interventions to address gender-specific constraints. As a result
of the 2006 gender assessment, gender specific measures are incorporated in Bank‟s operations and
non-lending activities and the Bank is advocating incorporating gender-responsive actions into country
strategy documents. Donors have supported the GoM design a gender and equity strategy. Through the
Household Energy and Universal Access (HEURA) Project, women‟s associations manage some of
the multifunctional platforms installed in 64 communities resulting in 7, 200 connections. Under the
Gender and Energy Program of the Africa Renewable Energy Access Program, the HEURA Project
strengthened the capacity of the national agency on household energy and rural electrification,
AMADER, to integrate gender activities. The Bank will now carry out a full gender and energy needs
assessment in selected villages to develop an action plan for training, knowledge sharing and CD
activities for women in rural communities. Gender-specific measures were also incorporated in all
agriculture, NRM and CC activities. The main issues tackled relate to the vulnerability of women and
female-headed households, capacity building for social institutions and women‟s groups, and
promotion of specific adaptation strategies under the leadership of women‟s organizations. An ESSD
TF on gender helped design an operations manual which addressed access to financial resources and
training for female producer groups, and female participation in agricultural policy decision making.
Under the GSP, two women associations are participating in the managing association of the matching
grant fund under the Enterprise Support Services component. In the context of the analytical work on
SSN, the Bank prepared a report on welfare effects of widowhood in Mali. Going forward, the
upcoming RH constraints assessment will include social norms analyses that affect women‟ RH
choices and inform new social marketing campaigns to increase uptake in family planning use. The
preparation of the RH Project will address gender issues as they are related to RH outcomes. In
addition, work has begun on a series of poverty and gender notes using the 2010 Household and Firm
Enterprise surveys to inform the preparation of the new GPRSF.
D. PARTNERSHIP AND THE A ID E FFECTIVENESS A GENDA
30. The GoM and donors have made some progress on harmonization and alignment, but room
for progress remains. A first joint donor assistance strategy (JAS) for the 2009-2011 period was
signed by 14 donors and focuses on results and linkages to the GPRSF with the view to improving
complementarities and joint policy matrices, funding mechanisms, and reviews. Key achievements
include: improved disbursement predictability; reduction in the total number of budget support
triggers; increase in number of donors using direct budget support; and progress towards more
programmatic approaches in some sectors (water, decentralization and transport, and to some extent
agriculture). Country-led aid management is being strengthened through the gradual operationalization
of the GoM‟s Aid Harmonization Secretariat (SHA). The JAS II process will build on the challenges
faced in many countries to move forward with joint programming and division of labor. On its side,
the Bank is advocating an incremental process with up-front focus on measurable measures. The
development of a National Aid Policy should provide increased visibility and traction to aid
effectiveness issues.
31. Donor assistance is better coordinated at sector level but remains fragmented overall, and the
capacity of Mali’s institutions and financial management mechanisms remain weak. Three sectors
are covered by sector budget support (education, health, and decentralization) and two other s are in
process (irrigation and water). During the CAS period, two new donors have started using budget
support, but the share of budget support to total disbursements has gone down from 33 percent in 2006
to 23 percent in 2010. The Bank chairs the donor working group on macro-economic issues, and
progress has been made in terms of quality of the joint budget review. Efforts to harmonize the
conditionality framework have reduced the joint trigger matrix to 39 triggers. The CAS period has
-9-

seen progress on a number of harmonization indicators (especially the JAS, framework for budget
support and program-based approaches). However, reducing the use of project implementation units
has proved to be challenging. The Bank is carrying out a PIU study to gain deeper understanding of
the drivers behind the creation of PIUs, and the impact on portfolio quality (see Appendix 5).
IV.

STRENGTHENED AND EXTENDED CAS PROGRAM

32. Drawing on the lessons from the implementation of its first two GPRSFs, the GoM launched
in December 2010 the preparation of its GPRSF III. The 2009 Progress Report of the GPRSF II
indicates that priority measures for 2011 will focus on six areas: education, health, food security and
rural development, development of SMEs, reforms in the business environment, and the promotion of
democratic governance. It further lays out key challenges to ensuring stronger growth, namely (a) the
high population growth with growing and unsustainable pressure on production resources and
increased demands in terms of nutrition, water supply, health, education an d training, (b) youth
employment, (c) environmental degradation and CC, and (d) MDG achievement. These challenges
were reconfirmed during the launching workshop for the new GPRSF that will cover the period 201217 to coincide with the electoral cycle. The GoM also launched the process to update the JAS in
February 2011.
33. In light of these considerations, the Bank proposes to extend the CAS period by one fiscal
year. The extension will allow the Bank to fully align the preparation of its next CAS with the new
GPRSF and the updated JAS. During the CAS extension period, the Bank‟s approach will be to: (a)
maintain a continuous engagement on its activities to consolidate gains to promote rapid and broadbased growth and to help address critical structural and governance related weaknesses in key
productive sectors; and (b) increase its engagement to support the GoM‟s renewed strategic priorities
in human development and service delivery (population growth, education sector, youth, and urban
water supply and sanitation) in order to place greater emphasis on inclusive growth. To that effect, the
lending program for the remainder of FY11 (Urban Local Governments Support Project) will be
delivered as planned and the Bank will deliver Reproductive Health and Higher Education Projects
and prepare Youth Employment, and Water and Sanitation Projects in FY12. The third PRSC series
will start in FY12. It will be integrative and focus on reforms to strengthen governance foundations
(including PFM), reduce poverty, and protect the vulnerable. The IFC will continue to complement
IDA activities to explore opportunities to support the private sector.
34. The Bank will complement its lending support with targeted analytical work and TA to tackle
emerging challenges. Consistent with the GoM‟s commitment to building its social protection base
and the findings of the Bank‟s FY11 Social Safety Nets review, and in a context of high volatility of
commodity price, the Bank will continue to provide TA for policy dialogue on social protection,
including support to reforms in contributive and non contributive schemes. Ongoing analytical work
on growth, gender (including a poverty profile) to support the GoM‟s medium term policy formulation
on growth, and poverty and gender challenges will be completed in FY12. In addition, the Bank is
providing TA for the preparation of the PEFA update, which will inform revisions to be made to
PAGAM II. The analytical work program will also encompass TA for the information and
communication technologies (ICT) sector, PRSP dialogue and the preparation of a PRSP-JSAN. The
Bank will also continue to support GoM activities to better engage its Diaspora in the transfer of
knowledge and use of remittances for community development through the implementation of an
Institutional Development Grant and a Japanese Social Development Fund to conduct need
assessments at the community level in the Kayes region.
35. The Bank is responding favorably to the request for addressing the rapid population growth
and higher education challenges. The Bank will prepare a RH operation that takes into account the
multi-sectoral dimension of RH and family planning. The operation will aim at increasing the demand
- 10 -

for and use of reproductive health services with a clear focus on family planning, nutrition and high
impact interventions proven to contribute to the reduction of maternal, neonatal and child mortality. In
addition, the Bank will pay special attention to improving girls‟ education and will use the
Demography and Economics Study as basis for public debate and policy formulation to strengthen
incentives for addressing demographic challenges. The GoM has renewed its focus on the importance
of higher education and skills development as a way to address shortcomings in the governance
system, weak linkages between public financial management, sector strategy and decentralization, the
low level of labor productivity on account of insufficient and low quality of education. The Bank is
expanding its support to higher education and skills development with the aim to build a solid
foundation for growth and to create new opportunities for youth to access the labor market. The FY12
Higher Education Project aimed at improving the sector‟s relevance, management and efficiency will
be complemented by an EFA-FTI Grant Development Policy Support (currently under preparation)
which focuses on policy and institutional reforms and the preparation of a Youth Skills Development
operation (delivery in FY13) aimed at improving productivity, leadership, and competitiveness.
36. To better mitigate the consequences of exogenous shocks, the GoM has asked the Bank to
help develop a comprehensive social protection strategy, including more efficient and relevant SSN
programs. The priority actions toward the development of a more efficient and cost-effective SSN
system would include: (i) strengthening the strategic, institutional, and financial framework for
designing, implementing, managing, monitoring, and evaluating SSN programs; and (ii) developing a
plan for improving the effectiveness of the SSN system by reforming existing programs and designing
new ones aiming to reduce small or ineffective programs while strengthening other viable programs
with better targeting and outcomes. Going forward, the Bank will consider an operation to help
develop a permanent SSN system that addresses the needs of the chronic poor and that can readily be
scaled up during periods of adverse natural hazards and exogenous shocks.
37. A key priority for the GoM is to mobilize the financing for Water Supply Project (Kabala
Project) to ensure adequate water supply for Bamako and eradicate the recurrent water shortages in
most neighborhoods of the capital city. While major investments have been made to rehabilitate and
expand water and sanitation infrastructure, investment sustainability remains an important challenge
for the sector. Lack of maintenance and underinvestment put at risk the gains made in the expansion of
the service. This is evidenced by the large number of rural water systems that are not operational and
the insufficient water production and distribution capacity in Mali, and notably Bamako. As the urban
population continues to grow, especially the peri-urban areas of Bamako, the Bank will complement
donor efforts by supporting the Kabala program with a targeted Water and Sanitation Project in early
FY13.
38. The Bank stands ready to help weather the impact of the insecurity in Northern Mali as well
as the regional instability. While the GoM has a special investment program for the Northern part of
Mali and is taking the lead in responding to the regional uncertainty, if needed, the Bank could scale
up development activities currently implemented in the Northern part of the country through its
operations, and further adapt its ongoing projects. Following the preparation of an internal note on the
potential impact of the Libya crisis, the Mali and the Post Conflict and Social Development Unit teams
have started working together to prepare a follow through of the 2011 World Development Report on
conflict, security and development for which Mali was a focus country. The analysis will deepen the
understanding of the underlying factors behind insecurity and how our operations can best mitigate
security risks. Associated to this, the Bank is partnering with the UN agencies, other multi-laterals,
and bilaterals to help the GoM deal with the conflict and insecurity.
39. The extended CAS period approach is fully consistent with the new Africa Strategy’s
Governance foundations, in addition to its pillars designed to address competitiveness and
employment, and vulnerability and resilience challenges. It also enables the Bank to target IDA 16
- 11 -

priority themes and results expectations. The Bank will (a) implement its portfolio of operations
supporting infrastructure, agriculture productivity, and growth-oriented sectors, (b) launch the urban
and GBD TA Projects to tackle urbanization challenges and the provision of basic service delivery at
the decentralized level, and (c) build on TA, analytical work and trust funded activities carried out to
help tackle vulnerability to commodity price fluctuations, better promote climate change resilient
development, improve resilience to exogenous and natural shocks, and foster greater transparency,
accountability and governance. In addition, the Bank will engage more directly to help Mali address
the low level of human capital and generate jobs, especially for the young population. The Bank will
also seek to renew the momentum of economic reforms with a new PRSC series that will focus on a
limited set of multi-sectoral issues to catalyze policies for faster growth, a more competitive economy
with employment opportunities, and better delivery of basic services. Finally, the Bank team will pay
special attention to further scaling-up gender mainstreaming and efforts on gender-related MDGs. The
development of the new CAS will fully integrate gender and climate resilient development issues and
strengthen its results framework accordingly.
V.

MANAGING RISKS

40. Overall, the risks assessed in the CAS remain valid but the challenging international and
regional environment of recent months has somewhat raised the risk level. While Mali‟s political
environment still represents a limited risk to the program, the 2012 electoral process is more than
likely to maintain stable political arrangements based on democratic rule. Mali is, however, highly
exposed to the political uncertainties of its neighbors. Persistence of the crisis in Côte d‟Ivoire and
Libya could have significant negative effects, through various transmission mechanisms, on the
Malian economy and society at large. The Bank is preparing an analysis to better understand the
underlying factors behind the insecurity and how we can best respond through our development
program. To minimize the risk of trade disruptions due to the political crisis in Côte d‟Ivoire, Mali has
strengthened alternative trade routes and the Malian council of shippers has reached a customs
agreement with the Benin authorities to use the port of Cotonou as an import/export gateway which
includes preferential arrangements for customs clearance and other services. The potential increase in
transportation costs as a result of the diversion of exports and import to more distant ports, fall in
livestock exports and decline in remittances may be mitigated by the rising demand for domestic
products, resulting from higher domestic supply, higher international prices and transaction costs. The
turmoil in Libya, could affect foreign direct investments as Libya is a major investor in ON and
tourism and is financing a number of public projects, as well as remittances and aid flows.
41. Mali remains highly vulnerable to fluctuations in commodity prices, external shocks and to
CC. Continued upward pressures in food and fuel prices in global markets could affect Mali‟s
inflation, lead to an increase in poverty, further burden the budget, and have significant fiscal impact
depending on the GoM‟s response to weather the price increases. Mitigation factors include Mali‟s
strong record of prudent macroeconomic management, in addition to Bank support to (a) enhance
productivity and competitiveness of the cotton sector, diversify agricultural production and further
develop commercial agriculture, and improve management of natural resources to reduce vulnerability
and enhance resilience to climatic shocks, (b) lower energy costs through connecting with lower-cost
regional producers; (c) reform the investment climate, (d) strengthen PFM, and (e) monitor closely
parastatal companies‟ financial and cash positions and restructuring efforts.
42. The upcoming presidential election might be a period of delay in reform implementation. In
the wake of the 2012 presidential elections, internal vested interests may slow further reforms and
commitment to finalize key structural reforms in energy, service delivery at decentralized level, and
investment climate may fade away. The Bank will continue to engage through its operations and in
dialogue on the benefits of timely implementation of the reform agenda.

- 12 -

APPENDIX 1. MALI UPDATED CAS RESULTS MATRIX FY08–12
Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)
CAS Strategic Objective 1. Promote rapid and broad-based growth
Agriculture productivity
increases for specific crops in
targeted areas:
 Cotton yield increases by 15%
from its 2005/06 level (950t/ha)
by 2011.
 Cowpeas yield increases from
400 kg/ha (2004) to 600 kg/ha
(2011).
Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

Competitiveness for selected
supply chains improves in
targeted areas
 Mango exports progress from
5,500t (2007) to 8,000t (2011).
 Local potato seed production
covers 60% of national needs
by 2011 from ~ 0% in 2007.

Availability of credit for
agriculture improved:
 Credit granted by BNDA and
MFIs to agriculture increases
from CFA 70.3 billion (2003) to
72 billion by 2011.

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

 Indicator met. Cotton yield at
1,020 t/ha.
 Indicator met. Dissemination of
selected cowpea seeds raised
yields from 250 to 750 kg/ha.

 Indicator met. Mangoes export
increase on the international
market. Estimation: 10,000 t.
 Indicator on track. The volume
of potatoes marketed on the
national and regional markets
reached 29,000 tons.

 Indicator met. Loans granted by
MFIs and BNDA totaled 161.1
billion CFA in 2009 (most recent
data available)

- 13 -

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

Grower networks are in place
for potatoes/cowpeas seed
multiplication, and more and
more farmers have adopted
new post-harvest & irrigation
technologies.
Work has started on
technology dissemination
mechanisms and on
improvement of researchextension linkages.
Coordination mechanisms
along specific supply chains
are in place: Two interprofessional entities created
for cotton and mangoes have
been established; private
operators and producers for
fruit and vegetables filières
are organized; and a fruit and
vegetable packaging facility
is functioning.
New financing instruments
(warehouse receipt, weatherindex-based insurance) have
not been developed. The
study on weather index
insurance and the regulatory
framework for the warehouse
were not done. Also, the
microfinance institutions
were not consolidated into
networks. Focus was put on
restructuring existing
networks rather that bringing
in the independent MFI into

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support
Ongoing lending:
 Ag Competitiveness and
Diversification Project
 Rural Community
Development Project +
AF from the global food
crisis response window
 GEF Gourma Biodiversity
Conservation Project
 Growth support Project
 Agricultural Productivity
project
 GEF Agricultural
Productivity
 PRSC 5
 West Africa Agriculture
Productivity Program
 West Africa Biodiversity
Project
 IFC – Agribusiness:
GRIMAS, Grand Moulin
du Mali
Planned lending:
 PRSC-6
AAA and TFs:
 Rural Finance Study completed
 Urban Environmental
Analysis – to be
completed by end FY11
 Sustainable Land
Management PER/CBA –
completed
 TA dialogue on SLM –

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones
networks.

Agricultural pressure on natural
resources reduced in Office de
Niger and cotton zones:
 By 2011, cotton producing
areas remain at 2006 level
(500,000 ha).

 By 2011, soil salinity remains at
its 2006 level in Office du
Niger (20% of irrigated ha)
zone.
Improved donor coordination
and country leadership:
 GOM has set up a national
pooled financing mechanism
for agricultural development.

Integration of Mali with regional
and global markets by increased
efficiency of transport operators
(roads, railway, and air) :
 Transport costs between
unloading imported containers
(20-foot TEV) from ship to
final destination are reduced by
at least 10%. Baseline: $1300 in
2006.
 Rail freight has increased



Indicator revised. Cotton
producing areas remains at
maximum of 2006 level.
Revision to clarify that
objective is to reduce land
extension for cotton
production to increase
intensification of cotton
production areas.

 Indicator met. Cotton
production intensified without
increased land extension. Cotton
producing areas currently at
250,000 ha.

Work to disseminate
sustainable land management
tools & good practices
integrated in agricultural
investments to producers has
started.

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support
ongoing
 CSIF – ongoing
 DRM grant – ongoing
 Integrated Land and
Water Mgt. for
Adaptation to Clmate
Variability and Change
TF - ongoing
Partners:
 AfDB, MCC, USAID,
Denmark, Dutch, France,
Canada, EU , IFAD,
Swiss.

 Indicator dropped since the
evolution of salinity is difficult
to assess and monitor on such a
large scale area.
 Indicator on track. FNDA
created but not yet operational.
PAPAM operation now effective
is supporting such instrument.

 Indicator on track. Indicator
linked with ongoing progress
from activities from the regional
project. Outcome by end of CAS
period will be conditioned by
external context – crisis in Côte
d‟Ivoire, and spike in oil prices.
 Achievement of indicator is
- 14 -

With the set up of the FNDA
mechanism and PAPAM
implementation, work has
started to move toward
pooled financing mechanism
for agricultural services comanaged by producers and
the GoM, as well as to
formulate sector MTEF and
its use for programming.
Decrees and legislation to
reduce security checkpoints
and safety checkpoints to an
agreed minimum on internal
routes adopted. Sustained
political commitment and
capacity of GoM to enforce
rules is needed.

Ongoing lending:
 Transport Sector 2 + AF
 WA Transit and Transport
Facilitation Project
 West and Central Africa
Security Project
 Growth Support Project
 IFC – US$25 million
investment in Aga Khan
Foundation for Celeste
Air which includes Air

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

Baseline: 423,000 t in 2005.
Target: 50% increase by 2011.

More rural localities have yearround transport access:
 Less than 20% of rural
population lives more than 2
km from a year-round passable
road. Baseline 2006: 41%.

 % of main roads in good
condition increases from 35%
(2005) to 65% (2011).
Improved air safety and security
in Mali as measured by:
 70% compliance rate with
ICAO safety standards.

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

contingent on concession being
restructured and political
commitment or lack of from
Malian and Senegalese Govt.

GOM ensures effective
leadership and coordination in
transport sector:
 Bi-annual joint evaluation and
review missions conducted.

 Joint evaluation matrix
prepared and used as
monitoring tool.

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

 Indicator dropped. The sector
has a coordinated approach
between development partners
and partners and the
Government but in a less
structured manner than through
the monitoring of a formal joint
evaluation matrix.
 Indicator revised. Percentage
of people who have access to all
weather roads has increased in
the project impact areas.
Indicator reformulated since
baseline data is only collected
for project impact area.
Baseline 2007:32%; target for
end 2011:42%.

 Indicator on track. Extensive
consultations between donors
and development partners are
meeting on a regular basis with
the Government to ensure
coherence with the Govt.
strategic objectives.

 Indicator on track. 40% of
people who have access to all
weather roads in the project
impact areas at end 2010.

Mali, Air Burkina and Air
Uganda
National transport sector
strategy study was completed
jointly by GOM and other
donors and national transport
sector strategy adopted by the
Authorities.

1,450 km of rural/secondary
roads rehabilitated by 2009.

 Indicator met. 64.8% of main
roads are currently in good
condition.
 Indicator on track but
implementation delays of IDA
funded project and delays in
- 15 -

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support

Funding mechanisms have
been strengthened to ensure
adequate resources for annual
road maintenance overseen
by the Road Authority

AAA and TFs:
 Governance diagnostic
note - completed
Partners:
 AfDB, EU, MCC, BOAD,
KfW

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

 40% compliance rate with
ICAO security standards.

 Fewer than 10 serious airport
security problems per year.
 Time to clear arriving
passengers reduced from 70
minutes (2006) to 30 minutes
(2011).
Availability of critical
production factors increased.
Additional 30-45 MW of thermal
capacity installed by 2011 to
increase power system reliability.
EDM SA achieves financial
viability and operational
efficiency through improved
sector governance as measured
by:
 EDM maintains technical and
non-technical losses below
20%.
 Electricity access rates have
increased from 2% in 2005 to at
least 6% in 2011 in rural and
peri-urban areas.
 Significant physical progress is
made on electricity
interconnection with
neighboring countries:
85% of planned transmission
lines constructed.

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes
refurbishment of Bamako airport
under MCA funded project.
 Indicator on track but
implementation delays of IDA
funded project and delays in
refurbishment of Bamako airport
under MCA funded project.
 Indicator met. 5 airport security
problems in 2010.
 Indicator met. About 30
minutes to clear arriving
passengers.

 Indicator on track. +80 MW of
thermal capacity confirmed for
2012.

 Investments to reduce technical
losses only expected to have full
effect in 2013.
 Indicator met.



Indicator on track. Current rate
of construction of the
interconnection is 47.9%.
However, ongoing crisis in Côte
d‟Ivoire and lack of political
commitment on the Ivorian side
for the interconnection could
compromise progress.
- 16 -

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support

through the creation of a
combined road agency and
road fund and increased levy
on fuel to fund road
maintenance.
Work is ongoing on the new
regulatory framework for
operation of road, air, and
river transport agencies, and
the concession contract
between the GoM and a
private operator.
+80 MW of thermal capacity
delivered first quarter 2011 to
reduce power outages; Rural
electricity access rates are
increased to 11% today.
EDM SA technical and
nontechnical losses remain
stable at 23%; tariff
adjustment took place in July
2009. Awaiting regulator
decision on tariff indexing
formula.
Ongoing work on
construction of transmission
lines. Satisfactory progress
on the Malian side. No
progress on the Ivorian
network.

Ongoing lending:
 Household Energy and
Universal Access + AF
 Energy Support Project
 WAPP APL 2 Felou
Hydropower Project + AF
 PRSC-5
Planned lending:
 PRSC-6
AAA and TFs:
 AF with trust funds from
Russia and The
Netherlands – ongoing
 Scaling Up Renewable
Energy in Low Income
Countries program
(AfDB, IFC and IDA) –
ongoing
 IFC Kenie Hydro Project
– ongoing
 Governance diagnostic
note - completed
Partners:
 AfDB, France, Aga Khan,

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

Efficiency of commercial banks
improved for better financial
intermediation:
 Spread between lending and
deposit rates reduced from
average of 9.1% in 2005 to 8%
by 2009.
 Ratio of gross NPL to total
loans decreased from 29% in
June 2005 to 10% by 2011.

 Share of total credit to private
sector to increase from 51.7%
in Dec 2005 to 60% in 2009.

Increase in private sector
investment (domestic and
foreign):
 Number of formal
manufacturing enterprises
increased by 10% by 2011.
Baseline: 350 firms in the
manufacturing sector.
 Access time to land by firms is
reduced from 180 days to 30
days.

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

 Revised indicator. Ratio of
gross NPL to total loans
decreased from 29% in June
2005 to 17% by 2011. Target
revised to 17 % (10%
unrealistic)
 Revised indicator. Bank credit
to SMEs increase from 25.6%
in 2006 to 30% of total loans
and advances by 2011. Original
indicator no longer tracked
following restructuring of the
project. Data for this indicator
is collected through GSP
Project. A proxy is being used
to measure credit to SMEs.

 Revised indicator. Time taken
to approve new investments is
reduced from 45 days in 2006
to 15 days in 2011. Original
indicator dropped following
restructuring of the GSP
Project.
 Revised indicator. Number of
days for property registration
reduced from 44 days in 2005
to 30 days by end 2011.
Original indicator dropped

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

 Indicator met. Spread between
lending and deposit rates of 7.9%
in 2009 (more recent data
available)
 2009 ratio is 22.6%.

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

GoM share in BIM reduced
from 61.5 % in 2007 to
10.5%.
A strategy to reduce number
of NPLs is not yet in place.

 The value for 2009 is 52.6%
(latest data available).

 Indicator on track. Time taken
to approve new investments is
currently 26 days.

 Indicator on track. Current
value: 29 days.

- 17 -

New civil and commercial
procedures adopted.
Investment promotion agency
operational. Business
licensing has been
streamlined with the creation
and operationalization of the
one stop shop.
Partial credit guarantee
facility established and
operating with 2 banks; trade
finance guarantee launched
with one bank.

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support
BOAD, ECOWAS, EU,
India, KfW, Sweden,
Dutch
Ongoing lending:
 Growth Support Project
 PRSC-5
 IFC – financial markets
(BoA Mali, Ecobank
Mali)
 IFC - tourism (Hotel
Salam) ; food processing
and packaging (GRIMAS
– supports industries that
supply to hotels;
manufacturing of printed
products (Graphique
Industries – prints posters
and brochures for tourism
industry)
Planned lending:
 PRSC-6
 Urban Local Governments
Support Project
 Water Supply and
Sanitation Project
AAA and TFs:
 Rural Finance Study –
completed
 ICA update – ongoing
 Programmatic TA: ICT
policy dialogue - ongoing
 IFC PEP-Africa
/FIAS:TA in investment
climate – ongoing
 IFC support to microentrepreneurs program
(STEP) – ongoing
 IFC Africa leasing

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

 Total corporate tax burden
reduced from 50% to 47% to be
closer to level of best
performers within WAEMU
zone.
Improved performance of
nonagricultural sectors by 2011 :
 Number of tourists increased by
at least 30%.
Baseline: 100,000 tourists in
2005.

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)
following restructuring of the
GSP.
 Indicator dropped following
restructuring of GSP and
indicator not being measurable.

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

Draft of PSD strategy
prepared but not yet
approved. Land tenure code
not revised yet.

 Indicator to drop as it may
not be relevant by end CAS due
to international factors and
instability in the North of Mali.



 At least 3 new investments
undertaken in small-scale
mining activities.

 Indicator revised. At least 10
new investments undertaken in
small-scale mining activities.

 Number of people with access
to information and
communication technology
doubled.
Baseline: 23.5/10,000
inhabitants in 2005.

 Indicator revised: Teledensity
increased from 2.5% (2005) to
30% by end 2011.

 Indicator on track. Several
investments in small-scale
mining sector already
undertaken.
 Indicator met.

Increased productivity of
targeted MSME
 Increased sales.
 Increased output.
 Baselines and targets to be set
once enterprises identified.

 Indicator revised. Average
revenue increase of beneficiary
firms of STEP will increase
from 25% in 2005 to 80% in
2011. Indicator is collected
through GSP.

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

Indicator on track. In 2009,
115,500 tourists arrived by air in
Mali.

 Indicator on track. 2009 value
is 78%.

Privatization of SOTELMA
completed in July 2009 and
sector regulator‟s new staff
trained; “One-stop-shop”
focused on service to new
entrepreneurs created;
property registration eased by
halving the transfer tax to
7%; Tourism sector strategy
completed and action plan
adopted.
Ongoing inventory of
regulations completed and
reform proposals designed by
2009.
Mining Code revised in 2011
with a focus on incentive
framework for improving the
sustainable development
impact of extractive
industries activities.
At least 50 MSMEs nationwide have managerial
training every year; Number
of college graduates trained
to provide support to MSMEs
increased from 15 to 50 in
2009.
STEP provided TA support
to 1,200 MSMEs since 2005
and PCG with BoA helped

- 18 -

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support
program - ongoing
 Doing Business reviews
(annual)
 IFC Trickle up program –
completed
 IFC Grassroots Business
initiative - completed
AAA and TFs:
 Mali – FSAP - completed
 Regional FSAP completed
 ICA update – ongoing
 Support to EITI
implementation TF
Partners:
 AfDB, Denmark, France,
EU, IMF, MCC

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support

extend term finance to SMEs.
Assistance to BoA led to an
increase in Bank‟s lending to
SMEs from $4 m in 2007 to
$37 m by end 2009.
Implementing association
established for the matching
grants and institutional
framework being finalized.
Strategic Objective 2. Strengthen public sector performance
More transparent budget
practices as measured by:
 PEFA indicators on quality and  Indicator revised. Timeliness
timeliness of in-year budget
of in-year budget reports from
reports and annual financial
D+ (2007) to at least C by 2011.
statements improved from D+
(2007) to at least C+ by 2011
 New indicator: Timeliness of
annual financial statements
improved from D+ (2007) to at
least C+ by 2011.

Improvement in procurement
practices as measured by:
 PEFA indicator on procurement
will have increased from C
(2007) to at least B by 2011.

Quality of internal and external
budget control will have
improved as measured by:
 PEFA grades on internal and
external audit have risen from
D+ and D (2007) to at least C



Indicator on track. Timeliness
improved and quarterly budget
execution reports are published 6
weeks after the end of the quarter
since Q3 2009. Quality also
improved.
 Indicator on track. Timeliness
of financial statements and
quality is now assessed with a
rating of C.

 2010 PEFA rates procurement as
C. Limited progress reflects
delays in the implementation of
reforms.

 Indicator revised. PEFA
grades on internal and external
audit have risen from D+



Indicator on track. Achieved
for internal controls; ongoing
work on external controls with
- 19 -

PAGAM-GFP was revised to
include intra-year reporting
following the 2006 PEFA;
The interconnection of MEF
with finance departments
(DAFs) of all ministries and
the regional budget
departments (DRBs) is
complete. Additional work
ongoing to ensure the
interface between PRED and
the Treasury software.

New laws and regulations for
procurement adopted and key
institutions put in place.
Revisions of the laws made
in 2011 to better align the
laws with WAEMU
guidelines. TA is planned
from FY12 and this will help
accelerate progress.
PAGAM-GFP revised to
incorporate actions to
strengthen internal controls.
PAGAM II adopted in 2010
includes actions to strengthen
external controls. Cabinet

Ongoing lending:
 PRSC 5
Planned lending:
 PRSC 6
 Governance and Budget
Decentralization TA
operation
 Urban Local Governments
Support Project
 Water Supply and
Sanitation Project
AAA and TFs:
 CPAR – completed
 PAGAM - completed
 PEFA - completed
 PEMFAR – completed
 ROSC accounting completed
 Policy notes on growthongoing
 PEFA update – ongoing
 TA poverty monitoring –
ongoing
 TA action plan for ROSC
– ongoing
 TA poverty and PRSP
brief – completed

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors
(2011).

Link between budget and sector
strategies has improved as
measured by:
 Annual MTEF update to
include sector operational plans
(education and health).

 Resources transferred from
center to municipalities have
doubled from 2007 level of 1
billion FCFA.

 Service delivery has improved,
as evidenced by beneficiary
surveys.
Improve access to and quality of
basic education, including
strengthening of institutional
management capacities as

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)
(2007) to at least B (2011).
 PEFA grades on external audit
have risen from D (2007) to at
least C (2011).

 Indicators dropped. A more
objective indicator is proposed
to measure policy-based
budgeting. Similarly, a new
indicator is introduced to
measure PFM capacity at
decentralized level focusing on
the creation of systems rather
than flow of funds.
 New indicator. Share of
primary expenditure of sectors
for which statements of sector
strategies exist and are fully
costed, broadly consistent with
fiscal forecasts. Baseline
(2006): 48.2%; Target (2013):
75%
 New indicator. PEFA indicator
on timeliness of reliable
information to sub-national
entities on their allocations.
Baseline (2006): D; Target
(2011): C

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes
delays in the reform.
 The PEFA grade on external
audit remains at D but actions
planned in 2011 may help
improve the situation to D+.

 Indicator on track. Much
progress was made since 2008 in
this area, with the expansion of
the number of Ministries with
MTEF.

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones
adopted an action plan to
clear audit backlogs and to
prepare the creation of an
Audit Court in December
2010.
Mechanism in place that
links transfer of resources to
municipalities (2009).

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support
 Governance note ongoing
Partners:
 AfDB, EU, France,
Canada, IMF,
Netherlands, PAGAM,
Sweden

Ministries have at least 6
weeks from time of budget
circular to incorporate
operational plans (2009).

 Indicator achieved. Much
progress made since 2008 with
the expansion of the number of
ministries with MTEF.

 Indicator on track. Progress
was made regarding the
timeliness of information
regarding the current budget but
more needs to be done regarding
information of the investment
budget. 2010 rating: D. Work
ongoing to improve the situation.
 Indicator on track. Beneficiary
survey to be undertaken in 2010
under TA operation.
1,400 classrooms
constructed; 6, 000 teachers
trained; 3,000 community
teachers trained and paid by
- 20 -

Ongoing lending:
 Devt. Learning Center
 PRSC 5
 IFC - US$11 million loan

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors
measured by:
 67% primary completion rate
by 2011 (disparities reduced
between urban/rural and
between girls/boys) Baseline:
2005–06: girls 38%, boys 59%,
total 49%).

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)
Basis has changed based on the
census with higher population
growth from 2.6 to 3.6% annual
population growth rate.

 70 % of primary students
reaching average score in
language, reading, and
mathematics in grades 2 and 5.
 Girls represent 50% of total
primary students (2011)
(Baseline 44.1% in 2005–06).

Improve access to and quality of
HIV/AIDS-related services as
measured by:
 At least 60% of adult people
know 2 ways of HIV/AIDS
transmission by 2011 (Baseline:
36.5 % in 2002).
 Condom use among men who
have had sex with more than 1
partner in last 12 months has
increased from 33% to 45% by

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes



Indicator on track. Gross
primary education enrollment
rate in 2009/2010 is 76% (girls at
67% and boys at 81%). Primary
completion rate at 51% in 2009.
New target for 2012: 70%
primary completion rate and girls
at 49% and boys at 51%.
 Indicator on track. 58% of
primary students reached
average score in language,
reading, and mathematics in
grades 2 and 5 in 2009/2010
period.

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones
GoM; 100 % of community
schools fully subsidized to
reduce out of pocket
expenses for poor families;
National strategy for girls‟
education prepared and
currently being implemented;
Study completed to identify
skill requirements to support
economic growth.
Only 74.1% Grade 1
admission rate in 2009
(target: 85%)

to Graphique Industries
which produces
approximately 48% of the
textbooks and 100% of
the notebooks for the
PRODEC program
Planned lending:
 Higher Education Project
 PRSC 6
 EFA/FTI Grant
Development Policy
Support
AAA and TFs:
 Skills development study
– completed
 TA youth initiative –
completed
 TA non formal education
– completed
 Education country status
report – ongoing

 Indicator on track. Girls
represent 45% of total primary
students in 2009/2011. 2012
target: 49%.

More than 4,000 people
living with HIV/AIDS have
access to treatment and care;
2225 non public testing
facilities were operational as
of end 2008.

 Indicator dropped. Project
results matrix revised following
restructuring of project in May
2009 to align indicators with
the new WB HIV/AIDS
scorecard.
 Indicator dropped. Same as
above.

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support

Partners:
 AfDB, France, Canada,
Germany, Netherlands,
USAID, Denmark
Ongoing lending:
 HIV/AIDS MAP
 PRSC 5
Planned lending:
 Reproductive Health
Project
 PRSC 6
AAA and TFs:

- 21 -

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors
2011.
 Testing services offered in at
least 40 nonpublic facilities (up
from 2) and all reference
hospitals comply with national
standards.
 At least 10,000 persons living
with HIV/AIDS eligible for
treatment are under
antiretroviral drugs and
monitoring by 2010 (from
3,000 in 2005).

Use of health services increased
as measured by:
 70% of births assisted by
qualified health personnel
(Baseline: 51%, 2006).
 4% of population covered by a
health mutual (Baseline: 1.4%,
2005).
 90% immunization rates for
DTCP3 (Baseline: 68% in
2006).
 Use of modern contraception
increased to 500,000 coupleyears of protection (Baseline:
256,000 in 2006).

Aid harmonization increased
and transaction costs reduced:
 Joint framework for general
budget support in place and
followed.

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support
 Demography and
economics – completed
 TA Social safety nets –
completed
 TA Follow-up social
safety nets – ongoing
 Health country status
report – ongoing
 IFC – Health in Africa
initiative

 Indicator revised: number of
non public health centers to be
25 by end 2011. Original target
overambitious given available
funds
 Indicator revised: At least
9,000 persons living with
HIV/AIDS eligible for
treatment are under
antiretroviral drugs and
monitoring by end 2011.
 New indicator: 55,000 persons
aged 55+ receiving counseling
and testing for HIV and
received their test results.

Partners:
 AfDB, EU, Belgium,
Canada, France, Global
Fund, Netherlands,
Unicef, USAID
 Currently 57% of births assisted
by qualified health personnel
 2.1% of population covered by a
health mutual in 2009 and 2.9%
in 2010.

Road map for reducing
maternal mortality approved
in 2009; Contracting of
NGOs to increase coverage
was implemented by 2009.
Work ongoing to establish a
system for rewarding
performance of health
district.

 Indicator met. Immunization
rates for DTCP3 at 101%
currently.
 Indicator on track. Use of
modern contraception currently
at 490,542 couple-years of
protection.

 Indicator met.

- 22 -

GoM Harmonization
Secretariat strengthened;
Joint framework for general
budget support prepared and
MoU to apply framework
signed; Program based

 TA and ESW/AAA from
WB, EC, and other budget
support donors

Original CAS Outcomes
and Indictors
 Reduced number of parallel
PIUs in Bank operations:
maximum 4.
 Program-based approaches: at
least 66% of Bank portfolio.
 Coordinated ESW/AAA: at
least 66% of all Bank
ESW/AAA.
 Collaborative sections of next
Country Assistance Strategy
drafted and MoU signed by
GOM and its main donors
(including WB).

Revised CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(If applicable)

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes
 Only PAPAM and PRSC series
with no parallel PIU.
 Indicator met. 65% based on
disbursements.
 Indicator on track. Good
coordination with the Govt.
 Indicator on track. Joint CAS
prepared in 2009 and signed by
main donors; new CAS
preparation not yet started.

- 23 -

Progress Towards CAS
Milestones
approaches represented at
least 42% of WB portfolio
end 2009 and 50% of
ESW/AAA with strengthened
coordination during
preparation.
GoM H&A action plan not
executed as planned;
Reducing parallel PIUs to 8
was not achieved.

WBG and Development
Partners’ Support

APPENDIX 2. IDA LENDING AND ANALYTICAL PROGRAM
A. Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY08-12)

CAS Planned Lending

US$ m

PRSC II

42

Total
GEF WA Biosafety Project

42
25

PRSC III
Energy Support Project
TA for Service Delivery
Regional operation

40
75
15
8

Total
GEF Sustainable Land Mgmt. *

138
6.3

PRSC IV

50-60

Agriculture Productivity Project
Regional Operation
Total

70
8-18
138

PRSC V
Urban Operation
Regional Operation

50-60
70
8-18

Actual Lending
FY08
PRSC II
Total
WA Biosafety Project
FY09
PRSC III
Energy support Project
Postponed to FY11
HEURA Additional Financing
HIV/AIDS Additional Financing
Total
FY10 with IDA operation
PRSC II Additional Financing (Global Food
Crisis Response Program)
FY10
PRSC IV (including $15.5 m from Global
Food Crisis Response Program)
Agricultural Productivity Project
Felou Additional Financing
Total
GEF Agricultural Productivity
FY11
PRSC V
Urban Local Governments Support Project

US$ m
42
42
3.9
65
120
35
6
226
5

70.5
70
14.2
154.7
6.2
70
70

Governance and Budget Decentralization TA
12
Transport Sector 2 Additional Financing
23
Total
138
Total
175
Rural Community Devt. Additional
11.2
Financing (Global Food Crisis Response
Program)
FY12
PRSC VI
70 **
Higher Education and Skills Devt.
50 **
No indicative lending for FY12
Strengthening Reproductive Health
30 **
Total
150**
*: Fully blended with IDA Agricultural Productivity Project.
**: These estimates for FY12 are indicative only and can change. Actual allocation in FY12 will depend on: (i) total IDA
resources available, (ii) the country‟s performance rating; (iii) the performance and assistance terms of other IDA borrowers;
(iv) the terms of IDA's assistance to Mali (grants or credits); and (v) the number of IDA-eligible countries. IDA allocations
are made in SDRs based on performance, and the US$ equivalent is dependent upon the prevailing exchange rate.

- 24 -

B. Planned AAA Program and Actual Deliveries
CAS Planned AAA
Rural Finance Study
Demography and Economics
PEMFAR
Governance Diagnostic Study
Poverty and PRSP brief (TA)

Growth note on mining
Skills Development Study
Country Environmental Assessment
ICA Update
SLM Advisory Services

Growth note on tourism
Social Protection
PEFA Update
Poverty and PRSP brief (TA)

Actual AAA
FY08
Delivered to client postponed to FY08
Delivery to client postponed to FY08
Delivery to client postponed to FY10
Delivery to client postponed to FY08
Delivery to client postponed to FY09
ICT Policy Dialogue - Programmatic TA
FY09
Converted to policy notes on growth
Delivery to client postponed to FY10
Delivery to client postponed to FY11
Converted to a pilot of a new generation of investment and
private sector growth diagnostic
Work started in 2008
Rural Finance Study
Population and Development
Governance Diagnostic Study
Poverty and PRSP brief (TA)
ICT Policy Dialogue - Programmatic TA
FY10
Converted to policy notes on growth
Converted to Social Safety Nets TA
Slipped to FY11
Mali FSAP
Skills Development Study
PEMFAR
ROSC Accounting
ICT Policy Dialogue - Programmatic TA
FY11

Growth note on light manufacturing
Governance Follow-up
TBD
TBD

Follow-up on Social Safety Nets TA
Youth Initiative TA
Non formal Education TA
SME Growth and Diversification ICA
Urban Environmental Analysis
Policy notes on growth
PEFA Update
Education Country Status Report Update
Health Country Status Report
Poverty Monitoring TA
Dialogue on SLM (TA)
Deepening Telecom Policy Dialogue - Programmatic TA
Action plan for ROSC (TA)

- 25 -

APPENDIX 3. STATUS OF MDGs

Three MDGs are likely to be achieved: (a) combating HIV/AIDS prevalence at 1.3 percent in 2008 is
projected to decline further; (b) reaching universal primary education: gross enrollment rates in 2009
reached 80 percent but the girls/boys parity index remained at 79.4 percent; (c) cutting by half by 2015
the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water: population with access to
drinking water increased from 63.4 percent in 2007 to 73 percent in 2009. However, progress in
sanitation is lagging. While progress was made towards health related targets, Mali is unlikely to
achieve the goals of reducing child mortality and improving maternal health. Actions to eliminate
gender disparities show progress but results are far from the MDGs: women in parliament level stands
at 10.2 percent.
Mali – Progress toward the Millennium Development Goals
Goal
Eradicate
extreme
poverty and
hunger
Achieve
universal
primary
education
Promote
gender equality
and empower
women

Current Status
Unlikely

Reduce child
mortality

Off track

Improve
maternal health

Off track

Combat
HIV/AIDS,
malaria and
other diseases

Possible to
achieve if some
changes are
made

Ensure
environmental
sustainability
(including
sustainable
access to safe
drinking water
& sanitation)
Develop a
global
partnership for
development

Insufficient
information

Possible to
achieve if some
changes are
made
Possible to
achieve if some
changes are
made

Insufficient
information

GoM Actions to Accelerate Progress
The GoM is implementing inclusive policy actions to increase
productivity and reduce vulnerability in the agricultural sector, from
which most of the poor derive their incomes. Actions are also ongoing
to improve basic infrastructure and the overall business environment.
The GoM plans to improve access, quality and equity by focusing on
improved HR management, improved systems for the distribution of
textbooks, enhanced monitoring of investments and through effective
decentralization and greater participation at local level.
The GoM has defined priority areas of intervention to promote gender
equity but specific actions still need to be defined. Areas selected
include equal access to education and employment, framework to
protect women from domestic and other forms of violence, and steps to
ensure that women participate in decision making.
The GoM plans to increase the availability of skilled health personnel,
extend access to immunization, improve sanitation and livelihoods of
households, increase access to information on health care issues and
reduce costs of child health care services.
The GoM action plan which includes free access to cesarean sections
for poor women, inclusion of sexual education in the education
curriculum, increase access to family planning, enhance decentralized
provision of health services and community participation.
The GoM plans to enhance monitoring and evaluation efforts, intensify
actions to change behavior, continue research activities to better
provide health care to those affected by the virus. A program is in
place to improve diagnostic and effectiveness of tuberculo sis
treatment. Actions to combat malaria focus on prevention measures,
including through sanitation and wide distribution of mosquito nets.
Actions will be undertaken to improve the collection and treatment of
data on environmental issues, strengthen the role of institutions in
charge of environmental issues, take into account environmental issues
in the design of strategies and actions plans, disseminate information
on international agreements ratified by Mali and ensure adequate
resources for decentralized environmental management.

Actions planned by the GoM include improved aid management
though the adoption of computerized systems, enhanced monitoring of
the PRSP and tightened linkages with the budget, to facilitate donor
support aligned with PRSP priorities, and improved governance.

Source: Gouvernement of Mali (2009), Deuxième Rapport de Mise en œuvre des Objectifs du Millénaire pour le Développement au Mali.

- 26 -

APPENDIX 4. IFC AND MIGA PROGRAM
1.
IFC‟s investment portfolio in Mali stands at US$53.3 million. Over the period under review,
IFC invested in the financial sector, agribusiness, services and infrastructure.
Company

Sector

GRIMAS
Grand Moulin du Mali
Graphique Industries
Ecobank Mali
BoA Mali
Hotel Salam
SIECO
Total

Agribusiness
Agribusiness
Services
Financial Markets
Financial Markets
Tourism
Services

Amount
($m)
19.0
9.8
9.2
8.5
5.2
1.3
0.3
53.3

2.
Fostering private sector access to finance: IFC, jointly with the WB, implemented the
IDA/IFC MSME program that aims to boost finance for the development of this underserved market
segment. The assistance consists of a risk sharing facility on a new portfolio of loans to SMEs to 2
selected banks, Bank of Africa (BoA) and Ecobank, and an SME banking TA program to support their
activity in a secure and profitable manner. Assistance to BoA led to an increase in the bank‟s total
lending to SMEs from about US$4 million in October 2007 to US$37 million in March 2011 with 231
SMEs reached, while Ecobank SMEs loans portfolio is expected to reach $12.5 million.
3.
IFC provided to Ecobank a trade guarantee under its Global Trade Finance Program, and is
discussing with several other banks to boost Mali‟s international trade activity.
4.
IFC, through its Capitalization Fund and African, Latin American & Caribbean Fund, in June
2010, provided Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (ETI) with a capitalization package of up to
US$150.14 million, including US$7.2 million to Mali‟s subsidiary.
5.
Following IFC benchmark bond issue in FCFA in 2006, IFC has plans for new issuances
(possibly in the form of a program) in the short term in order to boost on lending to projects in local
currency. Other products are also at work in order to lend in FCFA to projects otherwise exposed to
currency risk.
6.
Agribusiness: In October 2008, a €8 million (approximately US$11 million) loan was
committed for Groupe AMI, the largest private agribusiness group in Mali which produces flour,
animal feed and bottled water. The purpose of the loan is to help finance the company‟s US$25
million expansion and product diversification plans. SMEs reached were 102 in 2010, versus a target
of 40. Other development impact targets reached local suppliers and $3.5 million tax receipts increases
by 2012.
7.
In June 2010, IFC committed a €14 million (approximately US$19 million) loan to Groupe
Industriel Madiou Simpara (GRIMAS) which produces carbonated soft drinks, bottled water, performs
and caps for plastic bottles, and carbon dioxide for beverages. The purpose of the loan is to help
finance the company‟s €33 million expansion program in Mali, Senegal and Cote d‟Ivoire.

- 27 -

Development impact targets include the creation of 100 new jobs, 30 percent female employment, and
creating linkages with local SMEs by 2014.
8.
Global Manufacturing and Services: In June 2009, a €7.5 million (approximately US$9
million) loan was committed for Graphique Industries, the largest printed products company in Mali
supplying textbooks and notebooks to the education sector. The loan is being used to upgrade the
company‟s machines and increase its overall capacity, quality and efficiency, which will allow it to
expand its market to surrounding countries.
9.
Infrastructure: A US$25.0 million loan was committed in March 2010 to the Aga Khan Fund
for Economic Development (AKFED), for on-lending to its three African airlines including i.e. Air
Mali, Air Burkina and Air Uganda. The purpose of the loan is to support the turnaround and expansion
of the airlines, and help strengthen their competitive position especially in West Africa.
10. IFC is also unleashing key sectors‟ potential with advisory services and expanding private sector
base with investment products. Advisory services include:


Improving investment climate: IFC, through FIAS and PEP Africa, has been engaged, along
with the Bank, in providing support to improve the investment climate. Phase 2 of the
Investment Climate Reform program was launched in January 2010. The aim of the 3-year
program is to improve the Doing Business ranking, encouraging agribusiness investment, and
improving the regulatory framework for industrial zone development. Phase 2 focuses on: (i)
the investment code, tax regimes, and investment promotion; (ii) special economic zones; and
(iii) areas covered by Doing Business - dealing with construction permits, trading across
borders, and enforcing contracts. A regional investment climate team (FIAS/PEP Africa) was
hired in Dakar and one Operating Officer in Bamako to ensure support to the day-to-day
implementation of the program, including in Mali (Phase 2, FY09 and beyond). IFC is
supporting regional integration through the regional OHADA-level reforms, implementation
of new collateral registries in the OHADA region, and implementation of a regional credit
bureau within the UEMOA zone.



Capacity building program: IFC has completed during the current CAS period several
advisory programs targeting SMEs, including the Support and Training Entrepreneurship
Program (STEP) focusing on micro enterprises, TUP (Trickle Up Program-IFC funded), and
IFC-GBI (Grassroots Business Initiative. These programs were not renewed as a result of the
refocus of IFC‟s advisory services (focus is now to provide standardized products such as
Business Edge, via intermediaries, such as trainers, financial institutions or corporates with
reach to SMEs).



IFC, through its Africa Leasing Program (ALF), is promoting leasing as an innovative
alternative financial mechanism to SMEs. Since June 2009, ALF in partnership with 10
professional associations trained more than 250 entrepreneurs on the advantages of leasing.
Further training/advisory services will target firms (leasing companies, commercial and
development banks, microfinance, equipment providers), business professionals (lawyers and
accountants) as well as local authorities. ALF will assist the tax authorities to implement tax
breaks. IFC is also contemplating making investments in leasing providers.



Health in Africa initiative: IFC supports the private delivery of health services through the
Health in Africa initiative, in collaboration with the Gates Foundation, which aims to increase
the capacity of private sector health providers and improve the quality of their services
through investment and technical assistance. A country assessment of the private health care
sector in Mali was carried out during the CAS period. IFC committed to providing technical
- 28 -

assistance in three major reform areas: (1) establishing a Public Private Dialogue Committee
and structuring the private health sector through the creation of a Private Health Sector
Alliance, (2) improving the regulatory framework governing the private health sector; and (3)
increasing access to financing for the private sector. Work has started in all three areas and a
market study of the private health sector will be carried out soon.
11. Future Support: IFC plans to continue its focus on (i) improving the investment climate, (ii)
providing enhanced support to SMEs and micro-enterprises through financial intermediaries; (iii)
proactive project development, especially in infrastructure and agribusiness. In particular, IFC is
looking at investments in banks, agribusiness and clean energy projects, through direct investments
and the SREP facility in conjunction with IDA and AfDB.
12. MIGA remains open in Mali, and is very keen to support new projects. Currently, MIGA‟s
portfolio consists of one contract in the telecommunications sector, with a gross exposure of US$16.2
million and a net exposure of US$14.6 million. MIGA‟s political risk product may alleviate concerns
for private sector investors who are keen to invest in Mali, but who remain apprehensive because of
political risks or governance issues. With regard to MIGA‟s product offerings, while MIGA supports
projects of all sizes, its more streamlined Small Investment Product has proven useful for smaller sized
investors into a country. MIGA has recently extended its product line, and is now offering insurance
cover for the Non-Honoring of a Sovereign Guarantee, as well as its traditional Transfer Restriction,
Expropriation, Breach of Contract and War and Civil Disturbance covers.

- 29 -

APPENDIX 5. PARTNERSHIP AND AID EFFECTIVENESS
Evolution in context
1.
The government and donors have made some progress on harmonization and alignment, but
room for progress remains. A first joint donor assistance strategy (JAS) for the 2009-2011 period
was signed by 14 donors and focuses on results and the link to the GPRSF to improve
complementarities and joint policy matrices, funding mechanisms and reviews. Some results have
been achieved, such as improved disbursement predictability, reduction in the total number of budget
support triggers, increase in number of donors using direct budget support, and move towards more
programmatic approach in some sectors (especially water, decentralization and transport, to some
extent agriculture). The Bank has played a key role in achieving these results, although other donors
(the EU) have been more active in the decentralization and water sectors.
2.
GoM’s technical capacities to work on aid effectiveness have increased. The government‟s Aid
Harmonization Secretariat is gradually becoming operational, and is co-chairing the GoM-donor
working group to update the JAS. It has led studies on the evaluation of Phase 2 of the Paris
Declaration. It is also operationalizing the calendar to harmonize sector reviews with the annual
GPRSF review and leading work on aid predictability. The government‟s 2007-2009 Harmonization
and Alignment Action Plan will be updated when the JASII is more clearly defined. A National Aid
Policy is being considered to provide increased visibility and traction to aid effectiveness issues.
3.
Some evolution is seen in donor positioning and priority sectors, especially in macroeconomic
management, the social sectors, and water. The donor positioning table below was updated in 2010
based on 2009 commitments and positioning in 2010. As the table 1 shows, the EU, Canada, Denmark,
and Germany have all increased their engagement in macroeconomic management. The education
sector has seen increased participation of USAID, France, and Canada, while the African
Development Bank and Germany have reduced their engagement. In health, EU, USAID, Canada, and
the Netherlands have increased focus but the AfDB, France and Germany have accorded lesser priority
to this sector. The prioritization of the water sector has increased for the AfDB, EU, Denmark, and
Germany, while the rest of the donor group has maintained their engagement in the sector. Civil
society has received increased attention from France, Denmark, Canada and USAID.
Actual sector and harmonization strategies
4.
Challenges remain in strengthening the capacity of permanent country institutions and the
country’s financial management mechanisms. The CAS period has seen the creation of new PIUs for
the agriculture (not completely parallel), energy and urban operations in spite of the effort to move
away from PIUs and specific procedures. There is a need for the GoM to incentivize civil servants to
manage donor-funded projects, mainstreamed into existing structures. There is also no progress on
integrating of the transport PIU into the Ministry of Transport as foreseen in the CAS. This outcome
indicator has proven to be too optimistic. The Bank is carrying out a PIU study in collaboration with
the Ministry of Economy and Finance to better understand the incentives driving the use of PIUs and
the impact of PIUs on portfolio quality. The Bank is also supporting strengthened country systems
with gradual use of country systems for financial management, with a treasury accountant being
assigned specifically to each new Bank-funded operation. This should contribute to reduce the need
for external fiduciary support through PIU-type arrangements. Over the remaining CAS period, the
Bank will promote a coordinated donor approach to reduce PIUs, including through increased use of
programmatic sector approaches.

1

The table does not necessarily reflect changes in levels of funding to a given sector, but rather priorities
reported in the context of the 2010 sector mapping exercise.
- 30 -

5.
Fragmented donor assistance is still a problem, in spite of progress on joint funding
mechanisms. Three sectors are covered by sector budget support (education, health, and
decentralization) and two other sectors are in the process (irrigation and water). During the CAS
period, two new donors have started using budget support, but the share of budget support to tota l
disbursements has gone down from 33 percent in 2006 to 23 percent in 2010, while it has increased for
the Bank from 31 to 46 percent. The Bank chairs the donor sector working group (SWG) on macroeconomic issues and progress has been made in terms of quality of the joint budget review. Efforts are
undertaken to harmonize the conditionality framework with the indicators developed by the
government, and overall donors have reduced the joint trigger matrix to 39 triggers, under Bank
leadership, with a target of 30 triggers by end 2011. Use of national systems by donors remains fairly
low (32 percent for financial management, 37 percent for procurement), reflecting the remaining
challenges related to strengthening country systems.
6.
In order to continue to strengthen the capacity of permanent country institutions and the
country's financial management mechanisms, the Bank will continue to support sector ministries to
develop program-based approaches. In spite of the creation of PIUs, the Bank has stimulated
program-based approaches in the agriculture and urban development sectors, both being sectors where
the Bank has comparative advantages in terms of staffing and level of funding. Fragmentation remains
visible in the agriculture sector, for example, with 33 donors, implementing over 248 projects through
63 PIUs to deliver a total portfolio of US$2.3 billion. The specific challenge for the agriculture sector
is to gradually transfer implementation responsibility to the public and private actors in the sector, and
to the newly created investment fund. The Fostering Agricultural Productivity Project (US$70 million
IDA credit) has leveraged substantial co-financing from the Borrower, local farmer organizations, the
EU Food Crisis Rapid Response Facility Trust Fund and GEF Grant, in addition to parallel financing
from IFAD and UNDP-GEF.
7.
Operations in education, transport, agriculture, and water are relying increasingly on joint
sector reviews and paving the way for increased harmonization where it is less advanced (energy,
urban development). The transport sector has accomplished some harmonization, through the signing
of a MoU between the key development partners (EU, KFW, AfDB, IBD and BOAD) and the G oM
defining the harmonization framework in terms of: (a) joint supervision missions, (b) use of same
coordination unit, (c) use of same procurement procedures, and (d) use of a single M&E framework.
The Bank has been involved in the energy sector, which together with the water sector, has supported
the process of moving the electricity and water utility company (EDM) towards more efficient private
sector management. The Bank has also signed a MoU in the health sector (International health
Partnership+ Compact), defining collaboration modalities for donor alignment and aid coordination, in
line with the Paris Declaration. The education sector MoU was renewed in 2010 to provide a
framework for a multi-donor approach to support in the education sector. The last joint donor mission
took place in June 2010 and resulted in the endorsement of the third phase of the government
education sector program, on which to base the programs supported by the participating institutions.
The roadmap for the water sector continues to constitute a key tool in the sector harmonization
process, creating conditions for the gradual implementation of a true program approach in the sector.
Donor coordination on the Kabala water project and the urban water sector reform is being
coordinated with the dozen of partners involved in the program.
Challenges for the remaining CAS period
8.
The JAS expires in 2011 and the process to update the strategy was launched in February
2011 in order to align donor support with the GPRSFIII. At this stage, the GoM has not yet decided
on which approach it will follow. Based on the lack of substantial evidence of the benefits of JAS
processes (division of labor and joint programming), the Bank is advocating for an incremental
approach with up-front focus on measurable results of the chosen process. In parallel, the UN is in the
process of moving towards “delivering as one” and Mali is a focus country for the EU fast track
- 31 -

initiative for division of labor among member states. All donors are more or less inclined to
harmonize, but the JAS II process will shed more light on the direction, with a determining factor
being the level of leadership of the government in the process going forward. The Bank is poised to
play a central role in this process, bringing to the table the experiences learned elsewhere from similar
experiences and a strong focus on results management. The CAS extension period will allow to better
align with the JAS and PRSP updates.
9.
The Bank will continue to play a leading role in aid effectiveness issues. The remaining CAS
period will provide the opportunity to analyze internal and external constraints to deepening aid
effectiveness reforms and coordination in key sectors. The Bank is well positioned to participate in
potential division of labor exercise with the CAS focus on agricultural production and basic
infrastructure services (in energy, water, transport, agriculture, and urban development) being aligned
with the Bank‟s sectors of comparative advantage. Going forward, it will be necessary to find ways to
deepen donor coordination with strong focus on process contribution to actual results achieved in term
of contribution to the GPRSP III objectives. The CAS is fully in line with the new Africa Strategy‟s
principle to focus on a limited number of sectors. Extension of the CAS by one year will allow the
Bank to approach the JAS II process with more flexibility and to contribute to setting new objectives
for aid effectiveness in the context of the JAS II, GPRSP III, and the 4 th High Level Forum on Aid
Effectiveness scheduled for November 2011.
D ONOR FUNDING REPORTED FOR 2010
Rank

Donor

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

USA (USAID + MCC)
World Bank
United Nations, total
European Union
AfDB
Canada
Germany
Netherlands
France
Denmark

Amount
Rank
(US$ million)
213.0
11
153.3
12
103.0
13
98.5
14
95.8
15
87.3
16
67.3
17
56.7
18
53.4
19
29.7
20
Total: 1,092.9

Donor
Japan
Sweden
Belgium
Switzerland
Spain
Global Fund
Luxembourg
IFAD
GAVI
Italy

Source: 2011 Paris Declaration Survey, Mali Aid Harmonization Secretariat, March 2011

- 32 -

Amount
(US$ million)
29.5
26.6
16.5
13.8
13.2
10.8
9.4
7.9
5.4
1.9

EVOLUTION OF DONOR PROGRAMS IN MALI AND OF BANK POSITIONING
Sector/ Donors

Rural Development
Energy
Transport
Environment
SME/MSME
Communications
Public Adm. Reform
Macroecon. Mgmt.
Decentralization
Governance
Financial Sector
Civil Society
Education
Health/Social Dev.
HIV/AIDS
Water & Sanitation
Employment
Urban

The World
Bank
(a)

(b)





























The World
African
European
Bank as of Development
MCC
USAID
France
Canada
Union
end of CAS
Bank
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
GPRSP Pillar 1: Infrastructure Development and Strengthening the Productive Sector







































GPRSP Pillar 2: Strengthening the Structural Reform Agenda































GPRSP Pillar 3: Improve Delivery of Social Service



































(c)

Denmark

Germany

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)


















































































Netherlands

Cross Cutting Themes
Gender
Culture
Regional Integration

















Sector priority:  : High  : Medium : Low
(a) As in the CAS; (b) Situation as of CASPR; (c) Urban Project in CAS lending program, but not included in CAS Annex 7 table. Highlighted cells signify change
from 2007 to 2011.
Note: The donors in the original CAS Annex 7 constitute the largest donors in 2010. Together, they account for about 88 percent of official ODA. The table reflects
donor priority to a given sector, as per the 2010 division of labor exercise in Mali and not levels of funding to a given sector.

- 33 -

APPENDIX 6. CLIMATE CHANGE EFECTS ON MALIAN MAIN DEVELOPMENT
SECTORS
1.
The persistent drought has led to fairly significant rainfall deficits, so that the migration of
people and animals became a main strategy to tackle these new precarious environmental and climate
conditions. The decrease in rainfall is going to entail land conflicts because of the reduction in arable
lands and rangelands, the migration of populations towards urban centers, with as consequences the
increase in unemployment, insecurity, and in communities‟ life, livelihoods and health.
2.
Agriculture and water resources: The increase in temperatures, combined with a decrease in
precipitations and in the length of the rainy season, impacts on the agriculture production and
consequently on food security. By the year 2050, it could become difficult to contemplate rice farming
through controlled water submersion as currently in the Rice Offices of Ségou and Mopti as well as in
San, without hydraulic structures. Concerning the full control of parameters, the available volumes of
water for off-season farming could become limited given the weakness of the inputs of rivers, mainly
during the period of low water in rivers (report on the Adaptation Strategy, 2007).
3.
Through the fostering agricultural productivity project, several Sustainable Land and Water
Management (SLWM) technologies for the agricultural sector that are more resistant to the impact of
climate shocks will be introduced. The project will help end users to adopt SLWM practices which
mitigate CC and sequester atmospheric carbon (inter alia conservation tillage or conservation
agriculture, agro-forestry, sustainable grazing management, sylvo-pastoral systems and improved
forest management). It will also support SLWM practices that improve the ecosystem services
provided by the soil – leading to increased biomass production and more reliable crop yields – and
strengthen resilience in agricultural livelihoods.
4.
Water resources: Water constitutes the engine for the socio-economic development of the
country. Though theoretically abundant, surface and underground water resources are seriously
threatened by wastage and non-rational management of networks, sedimentation and sand silting of
water-courses, lakes, and ponds, various pollutions, etc. This situation will be exacerbated by the
effects of CC. The frequency of floods, following an increase in rainfalls, will cause economic losses
with current occupancy of its main water courses. Owing to the decrease in rainfall, the safe drinking
water supply for the population and livestock will be very difficult following the drying up of some
wells or increase in their in-depth. Due to the decrease in rainfall, the supplying of deep aquifers
through infiltration has become very weak. In some regions, as in the Bani-Niger sub-basin, aquifers
have experienced the lowest level since 1987 (National Directorate for Energy, 2006).
5.
The Bank is preparing the Bamako water supply project. Several studies addressing the impact
of CC on the sector will be achieved. The project should ensure the resilience of water and sanitation
infrastructure to CC as a major CC adaptation measure. The creation of safe water sources and
effective sanitation systems should guarantee protection from contamination and destruction from
natural disasters. Synergy with the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery throughout
the national flood early warning system should be encouraged.
6.
Forest resources: The forest sector plays a decisive role in the socio-economic and cultural life
of Malian populations. It provides capital goods that no other sector can provide (93 percent of energy
requirements, food products, and pharmaceuticals, ecotourism, biodiversity conservation, improving
the living environment, etc. Natural formations underwent great changes, due especially to the aridity
of the climate, successive droughts, and anthropic activities. In case of shortages or disruption of rural
production systems, some activities traditionally considered secondary will become very important.
For example, for some small basins such as Diola, Bougouni, and Selingué, wood-cutting will be
favored and will temporarily be a source of income but only for a short period because th e forest
- 34 -

plateau of these zones will not withstand for long. The degradation of land cover will increase soil
erosion and favor a blocking up of the water courses of water retention lakes.
7.
The Bank supported the elaboration of a Country Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land
Management (CSIF). Also a grant for DRM was approved to strengthen the DRM institutional
framework, reinforce key institutions‟ technical capacities and implement a pilot project for vulnerable
communities‟ protection. Mali also benefits from the Integrated Land and Water Management for
Adaptation to Climate Variability and Change Trust Fund to set up an operational information system
for DRM, CC and SLM. Going forward, the Bank will help Mali strengthen the resilience of its
agricultural and natural resources sectors.
8.
Biodiversity: The loss of biodiversity is mainly attributable to the loss and degradation of natural
habitats and, for some species, direct over-exploitation. The loss and degradation of natural habitats
through activities such as wood cutting, over-grazing, and cultivation of marginal lands are further
exacerbated by recurrent droughts.
9.
Through the Gourma project, the Bank supported the elaboration of several community
development action plan taking into account the CC and biodiversity issues. The project is supporting
protection of natural habitats in key conservation areas in and around the Gourma Elephant Reserve.
10. Energy sector: CC affects mainly two very vulnerable sectors, namely: the hydro-electricity subsector and woody fuels. The growth rate of electricity amounts, on average by year is 12 percent, of
which 15 percent for localities supplied by the interconnected network and 10 percent for isolated
centers. This demand is essentially met for more than 80 percent from hydro-electricity which are
water retention structures depending mainly on rainfall. Decrease in rainfall entails production
shortages that influence negatively the continuity of electric energy supply service.
11. Mali is a pilot country of the SREP, a targeted program under the Strategic Climate F und (SCF).
The aim of the SREP in Mali is to pilot and demonstrate, as a response to the challenges of CC, the
economic, social and environmental viability of low carbon development pathways in the energy
sector by creating new economic opportunities and increasing energy access through the use of
renewable energy. Multilateral development banks will assist the GoM in initiating a process leading
towards transformational change to low carbon energy pathways by exploiting the national renewable
energy potential in place of fossil-based energy supply and inefficient use of biomass. The specific
objective of the Malian investment plan is to develop an integrated approach to development policies,
strategies and investment programs based on a coherent and efficient public-private dynamic.
12. Health: The relationships between health and the environment dealt with two diseases: malaria
and meningitis. For malaria, an increase in temperatures will reduce the time of development of the
parasite in its vector, which will increase the virtual capacity of the anopheles mosquito. As for
meningitis, its expansion could be amplified in the future, following the modification of the extent of
eco-climatic zones. Although, in situations of flooding, due to poor hygiene and sanitation and lack of
clean drinking water, there are far more cases of cholera. It is also worth noting that the outdoor air
pollution associated with greenhouse gas emissions from smokestacks, vehicles, and burning of waste
can cause respiratory diseases, especially in urban centers.
13. Through its new Reproductive Health Project (under preparation), the Bank is considering CC
issues and efforts are targeted at increasing the demand for and use of reproductive health services
with a clear focus on family planning and other high impact interventions contributing to the reduction
of maternal, neonatal and child mortality, and at reinforcing of community health service delivery
capacity.

- 35 -

14. Infrastructures: In transport, the national road network comprises 89,024 km of roads of which
only 3,387 km are paved. This makes roads very vulnerable to meteorological and hydrological
phenomena such as wind, flooding, and surface water runoff resulting in erosion and siltation
processes. The national river network will be seriously handicapped by an overall reduction in rainfall,
disturbance in the distribution of precipitation, and the siltation of river courses. The lowering of the
average rainfall led to poor planning such as construction of houses and infrastructure in the beds of
rivers and weaknesses in the dimensioning of some hydraulic structures such as bridges, dams, drains
and dykes. This situation results in increasing human and material losses in relation with flooding,
often attributed to CC.
15. Through its ongoing projects and also the urban operation under preparation, CC issues should
be considered and tackled. These projects should help the GoM revise its infrastructure norms and
help make them resilient to climate variability and change.
16. Crosscutting considerations: With regards to each sector‟s high influence on others, adapting to
CC would require strong coordination mechanisms, with an integrated systemic vision and approach.
In this regards, Mali is highly committed towards the development of its Climate Change National
Policy and Strategy, with inputs from numerous international stakeholders, including the Bank.
17. In addition, CC combined with the demographic growth and little planning capacities are
altogether contributing to increase disaster risks. A number of activities are being supported by the
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (managed by the Bank) to support coordination
(institutional, political, legal and technical capacities) with regards to CC adaptation and disaster risk
management. These activities will, among other objectives, assist Mali in the development of a multihazard early warning system (food security, flooding, drought and locust), preparedness and crisis
management capacities as well as multi-sectoral planning capacities overall.

- 36 -

APPENDIX 7

Mali at a glance

4/5/11

M ali

SubSaharan
A frica

Lo w
inco me

14.5
1,240
3.6
33

819
24,242
2.5
36

828
17,838
2.2
28

8.9
680
1,190

887
1,082
1,973

379
457
1,137

4.5
0.9

5.2
2.7

6.2
3.9

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

51
77
48
101
28

51
73
52
83
25

..
..
57
77
28

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

35
18
100
83

72
54
105
95

73
59
107
100

56
36

60
31

64
35

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2008

(2009)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 9 )

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
300
250

200

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

150

100
50

0
1990

1995

Mali

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
Euro pean Co mmissio n
Canada
France
A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

Sub-Saharan Africa

a

19 9 0

2000

2009

262

479

288

964

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

42
13
45

42
21
129

10
13
98

149
99
82

14.8
37

19.9
55

12.0
27

11.0
76

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

..
16.3

0.6
4.9

-0.7
5.6

2.2
3.6

211.3
102

272.3
144

712.0
100

472.2
114

95

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

2007

19 8 0

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds
Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

2000

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 9
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

7.2
1,787

8.7
2,421

10.5
2,422

14.5
8,996

1.9
0.8

2.0
4.1

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

48.3
13.2
6.5
38.5

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n
Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

2.4
5.3

45.5
15.9
8.5
38.6

41.6
20.6
3.8
37.9

36.5
24.2
3.1
39.1

3.3
4.3
6.8
1.9

2.6
6.4
-1.4
3.0

4.8
4.5
5.1
6.5

87.4
11.6
15.5

79.8
13.8
23.0

79.4
8.6
24.6

76.8
10.3
22.4

0.6
7.9
3.6

3.2
3.2
0.4

0.7
22.2
6.2

14.7
29.1
..

17.1
33.7
..

26.8
39.4
..

4.8
6.6

9.9
3.5

6.3
3.9

(% o f GDP )

26.2
33.8
..

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2008.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

- 37 -

Mali
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (fo b)
Net trade in go o ds and services

547
595
-324

2,082
2,295
-711

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-227
-9.4

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

Voice and accountability

Political stability

-876
-9.3

Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

73

Reserves, including go ld

381

Control of corruption

308.2

0

1,528
2009

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

25

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

15.7
13.1
11.6

21.7
14.7
13.0

Overall surplus/deficit

-6.6

-4.2

50

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

..
..

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000
12.1

2008
18.0

0

28

14.8

2.7

32
10.7
..

32
10.1
2.1

5,449
6.5

4,722
..

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

2,960
93
797

1,904
97.5
27.6

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

122.2
12.9

21.2
2.5

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

82
0

427.6
9.3

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

Composition of total external debt, 2008
Short-term, 7
Private, 5
IBRD, 0
IDA, 534

0.05

0.05

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2009

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

957
49
14

698
160
5

78
57
0

9
9
0

9

0

0
0

16
0

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio
(US$ millio ns)

Bilateral, 983

IMF, 40

Other multilateral, 556

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
A ccess to /co st o f financing
Co rruptio n
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–

15
89.2
29

2000

2009

..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt

63.6
48.7

..
..

M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

..
..

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

- 38 -

4/5/11

CAS Annex B2 - Mali
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 4/6/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2008

2009

2010

2011

11
4.0
18.2
11.8
18.2
11.8
22.9

13
3.9
15.4
1.1
15.4
1.1
20.7

12
4.0
8.3
0.8
16.7
1.2
21.3

10
5.2
0.0
0.0
10.0
0.4
14.4

yes

yes

yes

yes

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
64
8
1,741.0
429.9
40.6
50.0
32.5
40.6

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 39 -

CAS Annex B3 (IFC) for Mali
IFC Program, FY2008-2011

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**
Net Commitments by Sector (%)
Food & Beverages
Finance & Insurance
Pulp & Paper
Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Guarantee
Loan
* As of March 31, 2011
** IFC's Own Account only

- 40 -

2008

2009

2010

2011*

0
0

33.8
33.8

17.0
17.0

5.3
5.3

0
0
0

34.5
34.2
31.3

33.5
66.5
0

0.0
100.0
0

0
0

34.2
65.8

66.5
33.5

100.0
0

CAS Appendix B6
Mali – Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009
2010

2008

Projected
2012
2013

2011

2014

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a
Agriculture

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

37

37

36

40

39

40

39

39

40

40

Industry

24

24

23

20

21

21

23

23

23

23

Services

39

39

41

40

40

39

38

38

37

37

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

89
23
8
15

85
23
9
14

87
22
8
14

97
19
8
12

91
20
11
10

92
18
8
11

88
21
9
12

87
21
8
13

85
21
8
14

85
22
8
15

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

26
37

32
40

26
36

29
43

26
34

25
33

27
35

27
33

27
31

26
31

Gross domestic savings

11

15

13

5

13

11

12

14

16

17

Gross national savings c

11

13

13

6

13

11

14

15

15

16

5305

5866

7146

8722

8996

..

..

..

..

..

440

460

530

610

680

..

..

..

..

..

6.1

5.3

4.3

5.0

4.5

5.8

5.3

5.5

5.5

5.1

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

26

32

26
21

29
24

26
22

25
21

27
23

27
24

27
24

26
23

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Net current transfers
Official (net)
Private (net)

37

40

36
25
6
3
2

43
31
5
2
6

34
24
5
2
3

33
24
5
2
3

35
25
4
1
3

33
24
4
1
3

31
23
4
1
2

31
22
4
1
2

-8
0

-12.7
0.0

-9.3
5.0

-9.0
-1.9

-9.7
-1.7

-8.3
-0.4

-6.5
1.1

-6.7
0.9

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated
from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Real annual per capita growth rates (%,
calculated from 87 prices)
Balance of Payments (as % of GDP)

Current account balance (including
official transfers)
Overall balance

(Continued)

- 41 -

CAS Appendix B6
Mali – Key Economic Indicators
(continued)

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009
2010

2008

Projected
2012
2013

2011

2014

Public finance (as % of GDP at market
prices)d
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth (%)
Government credit growth (net, %)
Price indices( YR87 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade annual %
change (deterioration - )
Real exchange rate
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

17.9
13.5
4.5
10.4
6.6

51.8
13.4
38.4
9.2
-26.6

16.9
13.6
3.3
9.7
6.6

16.0
12.9
3.1
9.8
5.5

17.1
13.0
4.1
10.8
7.2

17.4
13.0
4.4
7.9
4.0

16.3
14.2
2.1
9.2
4.7

16.5
13.4
3.1
8.3
4.5

16.9
13.4
3.5
7.5
4.3

17.1
13.5
3.6
8
4.3

30.0
9.5

30.4
10.9

29.4
8.0
4.6
0.5

27.9
8.4
5.2
-3.2

28.1
16.0
7.2
-13.9

27.9
8.9
8.4
2.5

27.7
9.3
8.3
8.5

29.0
11.8
9.0
4.5

29.9
11.5
8.3
-1.0

30.8
10.8
8.7
-1.2

..
..

..
..

3.4
3.4

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

0.0
0.5

36.7
8.0

27.7
0.3

-1.3
-6.3

12.8
..

-8.1
..

4.9
..

0.8
..

6.4
2.4

1.5
4.1

2.0
7.1

9.1
8.7

2.2
3.6

1.4
3.6

2.0
4.4

2.1
1.3

2.3
2.4

2.8
2.4

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor
services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers
excluding official capital grants.
d. Consolidated central government.

- 42 -

CAS Appendix B7

Indicator

2005

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2006
2007

Estimated
2009

2008

2010

Projected
2012

2011

2013

3260

1656

1992

2125

2667

2803

2989

3094

3130

Net disbursements (US$m)a

..

..

101

-9

234

428

88

64

68

Total debt service (TDS)

..

..

20

25

26

29

31

31

31

TDO/XGSb

241.8

90.2

104.8

84.5

108.0

121.3

108.7

104.5

101.1

TDO/GDP

59.3

27.0

27.8

24.2

28.3

30.0

29.1

28.1

27.7

a

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

TDS/XGS

..

..

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.2

1.1

1.1

1.0

93.7

95.1

96.8

95.9

94.1

93.9

94.1

94.5

94.8

IBRD DS/public DS

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Preferred creditor DS/public

..

..

48.5

55.2

57.6

48.6

49.9

49.1

50.2

IBRD DS/XGS

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

IBRD TDO (US$m)d

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1424

297

452

534

698

775

839

888

920

16.2

16.2

16.2

16.2

16.2

16.2

16.2

16.2

16.2

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)

DS (%)c

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
d

IDA TDO (US$m)
IFC (US$m)
Loans

Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

- 43 -

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) - Mali
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 3/31/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2009
2009/ 2010/ 2011
2009
2010
1994/ 1998/ 2003
2001/ 2002/ 2009

BoA Mali
Ecobank Mali
GMM
GRIMAS
Hotel Bamako
PAL-Graphique
Id
SEF SIECO
SIKA

1999/ 2004
1982/ 1983/ 1990/ 1993
Total Portfolio

Loan

Equity

Quasi
Equity*

Disbursed Outstanding

GT/RM**

Participant

GT/RM

Participant

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

6.0
12.2
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
10.8
4.7
1.5
8.5

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

2.8
5.4
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0.3
0
29.8

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
18.2

0
0
0

0.3
0.0
25.8

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
8.2

0
0
0

** Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.

- 44 -

Equity

Quasi
Equity

0
0
10.8
6.5
1.5
10.7

* Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

Loan

CAS Annex B8 - Mali
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 4/6/2011
Closed Projects

76

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

239.97
0.00
762.07
79.35
1,002.04
79.35

Total Undisbursed (Active)

328.05

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

10.63

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

338.68

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P052402
P082187
P080935
P082957
P073036
P040653
P090075
P081704
P095091
P108440
P099709
Overall Result

GEF Gourma Biodiv Conserv SIL (FY05)
Dev Learning Ct LIL (FY04) - (PCFD)
Growth Support SIL (FY05)
HIV/AIDS MAP (FY04)
Household Energy & Univ Access (FY04)
Rural Com. Dev. (PACR)
Transp Sec SIL 2 (FY07)
Agr Compet & Diversif (FY06) - (PCDA)
Agricultural Productivity (IDA)
Energy Support Project SIL (FY09)
Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP)

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

MS
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
S
MS
S
MS

2005
2004
2005
2004
2004
2006
2007
2006
2010
2009
2010

IBRD

IDA GRANT Cancel.
5.5
2.5
55
31.5
70.65
71.2
90
46.4
70
120
557.25

a/. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal

- 45 -

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

6.2
11.7

Undisb.

Orig.

0.80
0.36
33.90
1.34
16.09
25.05
38.42
18.58
68.72
125.59
6.20
335.05

0.80
0.27
27.30
-6.26
-19.91
10.57
29.14
17.21
8.09
49.39
0.50
117.09

Frm
Rev'd

16.77
-0.76
8.50

24.51

IBRD 33443R

MALI
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

RAILROADS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

REGION BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

5°W

0°
0

To
Chenachane

100

0

50

200

100

300 Kilometers

150

300 Miles
25°N

MALI

To
El Mreîti

S a h a r a
To
El Mreîti

ALGERIA

D e s e r t

Taoudenni
To
Poste Maurice
Cortier

TOMBOUCTOU

To
Abalessa

20°N

20°N

Tessalit

KIDAL
Va
llée
du Tilem
si

M A U R I TA N I A
Araouane

Nara

O

Nioro
du Sahel

15°N

To
Kédougou

Kéniéba
Kéni
niéba
ba

Kolokani

O

g

lé
Baou

Kita

BAMAKO

MOPTI

Mopti
Niono

San

Koulikoro

To
Nouna

Koutiala
To
Siguiri

GUINEA

DISTRICT
DE BAMAKO

Bougouni

SIKASSO

Menaka
Ansongo

Douentza

To Niamey

BURKINA
FASO

To
Bobo
Dioulasso

BENIN
10°N

TOGO

GHANA

CÔTE D’IVOIRE
10°W

15°N

Sikasso

To
Korhogo

SIERRA
LEONE

To
Abala

NIGER

To
Kankan

10°N

k
ua

To
Ouahigouya

Ségou Bani

r
ge
Ni

GAO

Gao

Bandiagara

SÉGOU

UL

K AY E S

K

Ba
fin

IK

Kayes
To
Goudiry

Hombori
Tondo
(1,155 m)

Lac
Débo

Nampala

Bourem

r

Lac Niangay

Niafounke

To Néma

RO

To
Kifa

Nige

de
L’A
za
o

To
Ayun
el ’Atrous

Gourma
Rharous

Vallée

Tombouctou
(Timbuktu)

Kidal

5°W

0°

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

MAY 2009

