Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 59966-MU

THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
April 11, 2011

South Indian Ocean Country Department 4
Africa Region
International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Date of last CPS discussion: November 2, 2006
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Currency Unit: Mauritius Rupee (MUR)
US$1.00 = MUR 31 (as at March 8, 2010)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
ABREVIATION AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AfDB
AFD
CEM
CPE
CPS
DDO
DPL
EAP
EC
EIB
EPZ
ESW
EU
ERCP
EDF
FDI
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GoM
ICA
ICAC
ICT
IDF
IFC
IMF
IPLC
METAP
MFA
MIC

Analytical and Advisor Activities
Asia Development Bank
African Development Bank
Agency Française de Développement
Country Economic Memorandum
Certificate of Primary Education
Country Partnership Strategy
Deferred Drawdown Option
Development Policy Loan
Eradication of Absolute Poverty Program
European Commission
European Investment Bank
Economic Processing Zone
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Economic Restructuring and Competitiveness Program
European Development Fund
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund
Government of Mauritius
Investment Climate Assessment
Independent Commission Against Corruption
Information and Communication Technology
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
International Private Leased Circuit
Mauritius Economic Transition Technical Assistance Project
Multi-Fiber Agreement
Middle Income Country

MTEF
NEF
PBB
PER
PIM
PPP
RMCE
SADC
SME
OECD
UNDP
WBG
VAT

Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Empowerment Foundation
Program Based Budgeting
Public Expenditure Review
Public Investment Management
Public Private Partnerships
Regional Multidisciplinary Center of Excellence
Southern Africa Development Community
Small and Medium Enterprise
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
United National Development Program
World Bank Group
Value Added Tax

Vice President
Acting Country Director
Task Team Leader

IBRD
Obiageli K. Ezekwesili
Constantine Chikosi
Constantine Chikosi

IFC
MIGA
Thierry Tanoh
Izumi Kobayashi
Jean-Philippe Prosper

This Progress Report benefited from contributions from the Mauritius Country Team, including
Jacques Morisset, Juan Gaviria, William Wiseman, Asya Akhlaque, Rafael Moreno, Sawkut Rojid,
Khoudijah Maudarbocus-Boodoo, Andrew Asibey, Eugenia Marinova and Katy Roffe.

Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report for the Republic of Mauritius
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.
II.

III.
IV.

Introduction. .............................................................................................................1
Country Context .......................................................................................................1
The Successful Adjustment to the “triple trade shock’ of the past decade ... 1
The Impact of the Global Crisis and the Euro Crisis .....................................3
The Policy Response and the Economic Outlook ..........................……….. 4
The Bank’s Role and Program .................................................................................8
Going Forward .......................................................................................................12

Annexes:
Annex 1
Annex A1
Annex A2
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B8
Annex B8
Annex B10

Revised Results Matrix
Key Economic and Program Indicators
Mauritius at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC Investment Operations Program
Summary of Non-lending Services
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA)
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

16
21
22
25
26
37
38
39
30
31

Tables:
Table1:

Preliminary macro projections, 2010-15

7

Boxes:
Box1:
Box 2:
Box 3:

Downsizing Mauritius’ Sugar and Textile Production
The causes of Mauritius’ Skills Mismatch Problem
The 2011 Budget

Map: IBRD 33446

2
3
6

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
I. Introduction
1.
In November 2006, the Executive Directors discussed the Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) that would guide the relationship between the Government of Mauritius
(GoM) and the World Bank Group (WBG) through 2013. The CPS, jointly developed
with the GoM and the European Commission (EC), provided a flexible framework within
which the relationship could evolve over time based on country demand, WBG
comparative advantage and changes in the global environment.
2.
This Progress Report provides an update on recent developments in Mauritius
including the impact of the global economic recession and reports on progress in
implementing the CPS. The CPS was structured around the Government’s four pillars of
reform: fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency; improving trade
competitiveness; improving investment climate; and democratizing the economy through
participation, inclusion and sustainability. While the objectives of the CPS remain
relevant and aligned to the country’s development agenda the programs have been
adjusted to respond to the changing global environment. The Progress Report provides
the context and rationale for the proposed WBG program for the remainder of the CPS
period which has been extended to FY15 to align with the elections.
II. Country Context
The successful adjustment to the ‘triple trade shock’ of the past decade
3.
Mauritius has achieved remarkable success since its independence in 1968,
with one of the highest per capita incomes in Africa. Between 1968 and 2009 GDP
per capita grew from US$260 to more than US$6,000. Underpinning this performance
have been macroeconomic and political stability, robust institutions, an efficient
administration, a favorable regulatory environment, a well developed financial system,
and preferential market access for sugar and textile exports. In the mid 1990s a new
vision began taking shape in Mauritius of a higher value added, more diversified, skill
and knowledge intensive economy through investment in human capital and
infrastructure, and making use of advanced technologies and reform the regulatory
environment to harness the creativity of the private sector. Yet little was achieved in
these areas during the decade that followed, perhaps in part because of the continuing
successful growth of sugar and textiles exports to the protected EU market.
4.
In the middle of the current decade Mauritius experienced a triple trade
shock with reduced preferences and lower prices for its sugar and textile exports
(see Box 1) and higher prices for its petroleum imports. The Government enacted a
major restructuring of the tax and incentive systems to promote the diversification
of the economy. It also instituted an Empowerment Program to ensure inclusive growth
with equity and a Maurice Ile Durable initiative to promote sustainable development and
contribute to combating climate change. A central revenue authority was established, and

a public debt law was enacted that stipulated reducing public debt to 50 percent of GDP
by 2013 from its peak of 80 percent in 2003.
Box 1: Downsizing Mauritius’ sugar and textile production in the face of external shocks
Over the years Mauritius has been heavily dependent on first sugar and then textile production as the
major sources of export earnings. These exports grew rapidly as a consequence of the protected EU
market for sugar, and the Multi-Fiber Agreement (MFA) for textiles allowing Mauritius duty-free
access to the EU and US markets. Sugar was 30 percent of GDP in the seventies. It is now down to 3
percent. Considerable restructuring has taken place. Production has shifted from raw sugar to white
sugar, energy from bagasse, and rum. The number of sugar mills has been reduced from 22 to 6 and
will eventually reduce to 4. In addition there has been a great deal of mechanization of sugar cane
growing and harvesting, though this is limited by Mauritius’ hilly terrain. Mauritius still gets double
the world price for its sugar exports to the EU– the reduction so far is from triple the world price, i.e.
one-third. The question for the future is how rapidly the EU will reduce its tariff (Mauritius is treated
in the same way as domestic EU producers for a quota it shares with other external suppliers.) The
Brazilian producer price is 7 cents a kg – the Mauritian producer price is 16 cents a kg. The objective
is to reduce this to 11 cents. The textile issue is also difficult, given the number of female workers
employed in textiles and the difficulty of shifting them to other kinds of employment. There has been
some diversification of textile output and a shift in production to higher quality and value addition. A
special public private group is assessing each textile producer. Mauritius still has duty free access to
the EU and US market. EU tariffs are 12 percent on average and US are 16 percent.

5.
These reforms had considerable success in achieving an acceleration of the
rate of growth, reduction in unemployment and speeding up the pace of
diversification of the economy through the development of new sectors.
•
•
•

Tourism is the most important economic success – arrivals nearly reached 1
million in 2008.
Real Estate has become an increasingly important source of foreign exchange and
stimulus for the construction sector in recent years.
Financial services have become an increasingly important foreign exchange
earner, with Mauritius emerging as a potential regional hub for East Africa. 1

6.
This was supported by a rapid increase in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI),
helping to diversify the economy. In 2005 Mauritius received only Rs2.5bn of FDI. In
the past five years it has received Rs50bn.
7.
Growth reached 6.5 percent in 2007/08. The overall fiscal deficit was lowered to
3.4 percent of GDP in 2007/08 from 5.4 percent in 2005/06, while public sector debt was
reduced to about 60 percent in June 2008 from close to 70 percent in June 2005. Net
employment creation was over 8,000 jobs a year in 2007 and 2008, compared to 3,000 in
2005.
8.
With rapid growth, human resources and infrastructure emerged as
important constraints to sustaining the 2006 to 2008 growth surge. The ‘skills
1

Mauritius is taking advantage of double taxation agreements with India and China that have induced
investors in those countries to channel their investment via Mauritius – spurring a fast growing offshore
finance sector.

2

mismatch’ remains an important constraint to future growth. As explained in Box 2,
Mauritius’ education, training and incentive systems do not adequately address the needs
of a rapidly growing, technologically advanced society. Infrastructure is also emerging as
an important constraint, particularly the transport system. While Mauritius has
outperformed most African countries on the Doing Business Index, it has not fared well
in the Logistics Performance Survey. In 2010 Mauritius under-performed in the Global
Logistics Survey in three aspects - infrastructure, logistics competence, and tracking and
tracing. Mauritius is confronted with serious infrastructure bottlenecks and poor logistics
performance both of which are not at par with its upper middle income status. In
particular this is a deterrent if Mauritius is to attract globally competitive industries. The
traffic congestion around the capital Port Louis and on Mauritius’ single freeway
connecting the capital to the East and West coasts, are raising costs for business. In
recognition of this, a large program of transport investment is planned to provide much
quicker and more efficient connections within the island. In addition port infrastructure
is being upgraded and new investments in electricity generation and sewage systems are
planned.
Box 2: The causes of Mauritius ‘skills mismatch problem’
Mauritius has a very traditional education system with strict standards for completion of primary
education. Thirty six percent of students are unable to pass the primary school certificate and in the
process a considerable pool of potential skills is lost. In addition the numbers who reach tertiary
education are relatively small due to very high entrance requirements. Efforts are being made to
provide remedial services and opportunities for those left behind by the system, but the rigid
approach of very high entry standards at each level has resisted efforts at change. There is a sizeable
brain drain out of Mauritius. Young people want to study abroad, but most (70 percent) do not
return. As a consequence the technical skills needed in areas such as ICT as well as managerial skills
for SME development, are very thin on the ground. As part of the reform package, Mauritius eased
restrictions on importing labor. With some exceptions workers from abroad who are paid US$1,000
a month or more receive an automatic work permit. Another difficult problem is the shortage of
unskilled labor in areas such as construction where Mauritians have been unwilling to take jobs in the
sector. This is compounded by the fact that women figure disproportionately among Mauritius’
unemployed. This is being partly dealt with by importing labor and there are ongoing efforts also to
provide training for more specialized functions in the construction sector, such as painting or
carpentry.

The Impact of the Global Crisis and the Euro Crisis
9.
The Mauritian economy proved quite resilient to the global economic crisis
but growth has slowed down to levels below the long term average and recovery
may be slow. Growth was 3.1 percent in 2009 and although it rebounded to an estimated
4 percent in 2010, very close to the long run average of 5 percent, estimates for 2011 and
2012 suggest growth at 3.5 to 3.7 percent with a projected level of 4 percent thereafter if
current estimates of fairly low rates of long term growth in the EU market prove correct.
10.
The leading drivers of the slowdown have been trade in goods and services
and FDI inflows. Between 1990 and 2007 Mauritian exports of goods and services
fluctuated at around 60 percent of GDP. Because of the crisis however, this fell to 52
percent in 2008 and is estimated to have declined further to 42 percent in 2009. Tourism
receipts fell by 13.4 percent and arrivals fell by 6.4 percent in 2009 compared to the
previous year. In 2009, the VAT declined by about Rs1b. or about 8 percent and the share
3

of tourism fell to 20 percent. Faltering external demand for textile exports has created
heightened uncertainty in the sector. In 2007 following successful restructuring in the
context of the phasing out of preferences, the sector had grown by 8.5 percent. There
was zero growth in 2008 and a 4 percent decline in 2009. Decreased liquidity in
international capital markets and negative prospects for demand contributed to zero
growth in FDI inflows in 2008 and a decline of 26 percent in 2009.
11.
The fiscal outlook deteriorated during 2009. The overall deficit for FY08/09
was 3.6 percent of GDP. The deficit has been partly contained by low execution rates of
capital expenditures in the first half of 2009. For the six month budget – July 1December 31, 2009 – the overall deficit is estimated to have reached 4.9 percent of GDP.
For 2010 the Government expects the deficit to be above 5 percent. Given low fiscal
revenues (22.9 percent), relatively high levels of current expenditure (23.6 percent), and
the ambitious public investment program, there are clear downside risks. Public debt to
GDP has interrupted its declining trajectory and is expected to go over the 60 percent
threshold.
12.
Higher levels of unemployment have created pressures for increased
spending on social programs. Unemployment increased from 7.2 percent in 2008 to 8
percent in 2009 and is estimated to have increased further in 2010. Because of the impact
of the crisis on the textile sector, the impact of increased unemployment has fallen
disproportionately on low-skilled women employees who have relatively few options for
alternative employment. This constitutes a significant potential social problem.
The Policy Response and the Economic Outlook
13.
Mauritius’ prudent fiscal policy in recent years created fiscal space for a
stimulus package. The government used special ‘rainy day’ funds it had prudently put
aside in previous fiscal years (to the tune of 3 percent of GDP) reducing current debt
financing needs. The government used this fiscal space from the first years of reforms to
finance its countercyclical policies by appropriating resources for six different investment
funds. A fiscal stimulus package of about 5 percent of GDP (spread over 2009-10) was
announced in December 2008.
14.
In the Government’s own words the stimulus package was intended to be
“targeted, flexible and temporary”. “After consultation with all key sectors . . . we are
using the fiscal space we have created to significantly increase public sector investment.
The stimulus plan deals with bottlenecks to boost private investment. It fast-tracks and
front-loads infrastructure projects. It provides support to business to continue operations
to protect employment and works. It enhances efforts on re-skilling, retraining and
returning retrenched workers to productive employment. It ensures that an adequate
safety net is in place” 2. By and large this is a fair characterization of the intentions of the
stimulus program. Its effectiveness in achieving these intentions will however, depend
on whether the public sector is able to rise to the occasion of implementing investments
at a level and pace that has not been achieved in the past. This will require strengthening
of the project pipeline, enhancement of the framework for public-private partnerships,
2

Budget Policy Statement 2009.

4

and stronger implementation capacity. The Government is well aware of this and a
special program has been set up to build capacity for investment planning and
implementation. Also the institutional framework for public procurement has been
streamlined.
15.
The 2010 elections resulted in the Prime Minister being re-elected but with a
different coalition partner and a Government committed to continuing the basic
structural reforms, but with increased emphasis on social programs. The
Government announced a further reform package in August 2010 aimed at stimulating
the economy. The previous package had been put forward on the assumption that growth
in the world economy and particularly Western Europe, would accelerate in 2010. The
continuing slow growth in the EU however, created, in the Government’s view, the need
for a further stimulus package. It recognizes that competitiveness needs to be enhanced
by: (i) further diversification toward new sectors and markets; (ii) promoting efficiency
and productivity gains at the firm level; (iii) reducing leverage by most firms; (iv)
developing the capital market and financial instruments; (v) encouraging long-term
corporate planning; (vi) improving the diversity of skills in line with the vision of
knowledge based economy; and (vii) speeding up the implementation of infrastructure
projects. This package is expected to be funded jointly by the private sector mobilizing
42 percent of the required Rs12bn, public sector institutions 25 percent, the Government
contributing 17 percent and 17 percent from acceleration of projects in the Public Sector
Investment Program. The fiscal cost is estimated around 4 percent of GDP for 2010. As
part of this package, the new Government announced: (i) the creation of a new Economic
Restructuring and Competitiveness Program (ERCP) 3 and (ii) additional financial
instruments for firms in the textile and clothing industry and SMEs (available through the
Leasing for Equipment Modernization Scheme).
16.
The 2011 budget provides a clear indication of the new Government’s policy
stance. See highlights of the budget speech in Box 3 below. In addition, the
Government has announced an ambitious five year plan with substantially increased
expenditures on public investment and social protection.

3

The ERCP comprises measures to foster and support long-term restructuring and deleveraging of firms. It has been
funded through the creation of a private equity fund with a seed capital of Rs 300 million, with equal contributions
from the Government and the Banking Sector.

5

Box 3: The 2011 Budget
The budget is focused on three axes: (i) Rebalancing growth, (ii) Enhancing productivity, and (iii)
Consolidating social justice. It provides continuity with previous ones, maintaining fiscal discipline and
competitiveness reforms while focusing more on education and protection for vulnerable groups.
Rebalancing growth
•
•
•
•

Diversify markets and products by reorienting exports towards new emerging markets.
Targeted support to SMEs through training and matching grants.
Financial assistance to traditional sectors to help them move up the value chain (sugar,
agriculture, fishing).
Incentives to promote growth and job creation in high valued sectors (health, ICT).

Enhancing productivity
•

•

New measures to put human capital development at the centre of the policy agenda through
enhancing education services (tax exemption for families, reintroduction of subsidies for
examination fees, redesigned scholarship schemes) and active labor market programs
(restructuring of the National Empowerment Program, more flexibility in the use of foreign
labor).
Continuity in business climate reforms and investment in infrastructure (transport, logistics and
communication).

Consolidating social justice
•

•

Social protection measures, especially for families with modest means (ambitious social housing
programs to construct about 40,000 units over the next ten years, at an estimated cost of MUR
18.5 billion (US$600 million), and a range of other social programs.
These measures to be financed principally from additional taxes on cigarettes, alcohol and
gambling.

17.
While noting significant risks, both the Bank and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF have a broadly positive outlook for Mauritius which is contingent upon
the current gradual global recovery being sustained. Over the medium term
Mauritius’ growth prospects depend heavily on the global economy. The country’s
economic growth is projected to be 3.4 to 4 percent per year over the next three to four
years, given the heavy dependence on EU markets and the slow growth expected in that
region (Table 1 below). The gradual acceleration in growth will be sustained by the
recovery in tourism receipts (accounting for 27 percent of total exports) and the
successful implementation of reforms aimed at diversifying the economy and promoting
private sector development. Unemployment will increase slightly in 2010 (up by 0.2
percent compared to 2009) but decline thereafter. In this scenario, the fiscal and external
balances should remain under control. The fiscal deficit is projected around 4.5 percent
of GDP in 2010 and 6.6 percent in 2011, with the current account deficit in the range of 9
percent in 2010. No major changes in monetary policy are expected and a stable inflation
rate in the range of 3-4 percent per year will likely continue.

6

Table 1: Preliminary macro-projections, 2010-15
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

GDP Growth
(%, real)

4.0

3.7

3.5

4.0

4.0

4.0

Private consumption Growth
(%, real)

3.5

4.1

1.9

3.3

3.1

3.1

Fiscal Deficit
(% of GDP)

4.5

6.6

5.6

5.1

5.0

5.0

Debt to GDP
Ratio

62.6

66.2

67.6

68.3

68.9

69.4

Source: Own projections based on official and IMF data

18.
The first risk relates to a slower than expected recovery of the global
economy, given Mauritius high dependence on trade in goods and services especially
with the European Union (which accounts for 70 percent). Further deterioration of the
external accounts cannot be ruled out if global demand remains sluggish (especially in
EU) and capital inflows dry up. This might affect negatively GDP growth, leading to
lower fiscal revenues, and a widening of the fiscal deficit. Similarly, a decline in exports
(coupled with lower FDI inflows) might increase pressure on the balance of payments
and the local currency. Going forward, the country also remains highly vulnerable to any
increase in commodity prices (including oil) because of its high dependence of imports.
Although Mauritius has had relatively good access to international capital (including
official aid) and net international reserves continue at a comfortable level (about 35
percent of GDP), it is important to keep a careful watch on the evolution of the external
balances.
19.
On the domestic front, there is a risk of not maintaining the required pace of
implementation of the reforms aimed at enhancing the competitiveness of the
private sector. While Mauritius has proved its capacity to adjust to changing conditions
(moving from sugar to textile and now to tourism, financial services and ICT), most
second round reforms in trade and in the regulatory environment will need to be carried
out with close cooperation with the private sector and public enterprises, that might be
reluctant to move quickly. Other reforms in the labor market would require time such as
upgrading skills through a reform of the education system and partnerships with leading
firms.
20.
Another risk is that the fiscal space could be stretched further as the result of
underfunding of the public expenditure program and political demands for
increased social expenditures. There are significant financing gaps and inefficiencies in
the Public Sector Investment Program (PSIP) that might require additional public
financing. In addition there is also a risk that the newly elected Parliament that has taken
office in May 2010 with a socially-oriented mandate might push for too rapid increase in
social protection expenditures.

7

21.
Debt sustainability could become a source of major concern. Over the recent
past, the Government has been cautious to maintain the ratio of debt to GDP lower than
60 percent – the threshold defined by Law. Yet, the new policy measures and the
ambitious public investment program could increase public debt above this threshold
from 2010. An external shock and/or an increase in the fiscal deficit would raise this
ratio to levels that might lead to the downgrading of Mauritius by international rating
agencies, raising the cost of financing. The budget is very sensitive to any increase in the
spreads because close to four-fifths of the debt is short term and would have to be
refinanced almost immediately
22.
These risks will need careful management from the authorities. The
mitigation of these risks will require the development of program that combines
appropriate safety nets with clear market signals on production and investment priorities.
The current generous welfare system will have to be appropriately adjusted, while the
education system needs to respond to the needs of the economy. Improving public sector
efficiency and capacity to implement capital projects are critical. What is particularly
important is that the short to medium term difficulties do not lead Mauritius to
compromise its longer-term objectives and to sacrifice the progress it has achieved in
raising competitiveness and moving forward with the basic economic restructuring that is
required for sustainable longer-term growth.
III. The Bank’s Role and Program
23.
The Country Partnership Strategy was prepared to lay out the basis for
cooperation. With concern about the adjustment required given the limited prospects for
both sugar and textile exports, the Government approached the Bank for support which
was formulated under the CPS with two major elements. First, it was agreed that the
Bank would support the reform through a series of US$30 million Development Policy
Loans (DPLs). The Bank was asked to play a central role in assisting the Government
coordinate the support of development partners for the reform effort. The DPLs were to
be used as a vehicle to organize the interventions of the Asia Development Bank (ADB),
(Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and the European Community (EC).
Second, the Bank would provide investment lending for infrastructure. The Government
expressed concern about the high transaction costs of investment lending due to Bank
procurement practices and safeguards. The Bank was asked to explore whether
Mauritius’ own procurement, environmental assessment and resettlement legislation
could be used for investment lending. 4The assessment will be completed in 2011.
24.
The CPS was structured around the Government’s four pillars of reform.
These were: fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency; improving trade
competitiveness; improving the investment climate; and democratizing the economy
through participation, inclusion and sustainability. Progress has been tracked during the
annual business planning meetings between the Government and its development
partners. Progress toward achieving the CPS outcomes has been generally good given the
4

The Bank and Government have concluded the equivalency and acceptability analyses for environmental
and social safeguards. Once these are approved by the Government and the Bank it will be possible to
develop future investment operations under the country systems pilot.

8

adverse external factors (see Annex1 for details). The CPS was also developed as a
platform for partnership through annual consultations with Government and the other
development partners.
25.
Fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency was on track until
the global crisis dictated the need for a stimulus package. Bank support has been
provided in the context of the DPLs which helped the Government establish and monitor
a framework for longer-term fiscal sustainability and the reduction of debt. Bank
economic analysis was particularly useful in analyzing the fiscal implications of various
policy options the Government was considering. Fiscal discipline and efficiency were
addressed by implementing a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and
Program Based Budgeting (PBB). The Bank has worked closely with the IMF and the
United National Development Program (UNDP) in supporting the implementation of
these programs.
26.
Trade competitiveness has been improved through the reduction of the bias
against exports in the tariff and import licensing regimes. The decision to move
forward expeditiously with the reform of the tariff and import licensing regimes was
greatly facilitated by the work undertaken by the Bank’s Aid for Trade mission which
analyzed the fiscal, growth and employment consequences of potential trade reforms.
Subsequent Bank analytic work on technology and innovation has also contributed to the
policy dialogue in this area. The framework provided by the DPLs was again a helpful
feature in providing direction and focus to Government policies.
27.
On the investment climate, despite the recent crisis-related slowdown in FDI,
Mauritius has maintained its status as the top ranked country in Africa on the
Doing Business Indicators. Overall, the time it takes to start a business was reduced
from 46 days in 2005-06 to 6 days by 2010. Mauritius ranking in the Doing Business
Indicator moved up to 20 in 2010 from 24 in 2009. As in the other two pillars, the Bank
has supported the reforms with the DPLs. In addition the Infrastructure Project
provides technical assistance and institutional development support in the transport,
water/wastewater and energy sub-sectors with the goal of improving the quality of
infrastructure and thus strengthening the country’s competitiveness. The project is also
addressing the need to improve the pipeline of feasible projects ready for investment with
80 percent of project funds allocated to specific contracts to be awarded. In the context of
the project the Bank is also working with the authorities to strengthen the pipeline of
infrastructure projects that are ready for investment through the preparation of high
quality feasibility and safeguard analyses. In addition the Mauritius Economic
Transition Technical Assistance Project (METAP) was designed to support a broader
and longer-term economic reform program by partnering with the Government to
strengthen investment climate reforms, assist public enterprises to improve their
efficiency and delivery of public services, and support the institutional framework for
Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) and utility regulation.
28.
The commitment which the Mauritian authorities have shown towards the
social protection system during the crisis is evidence of the concern to ensure
participation, inclusion and sustainability. The Empowerment Programme provides
financial support, training and placement facilities. The program also supports
9

unemployed women and provides capacity-building initiatives for SMEs. A dedicated
Eradication of Absolute Poverty program (EAP) with emphasis on education for children
and on life skills for their parents targets 229 pockets of absolute poverty, including the
island of Rodrigues. In parallel to these programs, the Government has also pursued the
strengthening of technical capacity to measure and monitor poverty. To this end, the
UNDP has provided support for the construction of a Social Registry containing
information on beneficiaries of social programs in Mauritius. The European Union (EU)
has supported the setting up of a poverty observatory in Mauritius to monitor the
effectiveness of poverty alleviation policies. The Bank has been providing advice towards
rationalization of social programs in the context of budget preparation through analytic
work. A Social Protection Review and Strategy was carried out in 2009 with Bank
support and the Government continues to receive technical assistance in the sector to
design and implement reforms. The Bank's support was instrumental in defining the
reform agenda announced in the 2011 budget, which is ambitious in its objective to move
up to 40 percent of Social Aid beneficiaries off welfare through an expansion and
overhaul of its existing empowerment programs as well as the introduction of appropriate
incentives to move people into work. This reform has the potential to help meet the
Government's objectives in terms of poverty reduction as well as consolidating
government spending and increasing efficiency.
29.
The Government’s interest in an enhanced Bank role, led to the
establishment of a Country Office in Port Louis in 2007, which strengthened and
deepened Bank engagement. This has enabled the Bank to play a much more effective
role both with regards to in-country coordination and in linking the Bank’s work in
Mauritius with its programs in the African mainland. This has also helped the Bank to
establish a solid relationship with all development partners active in Mauritius. Donors
have been supporting the establishment of the Regional Multidisciplinary Center for
Excellence (RMCE), for which the Bank carried out feasibility study with funding from
the EU.
30.
The Government puts a very high premium on Bank analytic work and some
key ‘flagship’ studies by the Bank have cemented its role as a primary source of analysis
and advice.
31.
More recent analytic work has been focused on responding flexibly to
Government requests. Subsequent analytic work by the Bank has supported the
Government’s infrastructure and innovation programs. In mid-2009, Government
requested just-in-time technical assistance to review business sector vulnerability to the
crisis, and provide technical advice on arrangements to facilitate work-outs of distressed
businesses. In addition the Bank is preparing an update of the Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) that is focused on: (i) launching second generation trade reforms to
further improve competitiveness; and (ii) adjusting the labor market so that it can better
absorb unskilled workers at the bottom end of the market, while providing incentives for
skills development at the upper end of the market.
32.
The need to respond to the crisis showed the strength of the partnership,
when the Government turned to the Bank to provide insurance against a worst case
scenario. In 2008 the Minister of Finance set up a group to manage the Mauritian
10

response. With serious concerns over declining revenues and Mauritius’ capacity to raise
financing from the market, the group came to the Bank. There was a very negative
scenario and they wanted to pre-empt this with some sort of insurance from donors. They
did not expect to use this but wanted it on a contingent basis. At that point the Bank’s
Board had just approved more favorable terms for the Deferred Drawdown Option
(DDO) which included the elimination of the commitment fee. 5 The Mauritians were
attracted by this as a source of contingency funding and requested a large amount which
they felt would not need to be disbursed, but would create confidence and head off
potential runs on the currency or the banking system.
33.
The Bank responded by increasing DPL3 from US$30 to US$100 million and
designing it as a DDO. The Bank determined that given the exposure limits for
Mauritius and the then existing volume of loans outstanding, the DDO would have to be
limited to US$100 million. Before the operation went to the Board, the Mauritian
authorities decided that they needed to draw down the money immediately after approval
in order to finance the emerging gap in the 2009 budget. There were increasing fears that
declining revenues would lead to a financing gap that could not be funded on reasonable
terms. 6 In June 2009 the operation went to the Board and the funds were duly drawn
down. As soon as DPL3 was disbursed the Mauritians requested a fourth DPL for
supporting the budget for the last six months of 2009. The Bank provided a further
US$50 million in funding through DPL4 approved on October 15 2009. This amount
was matched by Euros 40 million of funding from AFD directed at support for projects
meeting the criterion of environmental sustainability.
34.
Other donors have since followed the lead provided by the Bank. Since in
the view of the Mauritians this still left a potential sizeable funding gap if the crisis
continued to worsen, they continued to look to the donor community for additional
sources of funds. Initially the EU did not scale up its assistance to Mauritius, but
subsequently some additional funding was provided. In 2009 however, the African
Development Bank (AfDB) decided to make US$700 million available to Mauritius in
three tranches - US$200 million in 2009, US$300 million in 2010 and US$200 million in
2011. In the event, revenues improved such that the GoM has not as yet had the need to
draw down on the AfDB loan. Nevertheless the availability of this funding to support
potential shortfalls in the budget has been an important source of confidence for the
Government and the Mauritian financial sector and the Government is likely to draw on it
for expanded infrastructure investment.
35.
Investment lending was broadened from the approach outlined in the CPS.
While as indicated, the CPS had laid out the possibility of a series of investment loans to
support infrastructure investment, it was recognized that in a middle income country like
Mauritius the Bank had to maintain the flexibility to respond to the Government’s
evolving priorities. The CPS had proposed an annual business plan as a way of aligning
5

The commitment fee was re-instated in 2009.
Most Government debt is held in the form of short-term debt by the Mauritian commercial banks. While
there is a substantial appetite for this kind of security and ample liquidity in the banking system, the
commercial banks have very little interest in longer term instruments. The awareness of the risks
associated with rolling over the short-term debt has been an important factor in the overall prudent fiscal
stance of the Mauritian government.
6

11

the Bank program with Government priorities. This has been followed through and is
also proving a useful mechanism for donor coordination. As a consequence the lending
program was re-designed in order to provide direct support for structural reforms through
a Technical Assistance Loan and a loan for Manufacturing and Service Delivery and
Competitiveness.
36. IFC has focused on its interventions on three key sectors: infrastructure,
tourism and financial services. Its activities have been targeted at: supporting the
mobilization of foreign direct investment to these sectors; introducing climate change
mitigation and cleaner production standards and best practices; improving access to
finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs); and promoting South-South
transactions. To that end IFC has supported the Cargo Handling Corporation and Multi
Purpose Terminals project, for which the Government has requested the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) to search for strategic partners. IFC is seeking to play a role in
supporting Mauritian companies to expand across the Indian Ocean and Southern Africa
regions particularly in banking and non-banking financial services. To support the
Government policy for a ‘Green Mauritius’, IFC is exploring specifically structured
funding lines to the banking sector that will allow them to fund projects and project
components that favor low carbon emission, use of renewable energy and energy
efficiency projects. IFC has committed and disbursed on a US$75 million debt financing
package for the State Bank of Mauritius including SME capacity building. IFC is
currently in discussion with the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd concerning the
possibility of a US$125 million equity investment and a Tier II subordinated loan.
IV. Going Forward
37.
Mauritius has a relatively high income, political stability and a strong
investment climate, but still lags upper middle-income country comparators in a
number of dimensions which are critical for long-term competitiveness. While
Mauritius ranks close to Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) countries in terms of control of corruption and ease of doing business, it lags
significantly three other development dimensions – logistics, education and knowledge.
The efficiency and impact of public sector delivery (social protection, education and
utilities) constitute an important area where performance is significantly weaker than that
of many comparators.
38.
In addition, Mauritius’ development prospects are still subject to
considerable risks. These include: (i) political risks of a loss of appetite for maintaining
the structural reforms in place and resistance to further adjustments of declining sectors,
(ii) external economic shocks impacting sectors such as tourism and foreign direct
investment and terms of trade shocks relating to prices of imports particularly
petroleum 7; and (iii) natural disasters and environmental degradation. Mauritius should
7

In this regard it is worth noting the significant risk represented by the surge in piracy in the Western
Indian Ocean. Already seagoing imports and exports from Mauritius are being negatively affected by war
risk premiums which affect the cost of transport, and interruptions to energy imports could have broad
economic implications for Mauritius.

12

also be mindful of the piracy in the Western Indian Ocean which will continue to affect
the cost of transport. In the aftermath of the crises the country still faces challenges such
costly welfare system, education system not corresponding to the needs of the economy,
low public sector effectiveness for a middle income country, lack of capacity to
implement investment projects, which are critical in the medium term and long term but
require constant interventions.
39.
The combination of these lagging sectors and risk factors represent a strong
argument for a continued Bank presence in Mauritius. Sustainable growth in a more
difficult global context will require that Mauritius enhances its competitiveness through
addressing its logistics bottlenecks 8 and knowledge and skills constraints, develop
programs that combine improved public service delivery with appropriate safety nets, and
design public investment projects and private investment safeguards that go beyond
‘doing no harm’ to the environment and reflect the importance of Mauritius
environmental endowment to its economic future. These are areas where the Bank’s
experience and capacity can contribute to the programs developed by the Government.
The Bank has a particularly important role to play as an instrument for transferring
knowledge of the global economy and strategies in other middle income and small island
economies, and in providing objective analytic work on the Mauritian economy.
40.
Given the limits on the Bank’s budget and the need to be selective, the
Government has requested that the Bank focus on activities that will seek to assist
in: (i) re-engineering the platform for delivering social services; (ii) consolidating
performance management systems in the public service; (iii) improving delivery of public
services - with a focus on the utilities, health and education sectors; and (iv)
strengthening capacity building and Infrastructure projects. In addition, the Bank will
continue to support the reform program through both core diagnostic work and just-intime support in response to requests from the Mauritian authorities. The CPS period will
be extended by one year to 2015 so that it is synchronized with the electoral cycle.
41.
The Bank will continue to provide support to the Government program in
partnership with the other major development players. While most partners provide
direct budget support the annual business planning events are the venue for taking stock
and adjusting the respective programs. Through the DPLs, the Bank will continue to
focus its support along the broad categories outlines above. The EU will further its
involvement through the 10th European Development Fund (EDF) and will play
important role in covering the environmental and climate change issues, as well as
measures to offset the losses from the sugar sector. AFD is also supporting sustainable
environment including energy efficiency, and both AFD and AfDB provide funding and
technical assistance for the water and sewage, and work in the transport sector.
42.
Knowledge sharing is one of the key ingredients of the program in a middle
income country, and in Mauritius in addition to the planned ESW, the Bank will
also continue to provide just in time advice and analysis for the Government as
8

In the 2010 Logistics Performance Survey, Mauritius under-performed its income-level comparators in
three aspects: infrastructure, logistics competence and tracking and tracing. Public and private investments
are needed to remove bottlenecks and enhance competence and delivery in these areas.

13

needed. Bank analytic work plays an important role in Mauritius. Along with the IMF,
the Bank is one of the few sources of independent analysis and allows the authorities to
learn from other countries and benchmark their achievements relative to their
comparators. Given budget constraints the Bank and the Mauritian authorities are
discussing possible arrangements to fund just-in time experts. Recently the Government
requested support of this kind in the area of infrastructure including the possibility of the
Bank recruiting a Senior Adviser to be located in the Country Office or seconded directly
to the Government. The Bank will be exploring with the Government the role of such an
Adviser and options for funding this position, over the coming months. In line with the
DPL agenda, a Public Expenditure Review (PER) on civil service reform is planned in
FY11, to support the authorities’ request to assist in the design and implementation of an
action plan for the civil service and public enterprise reforms to help shape policy for
creating a modern and efficient public sector through political economy analysis to
identify barriers to institutional changes and further public sector reforms. A Public
Investment Management (PIM) analysis would be instrumental to support
implementation of the large investment program planned. Heavy investment is planned in
infrastructure and other sectors during the coming years. It would therefore be strategic to
support capacity building of ministry officials in best practices in Public Investment
Management (PIM) so that the quality and pipeline of investment projects is improved. In
this regards, the Bank could draw on its expertise to develop a knowledge product for
Mauritius. The Bank will also continue the dialogue with the authorities to explore
additional knowledge products to support the on-going government program, such as the
Country Status Report in Education.
43.
The Bank will facilitate knowledge transfers (both inbound and outbound) to
help the Government to leverage Mauritius record of successful development
achievement for the benefit of other countries. Mauritius has emerged as an exporter
of "how to do reform" knowledge to its peers on the African continent under SouthSouth arrangements which the Bank country office in Port Louis is increasingly being
asked to facilitate as part of the Africa Region’s Middle Income Country (MIC) Strategy.
The Bank will also support regional integration through its analytic work and promote
expanded contacts and interaction between Mauritius and regional bodies. The Bank will
play an opportunistic role in organizing some of its training and other activities, both for
Sub-Saharan Africa and more generally, in Mauritius with possible co-financing of these
activities by the Mauritian authorities.
44.
The Bank will continue to support the Government’s efforts to calibrate the
policy framework and promote efficient and fiscally sustainable implementation of
social programs and the structural reform agenda. After successfully addressing
competitiveness issues in the previous series of DPLs, the Government now aims to
consolidate and reinforce these reforms achieving substantial efficiency gains through
improved public service delivery, and regulatory and administrative simplification. The
core instrument for this purpose will be a new four year series of Development Policy
Loans of US$20 million each that seek to accelerate the civil service reform to raise the
productivity of human resources in the public sector; accelerate reforms in public
enterprises and parastatals to gain in efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector; and
implement reforms in social protection to ensure that all Mauritians benefit from the
economic progress achieved in recent years. In addition, the Government is considering
14

continuing Bank’s engagement in areas covered by the previous DPL series such as
competitiveness (notably trade); and exploring further assistance to improve social sector
delivery (education and health).
45.
The Bank will support the efforts of the authorities to mitigate and resolve
the infrastructure constraints that Mauritius faces. Mauritius has a particularly
difficult problem in this regard since it needs to balance the rapid expansion of
infrastructure with maintaining and enhancing the environment, to provide the quality
needed for both its population and for attracting tourism and residential investment.
Given the key role that outsourcing is likely to play in the future, communications
policies and investment has an important role to play. The Bank will provide investment
lending in this area of the order of about US$50 million a year. While this is small
relative to total investment it should allow the Bank to play a key role in helping the
authorities to remove infrastructure bottlenecks and improve the country’s performance
in logistics competence and tracking and tracing in the context of the need to meet
environmental objectives. The Bank’s lending will be supplemented by selective
technical assistance in this area in response to specific request.
46.
While currently MIGA has no active contracts in Mauritius, it will continue
to offer its political risk product for investors into the country concerned about Transfer
Restriction, Expropriation, Breach of Contract and War and Civil Disturbance risks. Over
the CPS period it hopes to also make the best use of its new products, the Non-Honoring
of Sovereign Guarantees and its more flexible, Small Investment Product to best serve the
needs of investors entering into the Mauritian market.
47.
The original results matrix has been revised to reflect the fact that the Bank
is no longer implementing a joint program with the EU. The original CSP was jointly
prepared between the Bank and the EU in 2007 responding to the request of the
authorities and reflecting the close collaboration between both institutions. As a result of
the international economic and financial downturn in 2008, the Government requested
quick financial and technical assistance to all development partners. Both Institutions
responded by accelerating preparation and increasing the financing amount of its lending
program but this resulted in EU and World Bank programs not keeping in step. The
results matrix is therefore revised to eliminate the areas that are undertaken by the EU
and is updated to align with the objectives of the new government appointed in 2010.
48.
The substantial program under discussion may require an expansion of the
Bank’s Country Office in Port Louis. Since the opening of the Country Office in 2007
the Bank has been able to maintain a much enhanced dialogue and respond much more
quickly to the requests of the Government.

15

Annex 1: Revised Results Matrix
Government Long Term
Objectives

Main Constraints to
achieving long term
goals

World Bank Strategy
Outcomes

Intermediate indicators
and Milestones

Progress to Date

Bank
Program
and
Partners

PILLAR 1: Fiscal Consolidation and Improving Public Sector Efficiency
Reduce debt to GDP ratio
from 59% of GDP to 55%
by 2015.

High debt is threatening
macro stability

Improved fiscal management by
making the MTEF operational

MTEF operationalized together with
PBB;

Improved budget allocation
Public Expenditure
management not efficient
and prioritized

Allocation of budget
according to pre-set
ceilings

2011 PEFA review shows that
substantial budget reallocation takes
place during the year

Tax system is unfair and
distorts incentives

Compilation and
publication of tax
expenditures in the budget

Tax collection increased from 24.3 of
GDP in 2006 to 25.8 of GDP in 2009.

Minister of Finance
relinquishing discretionary
power to remit duties and
taxes and grant exemptions

Done.

Adoption and
Implementation of new
Procurement Act

New Procurement Act introduced.
Review of procurement institutional
arrangements underway.

Lack of transparency in
public procurement

Public enterprises and
parastatals are costly and
underperforming
Inadequate procedures
for evaluating and
rewarding public sector
performance

Enforcement of new
procurement rules as measured by
audits
Budget transfers from Central
Government to parastatals is
reduced
Improved system and procedures
that reward performance

Consolidation of 4
parastatal bodies in the
water sector to create a
single Water Authority
A strategy for human
resources is prepared

16

AAA/TA
CEM –
Managing
Change in a
Changing world
(FY07)
Exchange rate &
output
fluctuations in a
small open
economy
(FY09)
PER (planned)
ROSC (planned)
Lending
DPL Series
1,2,3 and 4 for
total US$210
million)
New DPL series
(planned)

Government Long
Term Objectives

Main Constraints to
achieving long term
goals

World Bank Strategy
Outcomes

Intermediate indicators
and Milestones

Progress to Date

Bank Program and
Partners

Streamlined tariff measures

Tariff reduction program
under implementation

Anti-export bias regulation removed;
Liberalization of tariffs on 87% of
tariff lines; The highest tariff has
been reduced from 60% to 30%

AAA/TA
Competitiveness:
Labor & trade
policy note (FY11)

Unification of incentive regime for
EPZ and non-EPZ firms.

Skills development,
technology
absorption &
innovation (FY11)

PILLAR 2: Improving Trade Competitiveness
Streamline
trade
distorting
regulations
to
improve
competitivene
ss of existing
and new
emerging
sectors
and to increase
export/GDP ratio
to 55%

Tariff protection creates
anti-export bias

Lack of competition in
air access

Reduction in air fares and more
destinations served

High telecom prices and
limited connection
capacity

Improved telecommunications
infrastructure

Ineffective approach in
designing regulations
and red tape undermine
competitiveness
Lack of regulatory
transparency

Air access has been liberalised.

Doing business
Establishment of a fiber
optic cable under EASSy
project

Cable established and cost of IPLC
reduced by more than 25%

Increased exports

Identification and removal
of non-tariff barriers

Some NTBs identified, based on
complaints from the business
community.

Transparent administrative
regulations

List administrative
requirements on-ine via
trade portal at customs

Administrative requirements for some
Ministries already online in the
respective Ministries’ portal.

Education review
(planned)
Lending
DPL Series 1,2,3
and 4 for (total
US$210 million) Trade
Competitiveness
Manufacturing and
Services
Development and
competitiveness
Project (US$20 m)
DPL series
(planned)

PILLAR 3: Improving the Investment Climate
Become one of the
top 20 business
friendly countries as
measured by Doing
Business indicators

Costly regulatory
compliance (business
registration,
work/residence
permit) corruption

Reduction in cost of doing
business as measured by
surveys (land, labour
regulations)

Creation of a one stop
shop business
registration mechanism

17

The Doing Business indicator ranks
the country at 20 for the year 2010
Six out of the ten business
regulation areas successfully
reformed as measured by the DB
Report (2010): Reduction in the
cost of DB (average cost to start a
business reduced from 5% to 4%;

AAA/TA
Labor &trade policy
note (FY11)
ICA (FY08)
Doing business
(FY08,09,10,11)

Government Long
Term Objectives

Main Constraints to
achieving long term
goals

World Bank Strategy
Outcomes

Intermediate indicators
and Milestones

Progress to Date

Bank Program and
Partners

time to settle commercial disputes
reduced from 750 days to less than
100 days and backlog of
commercial cases reduced by
60%.); time to register property
title reduced from 210 to 15
working days).

Skills development
& technology
innovation
ROSC

Legislation has been revised to
facilitate investment (ex post
verification)
The Competition Commission has
been fully operational since
November 2009.
Improve recovery rate of
creditors

Rigid labour market

Inadequate
land use
planning to
support the
new economy
and fast track
investments
Low level of
technological
sophistication

Increase flexibility of
hiring and firing

Amendments in the
Labour Laws

Insolvency Act enacted.
Insolvency Unit set up at Registrar of
Companies.
Employment Rights Act and
Employment Relations Act enacted.
System in place to facilitate entry
of foreign labor. Occupation Permit
delivered within 3 working days.
A National Wages Council has
been established to replace the
present wage setting mechanism

A working land
market with reduced
Government
intervention

Development and
adoption of a land
administration and
management system
(LAVIMS)

The LAVIMS has been developed
and is under pilot phase

Improved traffic flow
along the main
corridor in
compliance with road
safety measures

Implementation of an
integrated plan for traffic
decongestion and public
transport improvement

Integrated Plan is under
implementation

18

Lending
DPL Series 1,2,3
and 4 for ( total
US$210 million)
Infrastructure
Project (US$50 m)
Infrastructure -2
Infrastructure -3
(panned)
DPL series
(planned)

Government Long
Term Objectives

Main Constraints to
World Bank Strategy
Intermediate indicators
achieving long term
Outcomes
and Milestones
goals
PILLAR 4: Democratizing the Economy through participation, inclusion and sustainability
Education system
facilitates the
delivery of the right
skills for the economy

High attrition rates at all
levels result in low
education attainment
levels
The
post-secondary
education system is
underdeveloped both in
the
technical
and
general streams

Significant expansion of postsecondary education (technical
and general)
Increased articulation between
the education strategy (in
particular at the post-secondary
level) and the overall economic
growth strategy

Potential efficiency gains
are identified at all levels

Development of a renewed
strategy of the postsecondary education sector
strongly linked with the
overall economic strategy

Progress to Date

Bank Program and
Partners

The education strategy was finalized
in 2009 and is being implemented,
yet without a clear roadmap and
action plan. (CPE failure rate in 2009
was 32.6%; 35% in 2005)

AAA/TA

Eradication of Absolute Poverty
program (EAP) introduced targeting
education of children and life skills
for parents

Social protection
review (FY10)
Health policy note
(underway)
Social protection
reform TA (ongoing)
Safeguards country
systems – pilot
(planned)

Enhance opportunities
for SME development

Bias against SMEs in
favor of large firms

Elimination of bias (financing,
regulatory, skills, etc) against
SMEs as measured by
increased number of new
SMEs registered

An SME consultancy
services schemes to assist
start-ups and existing
SMEs put in place

Opportunities for SME development
enhanced with the MSDC project and
schemes at the DBM; Number of
SMEs registered improved drastically
since the BFA (2006);

Consolidation of
institutions providing
services to SMEs to
improve efficiency

A Unified Business and Enterprise
Development Board is being set up

Empower the
Vulnerable
Groups

Social safety nets are
costly and not targeted to
most needy

Protection programs reach the
needy as measured by
household surveys

Development and
introduction of a targeted
social assistance scheme

NEF has several schemes in place to
empower the vulnerable. Reach &
effectiveness of social safety nets has
been improved. Further reform
underway.

Sound
Environmental
Management for
Sustainable
Development

Lack of adequate sanitary
infrastructure
for
sustainable development

Improvement in the
environment by increased use
of cleaner technologies in the
industrial sector

Revision of the NEAP 2
and implementation
started
Development of a policy
Framework and Action
plan for the Management
of the Coastal zone
Introduction and
promotion of the use of
leaner technologies in the
industrial sector

Maurice – Ile durable initiative for
environmental protection and tourism
launched

Adequate wastewater
management system in place
ensuring improved heath and
sanitation

19

Lending (grants)
HIV/AIDS (IDF)
Indian Oceans
commission support
(IDF)
DPL series
(planned)

Government Long
Term Objectives

Keep HIV/AIDS
rate under control
not to exceed the
current prevalence
rate of 0.3%

Main Constraints to
achieving long term
goals

High rate of increase in
HIV/AIDS cases

World Bank Strategy
Outcomes

Stabilization of the prevalence
of HIV/AIDS at 0.3%

Intermediate indicators
and Milestones

Progress to Date

Development of Strategy
plan for HIV/AIDS
(2006-2010)

Capacity building provided to
National AIDS Secretariat to
strengthen multi-sectoral response to
HIV/AIDS
HIV/AIDS prevalence has not been
contained and is 1.0% in 2009
(UNAIDS)

20

Bank Program and
Partners

Annex A1
Annex A1- Mauritius
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS
Prepared for all CASs/Progress Reports, but included in Board version of Progress Reports Only
As Of Date 12/2/2010

Actual

Forecast in Last CAS

Economy (CY)

a

2006/07 2007/08

a

2008/09

b

Avg.
2011/122009/10 12/13 b
b

Current CAS Forecast

2007/08 c 2008/09 c 2009 c

2010 c

2011 a

2012 b

2013 b

Growth rates (%)
GDP

3.5

3.6

3.8

4.3

5.3

5.5

2.6

4.7

4.1

3.7

4

Exports

63.5

66.3

67.1

68.4

70.9

52.1

49.6

47.6

50.4

45

45

45

Imports

71.6

71.6

71

70.8

72.9

67.7

61.5

59.3

62.3

57

57

57

8.5

6

6

5.5

4.5

8.8

6.9

1

2.7

4

4

4

Inflation (%)

4.3

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance

-6.9

-4.7

-3.7

-2.5

-2.2

-5.6

-9.4

-7.3

-8.6

-9.1

-9

-8.9

Gross investment

26.6

24.5

24

24.3

26.5

26

24.7

27.4

25.1

21

23

23

-1.4

-0.8

-0.7

0

0.6

-3.2

-3

-4

-4.5

-2.9

-1.6

-1.1

0.1

-0.2

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4

0

1.3

0.1

1.9

2

1.2

1.1

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financing
International reserves
(as months of imports)
Program (Bank ’s FY)
Lending ($ million)

FY07a

FY08b
42

FY09b
50

FY10b

FY11b

50

8.5
9.7
11
8.8
FY07c FY08c
FY09c
FY10c FY11d
30

30

118

120

30

30

101.5

1.1

Gross disbursements
($ million)

Note: Due to a change in fiscal year in 2009, from July-june to Jan-Dec, the figures reported for the period 2009 refers to Jul-Dec 2009
a. Estimated year
b. Projected year
c. Actual outcome

21

FY12b
100

FY13b
80

Mauritius at a glance

2/25/10

Key Development Indicators

SubSaharan
Africa

Upper
middle
income

1.3
2.0
0.6
42

818
24,242
2.5
36

948
47,176
0.8
75

8.5
6,700
12,480

885
1,082
1,991

7,472
7,878
12,297

Mauritius

(2008)

Age distribution, 2008
Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
15-19
0-4
6

4.5
3.9

5.0
2.5

4.7
3.8

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

..
..
72
13
..

51
73
52
89
27

..
..
71
21
..

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

90
85
101
101

71
54
103
93

95
93
112
108

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

100
94

58
31

94
82

3

0

3

6

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2003–2008)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200
150
100
50
0
1990

1995

Mauritius

Net Aid Flows

(US$ millions)

Net ODA and official aid

Top 3 donors (in 2007):

France
European Commission
Japan

1980

1990

2000

2008

33

88

20

75

13
1
1

32
8
7

9
3
2

40
34
3

3.0
34

3.4
84

0.4
17

1.0
59

2000

2007

Sub-Saharan Africa

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
8
6

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

4
2

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

0

42.0
26.6

13.5
10.1

4.2
2.1

9.7
7.6

7.7
..

14.9
104

26.2
100

28.5
74

95

05

GDP per capita

GDP

1980–90 1990–2000

2000–08

(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

1.0
1,137

1.1
2,653

1.2
4,583

1.3
9,320

0.9
6.2

1.2
5.2

0.8
3.7

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

13.1
26.2
15.8
60.7

12.9
32.8
24.4
54.4

7.0
31.0
23.5
62.1

4.4
29.1
20.0
66.5

2.6
9.7
10.7
5.1

0.0
5.4
5.3
6.3

-1.2
1.4
0.2
5.9

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

75.6
14.0
20.6

63.4
13.6
30.2

60.3
14.1
26.1

74.3
13.2
27.2

6.9
3.3
12.1

5.1
3.6
4.8

3.0
3.9
6.1

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

51.0
61.2
9.9

65.0
72.2
25.4

61.4
61.9
27.0

53.0
67.7
16.9

10.4
11.6

5.6
5.1

2.2
2.6

(% of GDP)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2007.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

22

Mauritius
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2008
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2008

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

..
2,158
-39

2,404
4,614
-1,366

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

29
0.6

-975
-10.5

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

177

215

Reserves, including gold

688

2,570

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption
0
2008

Central Government Finance

2000

(% of GDP)

Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

19.0
17.0
20.9

22.9
19.7
23.6

Overall surplus/deficit

-4.8

-2.4

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

25

25

15
15

25

50

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure
Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2008

97.0
39

100.0
110

1.0

8.1

56
18.7
..

56
18.2
3.3

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment

(US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

946
453
–

626
161
–

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

20.6
16.1

6.7
2.8

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

266
-4

378
34

Composition of total external debt, 2008

Private, 139

Short-term, 0

Bilateral, 223

US$ millions

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2,273

..

2,182
0.7

2.3

2.7

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

2000

2008

(US$ millions)

Other multilateral, 152

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Business licensing and permits

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

World Bank Group portfolio

IMF, 0

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

IBRD, 103
IDA, 9

Private Sector Development

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

2000

2008

–
–
–
2000

6
5.0
210
2008

..
..
29.0
..

52.7
46.8
36.9
..

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

86
4
18
5

103
30
9
4

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

13
0
1

9
0
1

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

6
6
0

0
0
0

3

0

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

23

2/25/10

Millennium Development Goals

Mauritius

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Mauritius

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

1995
..
..
..
..

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

..
..
..
..

..
96
62
..

93
105
78
95

95
94
88
96

102

37
7

..
36

8

98
39
8

100
38

24
20
76

21
20
89

19
16
84

15
13
98

..
91

..
98
..

..
100

15
99

0.1
28
..

0.1
26
86

0.2
24
88

1.7
22
69

100
94
19.2
..
1.4
..

100
94
19.0
..
1.6
..

100
94
18.7
..
2.3
..

100
94
18.2
3.3
2.7

5.3
0.2
0.0
0.4

13.2
1.0

23.7
15.2
7.3
10.1

75

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

2008
..
..
..
..

91

106
53
91

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

2000

17

26

0.2

3.2

..

..

28.7
81.4
29.9

17.6

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

120

75

90

50

60

25

30

100
75
50
25
0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

1990

Mauritius

1995

2000

2007

Sub-Saharan Africa

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

24

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Fixed + mobile subscribers
Internet users

2/25/10

Annex B2
CAS Annex B2 - Mauritius
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 3/7/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2009

2010

2011

0

1
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

4
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.2

4
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.9

0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

165
82

227
57

191
48

583
58

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
32
1
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
356.2
10.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
15.6
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
9.3
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

25

Annex B3
CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary

Mauritius

As Of Date 3/7/2011

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

Project ID

US$ (M)

2012

Development Policy Loan DPL5

20.0

H

L

2012

Development Policy Loan DPL6

30.0

H

L

2012

Infrastruture - 2

50.0

M

M

2013

Infrastruture - 3

50.0

M

M

2013

Development Policy Loan DPL7

30.0

H

L

total

180.0

26

Annex B3
Annex B3
Mauritius: IFC Investment Operations Program
2008

2009

2010

2011*

9.9
9.9

29.9
29.9

29.9
29.9

104.9
104.9

100%

100%

100%

100%

33%
67%
0%

33%
67%
0%

9%
19%
72%

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
Financial Services

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
100%
Sub-Debt
0%
Senior Loan
0%
* As of March 31, 2011
** IFC's Own Account only
FY ends in June

27

Annex B4
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -Mauritius
As Of Date 3/7/2011

Product
Recent completions
CEM - Managing change in a
Changing World
Doing Business 2008
Doing Business 2009
Exchange rate & output fluctuations in
the small open economy
Investment Climate Assessement
IDF- HIV
Labor and trade policy note
Social protection review
Underway
Health policy note
Skills development, technology
absorption & innovation
ROSC (accounting/Auditing)
Civil sevice reform policy note
Procurement review
Planned
PER - civil service
ROSC
Safeguards country systems pilot
Skills development analysis
Education Status report

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

2007
2008
2009

350
50
50

G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KN, PS
KN, PD, PS
KN, PD, PS

2009
2010
2011
2011
2010

200
100
90
182
150

G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KN, PS
KN, PS, PD
PS
KN, PS
KN, PS, PD

2011
2011

150
200

G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KN, PS
KN, PS, PD

2011
2011
2011

100
70
100

G,B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B

KN
KN, PS
KN, PS

2011
2011
2011
2013
2012

200
70
50
175
150

G, D, B, PD
G, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KN, PS
KN
KN, PS, PD
KN, PS, PD
KN, PS, PD

____________
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

28

CAS Annex B8 - Mauritius
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3/7/2011
Closed Projects

41

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Clos

4.16
0.00
172.88
85.17
177.04
85.17
130.52
0.00
130.52

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actua

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID
P105669
P091828
P112943
P116608
Overall Result

Development Implementati
Objectives
on Progress
MU-Economic TransitionMS
MS
MU-Infrastructure Projec S
S
MU-Manufacturing & Ser S
S
MU:Fourth Trade and CoHS
HS

Project Name

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal Year

IBRD

2009
2010
2010
2010

18
50
20
50
138

29

IDA

GRANT

Disbursements a/
Frm
Orig.
Rev'd
15.9025 4.92752
45.7941 27.7941 16.7941
18.95
3.3075
49.875
130.522 35.9041 16.7941

Cancel. Undisb.

Annex B8
B8 (IFC) for Mauritius
Mauritius
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed
FY Approval

Company

2010
0

Sbm ltd
Stanbicmauritius
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Loan

Equity

75
0

0
0

0
20

75

0

20

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

0
0

0
0

75
0

0
0

0
20

0
0

0
0

0

0

75

0

20

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

30

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

Annex B10
CAS Annex B10 - Mauritius
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As Of Date 3/7/2011

Network area

Country
performance

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender

good
good
fair
good

Human Development Department
Education
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection

fair
fair
fair

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development

good
good
good

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
good
Private sector
good
Energy & mining
Infrastructure
fair

a

Major issue

b

Country
priority c

high
high
high
moderate

Bank
priority c

high
high
high
low

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank
priorities d

other MDB

skills shortage high
high
unsustainable moderate moderate
targetting
high
high

moderate moderate
high
moderate
moderate moderate

congestion

high
high

high
high

high

high

a. Use “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” or “poor.”
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, “rural poverty;” for education, “female secondary completion;” for environment, “urban air pollution”).
c. To indicate priority, use “low,” “moderate,” or “high.”
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

31

IBRD 33446
57°30'E

MAUR I T I U S

INDIAN
OCEAN

Rodrigues Island

Flat
Island

19°40'S

Port Mathurin

Grand
Montagne

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
DISTRICT CAPITALS

La Femme

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Gunner's
Quoin

RIVERS

Petit
Gabriel

19°45'S

0

Crab
Island

MAIN ROADS

0

63°20'E

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Grand
Gaube

Grand
Baie

RIVIÉRE
DU
R E M PA R T

PPAMPLEMOUSSES
AMPLEMOUSSES

Riviér
e Citro
ns

Terre
Terre
Rouge

vi
Ri

PORT LOUIS

La
Nicoliére
Nicoliéére
Nicoli

PORT
LOUIS

e
ér

Ri

MOKA

r

M

lit

i

mp
Re

t
ar

Pointe
Quatre Cocos
20°15'S

a

s

ai

re

Ch

a ux

Po
s

u

e

te

Sa

s

va

Mt

L'Escalier

nn

a

e

Riviére
Riviéére des
Rivi
Anguilles

Baie du Cap

d
er

nd

ne

G

Chemin
Grenier

R iv

ra

va

des

s

Mahebourg

INDIAN
OCEAN

G

Sa

Riv e r

le t

Vieux
Vieux
Grand
Port
Port

Rivi
ére
L

Grand Bois

S AV
A
VA N N E
AVA

Bambou M ts

a

Rose Belle

Mt. Cocotie
(771m)

re

GRAND
PORT

Va

Ri

No
ir e

Ile aux Cerfs

Pointe
du Diable

Mare Nouvelle
aux
France
V
Vacoas
acoas

co

d

vié

Baie

Centre
de Flacq

Montagne
Blanche

r South East
Grand Rive

Curepipe

PLAINES
WILHEMS

Gra
n

20°30'S

du

Bel Air

ie

Vacoas
Vacoas

BLACK
RIVER

Pointe
Sud
Ouest

te

FLACQ

rt

ié

Rivié r e Tamarin

Cap

P os

ua
Piton de Milieu
Reservoir
Reser voir

Phoenix

du

re
v ié

Q

Bambous

Ile aux
Bénitiers

du

Quartier
Quartier
Militaire

Rose Hill

Mont Piton
(828 m)

rt
pa

Fla
cq

e

Moka

m
Re

Bon
Accueil

N
Découve
ou ll
ve e
rt

Point
Petite Riviére

Poudre d'Or

Riviére
Riviéére du
Rivi
Rempart
Rempart

Pamplemousses

Tamarin

Ile D'Ambre

Goodlands

du

3 Miles

20°00'S

Triolet
Triolet

re

2

57°45'E

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Riv

3 Kilometers

63°30'E

Point

20°15'S

2
1

63°25'E

20°00'S Cannoniers

INDIAN
OCEAN

1

Surinam

Souillac

MAURITIUS

0

0

1 2 3 4

1

2

5 Kilometers

3

4

5 Miles
57°30'E
DECEMBER 2004

