Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 64555-BW

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA
FOR THE PERIOD FY09 – FY13

October 5, 2011

Southern Africa Country Department 1
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

BOTSWANA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
PROGRESS REPORT

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Botswana Pula (BWP)
US$1 = BWP 6.54 (at July 31, 2011)
BWP 1 = US$ 0.15285

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
April 1 – March 31

Vice President:
Country Director:
Country Manager
Task Team:

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Ruth Kagia
Constantine Chikosi
Tom Buckley, Tim Gilbo, Zeinab Partow

This CPS Progress Report benefited from contributions from the Botswana Country Team, including Varadan
Atur, Jean-Christophe Caret, Sheila Dutta, Tazeen Fasih, Juan Gaviria, Tim Gilbo, Marcus Wishart, Riham
Shendy, Supee Teravaninthorn, Fang Xu and Chunlin Zhang under the overall guidance of the Country
Director, Ruth Kagia. Valuable peer review comments from institutional reviewers are also gratefully
acknowledged.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
ART
BAIS
BDP
BIDPA
BMC
BNAPS
BPC
BTC
BWP
CCS

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Anti-Retroviral Therapy
Botswana AIDS Impact Survey
Botswana Democratic Party
Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis
Botswana Meat Commission
Botswana National AIDS Program Support Project
Botswana Power Corporation
Botswana Telecommunications Corporation
Botswana Pula
Carbon Capture and Storage

ITP
kW
MAP
M&E
MIC
MIGA
MTEF
MSME
MW
NACA
NBFIRA

CBM
CPS
DWNP
DWR

Coal Bed Methane
Country Partnership Strategy
Department of Wildlife and National Parks
Department of Water Resources

NBFI
NDP
OFID
OPRC

CWIS

Core Welfare Indicators Survey

PEFA

CSP
EU
ESKOM
ESW
FIRST
FSAP
FSDS
GCM
GDP
GEF
GIA
GICO
HIV/AIDS

Concentrated Solar Power
European Union
Electricity Supply Commission (South Africa)
Economic and Sector Work
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Trust Fund
Financial Sector Investment Program
Financial Sector Development Strategy
Global Climate Models
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government Investment Account
Government Implementation and Coordination Office
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Investment Climate Assessment
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Government of the Botswana

PBB
PER
PFM
PR
RESA
SADC
SB
SAPP
SSA
STI
TA
TB
TFSCB

Integrated Transport Project
Kilowatt
Multi-country HIV/AIDS Program
Monitoring and evaluation
Middle Income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Micro, Small, Medium Enterprises
Megawatt
National AIDS Coordinating Agency
Non-Bank Financial Institutions Regulatory
Authority
Non-Bank Financial Institutions
National Development Plan
OPEC Fund for International Development
Output and Performance-Based Road
Contracting
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Performance-Based Budgeting
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Progress Report
Regional Environmental and Social Assessment
Southern African Development Community
Statistics Botswana
Southern African Power Pool
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sexually Transmitted Infections
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building

UN
UNAIDS
UNDP
WRM
WUC

United Nations
United Nations Joint Program on HIV/AIDS
United Nations Development Program
Water Resources Management
Water Utilities Corporation

IBRD
ICA
ICBC
IDF
IFC
IMF
GoB

I.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................... 1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT................................................................................................. 2

III.

PROGRESS THROUGH FY11 .................................................................................... 5
Pillar One: Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness ........................................................ 5
Pillar Two: Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes ........................... 6
Pillar Three: Increased Competitiveness – Infrastructure and the Climate for
Investment and Growth .................................................................................................... 8
Pillar Four: The Environment ....................................................................................... 11
Program Delivery and Portfolio Performance ............................................................... 12
Lessons Learned............................................................................................................. 13
CPS Relevance ............................................................................................................... 14

IV.

GOING FORWARD.................................................................................................... 14

V.

RISKS AND CREDITWORTHINESS ...................................................................... 16

Tables and boxes
Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators........................................................................................... 3
Table 2: Planned vs. Actual IBRD Financial Support .................................................................. 12
Box 1: Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project – Summary of Progress.................... 10
Annexes
Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix ....................................................................................................... 17
Annex 2: Botswana at a Glance .................................................................................................... 24
Annex 3: Selected indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ......................... 27
Annex 4: IFC Investment Operations Program ............................................................................ 28
Annex 5: Summary of Nonlending Services ................................................................................ 29
Annex 6: Key Economic Indicators .............................................................................................. 30
Annex 7: Key Exposure Indicators ............................................................................................... 32
Annex 8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) .............................................................. 33
Annex 9: Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC) ........................... 34

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Botswana was considered by the Board on May
21, 2009. At that time Botswana was dealing with the immediate impacts of the global financial crisis,
which from late 2008 had begun to have profound macroeconomic impacts on Botswana. Through
prudent economic management and sound governance Botswana had sustained high levels of growth for
many years, largely based on the export of rough diamonds, and built foreign reserves of some 80 percent
of GDP at end 2008, representing over two years of imports. However, the crisis saw diamond retail sales
plummet globally, and Botswana’s diamond exports fell by about 40 percent between October 2008 and
May 2009, with the contribution of diamonds to revenues falling from 44 percent to 31 percent between
the 2007/08 and 2009/10 financial years.
2.
The onset of the crisis coincided with the preparation of the tenth National Development Plan
(NDP10) by the Government of the Botswana (GoB). The seven year NDP10, within the framework of
Botswana’s long-term development strategy, Vision 2016, outlined a significant program of investment
focused on identified growth opportunities in tourism, energy, agriculture, financial services and
manufacturing. The advent of the crisis however highlighted Botswana’s vulnerability to reduced
diamond exports. With revenues reduced in the short-term, and against the backdrop of a secular decline
in diamond exports and eventual exhaustion of the resource1, the NDP10 program added urgency to the
long recognized need for Botswana to diversify its economy and establish new drivers of economic
growth. The NDP10 program implied substantial fiscal deficits in the short term, and thus new sources of
finance have been actively sought. These have included running down of reserves, borrowing from
international financial institutions, and accessing the domestic credit market.
3.
The CPS outlined a substantial program of World Bank re-engagement in Botswana. While the
first IDA operation to Botswana was approved in 1964, in the fifteen years to 2009 there had been little
demand for Bank financing, and the Bank’s engagement had been limited to small pieces of analytic
work. However, the GoB sought the Bank’s expertise in the design of the National HIV/AIDS prevention
strategy in 2007, which spurred a substantial increase in both lending and AAA activity. An
unprecedented energy crisis in Southern Africa developing at the same time, with substantial implications
for Botswana, also opened a window for dialogue in the infrastructure sectors. In response to this
growing interest in Bank support and consistent with Botswana’s vision and development strategy, the
CPS outlined a program of support focusing on four elements of the Government’s development agenda:
(i) enhancing public sector effectiveness; (ii) fighting HIV/AIDS and improving education outcomes; (iii)
increasing competitiveness – through infrastructure development and improving the climate for
investment and growth; and (iv) the environment.
4.
The strategy outlined in the CPS is aligned with the new Africa Strategy and its emphasis on
improving competitiveness and employment while addressing vulnerabilities and resilience, as well as
the Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa2. In particular, the CPS
emphasizes infrastructure investment and AAA to support the policy reforms needed to help Botswana
diversify its economy, making it more competitive and less reliant on diamond exports. In line with the
1
Establishing the likely remaining lifetime of Botswana’s diamonds is highly uncertain. The productive capacity of the largest
mines is being extended through additional “cuts”, although this will come at a cost to profitability. So while production is likely
to continue at roughly current rates for another 10 to 15 years, revenues will fall as the costs of production rise. Given the luxury
good and cartel-like nature of the international diamond industry, it is also difficult to predict trends in international prices and
demand.
2
Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to it, SecM2011-0116; IDA/SecM2011-0121. Partnering for Africa’s Regional
Integration: Progress Report on the Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa, SecM2011-0181 ;
IDA/SecM2011-0217

1

Africa Strategy’s emphasis on increasing resilience, the strategy features support for the Government
programs aimed at coping with the HIV/AIDS pandemic and stubbornly high rates of HIV infection in
Botswana. In keeping with the Africa Strategy’s cross-cutting focus on governance and public sector
capacity the strategy seeks to enhance government effectiveness with a particular focus on strengthening
public expenditure management. Given Botswana’s small population and economy, landlocked
geography and interdependence with its neighbors, the strategy also emphasized the importance of
regional approaches.
5.
This Progress Report (PR) describes implementation experience through the first three years of
the CPS (FY09- FY11). During this period the Bank’s partnership with Botswana has grown
substantially with new financing and guarantees totaling US$620 million and a significant deepening of
the policy dialogue based on an expanded program of analytical and advisory activities. This experience
has underscored both the value added that can be provided by the Bank to an African Middle Income
Country (MIC) like Botswana, but has also brought to light some implementation difficulties driven by
the lack of recent partnership experience between the Bank and Botswana’s institutions. This report
concludes that the CPS program and outcomes remain appropriate and relevant, as does the NDP10 on
which it is based, and that strong progress has been recorded against most of the milestones outlined in
the Results Matrix of the CPS. The flexibility built in to the CPS, befitting Botswana’s MIC status, is
sufficient to allow for the planned activities in the remaining two years of the CPS to substantially
achieve their intended outcomes.

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

6.
Botswana continues to benefit from a robust democracy built on sound institutions of
governance. Parliamentary elections were held in Botswana on October 16, 2009, with the Botswana
Democratic Party of President Seretse Khama Ian Khama increasing its majority by one seat to hold fortyfive of the fifty-seven seats in the National Assembly. As with the previous nine elections since
Botswana’s independence in 1966, polling went smoothly and the elections were internationally regarded
as free and fair. The next general election is scheduled to take place in October 2014. Opposition parties
have moved to form a united front in a bid to challenge the long-dominant ruling party. Economic issues,
including the need to diversify the economy and reduce government spending in the face of continued
global economic uncertainty could emerge as important issues and may increase challenges to the
dominance of the ruling party.
7.
Botswana is emerging relatively strongly from the effects of the global crisis which had a severe
negative impact on the country’s economic growth and exports. Government was able to rely on large
accumulated savings in the Government Investment Account (GIA, also known as the Pula Fund) to
maintain high public spending levels, which limited the contraction in GDP to 4.9 percent in 2009,
despite a decline in diamond exports of over 30 percent (in US dollar terms). Economic growth estimates
for 2010 indicate that the economy returned to strong GDP growth of 7.2 percent, as diamond production
and exports rebounded from their low levels during the previous year, with exports growing by 33 percent
in value terms. For 2011, GDP growth of around 7 percent is projected, and a return to pre-crisis
diamond production and exports is forecast for 2012/13.
8.
The decision to protect public spending levels during the crisis meant that large fiscal, and
external, deficits were – and continue to be – accumulated. While government revenues fell from 40
percent of GDP prior to the crisis to 35 percent in FY2009/10, public spending actually rose from
pre-crisis levels of around 30 percent of GDP to near 45 percent in 2009/10. Fiscal deficits of 10.9 and
9.7 percent of GDP were recorded in the 2009/10 and 2010/11 financial years. The deficits are being
financed largely by drawing upon the GIA, which has dwindled from close to 40 percent of GDP in 2008
to about 16 percent currently. A budget support loan of some 15 percent of GDP from the African
2

Development Bank has completed the government’s financing requirement. In tandem, external debt3 has
grown from under 3 percent of GDP pre-2008 to 19 percent today, virtually depleting the government’s
external borrowing capacity, which is legally limited to a maximum of 20 percent of GDP. The external
accounts have also shifted from surplus to deficit as a result of the decline in diamond exports, with
estimated current account deficits of 5.8 percent of GDP in 2009 and 4.9 percent in 2010.

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators
(percent of GDP unless otherwise noted)

GDP growth (annual %)
Inflation, CPI (annual %, period average)
Overall Fiscal Balance

1

Total Central Government Debt

1

External Public Debt1

2008

2009

2010 (p)

2011
Forecast

2012
Forecast

2.9

-4.9

7.2

6.8

7.1

12.6

8.2

6.9

7.8

6.0

-5.2

-10.9

-9.7

-5.7

0.0

6.4

16.1

19.3

20.6

20.0

2.1

14.2

19.7

20.4

18.9

Central Government Revenue & Grants

34.0

34.6

28.8

30.5

31.2

Export Growth (% yoy)

-2.9

-35.7

33.6

11.1

6.0

Import Growth (% yoy)

18.2

-3.5

18.1

10.0

5.7

Current account balance

6.9

-5.8

-4.9

-4.6

-2.5

(p) Indicates preliminary data,
1
Fiscal year data (April 1 – March 31)
Source: Ministry of Finance, Bank of Botswana, IMF, Bureau of Statistics

9.
On the positive side, the enclave nature of the mining sector has helped to contain the effects of
the global crisis from spreading to the rest of the economy. As only about three percent of the labor
force is directly employed in mining, unemployment rates are not thought to have risen substantially
above pre-crisis levels, although information on the labor market is limited. By maintaining public
spending levels and expanding the public work-fare program, Ipelegeng, the government further helped to
reduce the impact of the crisis on wage earners generally and on the poor in particular. The non-mining
private sector, which is highly dependent on government spending, also weathered the crisis fairly well,
growing at an estimated 5 percent during 2009 and at over 6 percent in 2010 (but down from peak levels
of 10 percent in 2007). And, as has been true for other countries in the region, the small and insulated
nature of the financial sector in Botswana protected it from the worst effects of the global crisis. Banks
remain liquid and well capitalized, and although household debt rose to worrisome levels in 2009, this
trend was reversed in 2010.
10.
Botswana’s past prudent macroeconomic and fiscal policies have largely paid off, but
significant challenges remain, and some risks may have increased with the global crisis. Downside
risks to growth come from weaker than expected global growth, which would have a significant impact
on Botswana’s revenues given the elasticity of diamond export to the economic performance of trading
partners such as the US, EU and Japan. And although these threats appear to be broadly balanced by a
potentially faster recovery in domestic private investment in the energy and non-diamond mineral sectors,
significant global uncertainty, combined with high food and fuel price pressures, little legal scope for
increased external indebtedness and a diminished Pula Fund, points to considerable potential risks to a
sustained recovery, particularly in the event of shocks. So while accumulated fiscal savings and large
international reserves have served their intended role as a cushion to enable a gradual adjustment to
adverse circumstances, emphasis on re-building these fiscal buffers as soon as possible would be prudent,
3

This includes publically guaranteed debt.

3

particularly while diamond prices are high. Any revenue over-performance, such as higher-thanprojected SACU income, should therefore be saved. In the event of multiple shocks, Botswana still holds
international reserves that cover nearly 17 months of imports, but cushioning the economy to the same
extent as in the crisis would be difficult with a diminished Pula Fund (now at just under 20 percent of
GDP, half its level pre-crisis, although still substantial) and very limited access to external debt given that
the country is very close to the 20 percent of GDP eternal debt limit – although significant space remains
to take on domestic debt.
11.
In the near term, over the next two to three years, the government’s priority will be to return
the fiscal accounts to equilibrium. Deficits are projected to remain high this year as major investment
projects are completed. The 2011 Budget Speech set an objective of closing the 2011/12 financial year
with a deficit of 6.3 percent of GDP (from an estimated 9.7 percent of GDP 2010/11 ), which would be
reduced to zero in 2012/13. Public spending would decline from 39.9 percent of GDP in 2010/11 to 37.5
percent in 2011/12, and to 31.1 percent a year later. This path implies a virtual halt to new capital
spending beyond the completion of ongoing projects, a focus on maintenance of existing infrastructure,
and a real reduction in recurrent spending, including in the wage bill. But holding the line on spending is
proving difficult, particularly in the case of public sector wages which this year will constitute nearly 30
percent of total central government outlays. Facing a third year without a pay increase as a result of the
impact of the crisis on public finances, public sector unions in Botswana went on strike in April. The
confrontation led to the closure of public schools and some medical facilities. The crisis underscored the
fact that reaching a consensus on the spending cuts that are needed to reduce the size of the public sector
to levels more consistent with the long term revenue outlook will be a significant challenge in the years
ahead. And while the economic consolidation program is largely expenditure-based, there is scope over
time for a greater focus on revenue measures, including broadening the tax base and improving tax
administration.
12.
Social protection programs have probably helped to contain the impact of fiscal austerity
measures. The government’s policy of providing a stable food basket to a number of vulnerable and
needy groups, a broad school-feeding program reaching all public primary school students, as well as an
expanded public work-fare program – Ipelegeng – help to shield large segments of the population from
the impact of expenditure reduction and inflation related to food and fuel prices.4 It is, unfortunately,
virtually impossible to assess the impact of these social protection programs as data on poverty and
unemployment is outdated and irregularly published, and there are no systematic evaluations of the
incidence of social protection programs or their impacts.
13.
Looking ahead to the medium- and longer- terms, clarity and vision in three broad areas of
economic policy-making will be required: these are (i) public spending reforms; (ii) economic
diversification, and; (iii) tackling poverty and inequality. Quite apart from the impact of the global crisis,
Botswana’s economy is beginning to slow down and the dramatic economic growth rates of the 1970s
and 1980s will be hard, if not impossible, to match. While this may be natural for a maturing economy
whose basic building blocks are in place, it also reflects low productivity associated with a large public
sector and a fledgling, largely uncompetitive and inward-looking private sector that is heavily reliant on
government spending and contracts. There is today an acceptance by policymakers that public spending
will need to fall from about 40 percent of GDP today to 25-30 percent in the medium-term, more in line
with long-term revenue potential. Improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending
will be indispensable for managing this transition.

4

At this stage, however, there appear to be no firm evidence of generalized price pressures in the economy, largely due to some
slack in the non-mining economy.

4

14.
The diversification agenda has been a central pillar of policy making in Botswana for over two
decades. Although some successes have been achieved, the country is still heavily reliant on diamonds
and on the public sector revenues they provide, as became painfully clear in 2008 and 2009. Regional
and international competitiveness are challenges which have not always been clearly targeted by policy.
Signals and incentives to domestic and international businesses are mixed and at times at cross purposes.
While overall tax rates are low, the increasing demand for exemptions – that are rarely evaluated for their
economic merits – risks undermining the broad policy over time. Subsidies to certain sectors are rarely
evaluated for their impact and serve as disincentives to investment in what may perhaps be more
productive areas with greater long-term potential.
15.
Botswana’s poverty and inequality rates remain too high for a middle income country.
Improving the quality of growth and tackling the causes of structural unemployment are critical for
poverty reduction. Here the diversification agenda is crucial to developing Botswana’s labor market and
increasing employment opportunities, as the capital intensive nature of mining is partly behind
Botswana’s high rates of unemployment and poverty. While the country achieved gender parity in both
primary and secondary education at least a decade ago, important gender disparities persist, particularly in
terms of economic empowerment. Public sector reforms will also need to address spending on social
protection and insurance, and how it can be more cohesive and better targeted. The 2010 Public
Expenditure Review (PER) found that public spending on social protection was significant, but its impact
was diluted by fragmentation of programs, poor targeting, and lack of monitoring and evaluation. The
lack of up-to-date information on the poor and their characteristics, and on the incidence of povertyreduction programs, makes policy-making all the more challenging. 5

III.

PROGRESS THROUGH FY11

Pillar One: Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness
16.
Milestones. The CPS results matrix outlined six Outcomes under Pillar One, and a total of nine
milestones/progress indicators against which progress would be evaluated. (Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix
– Progress Report). A summary of progress against these milestones is included in Annex 1, with the
main elements described in the paragraphs below.
17.
The Household Income and Expenditure Survey in Botswana is known as the Core Welfare
Indicators Survey (CWIS), which was conducted in 2009 and 2010 by the Central Statistics Office (CSO,
now Statistics Botswana (SB)). Data cleaning and processing is currently in the final stages, and the
survey data is expected to be made public in October 2011. The Bank, at the request of government, is
providing assistance to SB in the calculation of the poverty line and in the preparation of associated
documentation; this assistance includes training to SB staff and other researchers in building a new
poverty datum line consistent with international standards. Government has also expressed interest in
enhanced technical assistance from the Bank to support the ongoing transformation of SB into an
autonomous and technically excellent institution to increase the quality and credibility of official
statistics.
18.
The Bank has developed a substantive dialogue on public expenditure reform and public
financial management with government. This process has enjoyed the leadership and commitment of
government, and has contributed to strengthening the momentum for reform. The on-going engagement
began with the Public Expenditure Review (PER) which was delivered to government in FY10. The PER
identifies the challenges in the public spending arena, including the projected decline of mining revenues,
5

New data on poverty will become available later this year as the results of the Core Welfare Indicators Survey become
available. The most recent Household Income and Expenditure Survey was conducted a decade ago.

5

significant outstanding development needs, and the need to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability in the
aftermath of the global crisis during which large fiscal deficits were accumulated and savings depleted.
The PER suggests a re-examination of resource allocation and budgeting, with a greater emphasis on
fiscal discipline, policy priorities and efficient resource management. A shift by government to a role less
focused on channeling mineral revenues towards the provision of basic infrastructure and social services
and more concerned with supporting a dynamic and competitive private sector will be needed. The
ensuing dialogue with government has supported a reform program that includes a move toward a
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and Performance-Based Budgeting (PBB) in order to
improve the quality of spending and to enable policy makers to better respond to more constrained and
volatile resources in the future. The PER also takes a closer look at public investment management and
social protection as examples of areas where reforms are needed. A successful PER dissemination
workshop in August 2010 added significant detail to the PFM reform agenda, and included South-South
exchange and the sharing of experiences from Mauritius and South Africa. A related activity was the
assistance provided by the Bank to the Office of the Accountant General in the Ministry of Finance and
development Planning (MFDP) outlining the merits and costs of moving from cash-based to accrual
accounting.
19.
The Government’s recently-developed PFM Action Plan reflects recommendations from the
PER, and those of other partners including the IMF and the EU, and highlights the GoB’s
commitment to budget and financial management reform. Motivated by the imperative of confronting
the prospect of dwindling revenues and thus a smaller government, coupled with important unmet social
and economic needs, the Government is seeking to reform its planning and budget system in view of
emerging requirements to do more with less, paying greater attention to the quality of expenditures and
improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending. The Action Plan, prepared by the
Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (MFDP) foresees a gradual effort to improve financial
controls and reform the budget process. A number of measures have been already been undertaken,
including the inclusion of 3-year fiscal projections in the budget speech, a review of project appraisal
methodology and practice, and greater public consultations during the budget process. Nevertheless,
given the seriousness of the challenges, more rapid implementation of reforms than now envisioned is
warranted.
20.
Extending the dialogue on PEM/PFM to implementation and sequencing issues, a Public
Sector Performance Global Expert Team from the Bank provided advice to government in March 2011.
The mission concluded that Botswana has some elements of both a MTEF and PBB in place which would
facilitate more substantial reforms at a more rapid pace. The Bank views this agenda as a programmatic
engagement that is critical to Botswana’s continued economic success, and will continue its support to the
government in this area in accordance with the GoB’s PFM Action Plan.

Pillar Two: Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes
21.
Pillar Two of the CPS seeks to achieve two outcomes: (i) increasing effectiveness of HIV/AIDS
prevention efforts and (ii) identifying the skills mismatches between education outcomes and labor
market needs.
22.
Botswana continues to experience the second most severe HIV/AIDS epidemic in the world,
despite very high investments in the national HIV/AIDS program over the past two decades. National
adult (15-49 years) HIV prevalence is estimated at approximately 24 percent.6 Incidence data, which
6
Government documents reflect a 17.6 percent national prevalence rate versus the UNAIDS/WHO estimate of 24 percent
prevalence. The difference derives from the Government use of a denominator of “number of individuals tested between 18
months to 64 years,” whereas UNAIDS/WHO utilize the global standard of “number of individuals tested between 15-49 years”.

6

monitor new infections over the past year, are perhaps even more alarming, as these figures dramatically
highlight the need for a more effective prevention program and strategy. Incidence of new infections is
8.7 percent for young women (aged 25-29) and incidence for adult males (aged 45-49) is 8.1 percent,
indicating that over 8 percent of all Batswana in these age groups became newly infected with HIV.
23.
Recent analysis of the major drivers of the Botswana epidemic implicates the role of multiple
concurrent partnerships (including age-discordant relationships), limited practice of male
circumcision, and inconsistent condom use in high-risk sexual relationships. Botswana was the first
African country to provide no-cost, antiretroviral therapy to its citizens. It has achieved notable successes
in HIV treatment, including development of the medical infrastructure to deliver specialized services.
Acceptance of HIV testing also is widespread. It is estimated that 90 percent of individuals with
advanced HIV infection are receiving anti-retroviral therapy in Botswana. However, the traditionally
treatment-oriented national program has resulted in a lesser focus on prevention priorities and outcomes.
24.
Prevention is acknowledged by Government to be the weakest element of its national response to
HIV/AIDS. As noted above, data from recent serosurveys indicates that national infection rates continue
to remain remarkably high (e.g. over 40 percent of all pregnant women are seropositive in a number of
districts). In general, awareness of HIV/AIDS is widespread, but in large part this awareness has not
translated into sustained behavior change at the population-level. Although its impact has not been
quantified, it appears that the success of the no-cost national treatment program may have inadvertently
created a sense of false security at the individual level among those who are both seronegative and
seropostive (thereby yielding a possibly widespread “moral hazard”).
25.
Botswana is at the epicenter of tuberculosis and HIV infection in southern Africa; it is 2nd in the
th
world with respect to the magnitude of its HIV epidemic and 6 in the world in terms of tuberculosis
burden per capita. It also has among the lowest TB treatment success rate in the world – 65 percent in
2008 against a global target of 85 percent – and one the highest rates of HIV/TB co-infection. The
human dimensions and economic implications of the Botswana epidemic remain unacceptably high –
particularly given that both are expected to increase in coming years due to an increasing population
requiring treatment, in addition to drug-resistant cases of both HIV and TB infection. The high-cost of
sustaining the no-cost public anti-retroviral therapy program for a growing HIV positive population (for
the lifetime of each patient) poses an increasing challenge to Government, particularly as key donor
partners look to scale down their financial support in this area over the next several years.
26.
Given the above epidemic context, the Botswana National Aids Program Support Project
(BNAPS) was designed to enhance overall program efficiency while emphasizing HIV prevention. The
US$50 million BNAPS was approved in July 2008 and became effective in June 2009. The project
includes an innovative “buy down” mechanism whereby European Union resources are being used –
subject to satisfactory project performance—to lower the cost to Botswana of the IBRD loan. The
National Strategic Framework to combat HIV/AIDS was finalized in July 2010, triggering the first
tranche of the European Union's US$20 million Buy-Down grant (co-financing the BNAPS project).
However, the Project has experienced a slow start-up and low disbursements as a result of design and
implementation challenges, including challenges in country-level program coordination and management.
The project is now undergoing restructuring and it is anticipated that the next phase of the operation will
intensify focus on the delivery of behavior change interventions, specifically to reduce multiple
concurrent partnerships, support advocacy and delivery of safe male circumcision, and delivery of
interventions more strongly focused on the prevention needs of women aged 15-34 years.
27.
To address a major technical gap in the design of the prevention program, a Social Assessment
was carried out under the BNAPS project to improve understanding of the socio-economic and sociocultural factors that affect HIV/AIDS risk and prevention efforts. The assessment highlights the socio7

cultural factors underlying high-risk behaviors. Chief among these are gender norms that create an
imbalance of power between women and men, suggesting that greater empowerment of women could
bolster HIV prevention efforts. The assessment was completed in early FY11, and the study findings will
be used to help strengthen service delivery and focus on changing risky behavior. Looking ahead, there is
a realization that the chronic nature of the HIV challenge will require a broader approach with
implications for the overall health care system, financing, and social insurance programs. Hence, a major
focus of the project is to enable a transition from an emergency response to a broader, more strategic and
sustainable approach toward the epidemic. Addressing the capacity needs of the National AIDS
Coordinating Agency (NACA) is central to this effort.

Pillar Three: Increased Competitiveness – Infrastructure and the Climate for Investment and
Growth
28.
Pillar Three of the CPS seeks to attain Outcomes in five separate areas, with ten
Milestones/Progress Indicators being identified (Annex 1).
29.
The global crisis has brought into sharp focus the need to foster an increasingly dynamic and
diverse private sector in Botswana to progressively substitute for Government spending as a driver of
growth. While Botswana has a well articulated diversification strategy, progress in implementing the
reforms and initiatives it identifies has been limited.7 The Bank’s support in this area has focused on
identifying and developing options to address the key constraints to competitiveness through analytical
and advisory services. Botswana fell two places in the 2011 Ease of Doing Business ranking compared to
2010, from 50 to 52 overall. The Bank presented the Doing Business findings at the biennial Botswana
National Business Council meeting in September 2010, and subsequently IFC presented the work to the
Botswana Economic Advisory Council (BEAC).8 In this way, the Bank Group has helped to focus greater
attention on business environment issues and assisted Government in reinvigorating reforms. Following
these presentations IFC’s advisory arm is in discussions with GoB for an ongoing role in advising as to
how Botswana can move to rapidly improve its Doing Business ranking. For its part, the Government has
launched an inter-ministerial, committee, led by the Ministry of Trade and Investment, to coordinate and
catalyze business environment reforms with a view to making rapid improvements.
30.
The preparation of a Development Policy Review on Competitiveness and Diversification in
Botswana began in FY11, for delivery in FY12. By taking a close look at relevant government policies,
the DPR aims to provide fresh analysis regarding the causes of the limited success of Botswana’s
diversification efforts to date and to identify measures to spur the private sector in achieving greater
regional and global competitiveness. The DPR will focus on the overall incentive framework provided by
government (taxes, subsidies, credit schemes, etc.), labor-market related issues, the potential for services
to emerge as a growth sector, trade and export competitiveness, and the potential and constraints
represented by Botswana’s regional affiliations (SACU and SADC). The report also focuses on existing
sectors in which Botswana has already demonstrated a comparative advantage, but which may benefit
from more focused policy attention.
31.
Analytic work on Skills for Economic Diversification is progressing. A survey of employer and
employees has been completed to identify the specific skill needs and skills mismatch in the labor market
in Botswana. A series of background papers drawing on the knowledge of international and Batswana
experts was completed and discussed at a workshop in December 2010 co-hosted by the Ministry of
Education and Skills Development and the World Bank. Stakeholders acknowledged this as core piece of
work for the successful implementation of NDP10, and have requested the Bank to come up with new and
7
8

Government of Botswana, Botswana Excellence: A Strategy for Economic Diversification and Growth, November 2008.
BEAC is a group of key advisors organized by the National Strategy Office to advise The President on economic matters.

8

innovative policy recommendations, including experiences from similar successful case studies.
Preliminary results highlight gender disparities finding that women generally face high unemployment
rates, are more likely to be poor and a majority of them are found in the informal sector and subsistence
agriculture where wages are generally lower. There is therefore a need to come up with labour market
policies that can empower women The AAA is expected to be finalized December 2011.
32.
The policy dialogue on competitiveness and diversification has been supported by additional
AAA, including work focusing on regional trade and growth as well as microenterprise.


A report on Harnessing Regional Integration for Trade and Growth in Southern Africa was
completed in FY11. The report argues that non-tariff barriers continue to hamper the growth of
the trade in goods in the region, while domestic regulatory obstacles make regional integration in
services more difficult. It provides examples of obstacles encountered by some of the largest
firms that trade regionally as well as small ones for which the impact of trade barriers is more
severe.



A regional Investment Climate Assessment entitled "The Business Environment in Southern
Africa: Issues in Trade and Market Integration" was completed in December 2010.

33.
As a follow up to the FY07 Investment Climate Assessment, the Bank, working with the Ministry
of Trade and Industry, completed a survey of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and
accompanying analysis in identifying constraints in the microenterprise sector. Nevertheless, important
gaps in the government’s and Bank’s knowledge persist with respect to diversification and improving
the quality of growth. Much analytical work remains to be done to understand the linkages between
diversification, growth and employment, and how to promote competitiveness while ensuring a pattern of
growth that addresses structural unemployment and promotes the creation of private sector jobs in the
country. The latest unemployment data, several years out of date, suggest that the unemployed represent
about 17 percent of the population, and that youth are over-represented among the ranks of the
unemployed. Unemployment has historically been persistently high, and the rate would be substantially
higher were discouraged workers also counted. There is no information regarding the impact of the
global crisis on unemployment (or, for that matter, poverty) levels. Competitiveness indicators do not
identify major policy-induced obstacles in terms of labor market rigidity; the high unemployment rate
seems to largely reflect both the capital intensity of the mining sector, skills mismatches in the labor
market for the non-mining sectors, and also perhaps low productivity and relatively high unit costs of
labor. Data in this area is of generally poor quality, however (in addition to the paucity of employment
statistics, there is no reliable information on productivity, for instance). Understanding the relationships
at work and identifying the key policy variables to manipulate are challenges for future work. Clearly,
addressing the unemployment problem is also important for the long-term sustainability of growth.
34.
The infrastructure goals of the CPS are closely aligned with the goals of NDP10. In general
Botswana faces significant infrastructure challenges given the large size of the country and the widely
dispersed population. Currently the main challenges include increasing electricity generation capacity
and securing supply in the energy sector, addressing water supply and sanitation deficits while
implementing the water sector institutional reform, and balancing new development and asset
maintenance in the transport sector. During CPS implementation regional broadband connectivity has
also emerged as a key constraint to competitiveness. As other countries in Africa accelerate the
development of their broadband networks and services, Botswana is at risk of falling behind. This is
particularly important given the country's landlocked position and the significant role of the service sector
in the government's long-term economic development plans.
35.
Transport capacity. The US$186 million IBRD loan for Botswana Integrated Transport Project
(ITP) was approved by the Board in June 2009, co-financed by a US$40 million loan from the OPEC
9

Fund for International Development (OFID), and US$159 million from the government budget. The
project seeks to enhance the efficiency of the transport system by building modern business management
capacity, and improving the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical transport
infrastructure. It also includes an urban traffic improvement program in Greater Gaborone.
Implementation of the three critical activities under the project (road asset preservation, urban traffic
improvement, and regional transport integration study) has been slow for three main reasons: (i) a need to
build capacity in Bank procurement and disbursement procedures resulting in delayed initial
disbursements; (ii) the international consultants hired for the design of the Output and Performance Based
Road Contracting (OPRC) component performed poorly and the contract had to be terminated and retendered; and (iii) project management arrangements within the Ministry of Transport and
Communication have not functioned efficiently. Issue (i) has been addressed by intensive supervision
and concerted portfolio-wide training efforts by the Bank and implementation performance and
disbursement are expected to improve in the months ahead. Issues (ii) and (iii) have also been resolved
with the appointment of a qualified OPRC consultant and agreement on revised project implementation
and oversight mechanisms for the project.
36.
The Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project is a pillar of the Bank’s engagement in
Botswana. In October 2009 the Board approved a partial credit guarantee of US$242.7 million and an
IBRD loan of US$136.4 million for the project, which is co-financed by AfDB (US$202.5 million), the
Government and the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) (US$498.4 million) and the Industrial and
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), (US$582.3 million) at a total cost of US$1,662 million. The project
is a key element of GoB’s plans to ensure energy supply security for Botswana as import availability from
South Africa ends, and to further integrate Botswana’s power market into the Southern African Power
Pool (SAPP). The project includes support for a portfolio of measures intended not only to ensure
Botswana’s available coal resources are used as efficiently as possible, but also to kick start development
of alternative greener sources of energy to feed into the SAPP (see Box 1 for a summary of progress).

Box 1: Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project – Summary of Progress










Progress is satisfactory under all project components. The power station is on track to be completed in
October 2012, about two months ahead of schedule. Periodic safeguards reviews have found that the
project is on track with all environmental and social safeguards undertakings.
Work is underway to establish a new Energy-Water regulatory agency and a new electricity tariff policy.
Consistent with its commitment to get the sector on a sustainable financial footing, the government
implemented a 32 percent tariff increase effective May 1, 2010 and another 30 percent adjustment
effective June 1, 2011. As part of this process, BPC is also developing alternatives for a lifeline tariff to
protect poorer consumers.
BPC has installed 800,000 compact fluorescent lights and about 29,000 smart meters by end-2010 and
aims to install 80,000 by May-2011, which is expected to save about 30 MW (5 percent of peak load)
demand. The government has selected a firm to help implement a communications strategy over a
15-month duration, including capacity building in BPC and the government.
The government is committed to supporting international efforts to combat climate change and intends to
promote initiatives in this regard. At government’s request, the Bank facilitated a workshop in Dec. 2010
on PPP for coal bed methane (CBM) development, drawing participation from industry and officials,
including from South Africa. There is active interest and progress by private sector (4-5 firms) for
exploring and producing CBM for both domestic and export market (mainly to RSA). The government
will be hiring a CBM Advisor to fill the knowledge and capacity gap on CBM issues.
A feasibility study for a 200 MW concentrated solar power (CSP) plant is to start imminently (jointly
financed with the AfDB). In parallel, a grant of US$1.4 million from the Carbon Capture and Storage
Trust Fund (CCS TF) has been approved for awareness and capacity building on CCS in Botswana,
which would complement the Government’s interest to undertake a pilot CCS project by end-2013 (using
project funds).

10

37.
The CPS also envisioned support for a second power investment: a private sector coal-to-power
project at Mmamabula. The project was driven in 2009 mainly by the prospect of export sales to
ESKOM, South Africa’s power utility. However, despite lengthy negotiations, CIC Energy Corporation,
the sponsor of the Project, and ESKOM have not entered into a power sales contract, and the project is
now reportedly being restructured, and its future is uncertain.

Pillar Four: The Environment
38.
A US$5 million GEF grant was approved to support the Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife
Coexistence Project in December 2009. The project supports activities in three project areas (including
13 villages) to pilot and disseminate best international practice in reducing human-wildlife conflict, a
source of major tension in affected areas in Northern Botswana. While start up of the project has been
slow due to delays in getting staff on board in the Department of Wildlife and National Parks (DWNP),
problems retaining staff, and a lack of familiarity with Bank procurement and safeguard review processes,
pilot project activities are underway. Techniques that draw on global experience with human-wildlife
coexistence are being introduced in the project areas. A key challenge is the design of a revised policy
framework which builds on the unique experience in Botswana wherein public financing supports
compensation for wildlife-related losses to subsistence farmers. The benefits and costs of this system
have been reviewed and will be complemented with household and village level pilot activities which
focus on ex-ante prevention of human-wildlife conflict.
39.
Botswana is considering how to make climate change adaptation central to its development.
Under the CPS and in response to a request from the GoB, the Bank prepared two analytical pieces to
build the knowledge base regarding (i) the environmental implications of implementing NDP10, and (ii)
the likely impacts of Climate Change in Botswana. The Climate Change work developed a first-ever
analysis using Global Climate Models (GCM) to predict how climate variability might impact Botswana
over the next 50 years. The results suggest that Botswana faces a wide range of direct and indirect
economic impacts due to increased climate variability, including in agriculture and tourism which could
be adversely affected by drought. This work gathered further momentum over the past year. Building on
the Climate Change Policy Note, policy dialogue supported by the Bank‘s Global Expert Team (GET) on
Climate Change Adaption is helping the GoB consider how it could make adaptation to climate
change/variability central to Botswana’s development. Planned technical assistance will focus on ways
that Botswana could address the climate threat and make the country more resilient and less vulnerable.
This would likely require economy-wide work in: sustainable water management; increasing the climate
resilience of the key ecosystem on which the country’s world-class nature-based tourism is based; work
on agriculture, food security and livestock; and work on health information because of the spatial changes
in disease patterns, especially malaria.
40.
Water supply in Botswana will increasingly rely on sources beyond national boundaries,
making essential the development of a sound domestic and regional institutional framework and solid
analytical capacity. This is especially the case considering Botswana’s reliance on water-intense sectors
such as mining, energy, tourism and agriculture. Botswana’s water resources are characterized by high
dependence on internationally shared and trans-boundary waters, wide spatial variability, and extreme
scarcity. The dependency ratio, reflecting that, at 80 percent, the proportion of the total renewable water
resources originating outside the country is the highest in southern Africa; all of the country’s five major
drainage basins are shared with other SADC Member States. Bank support to the GEF SADC
Groundwater and Drought Management Project, hosted by the SADC Water Division in Botswana, is
helping to develop consensus among the SADC Member States for a regional strategic approach to
defining drought management policies. A Multi-Sector Investment Opportunity Analysis (MSIOA) for
the Zambezi River basin engaged all eight riparian countries in a consultative process to illustrate the

11

benefits of cooperation through a multi-sectoral economic evaluation of water resources development,
management options and scenarios.
41.
Botswana’s domestic water sector reform effort is proceeding well with Bank support via a
fee-based services arrangement. A new Water and Wastewater Sector Policy has been drafted and is in
the public consultation phase. It will be submitted to Parliament in its July 2011 session. The reform
program will eventually transfer all responsibility for the provision of retail water and wastewater to the
Water Users Corporation (WUC), as opposed to current provision by local governments and the
Department of Water Affairs (DWA). To date, management of 150 of the country’s over 200 water
systems has been transferred to the WUC. The program also seeks to enhance the capacity and focus of
DWA for strategic Water Resources Management (WRM). Government subsidies to the sector have been
substantially reduced; subsidies which amounted to P364 million (US$56 million) in FY07/08 are
expected to be reduced to zero by FY14/15. Recognizing the value of the Bank’s advisory support for the
reform process, the Government has requested an extension of the fee-based services arrangement
through 2014.

Program Delivery and Portfolio Performance
42.
All of the projects identified in the CPS have been delivered with the exception of one (the
Mmamabula IPP Power Project) which has been put on hold in light of developments since the CPS
was prepared. As a result, the project portfolio has grown from one project at the time of the CPS to four
(including one GEF project). Net commitments stand at US$378 million, reflecting the Bank’s growing
lending engagement with Botswana in energy, transport, environment and HIV/AIDS. In addition a
US$242.7 million IBRD Partial Credit Guarantee for the Morupule B project has been instrumental in
allowing rapid project implementation progress by unlocking financing for power station construction
from commercial sources.
Table 2: Planned vs. Actual IBRD Financial Support
Indicative CPS IBRD
lending (US$ million)
FY09
HIV/AIDS Project
Morupule B Generation and Transmission
Project

50.0
450.0

Integrated Transport Project
FY10
Mmamabula IPP Project
Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife
Conflict Prevention
Total

Actual Lending to
date (US$ million)

180.5

50.0
136.4 IBRD Loan
242.7 IBRD PCG
186.0

100.0
-

0.0
5.0 GEF grant

780.5m

377.4 Loan/grant
242.7 Guarantee
coverage

*

Includes GEF, and guarantees

43.
Reflecting a lack of recent experience with investment lending in Botswana, several projects
have experienced a slow start-up highlighting the need for more intensive implementation support.
With a young portfolio that is heavily weighted towards infrastructure, IBRD disbursements in Botswana
through FY09-FY11 were projected to be modest. With the exception of the Morupule B project,
12

disbursements have tended to lag behind initial projections due to slow administrative processes in
Government, a lack of recent experience in implementing Bank-financed projects and, in some cases,
capacity constraints and rapid turnover among counterpart Government agencies. Both the Bank and
GoB are learning from the challenges that have emerged and implementation is expected to accelerate in
the months ahead. Nevertheless, implementation of key projects such as the BNAPS and the Integrated
Transport Project will require stepped up implementation support to accelerate implementation and ensure
successful outcomes. The portfolio has currently one problem project, the GEF-financed NorthernBotswana Human Wildlife Coexistence Project.
44.
Progress towards CPS outcomes has generally been good (Annex 1). While progress in some
areas, such as developing M&E and Transport Management capacity, have proven disappointing,
significant milestones have been achieved in most areas of the Results Matrix. To improve the quality
and realism of the CPS results matrix, this Progress Report proposes several revisions to the Results
Matrix Outcomes and Indicators. The suggested changes (a) remove the Outcome related to the proposed
Mmamabula energy project, which has foundered for reasons outside the control of GoB or the Bank, (b)
include an Outcome related to Financial Sector strengthening, where the Bank’s engagement has been
increasingly demanded, and (c) includes a new Outcome related to Climate Change work, in which the
Bank’s AAA during FY09/FY10 has resulted in significant demand for follow-up analytic support. In
addition, the revised Results Matrix is strengthened by adding baselines and targets for outcomes, where
these were unavailable at the time of the CPS. Finally, to align the matrix more closely with the Bank’s
Africa Region strategy and the Government’s economic diversification agenda, the CPS outcome related
to skills development is now included under the Competitiveness Pillar of the CPS.

Lessons Learned
45.
Despite Botswana’s MIC status, close implementation support has been required. Several
projects such as the BNAPS, Integrated Transport Project, and the Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife
conflict GEF have experienced substantial delays in start up. While these were foreshadowed as
implementation risks in the CPS, readiness for implementation of projects such as the BNAPS, Integrated
Transport, and Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife conflict Prevention GEF was likely to have been
somewhat overestimated. Concerted efforts through FY10 in delivering procurement, disbursement and
financial management training to both implementing agencies and central ministries have helped to
overcome some delays. Task teams are also working with Government to strengthen project management
arrangements, add implementation capacity, and restructure projects where necessary. Intensive
supervision, supported by the opening of a Bank office in Gaborone in FY10, providing videoconference
access to experts based in Washington and the region in real time, has greatly enhanced the effectiveness
of implementation support and the Bank’s ability to monitor high corporate risk projects such as
Morupule B.
46.
The Bank program is strengthened by deeper cooperation with a ranger of partners. For
example, in HIV/AIDS working with other donors has helped to harmonize overall program efforts while
solidifying a stronger focus on prevention, in particular by working with the EU to utilize grant resources
to lower the cost of IBRD financing contingent on satisfactory project performance. Similarly, work on
public expenditure management has benefitted from close coordination with the EU and IMF as well as
South-South exchanges with Mauritius and South Africa. The Moropule B project is bringing together
multiple financiers and marks the Bank’s first co-guarantee operation with a bilateral agency, namely,
China Export & Credit Insurance Corporation, helping to mobilize a substantial amount of long-term debt
despite the financial crisis. A planned knowledge exchange event on the diamond industry will bring
together government and private sector representatives from Lesotho, Armenia, Botswana and Namibia.

13

CPS Relevance
47.
The FY09-13 CPS remains appropriate and relevant for Botswana. Botswana has managed to
navigate the immediate impacts of the global crisis, but has emerged in a weaker position with reduced
savings. With the international economic outlook presenting significant uncertainties for Botswana, a
critical policy challenge will be to contain the fiscal expansion employed through the crisis and push
forward with far reaching institutional reforms to improve spending efficiency, service delivery, and
reduce the size of the public sector over time. Concurrent investments in critical infrastructure
(particularly in energy, transport, and water), and aggressive action to improve the effectiveness of
HIV/AIDS prevention efforts are also needed, and, together with intensifying efforts to diversify the
economic base and strengthen public expenditure management, these form the critical agenda for
progress. The Government of Botswana has confirmed that the four pillars of the current CPS thus
remain highly relevant and appropriate for Botswana for the balance of the CPS period.

IV.

GOING FORWARD

48.
In line with the Africa Strategy, the Bank will increasingly focus on mobilizing knowledge in
support of CPS objectives. The first two years of re-engagement under the CPS have deepened our
understanding of Botswana’s development challenges and positioned the Bank to increasingly focus its
AAA in support of policy reform implementation. Going forward during the remainder of the CPS period
the strategy is being adjusted with addition of new and expanded activities that reflect Government
priorities for enhanced Bank support in economic diversification, public expenditure management reform,
and climate change. Working in partnership with the government and others, the Bank will mobilize
global expertise and technical assistance with the aim of bringing the knowledge and experience of
countries that have faced similar challenges in other parts of the world. Specific areas of focus will
include:


Economic Diversification and Competitiveness. Recognizing the growing urgency of this
agenda, the Government is focused on accelerating implementation of its Economic
Diversification Drive. During the balance of the CPS period the Bank Group will seek to support
the development and implementation of a reform roadmap focusing on the concrete actions in
business environment reforms, infrastructure, access to finance, and skills, technology and
productivity. This will build on recent and ongoing analytical work, including the ICA, Doing
Business Surveys, regional trade and market integration, and economic diversification.



Public Expenditure Management. With the preparation of the PER and the finalization of the
GoB’s PFM reform strategy, continued technical assistance will be provided during the balance
of the CPS period in support of its implementation. Complementary AAA will focus on
increased value for money in public spending by helping identify opportunities for greater
economy and efficiency in, inter alia, social protection and public procurement.



Financial Sector. Additional work planned during the balance of the CPS will support the GoB
in finalizing and implementing a Financial Sector Development Strategy now under preparation.
An early draft of the strategy has identified various constraints in the financial sector relating to,
inter alia, access to financial services; housing finance; banking and financial system
infrastructure; non-bank financial institutions; capital markets; and regional integration of
commitments under the SADC Protocols.



Information and Communication Technology. The Government has expressed interest in Bank
technical assistance in broadband connectivity where changes to the market structure and the
regulatory strategy could deliver major improvements in the sector with positive spillover
benefits to the rest of the economy. In addition, there is potential for supporting development of
the strategy for utilizing the ICT infrastructure to enhance public service delivery (e.g.
14

e-government systems, management of decentralized services via mobile phones, government
grant payments via mobile phone networks, public consultation and participatory decisionmaking using ICT networks, community monitoring of service delivery at clinics, schools etc.)


Climate Change. A fee-based technical assistance engagement is planned to help Government to
develop a climate resilient development strategy.



Poverty and social protection. The release of the results of a new Core Welfare Indicators Survey
later this year, after a ten-year hiatus, presents an opportunity for the Bank to respond to
government demand for analytical assistance in this area. Linking new information on poverty
and on the incidence of social protection programs would also help in developing policy
recommendations for strengthening public sector management and encouraging greater emphasis
on service delivery and on focusing on the effectiveness and efficiency of government programs.
Gender-disaggregated data will also facilitate Bank AAA that would seek to develop a greater
understanding of the gender dimensions of development in Botswana and support mainstreaming
of gender concerns in the policy dialogue with Government.

49.
Important data issues constrain analytical work, the formulation of robust policies, and
program evaluation. As noted above, despite high levels of poverty and inequality, household income
and expenditure data is a decade old in Botswana. Information on unemployment is not regularly
produced. There are no reliable indices of productivity. Evaluations of public programs are rarely
undertaken. The quality of national accounts data has been questioned. For an upper middle income
country, this lack of quality data is an important constraint to implementing evidence-based policy, and is
an area that deserves urgent attention. The Central Statistics Office, which has been hampered by lack of
staff, high staff turnover and limited budgets, was recently made autonomous, and it is hoped that this
will assist it in beginning to address some of these problems.
50.
Additional lending during the balance of the CPS period is possible, but will depend on
Government demand within the context of its overall financing needs and strategy. Emerging from the
global crisis with foreign debt levels reaching statutory limits, GoB is seeking to use liquidity in domestic
capital markets and any available concessional resources to meet its immediate financing needs. The
IBRD Treasury team has provided advice to GoB regarding how the Bank might assist in mobilizing
domestic financing using available Bank instruments, and will continue to provide support on an
as-needed basis. Nonetheless, in FY12 and FY13 the Bank will remain ready to respond to any GoB
requests for tailored financial support, as borrowing capacity allows, through the annual business
planning process. Possible areas of further financial support include:
 DPL financing to support the ongoing reform program and close the short-term fiscal gap;
 Facilitating local currency financing either via a local currency guarantee or a World Bank
loan funded by a local bond issue in Pula;
 Possible investment/TA lending in support of the PFM reform program as well as
competitiveness-enhancing reforms;
 Investment support to the water reform program.
51.
Improving the pace of project implementation will be a critical focus during the remaining two
years of the CPS. As a first step, implementation support to projects experiencing delays has been
increased. Agreement has been reached on the need for project restructuring in the case of the BNAPS in
order to strengthen implementation capacity while streamlining the project to allow for a greater focus on
delivery of prioritized interventions. In the case of the Integrated Transport Project, project oversight
structures are being modified with a view to strengthening project management and accelerating
implementation. Finally, staffing in the Bank’s office is being increased with placement of a senior
15

economist and the possible addition of an operations analyst which should further increase the
responsiveness of the Bank in addressing implementation issues.

V.

RISKS AND CREDITWORTHINESS

52.
The major risks identified in the CPS remain valid. With respect to credit risk, although
diamond exports have recovered and are expected to return to pre-crisis levels by 2012/13, Botswana’s
creditworthiness will remain constrained by its narrow economic base. Nevertheless, Botswana’s S&P
credit risk rating of A- remains the strongest in Africa, on a par with Malaysia and Poland, although the
outlook is less favorable now reflecting the weakening of the fiscal stance as a result of the response to
the impact of the financial crisis.
53.
Reputational risk, as identified in the CPS, remains in particular due to the Bank’s engagement in
financing the Morupule B coal-fired power generation project. However, substantial communication and
outreach effort in the lead up to the approval of the project, close implementation support and attention to
safeguards through implementation, the growing Bank engagement in promoting renewable and lower
carbon options for Botswana, and concurrent Bank efforts to help Botswana participate in the global
climate change debate have all contributed to mitigating this risk. These efforts notwithstanding, the
Bank’s work in the energy sector in Botswana and the region will continue to generate reputational risk
which will require close management at the country, regional and corporate level.
54.
The implementation risks outlined in the CPS did materialize and were a source of delay during
the first two years of implementation. As discussed above, the result was lower than expected
disbursements, particularly in the HIV/AIDS and Transport Projects. However mitigation measures,
including portfolio-wide procurement, disbursement and financial management training for counterparts
and more intensive implementation support by task teams, have helped bring about the beginnings of a
turnaround. Fiduciary training will continue during the balance of the CPS period as this is recognized as
an ongoing need. The opening of a Bank office in Gaborone has facilitated these efforts.

16

Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix

World Bank
Strategic
Element
Enhancing Public
Sector
Effectiveness

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives
Need for greater public
sector effectiveness in the
implementation of policies
and programs

Improved capacity to compile, analyze and
disseminate poverty-related statistical
information



Public financial
management needs
strengthening

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes

Poverty related household survey data
documented and archived by 2010.

Household Income and
Expenditure Surveys (HIES)
completed.

At least 5 statisticians and researchers trained
in poverty analysis of household survey data
by 2010.

Training of statisticians and
researchers completed.

Improved public expenditure management.
Public financial management reform


Improved capacity to analyze and forecast
fiscal variables; macroeconomic model in use
at MFDP.



Strengthened budget process: greater
coordination between the various elements of
budgeting – recurrent and capital budgets and
personnel management.



PFM system further strengthened in key
dimensions, including openness and
accountability in public procurement.

Public expenditure Review
(PER) carried out.

Progress to Date

Core Welfare
Indicators Survey
conducted in
2009/2010.

TFSCB Grant for Capacity
Building and Poverty Analysis
(FY09)

The PER was
delivered in FY10, and
a successful PER
dissemination
workshop in August
2010 added significant
detail to the PFM
reform agenda.

PER (FY10)
Macro-modeling (FY10)
PFM Reform TA (FY10-12)

PFM reform strategy
formulated and initiated.
Issues Note on Accrual
Accounting completed.

A PFM action plan has
been finalized by the
MoFDP.
Accrual accounting
issues note has been
delivered to
complement TA being
provided by the IMF.

17

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions

Issues Note on Accrual
Accounting (FY11)
Public Sector Management
Justice and Law TA (FY 12)

World Bank
Strategic
Element

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives
Most ministries and
agencies lack the
institutional capacity to
monitor and evaluate
Government policies,
programs and projects

Weak institutional capacity
for data tracking, collation,
analysis and dissemination

Fighting
HIV/AIDS and
Improving
Education
Outcomes

Success in good
governance and
macroeconomic and fiscal
management has not been
accompanied by a
reduction of inequality,
poverty and improved HD
outcomes.

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes

Enhanced capacity of Government to adopt
evidence-based management through increased
application of monitoring and evaluation
information


At least 15 ministries have functional resultsbased M&E systems in place by 2011.



At least 60 percent of trained CSO (Civil
Society Organizations) are using scorecards to
assess the effectiveness of service delivery by
2011.

Improved National Statistical Capacity

Increased effectiveness of HIV/AIDS prevention
efforts




HIV/AIDS is a huge drain
on the economy and
society with the youth
most vulnerable.


Increased proportion of youth reporting no
sexual activity. (Age 15-19: from 78.4% to
85% by 2013; age 20-24: from 30.8% to 50%
by 2013)
Proportion of youth aged 15-19 and 20-24
reporting condom use during the last sexual
encounter with a non-regular partner in the
past 12 months. (Age 15-19: from 89% to
95% by 2013; age 20-24: from 85% to 95%
by 2013)
Number (cumulative) of male circumcision
procedures performed in selected facilities
increases from 52,000 (2008) to 262,000 by
2013

18

Progress to Date

A needs assessment of
M&E capacity of at least 15
ministries carried out.

Little progress has
been made on
activities foreseen
under IDF grant.

Training of CSOs initiated
and completed.

GICO has been
restructured into the
National Strategy
Office (NSO)

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions
IDF Grant to Strengthen the
M&E Capacity of the Vision
2016 Council and the
Government Implementation
coordination Office (GICO) in
the Presidency Office (FY10)

Report on “strengthening
national statistical capacity
and policy analysis”
completed and
disseminated.

HIV/AIDS interventions
adequately implemented.
National Strategic
Framework to combat
HIV/AIDS was finalized in
July 2010
A total of $6.6 million of
grants for prevention
activities has been awarded
under the project’s Civil
Society grant component

Approximately 90 %
of individuals with
advanced HIV
infection are receiving
ART
Proportion of youth
(15-24 years reporting
condom use increased
from 19.2 % in 2004
(DHS Survey) to
42.8% (BIAS III
Survey)

HIV/AIDS Prevention Support
Project (FY09)
Southern Africa Regional
HIV/AIDS Strategy (FY10)
Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis (FY 11)

World Bank
Strategic
Element
Increased
Competitiveness –
Infrastructure
and the Climate
for Investment
and Growth

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives
Efforts to diversify the
economy have yet to
generate significant results.

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes

Improved Investment Climate


Identify key bottlenecks to greater domestic
and international foreign investment.

Diamond production is
predicted to fall by 40%;
Revenue from diamonds
are projected to decline by
50%.

Follow-up to the FY07
Investment Climate
Assessment done.
Strategic Issues in
Competitiveness Study
completed.

Progress to Date

Botswana fell two
places in the 2011
Ease of Doing
Business ranking
compared to 2010,
from 50 to 52 overall

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions
Follow-up to FY07 Investment
Climate Assessment (ICA)
(FY09)
Development Policy Review
(FY12)
Strategic Issues in
Competitiveness Study (FY10)
Competitiveness Dialogue/TA
(FY12)

Economic growth has not
generated enough jobs.
There is a skills mismatch
between education
outcomes and labor market
needs.

Skills mismatch is identified and policy options
agreed to reduce the gap

Skills gap/labor market
study completed.

Study underway

Skills Gap/Labor Markets Study
(FY12)

Inadequate access to
financial services due to
need for stronger
banking/financial system
infrastructure and legal and
regulatory frameworks for,
inter alia, NBFI, pensions,
insurance, and capital
markets

Government Financial Sector Development
strategy adopted with action plan to address
identified constraints.

New pension and insurance
regulations developed.

Revised pension and
insurance laws have
been finalized and are
pending approval;

Financial Sector Reform and
Strengthening (FIRST) Initiative
support to the Pension and
Insurance is under preparation.

Revised pension and
insurance regulations
have been approved

FIRST-funded technical
assistance to develop Financial
Sector Development Strategy
(FSDS).

Financial Sector
Development Strategy
Finalized
Investment and Securities
regulatory regime Revised
Collective Investment
Undertakings (CIU) Act
revised.

Compliance gaps in both
corporate accounting and
auditing practices
undermine investor
confidence and reduce
investment

Revised securities
markets regulations
and CIU Act have
been prepared and are
undergoing final
review.

FIRST-funded technical
assistance to the Non-Bank
Financial Institutions Regulatory
Authority (NBFIRA).

Strengthened accountancy profession to
enhance corporate finance and reporting
1. Increased capacity of the Botswana Institute
of Accountants (BIA) to carry out its
functions as a professional accountancy body

19

IDF Grant utilized and
activities fully implemented

National qualification
launched in April
2011

IDF Grant For Strengthening the
Institute of Accountants (FY10)

World Bank
Strategic
Element

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes



Progress to Date

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions

National qualifications developed and at least
50 nationals have passed Part-1 (intermediate
level ) examinations by June 2011
At least 5 Continuing Professional
Development (CPD) courses are developed

2. Improved compliance with the International
Federation of Accountants (IFAC)


Infrastructure capacity and
quality has not kept pace
with growth.

Development of
Accountancy Profession
Legislation
Road asset management
protocols completed

Improved national capacity in transport
management


There are transport
bottlenecks.
Regional trade has more
potential

Enactment of Accountancy Profession
Legislation



At least 250 km of roads under long-term
output and performance-based road contracts
(OPRC) for rehabilitation and maintenance by
2014.

Regional Investment
Climate Assessment
completed**
Southern Africa Regional
Trade and Integration Study
completed**

20

Conceptual design for
the 800 of OPRC
component has started

Contract awarded in June
2011for Regional Transport
Integration Study

Average vehicle operating costs per vehiclekm on OPRC roads falls by 8% by 2014.

Improved Regional Trade**

The Accountancy Act
and the Financial
Reporting Act enacted
in 2010 and effective 1
April 2011

FIRST Initiative supported
project, “Updating Accounting
and Auditing Legislation
Transport Sector Project
AAAs:
Regional Investment Climate
Assessment**

Regional Transport
Integration Study
contract awarded in
June 2011.

Regional Trade Study
completed

Southern Africa Regional Trade
and Integration Study**

World Bank
Strategic
Element

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives
Major shortfall in
electricity production
Uncertainty of reliance on
South Africa for electricity
needs as Eskom faces
electricity shortfall

The Environment

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes

Improved energy security
 Domestic generation capacity as % of peak
demand increases from 18% to 102% by FY13
 measures to address social issues and demand
management implemented

Government adoption of
electricity tariff policy
Testing of new generation
unit: 1 unit completed
New Regulatory Agency:
Contract awarded for TA

Broadband Strategy Developed and Adopted

Agriculture and naturebased tourism potential not
fully utilized

Selected strategic challenges in agriculture and
nature-based tourism identified and policy
options presented to government

Policy notes completed

Weak environmental
management

Reduced human-wildlife conflict (HWC)
incidence in targeted hotspot areas in northern
Botswana

Interventions to prevent
wildlife conflict incidents in
hot spot areas fully
implemented



Numbers of wildlife conflict incidents in
targeted hotspot areas reduced by 33%.



Number of people employed in eco-tourism
increases by 75

21

The Government
implemented a 32 %
tariff increase
effective May 1, 2010,
which is consistent
with the commitment
to make the energy
sector financially
sustainable
BPC installed 800,000
compact fluorescent
lights and about
29,000 smart meters
by end of 2010

Regional broadband
connectivity is held back
by high cost

High incidence of humanwildlife conflicts

Progress to Date

Training programs for
tourism-related programs
implemented.

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions
Morupule B Project (FY09/10)

South Africa/Botswana Regional
Broadband TA (with PPIAF)
(FY12)
SDN Policy Notes on Agriculture
and NBT (FY10)

Wildlife and human
conflict incidents in
targeted hotspots areas
have yet to be
drastically reduced.
From November 2009
to 17 January 2011
conflict incidents for
elephants increased
from 99 to 145 and for
lions from 84 to 134
respectively. The
increase in incidents is
attributed to the lack
of separation between
the two project
villages and the
Makagadikgadi NP

Wild Life and Conflict
Management Project in Northern
Botswana (GEF) (FY10)
SDN Policy Notes on naturebased tourism (FY10)

World Bank
Strategic
Element

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives
Low capacity to capture
Carbon Finance potential

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes

Progress to Date

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions
Carbon Finance Assistance
Program

Low carbon growth strategy under
implementation
 At least one low-carbon (CBM) reserve or nocarbon (CSP) energy alternative has been
identified, or a CCS pilot project has been
identified.

Government policy on
carbon finance defined

Feasibility study for
up to 200 MW
concentrated solar
power (CSP) plant is
underway

Climate Change Policy Note
(FY 10)
Carbon Capture and Storage
(CCS) Trust Fund grant

Enhanced capacity to participate in the global
carbon market

Frequent drought and
frequent threats to water
resources

Number of new carbon programs identified

Improved ground water management (regional
project)**


Number of key technical officers and policy
makers aware of groundwater management
and its importance over total number
questioned (relates to SADC countries of
which Botswana is a participating member
state)

22

Regional environmental and
social assessment study
completed**

A Multi Sector
Investment
Opportunity Analysis
(MSIOA) for the
Zambezi River basin
engaged all eight
riparian countries in a
consultative process to
illustrate the benefits
of cooperation through
a multi sectoral
economic evaluation
of water resources
development,
management option
scenarios.

Groundwater and Drought
Management Project**
Advisory Services for Water
Sector Reform Phase II (FY 11)

Regional environmental and
social assessment study**

World Bank
Strategic
Element

Major Issues and
Constraints to
achieving
Government’s
objectives
High vulnerability to
drought and flood
exacerbated by climate
change.

Milestones/Intermediate
Indicators

CPS Outcomes

Increased understanding of implications of
increased climate variability for Botswana with
appropriate policy options for adaptation
developed

Climate impacts modeled by
end 2010.
Policy options for climate
adaptation developed and
adopted by end 2012
Water and Wastewater
Sector Reform FBSA Phase
1 completed

Improved water conservation and management.
Water and Wastewater Sector Reform Option
Implemented

**



WUC assumes water delivery nationwide



Water Resources Council and Regulator
established

Water and Wastewater
Sector Reform FBSA Phase
2 completed

Progress to Date

The climate change
work developed a
first-ever analysis
based on a Botswana
data set using Global
Climate Models
(GCM) to predict how
climate variability
might impact on
Botswana over the
next 50 years
To date, management
of 150 of the
country’s over 200
water systems has
been transferred to the
Water Users
Corporation (WUC)

Bank Program/Projects and
Other Partner Interventions
Climate Change Policy Note
(FY11)
Environment Policy Note (FY10)
Climate Adaptation FBSA
(FY12)

Water and Wastewater Sector
Reform FBSA Phase 1 (FY09)
Water and Wastewater Sector
Reform FBSA Phase 2 (FY10)
Water and Wastewater Sector
Reform FBSA Phase 3 (FY13)

Achievement of regional outcomes cannot be measured within the timeframe of the CPS and can only be assessed against regional objectives

23

Annex 2: Botswana at a Glance

Botswana at a glance

2/25/11

B o tswana

SubSaharan
A frica

Upper
middle
inco me

1.9
582
1.5
60

819
24,242
2.5
36

993
48,659
0.9
75

12.2
6,260
12,840

897
1,095
1,981

7,363
7,415
12,800

-3.7
-5.1

5.2
2.7

4.1
3.2

51
73
52
83
25

..
..
71
20
..

83
84
111
109

72
54
105
95

95
92
111
110

95
60

60
31

95
84

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2009

(2009)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )
31 a
49 a
54
43
..

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200

150

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

100

50

0
1990

1995

Botswana

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
Germany
United States
Euro pean Co mmissio n

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2009

105

145

31

716

15
12
6

19
15
8

7
1
4

439
232
27

10.2
107

3.9
107

0.6
18

5.6
373

2000

2008

Sub-Saharan Africa

b

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
12
10
8
6

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

4
2
0

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-2
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

13.6
10.2

11.4
6.3

8.7
0.0

8.4
-5.7

0.8
..

1.9
119

5.1
100

7.0
15

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2000–09
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

1.0
1,061

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

14.7
50.7
5.1
34.6

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n
Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

1.4
3,792

1.7
5,632

1.9
11,823

3.2
11.0

2.4
5.7

1.4
4.4

4.9
61.0
5.1
34.1

2.7
52.6
4.5
44.7

3.1
39.6
4.2
57.3

2.5
11.3
11.5
15.1

-0.7
5.4
3.5
7.5

1.2
2.5
4.8
5.6

52.0
21.3
40.1

33.2
24.1
37.4

30.8
25.4
31.8

62.8
24.2
24.0

6.2
14.9
7.6

5.9
6.1
4.6

6.6
4.9
3.0

53.1
66.4
28.7

55.1
49.8
41.6

53.3
41.2
41.4

33.6
44.6
18.7

12.5
9.2

4.4
4.3

2.8
4.8

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. Co untry po verty estimate is fo r earlier perio d. b. A id data are fo r 2008.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

24

Botswana
Balance of P ayments and T rade

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services
Current account balance
as a % of GDP

2,682
2,005
681

3,462
4,734
-1,624

Voice and accountability

547
9.7

-966
-8.2

Regulatory quality

26

88

Control of corruption

6,300

12,438

Political stability

Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves, including gold

0

2009

Central Government Finance

25

2000

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure
Overall surplus/deficit
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

47.0
40.2
28.0

32.5
20.4
30.7

7.8

-14.7

25
25

25
25

50

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T echnology and Inf rastructure

2000

2008

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

35.3

32.6

21

85

0.5

0.6

46
22.1
..

46
20.7
30.1

1,354
0.2

1,249
..

E xternal Debt and Resource Flows
E nvironment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

453
69
–

1,617
47
–

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)

8.0
2.0

13.7
0.7

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

57
-6

234
18

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

2.5

2.6

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

9.1

11.8

1,066

1,068

Composition of total external debt, 2009

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

IBRD, 0
Short-term, 229

IDA, 5
IMF, 0

Private, 2

W orld Bank Group portfolio

Other multilateral, 1,246

US$ millions

P rivate S ector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Anticompetitive or informal practices
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

(US$ millions)

Bilateral, 135

2000
–
–
–
2000
..
..
17.4
10.3

2009
61
2.1
16

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

16
0
7
1

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

9
0
1

5
0
1

2
2
1

27
27
1

0

0

–
–

–
–

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

2009
24.3
11.6

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

33.8
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

25

2/25/11

Millennium Development Goals

Botswana

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Botswana

Goal 1: halve the rates f or extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
31.2
..
3.1
..

2000
..
..
..
10.7

87
90
40

79
92
58

83
91
76

108
34
5

104
38
9

102
39
11

101
41
11

60
46
87

78
57
89

99
66
91

76
57
94

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three- f ourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

83
77
33

130
87
..

310
94
48

198
95
53

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV /AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

4.7
307
71

19.0
444
70

26.5
595
73

23.9
536
63

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

93
38
24
..
1.6
7.6

94
42
23
..
2.2
7.8

96
45
22
..
2.5
9.1

96
84
21
19.0
2.5
11.8

Goal 8: develop a global partnership f or development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

2.0
0.0
0.0
..

3.9
0.0
0.1
1.0

7.9
12.9
2.9
3.5

7.4
77.3
6.2
6.2

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under- 5 mortality by two- thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

2008
..
..
..
4.3

87
86
80

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

100

100

80

75
75

60
50

50
40

25
25

20

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2008

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Botswana

Sub-Saharan Africa

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

26

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

2/25/11

Annex 3: Selected indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of 7/5/2011

Indicator

2009

2010

2011

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a

2

4

4

Average Implementation Period (years)

b

0.5

1.1

1.8

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

a, c

0.0

0.0

25.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c

0.0

0.0

1.5

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number

a, d

0.0

0.0

25.0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount

a, d

0.0

0.0

1.5

0.0

1.0

13.3

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

20

0

195.0

0.0

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number

20.0

0.0

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

11.4

0.0

Disbursement Ratio (%)

e

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

27

Annex 4: IFC Investment Operations Program

2009

2010

2011

Original Commitments (US$ millions)
IFC and Participants

4.76

IFC's Own Accounts
only

4.76

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
OIL, GAS AND
MINING

100
0

Total

100

0

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity

100
0

Total

* Data as of July 01, 2011

28

100

0

Annex 5: Summary of Nonlending Services
As of July 2011
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Recent Completions
Public Expenditure Review

FY10

471

G, B

KG, PS

ICA follow up; Informality survey and TA

FY10

71

G, B, P

KG, PS

Agriculture and Environment Policy Notes

FY10

70

G, B

KG, PS

FBSA Water Sector Reform (Phase 2)

FY11

463

G, B

KG, PS

Climate Change Policy Note

FY11

58

G, B

KG

Accrual Accounting Guide

FY11

45

G, B

PS

Skills and Competitiveness

FY12

212

G, B

KG, PS

Public Sector Management Justice & Law TA

FY12

75

G, B

PS

Financial Sector Development Strategy

FY12

200

G, B, D, P

KG, PS

Strengthening Accounting Oversight Board

FY12

34

G

KG, PS

Enhancing Supervision of Capital Markets

FY12

191

G, B

KG, PS

Programmatic DPR (Policy Notes)

FY12

200

G, B, D, P

KG, PS, PD

Public Expenditure Management TA

FY12

100

G, B

KG, PS

Competitiveness and Diversification TA

FY12

50

G, B, P, D

PD PS

Social Safety Net Review

FY12

50

G, B, D, P

KG, PS

TA to Public Private Partnerships

FY13

50

G, B

PS

Climate Change Adaptation FBSA

FY13

400

G, B, P

PD, PS

Poverty Assessment

FY13

250

G, B, D, P

KG, PS, PD

Health Public Expenditure Review

FY13

100

G, B

KG, PS

FBSA Water Sector Reform (Phase 3)

FY13

250

G, B

KG, PS

Underway

Planned

a. Government, Donor, Bank, Public Dissemination
b. Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-solving

29

Annex 6: Key Economic Indicators
Botswana - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product

a

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

Industry

51

54

53

53

40

45

45

47

47

Services

48

44

45

45

57

52

51

58

58

11
25
7
17

10
22
6
16

10
24
9
15

10
23
12
11

11
28
15
13

12
26
13
13

0
26
11
15

0
26
10
16

0
22
9
13

51
34

47
31

48
36

42
38

32
43

33
40

31
32

29
30

27
27

Agriculture

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
b

Exports (GNFS)
Imports (GNFS)

Gross domestic savings

100

89

90

90

90

89

88

100

100

100

87

91

93

93

94

91

102

103

103

10255

11255

12376

13473

11474

14857

14508

16362

18459

5180

5730

6100

6620

6450

7020

7290

8180

8750

5.1
5.0

4.8
5.5

2.9
-0.2

-4.9
-8.0

7.2
7.9

4.8
9.5

7.2
6.1

7.4
8.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.5
3.9
Total consumption
2.5
1.2
Private consumption
-2.2
3.9

3.5
3.4
2.7

1.6
5.0
3.3

-6.1
9.2
14.3

5.9
5.6
8.7

3.5
3.1
3.5

5.9
6.0
6.9

6.1
7.3
8.4

Gross national savings

c

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
1.6
Gross Domestic Income
2.3

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
b

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
b

Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reserves

d

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

5277
4444

5292
4521

5902
5053

5707
4789

3477
3462

4112
4112

4479
4437

4686
4640

4963
4915

3550
2686
1727
672
1564

3451
2617
1841
871
1939

4471
3443
1430
1105
1798

5580
4458
127
1010
473

4121
4121
-644
1067
-244

4599
4595
-487
1119
-33

4682
4682
-203
1137
94

4836
4836
-150
1362
350

4988
4988
-25
1362
542

223
..
-26
..
..

437
..
-40
..
..

444
..
-27
..
..

617
..
-12
..
..

0
..
957
..
..

347
..
264
..
..

372
..
183
..
..

376
..
23
..
..

403
..
16
..
..

-1377

-1757

-1742

-1092

-13

231

-268

7

-202

16.8

16.4

11.6

0.9

-5.6

-3.3

-1.4

-0.9

-0.1

1.5
3.1
38.5
-9.1

15.4
21.5
-43.8
-11.0

3.1
-1.3
96.9
18.9

-5.7
-5.4
-20.8
-84.0

-35.7
-46.9
-28.3
102.5

13.9
3.8
17.6
28.9

12.9
27.1
6.8
12.3

-100.0
-100.0
-100.0
-100.0

..
..
..
..

30

Botswana- Key Economic Indicators (Continued)
Actual
Indicator

2005

2006

Estimate

2007

2008

2009

Projected
2010

2011

2012

2013

Indicator
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues

40.5

39.8

37.7

33.1

32.9

32.8

34.8

37.8

37.6

Current expenditures

26.6

24.0

24.5

26.0

31.2

26.9

28.8

27.4

25.9

Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)

13.9

15.8

13.2

7.1

1.7

5.9

6.0

10.4

11.7

Capital expenditure

6.7

5.6

8.2

12.2

16.7

11.9

10.7

10.0

9.5

Foreign financing

0.0

0.1

-0.1

-0.2

7.8

1.3

0.1

0.1

-0.1

M2/GDP

28.0

37.4

42.4

42.4

46.7

44.1

47.9

Growth of M2 (%)

10.6

67.4

31.2

21.1

-1.8

16.1

9.5

-27

-32

-79

202

21

44

42

Monetary indicators

Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR94 =100)
Merchandise export price index

86.1

75.9

82.2

82.7

93.0

96.9

92.7

Merchandise import price index

140.9

152.1

167.7

653.9

604.3

523.4

474.9

Merchandise terms of trade index

61.1

49.9

49.0

12.6

15.4

18.5

19.5

Consumer price index (% change)

8.6

11.6

7.0

12.7

8.1

6.7

6.3

5.6

5.4

GDP deflator (% change)

9.3

19.2

10.4

17.7

-6.1

14.7

-3.9

5.2

5.0

a. GDP at
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

31

Annex 7: Key Exposure Indicators

Actual
Indicator

Estimated

Projected

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

447

382

458

431

1767

2363

2483

2642

2760

Net disbursements (US$m)a

-1

-65

-15

-26

905

188

121

15

-11

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)

51

58

52

69

78

101

130

125

TDO/XGSb

7.8

6.5

7.1

7.0

43.5

46.2

39.2

48.9

48.8

TDO/GDP

4.4

3.4

3.7

6.4

16.1

19.3

20.6

20.0

12.9

TDS/XGS

0.9

1.0

0.8

1.1

1.9

2.0

2.1

2.3

0.0

65.4

64.2

52.5

57.4

70.9

51.7

61.3

68.1

8.5

2.3

2.1

2.4

0.0

0.0

1.3

2.6

3.9

..

69.2

67.5

66.0

44.7

59.6

74.7

43.6

64.1

..

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1

2

1

0

0

0

141

173

231

295

0

0

0

0

0

121

121

121

121

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

Loans

2

0

0

17

18

7

20

20

20

Equity and quasi-equity /c

8

7

6

13

10

14

11

11

11

0

0

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS
(%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)

d

IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International
Settlements
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

32

Annex 8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 7/15/2011

Closed Projects

25

IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active)

56.2

of which has been repaid

0.0

Total Disbursed (Closed)

0.0

of which has been repaid

14.1

Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

56.2

of which has been repaid

14.1

Total Undisbursed (Active)

316.2

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.0

Total Undisbursed (Active +Closed

316.2

Difference
Between
Expected and
Actual

Active Projects
Last PSR

Original Amount in US$

Supervision Rating
Project
ID

Project name

Dev.
Obj.

Imp.
Progress

Millions
Fiscal
Year

IBRD

IDA

Grant

Disbursements
Cancel

Undisb.

Org

P102299

BW-HIV/AIDS Project SIL
(FY09)

S

S

2009

50.0

40.5

16.5

P102368

BW-Integrated Transport
SIL (FY09)

S

S

2009

186.0

182.6

30.6

P112516

BW:Morupule Generation
and Transmission

S

S

2010

136.4

93.1

-43.3

P095617

NB Human Wildlife
Coexistence Project

MS

MU

2010

5.5

3.4

-0.9

5.5

319.6

2.9

Overall Result

372.4

33

Frm
rev’d

3.5

3.5

Annex 9: Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC)

As of July 2011
(In USD Millions)
Committed
FY
Approval

Company

Loan

2001/08

Afrbnkcorp

2005/08

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

0

4.68

Letshego

6.84

2003

Petra
diamonds

2010

Tsodilo

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding
*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

13.55

0

0

0

4.68

13.55

0

0

3.9

0

0

0

6.84

3.9

0

0

0

0

0.54

0

0

0

0

0.54

0

0

0

0

3.4

0

0

0

0

3.4

0

0

0

6.84

12.52

13.55

0

0

6.84

12.52

13.55

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management
Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

34

