Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
the World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report Number: 61923 - MD

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
FOR THE PERIOD FY09-FY13

May 12, 2011

Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Middle East, North Africa and Southern Europe Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2011)

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31

Currency Unit = MDL (Moldovan Leu)
US$1 = MDL11.9096

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
AEI
AF
CEM
CEP
CPAR
CPIA
CPS
CPSPR
DFID
DPO
EBRD
EC
EFA/FTI
EIB
EU
ESRP
FDI
FY
GAC
GDP
GEF
ICT
IDA
IEG
IFC

IMF
KfW
MCC
MDL
NBM
MIGA
MDTF
MSIF
NPL
PEFA

Analytical & Advisory Activities
Alliance for European Integration
Additional Financing
Country Economic Memorandum
Competitiveness Enhancement Project
Central Public Administration Reform
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
UK Department for International Development
Development Policy Operation
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
European Commission
Education for All/ Fast-Track Initiative
European Investment Bank
European Union
Economic Stabilization and Recovery Program
Foreign Direct Investment
Fiscal Year
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Information and Communication Technologies
International Development Association
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation

PER
PFM
PRSC
RISP
ROSC
SME
SIDA
TA
TF
TSA
UNDP
UNICEF
USAID

International Monetary Fund
KfW Entwicklungsbank
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Moldovan Leu
National Bank of Moldova
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Multi-donor Trust Fund
Moldova Social Investment Fund
Non-Performing Loans
Public Expenditure & Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Rural Investment and Services Project
Accounting and Auditing Report on the
Observance of Standards and Codes
Small and Medium-size Enterprises
Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
Targeted Social Assistance
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
United States Agency for International
Development

The World Bank Group Team
IFC

IDA
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leaders

Philippe H. Le Houerou
Martin Raiser
Connie Luff, Carolina Odobescu

i

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

Rashad Kaldany
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Ana Maria Mihaescu

The Moldova CPS PR was prepared under the guidance of Martin Raiser, Country Director, with overall
direction from Indermit Gill, ECA Chief Economist, and M. Willem van Eeghen, Lead Economist. The core
CPS PR team included Connie Luff, Ana Maria Mihaescu, Carolina Odobescu and Faith Tempest.
Contributions are gratefully acknowledged from Melanie Marlett, Pablo Saavedra, Marius Vismantas, Paolo
Belli, Tamara Sulukhia, Gerardo Corrochano, Peter Thomson, Mamta Murthi, Dina Umali-Deininger, Benu
Bidani, Caroline Kende-Robb, Dino Merotto, Scherezad Latif, Rajeev Swami, Martin Melecky, Mariana Doina
Moarcas, Wendy Jo Werner, Vara Vemuru, Kiran Pandey, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Jock Anderson, Jyoti
Bisbey, Luisa Masutti, Enver Kamal, Elmas Arisoy, Roumeen Islam, Tevfik Mehmet Yaprak, Abebe Adugna,
Iryna Trach, Elena Kladova, Zoran Anusic, Julia Smolyar, Anatol Gobjila, Elena Corman, Sandu Ghidirim,
Victor Neagu, Irina Guban, Ghenadie Cotelnic, Lilia Razlog, Iaroslav Baclajanschi, Felicia Pricop, Kristin
Sinclair, and Sophia Georgieva. Administrative support was provided by Olesya Gafurova, Ala Muntean and
Valentina Golokoz.

ii

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 1

II.

Relevance of the CPS....................................................................................................................... 2

III.

Country Context ............................................................................................................................... 3

IV.

Results and progress towards achieving CPS objectives and outcomes .......................................... 5

V.

Post-crisis agenda and modifications to the CPS ............................................................................. 9

VI.

Risks............................................................................................................................................... 12

Tables and Figures

Table 1. Pledges made at the Consultative Group: Moldova Partnership Forum (USD millions) ............... 7
Table 2. CPS Progress Report Indicative Program for the period FY11-FY13 (USD million)* ................ 11

Annexes
ANNEX 1: CPS FY09-13 REVISED RESULTS MATRIX AND PROGRESS TO DATE ..................... 14
ANNEX 2: LIST OF ACTIVE BANK-ADMINISTERED TRUST FUNDS IN MOLDOVA.................. 33
ANNEX 3: DEVELOPMENT PARTNER COMMITMENTS BY SECTOR, CONSULTATIVE GROUP:
MOLDOVA PARTNERSHIP FORUM, MARCH 2010............................................................................ 34
ANNEX 4: STANDARD CPS ANNEXES ................................................................................................ 35

iii

MOLDOVA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
I.

Introduction

1.
This Progress Report assesses implementation of the current joint Bank-IFC Moldova
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). The CPS focuses on three pillars: (i) improving economic
competitiveness; (ii) minimizing social and environmental risks, building human capital, and promoting
social inclusion; and (iii) improving public sector governance. The CPS envisages annual commitments
of approximately USD 45-50 million. The IDA-15 lending envelope, along with an additional USD 20
million, and USD 11.2 million from the IDA Crisis Response Window, have been fully utilized. IFC has
actively increased its activities in the last three years with a total of USD 79 million in investments and
envisages annual commitments of USD 30-40 million.
2.
The CPS was prepared during a time of political and economic uncertainty and was
deliberately kept flexible. Political and economic developments over the last two years confirm that this
has been an appropriate strategy. The parliamentary elections of 2009 delivered a mandate for change,
expressed in Moldova’s European aspirations. The global economic and financial crisis hit Moldova hard
and required the Bank to provide rapid and flexible support. Additional financing to existing projects
delivered assistance fast to support rural communities and vulnerable people and to promote economic
recovery. The DPO was used as a tool to support the Government’s Economic Stabilization and
Recovery Program (ESRP).
3.
Significant progress towards CPS milestones and outcomes has been delivered.
Development objectives in ongoing investment projects are being met, with a good performance record in
place. AAA has been an important component of the Bank’s partnership strategy, both in addressing the
economic crisis, as well as supporting sector level reform programs with other partners. IFC’s strategy
complemented IDA’s efforts in private sector development. Details of progress to date and updated
performance indicators are reflected in the Results Matrix (see Annex 1).
4.
Following the election of a new, European-oriented coalition government, the Bank has
helped Moldova receive significant external support to turn its European aspirations into reality.
The Bank, with other development partners, prepared a set of Policy Notes on key economic and social
challenges to address the impact of the crisis and build the platform for post-crisis growth and improved
competitiveness. The Notes were instrumental in the preparation of the ESRP, which provided the basis
for the Consultative Group meeting on March 24, 2010. Development partners pledged USD 2.6 billion
to support these reforms during 2010-13. Such leverage of the Bank’s limited resources is critical to
financing the significant investments Moldova needs to make in its path to European integration.
5.
Moldova is now poised for a new phase of sustained growth but fundamental structural and
governance weaknesses must be addressed. Critical and comprehensive structural reforms on business
regulation, de-monopolization, regulatory environment, and improved competitiveness will foster a
speedier economic recovery. Governance and anti-corruption remain important and governance as a
cross-cutting theme will be strengthened to ensure enhanced accountability and transparency in the social
sectors. These structural reforms to improve competitiveness and reforms to enhance governance will be
the focus of the remaining two years of the CPS.
6.
Modifications proposed to the CPS respond to the changed environment. The pillars of the
strategy remain valid for the post-crisis period. The Bank will continue to be selective given its limited
resources and will remain flexible to adjust to changing economic and political realities. Resources will
be put into core areas with solid track records, strong government ownership and commitment to reform,
and opportunities for strategic partnerships. Where other partners are in the lead, the Bank may exit or

1

scale down. Given the opportunity provided by a reform-minded Government, we propose that the CPS
period be extended to the end of FY13 to support key reforms and consolidate and focus the Bank’s
program, with a new CPS starting in FY14.
A transition to a more strategic and focused Country Partnership Strategy at the mid-point
In FY09 the flexibility in the CPS reflected concerns about the potential impact of a global financial crisis and the
expectations of political change after a number of years in power of a Government reticent to undertake reforms.
The lending program was fragmented but some projects had shown the potential for further gains, particularly in
the social sectors. The first two years of the CPS took a conservative approach, initially with no policy based
lending and an emphasis on additional financing in successful projects. This additional financing together with
an Economic Recovery DPO supported Moldova through the financial and economic crisis, and provided the
opportunity to open a dialogue with the newly elected Government on a longer term reform agenda. The CPS did
not set out a lending program beyond the CPS mid-point, leaving this to be decided at the time of the CPS
Progress Report. This flexibility has proven effective, allowing the Bank to adapt to changed circumstances.
Going forward the Bank will consolidate and focus its program to support reforms which will increase
competitiveness and job creation during the remainder of the CPS period. Policy based lending will recommence, and a selective program of sector investment lending will focus on those sectors in which the
Government wishes the Bank’s support to make key reforms.

II.

Relevance of the CPS

7.
The CPS strategic objectives of improving economic competitiveness, minimizing social and
environmental risks, and improving public sector governance remain relevant to Moldova in light
of the post-crisis recovery agenda and Government-led reform priorities. Continued attention to
addressing economic and social vulnerabilities and building a robust foundation for post-crisis
competitiveness and sustainable growth remain vital to Moldova’s prospects.
8.
Moldova’s politics have been volatile in recent years, but voters have given the Alliance for
European Integration a mandate for change. After two rounds of heavily contested elections, the
Communist Party lost its majority in Parliament and the four centrist parties in opposition to the
Communists formed a majority coalition, the Alliance for European Integration (AEI), forming a
government in September 2009. However, the AEI had insufficient parliamentary votes to elect a
President (requiring a 60 percent majority under the Constitution) and after two failed attempts, another
early parliamentary election took place in November 2010. The AEI gained an increased majority but
was still short of the number of seats to elect a President. Despite this uncertainty the population has
voiced its aspiration for change and the Government has committed to an ambitions reform agenda. Its
implementation will be challenging given weak political institutions and a relatively underdeveloped
capacity for collective action.
9.
Moldova now benefits from considerable external support, especially from Europe, and is at
the forefront of the Eastern Neighborhood Partnership supporting European integration. The
Government’s pro-European orientation has accelerated progress on visa liberalization and free trade with
the European Union. Moldova receives the highest EU aid per capita in the Union’s neighborhood and
has been praised by Brussels for moving fast on important reforms required to strengthen bilateral
economic and political integration. Key areas of programmatic alignment between the Bank and the EU’s
National Indicative Program 2011-2013 include trade (in particular quality assurance infrastructure and
standards), public administration reform, social protection, health sector reform and energy. EU member
States are also providing significant bilateral support to Moldova. The United States has expressed at the
highest levels of government its support for Moldova’s European integration aspirations and recently
agreed to a significant program of support to Moldova.

2

10.
However the coalition remains fragile and there are deep social and political rifts running
through Moldova’s population. The ability of the Government to address effectively the differing
views on the future direction of the country, while maintaining its EU integration agenda and reforms,
will be key to stability and cohesion.
III.

Country Context

11.
Moldova was hit hard by the economic crisis. Almost 30 percent of GDP is accounted for by
remittances, which fell by more than a third during 2009. GDP growth dropped dramatically from 7.2
percent in 2008 to -6.5 percent in 2009, with FDI decreasing by 88 percent during the same period.
Economic sectors, including mining, agriculture and construction, recorded declines in output, ranging
from 12 percent to 60 percent in 2009 and job losses pushed annual unemployment rates to 9 percent from
4 percent at the end of 2008. Almost half of all Moldovans depend on agriculture, and the country also
depends on exports to and fuel imports from Russia. Moldova has a large but inefficient public sector
(taxing 32 percent and spending 45 percent of GDP). It has an improving but still poor business
environment and its infrastructure is dilapidated.
12.
The banking sector was strained and fiscal imbalances grew. The quality of the banks’ loan
portfolio deteriorated rapidly in 2009, with non-performing loans (NPLs) reaching 16.3 percent of total
loans (up from 4.6 percent in 2008). The real cost of borrowing increased, making access to loans
expensive for firms, thereby compressing demand and prolonging the “credit crunch”. The crisis
contributed to a fall in tax revenues by 8 percent and pre-election spending hikes in early 2009 increased
spending by 5 percent (public wages by 22 percent), opening an unsustainable fiscal deficit, reaching 6.4
percent of GDP in 2009. Following the June 2009 elections, the Government took actions to reduce the
deficit, and with additional fiscal measures under an IMF program and a faster than expected recovery,
the deficit for 2010 is expected to be below 3 percent of GDP. External imbalances have also adjusted
somewhat with exchange rate depreciation, but are expected to widen again as remittances have picked up
during 2010.
13.
The poverty impact of the crisis was felt most acutely in rural areas and the social
assistance program does not reach all those in need. Rural food consumption declined by 17 percent
over a six-month period in late 2008 – early 2009, compared to only 6 percent in urban areas; income
from self-employment in agriculture declined by 25 percent. The decrease in remittance-driven revenues,
and reduced farm revenues as a result of lower food prices drove rural poverty growth, with rural poverty
rates rising to 36.3 percent in 2009, up from 34.6 percent in 2008. Urban poverty rates continued to fall,
masking growing rural urban disparity in stable national poverty rates. A targeted social assistance
program was introduced at the end of 2008 but has struggled so far due to low awareness of available
benefits and a low coverage rate. These issues will be addressed in the remaining CPS period.
14.
Large-scale migration has accompanied both social and economic developments in the
country. Remittances have had a palpable impact raising consumption levels and enhancing education
opportunities in recipient households, but have created inequalities between households with members
working abroad and those without. Negative impacts of migration have been felt through children and
youth “left behind” or in the care of elderly relatives, and in limited investments and civic participation at
local level. The incentives for migrants to invest more actively in their communities or to rejoin them are
still under-researched. Safety issues and the risk of human trafficking exist alongside migration, with
women and children especially vulnerable. Migration is increasingly permanent as a growing number of
Moldovans are acquiring or are eligible for dual citizenship with Romania, Russia or Bulgaria. An
estimated 800,000-1.5 million people are in the application process for Romanian citizenship.
15.
Climate change and natural disasters have had a pronounced social and economic impact.
Severe weather events have become an almost annual occurrence in Moldova, with drought in 2007,

3

floods in 2008 and 2010, pointing to the need for higher resilience both at the national level (technology
and capacity-building), and at the local level supporting the coping strategies of farmers and rural
communities.
16.
Moldova’s economy is beginning to recover but needs a broader base, with a second engine
to the remittance-driven growth model. Macroeconomic trends started to improve by the end of 2009
and a strong recovery was registered in 2010. Real GDP increased by 6.5 percent between JanuarySeptember 2010 compared to the same period in 2009. The value added in agriculture grew by 6.6
percent. Exports increased by 7.9 percent and imports by 12.2 percent. However this growth has seen no
corresponding increase in employment and without significant reform there is a danger that growth will
not create jobs. It is expected that economic recovery will continue, but this is essentially dependent upon
political stability in Moldova, as well as economic stability throughout the rest of Europe. With a big
share of the workforce already abroad, fast economic growth is unlikely to come only from an increase in
remittances.
17.
The key is to promote private investment and job creation and build on comparative
advantages in boosting exports. There is a window of opportunity for Moldova to expand exports. The
introduction of autonomous trade preferences by the EU and normalization of trade relations with Russia
(which were disrupted again in 2010 with the temporary resumption of a wine ban), create the opportunity
for Moldova to increase exports in traditional markets and diversify into new markets. Labor costs in
Moldova are already low relative to neighbors, so with the right macro and micro policy framework in
place for competitiveness, and with improvements in infrastructure, Moldova could attract new private
investment in export sectors and see rapid improvements in productivity growth.
18.
Moldova needs to deepen regulatory reforms and strengthen the rule of law to encourage
private investment. Progress has been made on business environment reform, including overhaul of the
business registration system, streamlining legislation governing the regulatory regime, and efficiencies in
filing taxes. The Government has taken steps to de-monopolize exports and imports and to simplify
licensing procedures. Further actions are required to facilitate business entry and exit, and to improve
business regulation and legislation on competition and intellectual property rights. There needs to be
fairer enforcement of legislation through the judicial system. Improvements in the rule of law are a key
focus of the European integration agenda under which Moldova will receive significant support from the
EC and other bilateral partners to reform its judicial system and other law enforcement bodies. These
efforts are highly complementary to the Bank’s work to help Moldova improve the investment climate.
19.
Moldova’s agricultural policies need to be revised to capitalize on export opportunities,
which remain far below potential. At 56 percent, Moldova has the world’s highest ratio of arable land
in total land area, which, coupled with high-quality soils, favorable climate and low labor costs, gives the
country a comparative advantage in farming and agro-food products. However the real value of
agriculture declined between 2005 and 2009, driven by a rapid deterioration of agricultural terms of trade
and stagnant yields. Greater production costs for high-value crops, insufficient access to finance by
Moldovan farmers and poor marketing of these products has lead to the perverse result of declining land
area under highly profitable crops and rising area under low-profit crops. Enhancing the competitiveness
of high-value products is complex and requires efforts to facilitate farmers’ access to modern inputs,
improve food safety infrastructure and adopt EU quality standards, promote modern post-harvest
infrastructure facilities, discourage buyer monopsonies and encourage producer cooperation, improve
efficiency of cross-border trading, as well as upgrade agricultural research and education programs to the
evolving needs of the private sector.
20.
Recent reform in the ICT sector is promising and this may turn into an additional niche
industry with important potential links with improved governance in the public sector. Competition
in international telecommunications cable connectivity was improved recently with Bank support under a

4

Development Policy Operation that de-monopolized access to cross-border fiber-optic cable links. The
language skills of most Moldovans mean there is scope for outsourcing back office functions to Moldova,
which some European firms have already begun, but high external call rates and low broadband access
under the state-owned telecoms monopoly have prevented growth in these services. There is scope for
improvement: Moldova ranks 80th of 129 countries worldwide in international e-readiness rankings. The
Government’s commitment to implementation of an e-governance strategy will improve public service
provision through increased utilization of information and communication technologies. The Government
has made use of the South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund to support leadership development for
government officials on ICT for improved governance and growth, exchanging experience with India on
improving e-governance.
21.
Moldova’s public services need to be reformed to become more efficient and deliver greater
quality. The Government is coming to terms with an unsustainably large and inefficient public sector: (i)
the education system is, per capita, amongst the world’s most expensive at 9.2 percent of GDP, with
empty classrooms and poorly paid teachers fearing retirement on low pensions; (ii) the social assistance
system is fragmented, with most benefits not targeted to poor households; (iii) the pay-as-you-go pension
scheme is fiscally unsustainable, yielding very low replacement ratios; (iv) health indicators remain well
below EU averages but health spending, like education spending, is high at 6.4 percent of GDP. Surveys
show that out of pocket expenditures in both the health and education sectors are high, suggesting
structural governance problems which limit access to better quality services by the poor.
22.
More needs to be done to facilitate construction and trade and improve the deteriorated
infrastructure. Laws on simplifying construction permits and creating a one-stop shop for business
registration are still awaiting parliamentary approval. The Government needs to press ahead with other
outstanding reforms to promote trade and competition. Steps must be taken to remove technical barriers
and simplify customs procedures, which keep trade below potential. Better protection of competition, a
more sophisticated financial system, and better access to infrastructure (especially transport logistics) are
all required to support new exports. The road network needs major repairs and a dilapidated heating
sector renders the economy highly energy inefficient. Just 10 percent of national roads and about 5
percent of local roads are in good condition. Moldova uses twice the energy per unit of GDP (PPP rate)
as Romania – three times more than the EU average. Reducing the costs of transport and energy by
improving infrastructure will be key to maintaining competitiveness.
23.
The Government, recognizing these development challenges, has shown commitment to
reforms in the medium term as reflected in its new program. The Government has started to
implement comprehensive reforms entailing a shift in economic management and international
development relations. In October 2009, the Government launched the Economic Stabilization and
Recovery Program for 2009-2011. In January 2010, the IMF approved a 3-year Extended Credit Facility
and Extended Fund Facility Program based on the ESRP. Under the ESRP, the Government began
implementing a comprehensive and detailed action plan of legal and administrative reforms to “deregulate, liberalize and de-monopolize” the economy. In January 2011, the new Cabinet set 7 priorities in
its program entitled “European Integration: Freedom, Democracy, Welfare”, namely: (i) European
integration; (ii) reintegration of the country; (iii) efficient and balanced foreign policy; (iv) rule of law; (v)
fighting poverty, provision of high quality public services; (vi) sustainable economic growth; and (vii)
decentralization of power.
IV.

Results and progress towards achieving CPS objectives and outcomes

24.
The Bank’s current portfolio includes 11 investment projects, all of which are proceeding in
a satisfactory manner. Total commitments amount to USD 227.3 million, and the disbursement ratio
constantly exceeds 20 percent annually. Some projects have faced difficulties during implementation
which have been addressed through appropriate restructuring, and are now proceeding satisfactorily. The

5

IDA-15 allocation of USD 161 million, including the additional USD 20 million received in FY11, and
USD 11.2 million allocated from the Crisis Response Window, have been fully committed for existing
projects. IFC’s current portfolio of USD 79 million is performing well.
25.
The strong emphasis on partnerships with other donors has proven effective in leveraging
financing and reforms. The Rural Investment Support Project and the Moldova Social Investment Fund
attracted the support of other donors (DFID, EC, GEF, KFW, Netherlands, SIDA Switzerland, UNICEF
and USAID), with additional financing of USD 24 million and USD 36.4 million respectively.
Development partners (DFID, the Netherlands, SIDA) have looked to the World Bank to administer
multi-donor Trust Funds for Central Public Administration Reform and support to the Supreme Audit
Institution. These partners have also provided USD 5.5 million as co-financing to the on-going Public
Financial Management Project (USD 8.5 million IDA).
26.
Strong partnerships have also allowed the Bank to be more selective in its activities.
Following World Bank assistance to the Government to develop the Land Transport Infrastructure
Strategy, including a prioritized investment plan, and to put in place safeguard systems for road sector
investments, the roads sector has attracted financing from the EBRD, EIB, EC, Romania and MCC
totaling about USD 550 million and further large funding commitments from the Government of China.
Due to a case of mis-procurement USD 11 million was cancelled from the Road Sector Program Support
Project. The Bank has gradually exited the roads sector given the availability of other donors to provide
more substantive financing to this area. Dialogue on transport policy will be maintained through the
competitiveness DPO.
27.
The Bank has provided significant support to enhance donor coordination and improve aid
effectiveness. In consultation with other partners, in particular SIDA and UNDP, the Bank supported the
development of a new set of Partnership Principles for the coordination and harmonization of external
assistance to Moldova. The Partnership Principles were signed in March 2010 by the Government and 22
of Moldova’s development partners. This was a significant increase from the 6 partners who had signed
an earlier Partnership Framework in 2006, and was partly the result of the Bank’s efforts to ensure a
consultative and participatory approach. The Bank also supported the development of an implementation
plan for the Partnership Principles to ensure that positive steps are taken to enhance aid effectiveness.
28.
The Bank used its leading analytical expertise and investment in AAA to engage early with
the Government in outlining the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Program. Together with the
EC, UN, DFID, SIDA and IMF, the Bank prepared Policy Notes on key economic and social challenges
to address the impact of the crisis. The Notes were instrumental in the preparation of the ESRP for 20092011 and, for the first time in Moldova’s history, the entire Cabinet of Ministers convened for a wholeday discussion of the recommendations. The ESRP provided the basis for the Consultative Group
meeting on March 24, 2010, jointly hosted by the Bank and the EU, where development partners pledged
USD 2.6 billion (see Table 1) to support key reforms during 2010-13.
29.
The first two years of the CPS were marked by flexibility to react to the combined
challenges of significant political change and the global economic crisis. The Bank used additional
financing to deliver support through existing successful projects, in particular to assist vulnerable
populations to deal with the crisis. Noteworthy examples include the Rural Investment and Services
Project (RISP) providing help to farmers by facilitating access to credit, which otherwise was unavailable
during the crisis; Moldova Social Investment Fund (MSIF) helping rural communities with a focus on job
creation; and the Competitiveness Enhancement Project (CEP) helping exporters at a time when world
markets were down and access to credit was blocked. This use of additional financing also had the effect
of better focusing the investment lending portfolio, which had been fragmented at the start of the CPS.

6

Table 1. Pledges made at the Consultative Group: Moldova Partnership Forum (USD millions)

Total Pledge
(2010-13)
percent of
Total

EU
Members
251.6

EC

US

EBRD

EIB

UN

IMF

Other

Total

129.5

World
Bank
302.3

749.8

177.7

129.5

129.5

578.8

58.0

2605.5

10.0

29.9

7.0

5.1

5.1

5.1

12.1

23.1

2.3

100.0

30.
A one-off DPO in support of the Government’s ESRP proved effective. The global economic
crisis demanded that the Bank provide more significant financing for the ESRP than envisaged in the
initial PRSC series, which was cancelled. A USD 25 million Economic Recovery DPO (including USD
11.2 million from the IDA Crisis Response Window) provided much-needed budget support and focused
the reform agenda on laying the foundations for post-crisis recovery. Moldova’s strong performance in
2010 shows the strategy worked.
31.
The portfolio continues to deliver strong development results across all three pillars.
Through the MSIF project, 700 community based organizations have participated in 225 MSIF subprojects benefitting almost 932,000 people. Such benefits include an increase by 5 percent in student
attendance during winter as a result of installation of central heating. Indirect benefits accrue through the
26,000 temporary jobs created, providing around 2 million days of work. The Education for All/FastTrack Initiative (EFA/FTI) project has supported renovation of 65 kindergartens and provision of
teaching materials to 600, and assisted the Government to implement policies for improving kindergarten
education standards. The Competitiveness Enhancement Project has assisted 150 companies to date (with
another 100 applications) to improve quality standards, leading to increases in product quality and
improved sales. The project also supports reform of the regulatory sector and has contributed to a
reduction by 35 percent in management time spent on compliance. The Rural Investment and Services
Project has assisted in the creation of 1,700 new businesses in high value agriculture, livestock and small
industries, creating 7,000 new jobs. The Results Matrix (Annex 1) gives more details of how the Bank’s
programs, including MSIF, EFA/FTI, Quality Education in Rural Areas, and Health Services and Social
Assistance, have supported greater social inclusion and have reached the most vulnerable.
32.
Reforms have established the basis for improved management of public funds and a more
effective public service but there has been little progress in consolidating the public sector. In 2009
the Government revived Central Public Administration Reform. The basis has been laid for improved
public financial management but the complete implementation of the Financial Management Information
System is necessary to see through reforms fully. Fiscal discipline has improved. Although the 2009
budget exceeded its estimated deficit of 1 percent due to the financial crisis and pre-election spending,
significant austerity measures by the Government together with external financing prevented a worse
situation than the eventual deficit of 6.4 percent of GDP in 2009. 2010 budget performance was better
than agreed under the IMF program. The foundations for a merit-based, professional civil service are
being laid through legal reform, strengthened HR management capacity and a functional civil service
training system. Legislation on civil service remuneration is being drafted and is expected to increase
civil service salaries by 25 percent, making it a more attractive career choice, but there has been little
corresponding streamlining of the civil service to allow higher salaries without an increased wage bill.
Strategic planning and policy coordination capacity has increased, but requires further support to embed it
across Government. The Government has asked for additional support through the CPAR MDTF to
continue this reform over the next two years.
33.
The IDA 16 special theme of gender will continue to be integrated into the program. The
latest CPIA assessment notes the positive legislative environment for gender equality in Moldova, but

7

gender inequality persists through lower pay and lower status jobs for women and in the underrepresentation of women in decision making positions in the business, public service and political
spheres. Social attitudes contribute to high rates of domestic violence. In the education and health
sectors boys and men are disadvantaged through higher drop-out rates in the higher grades of school and
higher rates of early death. Women and girls are vulnerable to trafficking. The Government has
developed a National Strategy for Gender Equality for the years 2010-2015, and is closely supported in its
implementation by UN Women. The Bank worked with SIDA to introduce gender perspectives in
budgeting in the PER in 2009. The program going forward offers opportunities to enhance gender
equality, for example, through education sector reform, and the regional consultations on the next WDR
on Gender may also identify additional opportunities.
34.
We will continue to address the IDA 16 theme of climate change. During this CPS period a
number of interventions have helped address climate change vulnerabilities by reducing environmental
degradation, specifically soil conservation, community forestry development, pollutant management,
emissions reduction, and agricultural pollution-related activities. These activities could be continued and
strengthened under the Agricultural Competitiveness Project. With the ongoing Energy 2 Project and
follow-up Energy Efficiency TA, the Bank will help Moldova to increase its energy efficiency. Water
resources management and adaptation to increasing water shortages and an increasing risk of flooding is
likely to be a key issue in the long run to mitigate climate risks. The Disaster and Climate Risk
Management Project will help address this through improved hydro-meteorological services and
preparedness. AAA on adaptation and mitigation practices will help set the ground for further activities
in this area.
35.
IFC remains an active partner in the private sector. The IFC strategy in Moldova
complements IDA’s efforts in private sector development by focusing in particular on the financial sector,
SMEs, agribusiness, healthcare and infrastructure modernization. Since 1995, IFC has invested a total of
USD 174 million of its own funds in 19 projects and arranged USD 25 million in syndications to support
power, telecommunications, agribusiness, SMEs, and the financial sector. IFC has ramped up its
activities in the last three years with a total of USD 79 million in investment in FY08-FY10, with the
largest exposure in financial markets followed by infrastructure. IFC will focus on policy reforms and
implementation in select areas to support development of High Value Agriculture. In agribusiness
investment, the IFC Advisory Services project will focus on investment generation activities, assisting the
Government to develop and implement a targeted FDI attraction strategy in the agribusiness and highvalue agriculture subsectors, as well as establish a better framework for public-private dialogue on
agribusiness policy issues.
36.
MIGA currently has two active projects in Moldova. A USD 61.1 million guarantee issued to
Union Fenosa Internacional of Spain protects against political risks of transfer restriction, expropriation,
war and civil disturbance, and breach of contract for investments in the upgrading of three privatized
electricity distribution companies. A guarantee of USD 7.34 million was issued by MIGA to Raiffeisen
Bank SA in Romania, covering its shareholder loan to its subsidiary I.C.S. Raiffeisen Leasing S.R.L. in
Moldova providing coverage against the risks of transfer restriction and expropriation of funds. This
project constitutes the start-up phase of Raiffeisen Zentralbank Group’s leasing operations in Moldova,
undertaken by its Moldovan subsidiary.
37.
Trust Funds are integrated into the Bank strategy and support key institutional reforms
and project implementation. The Bank administers a substantial USD 80.9 million TF portfolio, which
provides co-financing to IDA operations, finances GEF and carbon operations, and provides other forms
of support, such as an USD 8.8 million Education for All/Fast Track Initiative grant for pre-primary
education, an USD 16.7 million Regional Development and Social Protection TF with the EC, and a USD
6.15 million Public Administration Reform MDTF. Annex 2 gives details of active TFs in Moldova and
shows that many will close in FY12, leading to consolidation.

8

38.
Going forward, it will be crucial to maintain a solid track record of project implementation.
Overall, the Bank’s portfolio performance in Moldova has been smooth, with some minor exceptions.
During the CPS implementation period, the Bank has been proactive in appropriate restructuring or partial
cancellation when necessary. The Country Portfolio Performance Review in 2011 focused on the
portfolio under implementation. It identified best practices and looked at cross-cutting themes, including
issues such as readiness for implementation, capacity building for results monitoring, and excessive
complexity of project design. These reviews will be a regular instrument to assess jointly with the
Government implementation performance and address any project-specific issues.
V.

Post-crisis agenda and modifications to the CPS

39.
Although the pillars defined in the CPS remain valid, there have been important changes
which require an adaptation to the Bank’s program in the CPS PR. These changes are: (i) the global
economic and financial crisis; (ii) a significant change in the political landscape and the opportunity
created by the reform mandate given to the Government by the Moldovan people; and (iii) the country’s
European integration agenda.
40.
The Government has shown strong commitment to post-crisis structural reforms and the
Bank will follow the Government’s lead in defining its activities. For the remaining period, a
competitiveness DPO series will be launched based on an in-depth diagnostic provided in the CEM and
supporting the Government’s competitiveness and private sector job creation agenda. The focus will be
on the business climate, as well as on sector policies in agriculture, IT and other areas that would lift
current constraints to growth. This will be complemented by an expansion by IFC of advisory services in
the agribusiness sector and for small and medium enterprises. The competitiveness agenda will also be
supported by one or two new additional IDA lending operations per annum in areas such as agricultural
competitiveness or energy efficiency. The timing of these operations will depend on progress made in
addressing key policy and institutional constraints in both sectors.
41.
The Government has strongly embraced the need for reform to improve the efficiency and
quality of public services. IDA will support this in three areas: social assistance, health care and
education. The Strengthening Social Safety Net results-based operation will seek to improve the
efficiency and equity of social assistance through a fiscally sustainable expansion and strengthening of the
targeted Ajutor Social Program. Additional financing will be provided to the Health Services and Social
Assistance Project to improve the efficiency and viability of the primary health sector.
42.
An ambitious education reform agenda based on school optimization has recently become
the focus of the Government’s attention. Inefficiency in the sector – and with it declining quality – has
focused the reform discussions on rationalization and school network optimization and the savings they
can bring. The Government's reform plan is intended to increase the efficiency of the general education
sector, while simultaneously improving the quality and relevance of education to meet the demands of the
modern economy. An IDA results-based education project will provide much-needed support to these
important reform efforts. The Bank’s support will also address the potential risks of such reforms,
including of increased drop outs and marginalization of minority groups or the poorest, through a
monitoring and evaluation scheme that tracks students to gauge the impact of reforms. Moreover, the
Bank’s System Assessment and Benchmarking for Education Results (SABER) toolkits in various aspects
of education, including Skills Measurement, will be used as part of the work on the competitiveness
agenda, allowing the Government to ensure that education can deliver skills for growth sectors of the
economy. It is imperative that improved quality of education be accompanied by a sustainable growth
model that creates jobs and economic opportunities for young people.
43.
Moldova’s European aspirations will place increasing demands on the country’s
institutions. The authorities have intensified efforts to improve core country systems, including public

9

financial management (PFM) and public administration. Strengthening of PFM reform is an important
component to increase the efficiency, transparency and strategic alignment of the budget in the medium to
long term – elements that could be supported through a potential PFM 2 operation and the ongoing CPAR
MDTF. Such reforms will require strong leadership and coordination from central Government, as well
as significant inputs and commitment to change from Government staff in all ministries.
44.
The Bank needs to reorient its approach towards governance and corruption given the
political changes and realities in Moldova. Governance as a cross-cutting theme will be strengthened
to ensure enhanced accountability and transparency in the social sectors, for example through support to
more equitable and less fraud prone administration of social assistance payments and support to the
development of health and education information systems to improve transparency. With the
Government’s goal of European Union integration, areas of core GAC importance such as business
regulation, public financial management and central public administration reform will remain essential.
Demand for good governance and social accountability will continue to be supported, for example
through the Civil Society Fund, which issues grants to NGOs to develop innovative communication and
information applications which increase transparency and social accountability. The World Bank, in
partnership with SIDA and UNDP, commissioned the Moldova Citizen Report Card, which provides a
comprehensive overview of public perceptions of the accessibility and quality of the Moldovan public
sector. It is an important entry point for the Governance e-Transformation Project to improve the quality
of selected public services using ICT. E-transformation will help improve governance and tackle
corruption through IT solutions.
45.
The Bank’s program going forward will respond to the opportunities created by the
changed environment and continue consolidating the Bank’s support with an extension of the CPS
to FY13. The CPS was developed for a period of four years from FY09-12 and commenced with a
fragmented lending program. This legacy, the prevailing economic context, and an uncertain political
environment led us to rely in the first two years of the Strategy on additional financing which had the
added benefit of providing more focus to the program. The recovery in the economy and a more
favorable political environment for reform now allow us to move towards a more strategic program of
support in the last years of the CPS, with a focus in the lending program on a small number of operations
supporting key reforms being implemented by the Government. During FY13 a number of projects will
exit, and extending the CPS until the end of FY13 will enhance the prospects for a focused and strategic
CPS beginning in FY14.
46.
The Bank faces constraints and therefore must be selective in its support to the
Government’s reform agenda. Selectivity will be driven by the principles of comparative advantage in
areas in which the Government is ready for and committed to necessary policy reforms, as well as a solid
implementation track record, and availability of alternative sources of financing and analytical support,
leveraged through strategic partnerships with other development actors. The Bank’s lending program will
include one or two new investment lending operations per year, in addition to a DPO and continued
investment in AAA. The choice and timing of investment lending operations will be driven by the
Government’s willingness to take complementary reform measures to enhance the economic impact of
supported projects. The Government has indicated that reform areas could include education, public
sector reform, agricultural competitiveness and energy efficiency. The Bank will use a number of tools to
support dialogue on reforms, including utilizing portfolio reviews for policy discussions, developing
policy notes on the reform agenda in sectors in which investment lending is proposed, and raising
awareness of policy constraints or options which both policy and investment lending can help to address.
Table 2 below provides a summary of the planned IDA lending and IFC investment program for the
remaining CPS period covering FY11-13.

10

Table 2. CPS Progress Report Indicative Program for the period FY11-FY13 (USD million)*
Proposed Program

Lending/
Investment

AAA and TA Program

FY 11 Actual
IDA
Disaster and Climate Risk Management
Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social
Safety Net
Governance e-Transformation

$10
$37
$20

TOTAL IDA lending FY11

$67

IFC
Moldova Agroindbank
Chisinau Municipality
EximBank

$6
$10
$26

TOTAL IFC Investment FY11

$42

Country Economic Memorandum: Growth Study
Accounting &Auditing ROSC follow-up
Agricultural Policy Revision and Budget TA
Public Expenditure Review
Financial Sector Monitoring TA
Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA
Applications for good governance - Civil Society Fund Demand for
Good Governance
Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of Agricultural Systems in
Moldova TA

Credit Bureau Technical Assistance
Risk Management Technical Assistance
Health Public Private Partnership Technical Assistance
MoldTelecom Technical Assistance

FY12
IDA
Competitiveness DPO 1
Health Services and Social Assistance AF
Agricultural Competitiveness

$20
$10
$20

TOTAL IDA lending FY12

$50

IFC
Investment in Real Sector and Financial
Markets

$30

TOTAL IFC Investment FY12

$30

Competitiveness and structural reform follow-up work
Programmatic fiscal work (including BOOST studies)
Financial Sector Monitoring TA
Food Security TA
Agricultural Competitiveness TA
Energy Efficiency TA
Education Rationalization TA

Credit Bureau TA
Risk Management TA
Investment Climate Reform Technical Assistance
Health Public Private Partnership Technical Assistance

FY13
Competitiveness DPO 2
Education Program for Results
Public Financial Management 2

$20
$30
$20

TOTAL IDA lending FY13

$70

IFC
Investment in Real Sector and Financial
Markets

$30

TOTAL IFC Investment FY13

$30

Competitiveness and structural reform follow-up work
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Corporate Financial Reporting Enhancement TA
Public Financial Management TA
Energy Efficiency TA (continuation)
Social Inclusion and Resilience TA

Investment Climate Reform Project TA
Credit Bureau TA
Health Public Private Partnership Technical Assistance

* NOTES: IDA16 allocations are indicative. Actual IDA lending will depend on (i) total IDA resources available (ii) Moldova’s performance
rating (iii) performance and assistance terms of other IDA borrowers (iv) the terms of IDA’s assistance to Moldova (grants or credits) (v) the
number of IDA eligible countries. In FY14, the last year of IDA16, the lending program could include a third Competitiveness DPO and an
energy efficiency project.

47.
IFC will play an important role in support of the competitiveness agenda and continue to
provide trade finance, credit lines for on-lending to medium and small enterprises and agriculture,
as well as advisory services in corporate governance and risk management. IFC has a portfolio in
four banks and is planning to support additional banks with advisory services and access to trade finance.
Progress was also registered with the development of a Credit Bureau. In infrastructure, IFC is financing
the rehabilitation and expansion of the water and wastewater networks and street rehabilitation in the City

11

of Chisinau. This is the World Bank Group’s first sub-sovereign loan in Moldova. IFC is supporting the
Government to implement the first PPP in the health sector, working with the Ministry of Health to open
an imaging center at the National Hospital and with the Ministry of Economy to assess a sustainability
strategy for MoldTelecom.
48.
The Bank will continue to leverage strategic partnerships with others to support the reform
agenda. Given the limited resources of the Bank, it will be important to work with other development
partners who may have additional investment resources, and the Bank will maintain its role as a convener
in the donor community. The Bank will seek increased partnerships with the EU and EU Member States
and other development partners to ensure coherence in understanding of and support for critical reforms
with a view to achieving maximum impact. A key focus will be where other partners’ resources
complement financially the Bank’s AAA program. Annex 3 gives details of the activities of other donors
in key sectors.
49.
The Bank will seek to use Trust Fund resources more strategically to support core
objectives. The Bank is exploring opportunities for increased partnerships with the EU, including
through the existing Regional Development and Social Protection TF, and other ongoing/planned TFs for
Improving Forest Law Enforcement and Governance, Food Safety, a coordinated program in the health
sector, investment regulation activities, and Public Expenditure Financial Accountability assessment.
Other potential areas for TF support include public sector reform supported by the Russian PFM Trust
Fund, and technical assistance to improve Corporate Financial Reporting could also be funded through a
Trust Fund, although donor support still needs to be identified. These types of partnerships will build on
the Bank’s efforts towards a more programmatic approach to mobilizing TF resources and consolidating
them in order to reduce portfolio fragmentation and administration costs. Trust Fund resources will, to
the extent possible, complement limited resources to finance Bank staff.
50.
The Bank’s AAA will continue to have a prominent role in forming a solid basis for the
Bank’s support in Moldova. For example, the recommendations of the recent Country Economic
Memorandum and follow-up work would set the background for deeper and more comprehensive fiscal
and competitiveness reforms. The Bank will continue to provide economic and social analysis as a basis
to discuss policy choices and needed structural reforms with the authorities. Possible AAA work includes
the continuation of the programmatic fiscal work, follow-up work on competitiveness and structural
reforms, public financial management technical assistance, and analysis of social inclusion and resilience,
taking a broad view of social inclusion and enhancing the focus on gender. Sector-specific analytical
work to complement the proposed lending program could take place in energy, education rationalization
TA, as well as agriculture. A new TA project related to food security is under implementation. AAA in
the financial sector could include monitoring to support crisis resilience and market development
measures, and a Financial Sector Assessment Program update with a focus on development issues.
51.
IFC will expand Advisory Services in Investment Climate with a new project in FY12. The
project will aim to increase the competitiveness of the Agribusiness sector through regulatory reform and
more targeted investment promotion, as well as address key constraints for SMEs and the private sector in
(i) construction permits; (ii) insolvency; and (iii) business inspections.
VI.

Risks

52.
The risks identified in the CPS remain. Fiduciary risks continue to be mitigated through the
Bank’s emphasis on improved public financial management, as do the risks associated with limited
institutional capacity through support to planning and allocation of budgetary resources. A continued
global recession, particularly in the EU, may limit the benefits to be gained from Moldova’s greater
integration into the global economy through reduced exports and remittances, and perhaps reducing the
support available from the EU for the Government’s integration agenda. Conversely, there is a risk that a

12

rapid return of remittance flows may weaken the reform resolve, delaying key reform measures, allowing
IDA deliverables to slip or need to be redesigned to match a less ambitious agenda. Recent restrictions on
exports highlight this risk. These risks suggest the continued need for a flexible approach from the Bank
and other donors to assist Moldova to weather these external shocks, as well as the Bank working closely
with others, in particular the EU and IMF, for joint leverage. Climate change and natural disasters
continue to pose a risk to the country, but the Bank’s support for disaster risk mitigation and agricultural
competitiveness should help to address these.
53.
Risks arising from the political economy may continue for some time. The stalemate over
election of a President could still lead to early elections, potentially limiting Government commitment to
undertake unpopular reforms. Perhaps more significant are the differing views amongst coalition
members over the pace and depth of reforms. These differences reflect social and political rifts
throughout the wider population including concerns about the impact of a transition to a market economy
on different segments of the population. Although the Alliance partners are bound by their desire for
European integration, it remains to be seen whether the Alliance can maintain support for its reform
agenda. Should possible future elections bring a less reform-committed Government, the Bank would
follow a more traditional investment program. If the Government secures a four year parliamentary
mandate, it will be important that there is political commitment to the reform agenda across all parties –
lack of such commitment may pose a risk to both the Bank’s DPO series, as well as the IMF program.
The Bank may help mitigate this to some extent by offering a platform for inter-ministerial discussions on
key areas of reform, which needs to be done consciously and continuously, not just as problems arise, and
will be a key challenge for the Country Team.

13

ANNEX 1: CPS FY09-13 REVISED RESULTS MATRIX AND PROGRESS TO DATE
CPS Pillar I. Improving economic competitiveness to support sustainable economic growth
Country Development Goals / Outcomes

Export of goods and services increased as percent of GDP from 30.5 percent in 2007.

FDI increased (net) from USD 130 per capita (2007).

Increased length of roads rehabilitated.

Decreased share of electric power losses as share of total energy consumption from 12.7 percent in 2007.

Improved competitiveness of rural farm sector as reflected in rising exports and unit values of agricultural products.
Issues and Obstacles

Moldova production and export structure are dominated by low-value products. The range of both markets and goods for export are poorly diversified. Lack of
conformity with international standards on product quality is a particular constraint for market access.

Moldova still has one of the highest regulatory compliance costs in the region.

Cost of financial intermediation is relatively high and access to long-term financing for investment purposes remains limited.

Adequate physical infrastructure is necessary to attract investments and support production.

The road network has experienced severe and prolonged neglect over the last 15 years due to lack of maintenance.

Road rehabilitation will require support from the international donor community and the use of foreign contractors for works execution, given the low capacity of the
domestic road construction industry

Due to outdated equipment and technology, energy consumption is intensive—totaling about 3 times the respective indicators reported in developed countries.

Heavy reliance of the economy on imported energy resources, coupled with significant price increases, restricts the production sector.

Unfinished reform agenda and accumulation of new debts (mainly in the district heating sector in Chisinau) threaten the financial viability of main parts of the energy
sector.

Lack of access to finance for productive cultivation of crops and investments in land improvements.

Lack of information and quality management has reduced productivity and export potential of farms.

Land privatization resulted in fragmentation of agricultural land ownership, with individuals’ small holdings often being spread over 3 or more distinct parcels located
kilometers apart.
Strategic Goal 1: Improved competitiveness of Moldova’s enterprise sector
CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

MSTQ system meeting the WTO
commitments.

Number of EU-compatible
standards adopted increases from
200 (2007) to 500.

514 EU compatible standards
adopted by Oct 2010; though
delays exist in adoption of
standards from the Romanian
Standardization Authority.

Number of firms obtaining
internationally recognized
certificates of quality increases

160 firms had received
international certificates of quality
by end of 2010.

14

Progress to date

CPS Instruments and Partners
Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Competitiveness Enhancement
Project, including Additional
Financing
Planned Lending:
Competitiveness DPO
Partnerships and TFs:

from 130 (2007) to 300.

The number of accredited testing
facilities increased from 36 in
2005 to 117 by Oct. 2010.

Decreased regulatory compliance
costs for enterprises from 16
percent in 2007 to less than 12
percent (as measured by Cost of
Doing Business survey).

Reduction in cost of getting
construction permits from 292
days (DB09) to less than 200
days.

RIA made mandatory for all new
legislation in January 2008, with a
standardized consultation
mechanism, including Government
and private sector representatives.
Some 1,300 government officials
and business representatives
trained in principles and
techniques of RIA.
Regulatory compliance costs
estimated at 9.9 percent in 2010
CODB report.
Yearly number of inspections from
State Agencies per company
decreased from over 10 in 2006 to
less than 8 as of end of 2010.

Increased share of enterprises
with access to formal sources of
investment finance from 17.71
percent (2005) to 25 percent
(BEEPS survey).

Establishment of a fully
functioning credit information
bureau.
Increased share of credit going to
private sector, from 27.9 percent
(2006).

Two private credit information
bureaus established, covering the
majority of the banking sector.

Moldova Dutch TA-TF Financial
Sector Reform
PHRD-Moldova:
Competitiveness Enhancement
Project
Credit Bureau TA (IFC)
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
FSAP Update (IMF)
Country Economic
Memorandum – Competitiveness
INF Sector Investment Planning
Capacity
Corporate Financial Reporting
Doing Business Report
GFRP Moldova Food Security
TA
PSD/FSD Dialogue
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Planned AAA:
Corporate Financial Reporting
Enhancement TA
Financial Sector Assessment
Program
Financial Sector Monitoring TA
(including Secured Transactions,
Modernization of Payment
Systems, Security Settlement
Systems)
TF for Investment Regulation
(EU)
Skills Measurement Survey
Remittance intermediation work
Programmatic fiscal work
Competitiveness and structural
reform follow-up work
IFC:
Loan and equity investment and
advisory service in financial

15

sector, to strengthen local banks,
direct financing in real sectors
and regional private equity fund,
and develop non-bank financial
institutions.
Strategic Goal 2: Improved management of the road network
CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Increased percentage of roads in
good or fair condition from 7
percent in 2006--transport costs
will be estimated based on the
percentage of National Roads in
good, fair, and bad condition.

Technical audits confirming that
road works comply with
contractual specifications.

Vehicle operation costs on the
roads improved under the Road
Sector Program have decreased
by at least 8 percent according to
ex-post economic evaluation.

Total funds allocated for
maintenance works on public
roads are at least 450m MDL in
FY09/10.

Increased Road Asset Value
from USD 8.4 billion in 2007.

Percent of funding used for road
maintenance awarded through
competitive bidding increased
from 0percent in 2008 to 20
percent in 2010 and 30 percent in
2011.

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones
Significant restructuring of this
investment after cancellation of
69 percent of credit.
Results remain the same since
they are based on collective
investments of several partners,
though Bank is no longer
providing financing.

Progress to date
The State Road Administration
has implemented successfully,
and to contract specifications, the
investments funded by EIB
under the Roads Sector Program
Support Project and by the
National Budget, with 120 km of
roads rehabilitated between
project start and the end of 2010.
5 additional contracts have been
awarded in early 2011.
Budget allocations for road
maintenance have increased
significantly and exceeded
targets in FY09/10, with an
amended Road Fund Law and
new fuel excise tax regime, but
there is still a gap between actual
allocations and those planned
under the LTIS, this gap will
need to be closed when macrosituation permits.
All contracts for periodic road
maintenance are awarded based
on competitive tenders. Routine
road maintenance works and
winter maintenance are not being
tendered until now.

16

CPS Instruments and Partners
Ongoing/Completed Lending:
IDA credit for Roads Sector
Program Support Project
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Transport Sector Strategy
(EBRD, EIB)
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Partnerships and TFs:
Additional loans and grants from
EBRD, EIB, EC, MCC and
China
EC Regional Development and
Social Protection Grant (Roads
Component)

Strategic Goal 3: Reduced energy vulnerability through improved energy efficiency and increased diversification of energy sources
CPS Outcomes
Ten percent reduction in energy
intensity measured by the total
primary energy use (toe) per
USD 1000 of GDP at PPP rate.

Ten percent increase in
production from renewable
energy sources (RES).

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Progress to date

Government adopts and starts
implementing an Energy
Efficiency Program (pending
approval by the Government) in
support of the 2020 Energy
Strategy of Moldova (adopted in
2007).

A new Energy Law was adopted
in December 2009 enabling
Moldova to meet requirements
and become a full member of the
Energy Community Treaty.
The Energy Efficiency Program
and Action Plan updated by
government, but delays in
documents’ formal approval by
the Government.
Moldova has ratified the ECT.

Government and ANRE develop
and adopt measures supporting
renewable energy production,
including feed-in tariffs for RES.

EC and SIDA to provide TA
support to Government and
ANRE to work on feed-in tariffs
for RES.

Moldelectrica commissions a
new power dispatch center and
introduces modern supervisory
control and remote monitoring of
all transmission substations.
At least one project signed and
started disbursement with energy
efficiency component.

The dispatch center to be
commissioned by September
2011.
85 percent of AF for the heating
component committed.
Tariffs for DH in Chisinau
approved by ANRE starting
January 2010. All tariffs at cost
recovery levels.
Cash collections for gas and
electricity on target.
Concerns remain regarding the
fiscal sustainability in the sector,
unless prompt reforms are made
in the district heating sector and
efforts to further improve the
regulatory environment continue.

Cost recovery of heat, gas and
electricity tariffs for all
categories of consumers
approaches 100 percent, while
cash collection ratios stay above
95 percent (for gas and
electricity) and 90 percent for
district heat.

The outage rates of
Moldelectrica transmission lines
and substations were reduced by
48 percent (the initial target was
35 percent).

17

CPS Instruments and Partners
Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Energy 2, including Additional
Financing
Planned Lending:
Energy Efficiency Project
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
District Heating Sector Reform
TA
Chisinau Energy Supply
Improvement TA
Energy Efficiency Program and
Action Plan
Public Utilities Subsidies Study
(DFID)
Energy Policy Note
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Partnerships and TFs:
CDCF – Moldova Biomass
Heating ERPA
CDCF – Energy Conservation
and Emissions Reduction
SIDA TF on Financing Energy
Sector Reform and Efficiency
Improvements
PPIAF: Chisinau Energy Supply
Improvement Project
Planned AAA:
Energy Efficiency TA
IFC:
Advisory service and investment
to promote PPPs, energy
efficiency credit lines to local
banks.

Non-technical losses in the
transmission network were
nonexistent in 2009, while the
non technical losses in the
distribution network were
reduced by 94.5 percent,
reaching 0.6 percent in 2009 (the
initial target was the reduction of
non technical losses in the
transmission and distribution
networks by 75 percent).
Targets for public heating
exceeded. 35 institutions and 37
residential buildings have heat
and domestic hot water
availability throughout the entire
year (including during the winter
heating season, which is more
than 120 days/year as initially
planned). 8,399 students and 1.5
million patients, staff and visitors
benefit from facilities heated 120
days or more during the winter
season. Additional Financing
allowed scaling up the heating
component, thus increasing the
impact.
Strategic Goal 4: Agricultural competitiveness
CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Number of agricultural
enterprises with internationally
recognized quality certificates
increased from 30 in 2007 to 80
at the end of 2011.

Law promoting enabling
environment for SCA (Savings
and Credit Associations)
development passed.
Increased entrepreneurial activity
in the Rural Investment Services
Project areas and increased
survival rates.

More efficient use of market info
and technical knowledge along
agricultural value chain leading
to (as measured in 6 pilot

Land re-parceling implemented
with participation of at least 30
percent of the population in 6
villages.

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Re-parceling activities
implemented in another 40
villages, in addition to the 6 pilot
villages.

18

Progress to date

CPS Instruments and Partners

SCA Regulator established. The
financial crisis impacted
negatively the portfolio quality
of SCAs; the SCA Regulator was
initially slow to respond but now
showing stronger supervisory
capacity and interventions with
problematic institutions.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Rural Investment Services
Project 2 Additional Financing
Competitiveness Enhancement
Project 2 Additional Financing
Disaster Risk Mitigation and
Adaptation Project

40 percent of village population
participated in land re-parceling
implemented in 6 villages; reparceling now being undertaken

Planned Lending:
Agricultural Competitiveness
Project
Competitiveness DPO

in 40 additional villages (20
percent participation). Impact
assessment of the six pilot
villages is under way, to be
completed by the end of April
2011.

villages compared with baseline
and control cases):

Higher output value and
lower variability;

Fewer loss making farms;

Higher total factor
productivity in surveyed
farms.

762 rural businesses have been
created (as of end-March 2011)
under RISP II, with a first-year
survival rate close to 100
percent.
Growth in lending to agricultural
and rural sectors has exceeded
targets. It has reached MDL 3.5
billion as of end-March 2011
(compared to a 2012 target of
MDL 2.85 billion and a baseline
of MDL 2.14 billion).

USD value of loans disbursed
with at least one bank with credit
lines to rural sector.

A total of 111 agricultural
enterprises (which exceeds the
target of 80) received
internationally recognized
quality certificates: 80 – I
SO9000, 21 – HACCP, and 10 –
GlobalGap.
Increased number of agroprocessors adopting mitigation
measures and increased area of
agricultural land with resource
conservation technologies and
increased production of
organically-certified products
through the Ag Pollution Control
Project:

59 farms installed adequate
manure storage facilities.
7 agro-processors installed
WWTPs. Efficient irrigation
technology introduced on
720ha of land exposed to
soil erosion on 27 farms.
Grassed waterways, buffer

19

Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Country Economic
Memorandum
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Agricultural Sector Policy
Revision and Budget TA
Reducing Vulnerability to
Climate Change of Agricultural
Systems in Moldova TA
Partnerships and TFs:
Agricultural Pollution Control
Project (GEF)
SIDA Support to RISP 2
GFRP Moldova Food Security
TA
Planned AAA:
Agricultural Competitiveness TA
Competitiveness and structural
reform follow-up work
Skills Measurement Survey
IFC:
Direct financing to companies in
agribusiness, credit lines to local
banks, which lend to
agribusiness sector and to the
rural areas. This will be
complemented by IFC expansion
of advisory services in the
agribusiness sector and for small
and medium enterprises.

strips, forest belts on 253ha
(9farms) (while the
percentage of achievement
cannot be measured since
no target was set at
appraisal (the M&E
framework at the time did
not require performance
targets), the number of
interventions is significant).
Strengthened farmers’
preparedness to climate risks
through information on practical
techniques for adaptation, i.e.
grants/demonstration about
adaptation to climate risks, on a
pilot basis:

At least 50 investment
grants are provided and
introduced at demonstration
plots.

Pillar II. Minimizing Social and Environmental Risks, Building Human Capital, and Promoting Social Inclusion
Country Development Goals / Outcomes

Decreased percentage of people below poverty line of USD 4.3/day PPP from 34.5 percent in 2006.

Increased access to quality preschool programs from 71.1 percent in 2008 to 75 percent in 2011 for children aged 3-6 and from 77.1 percent in 2008 to 85percent in 2011
for children aged 5-6.

Improved quality and equitable access to general education from 94.1 percent in 2004 to 95 percent in 2011 and to 98 percent in 2015.

Reduced maternal mortality rate.

Reduced HIV/AIDS incidence per 100,000.

Reduced TB-associated mortality per 100,000.

Improved coverage and quality of water and sanitation services—57 percent of population will have sustainable access to improved water source by 2010 and 68.5
percent will have access by 2015.
Issues and obstacles

Fragmentation of social assistance transfers has limited their ability to reach the poor.

Increased Government capacity is needed to implement the recently approved social support law.

Pension benefits in Moldova are not yet based reliably on actual contributions paid. The long-term financial sustainability of the pension system will require expanding
the limited capacity of the ministry for policy analysis and monitoring and evaluation on social protection issues.

There is a reduced capacity for preschool services, particularly in rural communities.

Modern learning and development standards have been developed and implemented; Early Childhood Curriculum reviewed; human resources need to be trained on

20




modern teaching methods; new teaching and learning materials need to be introduced.
School enrollment varies by income level.
Population-based funding is used to allocate budgets to schools but school directors have had no flexibility in the use of their budgets.
A declining number of school age children has led to smaller classes and smaller schools.
Health indicators remain below EU averages. Chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease cause double the share of avoidable mortality in the working age
population as in the EU-10.
Problems in the health sector include:
o informal payments for health services;
o lack of health insurance for the non-public sector working population;
o lack of adequately skilled doctors and nurses;
o need for consolidation of the healthcare infrastructure;
o poor capacity for surveillance and diagnosis to react to infectious diseases.
The quality and reliability of Moldova’s water supply and wastewater services are generally deficient. Few of the existing wastewater treatment facilities meet standards
and many are abandoned due to unaffordable operating and maintenance costs.
Water and sanitation service coverage should be expanded in a way that favors the poor, who typically are connected to public services last.
The absence of an obsolete pesticides management strategy has increased the possibilities for leakage of toxic materials to the environment.



Moldova has an unusually high amount of PCBs requiring disposal.









Strategic Goal 5: Broader inclusion and better social protection
CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Progress to date

CPS Instruments and Partners

Share of non-contributory social
transfers received by the bottom
20 percent of households in
terms of income increased from
40 percent in 2009 to 50 percent
in 2011.

Proportion of new pensioners
with pension eligibility
determined outside the Pension
Insurance Law increased from 98
percent (excluding military and
police) to 100 percent.

Improved equity and inclusion:
increased coverage and
maintained targeting accuracy of
the Ajutor Social Program:
 20 percent of population in
the poorest quintile receive
AS benefits.
 Targeting accuracy is
maintained such that at least
65 percent of Ajutor Social
transfers reach the poorest
population quintile.
 Spending on categorical
benefits reduced by 22
percent.

New Social Assistance system
piloted in 2008 and scaled up in
2009 and 2010; old system still
in place but being phased out by
freezing Nominative
Compensation benefits and
stopping new entrants while
cancelling them for all categories
of recipients except WWII
veterans, Afghanistan veterans
and Chernobyl victims in 2012.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Health Services and Social
Assistance, including Additional
Financing
Social Investment Fund 2
Strengthening the Effectiveness
of the Social Safety Net Project

Proportion of new pensions
calculation based on actual
contributions paid increased
from 60 percent to 100 percent.

More actuarially sustainable
retirement age – increasing by 6
months per calendar year (2008
baseline is age 62 for men and 57
for women).
Law on social care services
adopted and Strategy on disabled
persons approved.

Increased allocative efficiency categorical benefits
consolidation for fiscally

21

According to the MOU with
IMF, the GoM embarked upon
development of plan for
consolidation of all categorical
benefits which should be
delivered by end 2011.
The distribution of benefits

Planned Lending:
Health Services and Social
Assistance Additional Financing
Partnerships and TFs:
EC Moldova Regional
Development and Social
Protection Grant (Social
Component)
Grant for Second Additional
Financing for the Moldova
Social Investment Fund Project

sustainable expansion of Ajutor
Social Program:
 Enhanced administrative
efficiency, governance, and
transparency.
 Turnaround time for Ajutor
Social application processing,
including verification and
eligibility decision, is reduced
to 25 days.
 Increased number of Moldova
citizens is aware of Ajutor
Social (5 percent increase
from the baseline).
 Process of Social Assistance
Automated Information
System (SAAIS) introduction
is launched.
 Social Inspectorate is
established and functional.
New initial pensions calculation
fully based on actual
contributions paid (valorized
with wage growth), and the real
value of pensions preserved
(indexed with inflation rate).
More actuarially sustainable
retirement age – retirement age
equalized and increased for both
genders at 6 months increments
per calendar year.

across consumption deciles
focusing on social assistance
shows that only 20.9 percent of
the overall benefits reached the
poorest 10 percent of the
population in 2009, and about 40
percent of benefits reached the
poorest 20 percent of population.
During 2010, a total of 59,000
households benefited from
Ajutor Social with an average
allowance of 721 lei per month.
Concerns over IT system
capacity to support Social
Assistance program, and
retention of qualified IT staff to
manage it.
SAAIS development has been
launched and is being extended
with additional functionalities.
Concerns regarding the capacity
of MLSPF for analysis and
monitoring of SAAIS data that
would feed into social safety net
policy-making.

(SIDA)
PHRD Grant for
deinstitutionalization and
mentally ill
Community Participation in
Post-conflict Regions (Japan)
PSIA TF
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Country Economic
Memorandum
Pension Policy Note
Poverty Update and TA
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Impacts of the International
Financial Crisis on Workers’
Remittances, Migration and
Poverty in Moldova
Planned AAA:
Social analyses (ESW)

Strategic Goal 6: Increased quality of and access to education in line with MDGs
CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Progress to date

CPS Instruments and Partners

Increased access to quality
preschool programs from 71.1
percent in 2008 to 75 percent in
2011 for children aged 3-6 and
from 77.1 percent in 2008 to 85
percent in 2011 for children aged
5-6.

Preschool facilities rehabilitated
and endowed in selected
communities.

Increased enrollment in
preschool programs from 71.1
percent in 2008 to 75 percent in
2011 for children aged 3-6 and
from 77.1 percent in 2008 to 85
percent in 2011 for children aged
5-6.

Significant increases in preschool enrolment rates, reaching
80 percent in 2009.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Quality Education in Rural Areas
Project
Social Investment Fund 2,
including Additional Financing

Percent of preschool staff trained
by EFA-FTI, cumulated with
other trainings provided by the
MEY through other sources will

22

Planned Lending:
Education Program for Results

increase from baseline of 14.7
percent in 2008.

Preschool facilities rehabilitated
and endowed in selected
communities.
Percent of preschool staff trained
by EFA-FTI, cumulated with
other trainings provided by the
MEY through other sources will
increase from baseline of 14.7
percent in 2008.

Increased quality of education in
rural areas as measured by
increased student achievement
(baseline 9th Grade National
Assessment and Baccalaureate
scores identified by subject:
achievement will increase by at
least 5 percent).

Participation by Moldova in at
least one international
assessment program.

Improved efficiency of spending
on education

Formula funding, developed
in 2008, will be piloted in 2
raions by 2010.

Increased average class size
from 22 students in urban
areas and 18 students in
rural areas in 2007 to 23
students in urban areas and
19 students in rural areas by
2012.

Revised funding formula for
schools has been piloted and
rolled out nationwide
percent of schools in pilot Raions
that have become autonomous
will increase from 0 percent in
2008
School optimization strategy
piloted and rolled out
nationwide.

6.4 percent of all pre-schools
renovated and endowed; approx
34 percent of pre-school teachers
trained and 37.5 percent of preschools provided with teaching
and learning materials.
New policies developed and
applied in pre-schools: childcentered curriculum, early
learning development standards,
and professional standards for
teachers, pre-service and inservice curriculum for teachers,
and associated guides.
Baccalaureate scores increased
by an average of 3.2 percent
since baseline, and the difference
between rural and urban scores
reduced. The difference not only
decreased but also reversed. The
difference between average score
for rural and for urban BAC is
1.8 points in favor of rural area.
Rural average score is 2.4
percent higher than urban
average score.

Improved efficiency of spending
on education as illustrated by
school optimization, class
rationalization, implementation
of per student financing and
other measures agreed to in an
MOU with the IMF implemented
successfully.
Amendments to the legal code to
allow for larger class sizes and
change in the way teachers are
hired.
Increased average class sizes
nationwide by start of school
year of September 2012 [exact
numerical increase TBD].

23

MOE in the process of
developing an implementation
plan for the reform program to
take place from April 2011 –
2013.

(P4R)
Partnerships and TFs:
Education for All—Fast Track
Initiative-Preschool Phase II
(Grant)
Education for All—Fast Track
Initiative Phase III (Grant)
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Country Economic
Memorandum
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Planned AAA:
Public Expenditure Review
Education Chapter/Note (stand
alone)
Education Rationalization TA

Rationalization of the school
network by closure of schools
and creation of hub schools
[exact numerical values TBD].
Per student financing being
implemented in 11 raions by
2012.
Strategic Goal 7: Improved access to and quality of health, water, and sanitation services and reduced environmental degradation and health hazards
CPS Strategic Goals and
Outcomes

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Progress to date

CPS Instruments and Partners

Increased efficiency in resource
use in the health sector as
measured by higher utilization of
primary care services.

Number of visits to primary care
facilities increased by at least 5
percent.
Increased number of primary
care physicians to be directly
contracted by National Health
Insurance Company.
# of rural primary care facilities
upgraded and staffed with
trained personnel
Decrease in GP vacancies in
rural health facilities

Increased utilization of primary
health care services:
Baseline: 9,763,321 visits per
annum; more recent update
10,225, 282
Increased satisfaction for use of
government health services:
Baseline (from LiTs 2006): 43
percent of citizens were
satisfied); more recent update
(LiTs 2010): 67 percent of
citizens are satisfied with quality
and efficiency of public service
delivery.
Decreased number of GP
vacancies in rural areas from 20
percent to 15 percent by 2012.

20 Primary Care centers
rehabilitated, and 15 in advanced
stage of works
88 primary care providers
directly contracted by NHIC by
end 2010, up from 29 in 2007 – a
203 percent increase.
Revised curriculum for primary
health care staff and managers
approved and implemented;
Cumulative increase of 11
percent in number of GPs
employed at rehabilitated PHCs.
35 standardized medical
protocols for primary care
produced.
New Diagnostic Related Group
System piloted in 7 hospitals.
Legislative Framework for PPPs
established and PPP pilots
initiated.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Health Services and Social
Assistance, including Additional
Financing
Avian Influenza Project
National Water Supply and
Sanitation Project
Social Investment Fund 2,
including Additional Financing
Disaster and Climate Risk
Management Project

Improved access to quality
health services.

National Hospital Master Plan
completed and approved by
Government to guide health
infrastructure investments.

Increased health financial risk
protection.
Baseline: 76.7 percent of
population covered by health

A strategy to increase insurance
coverage among 15-49 year olds
developed and implemented.

Hospital Master Plan completed
and approved in 2010:
Government Decision No. 379
dated 07.05.2010 regarding
Hospital sector development
Program for 2010-2012.
Increased share of the population
with health insurance:
Baseline: 76.7 percent (2007)

24

Health insurance extended to
include social assistance
beneficiaries; incentives for other
vulnerable groups and farmers

Planned Lending:
Health Services and Social
Assistance Additional Financing
Agricultural Competitiveness
Project
Partnerships and TFs:
EC Regional Development Grant
(Water and Sanitation
component – Wastewater
Treatment Plant in the town of
Orhei)
JSDF for Hepatitis B & C
Moldova Health PPPs (IFC)
Coordinated Program in the
Health Sector (EU)
POPS Stockpiles Management
and Destruction (GEF, Dutch,
Canada)
PCF: Moldova Soil Conservation

Value in 2010: 80.8 percent.

insurance (2007).

introduced and approved.
Additional financing supported
distribution of food packages to
11.6 percent of pregnant and
lactating women and 10 percent
of children under 2 years in
response to the financial and
economic crisis.
Successful implementation of the
Avian Influenza project has
established the capacity to
monitor and respond to
infectious disease outbreaks in
both the animal and human
health sectors.

Increased proportion of the
population with sustainable
access to an improved water
source, urban and rural (MDGs
Indicator 29: by 2010 (FY11) 57
percent and by 2015 (FY16) 68.5
percent.

# of Apa Canal employees per
thousand households connected
to a water network (baselines
identified for each village).
# of drinking water samples
meeting Moldovan
bacteriological standards from
participating villages’ water
supply system.

Sector strategy financing revised
(funded by EC/ADA).
The National Water Supply and
Sanitation Project is undergoing
major restructuring, including a
revision of project outcomes and
monitoring and evaluation
indicators. The restructuring will
be completed by November 2011
(mid-term review is planned for
September 2011).
Reduced environmental
degradation as measured by
reduction in pollution of areas
under improved land
management.

25

Quantitative targets for POPs
project, such as the destruction
of POPs contaminated stocks of
obsolete pesticides and PCB
capacitors were achieved and in
some cases surpassed:

safe disposal of 1,293
metric tons of obsolete
pesticides;

safe disposal of 934 metric
tons of PCB-contaminated
capacitors (approximately
19,000 units);
Technical capacity of Moldovan
laboratory and testing

Projects 1,2
Renewable Energy from
Agricultural Waste (GEF)
CDCF – Moldova Biomass
Heating
Energy Conservation and
Emissions Reduction (Carbon
Fund)
Community Support Program for
Sustainable and Integrated Forest
Management and Carbon
Sequestration through
Forestation
Improving Forest Law
Enforcement and Governance’
(FLEG) TF
GFDRR: Moldova Disaster and
Climate Risk Management CB
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Advisory services and
investment to promote publicprivate partnerships in health
(IFC)
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Sector Coordination Council
GFDRR: Moldova Post-Disaster
(Flood) Needs Assessment
Reducing Vulnerability to
Climate Change of Agricultural
Systems in Moldova TA
Planned AAA:
Health sector BOOST
Agriculture TA
TA / Dialogue on environment
investment strategies and
integration of environmental
considerations in other sectors

infrastructure for POPs
substances upgraded.
New legislation, by-laws and
guidelines aimed at improving
the regulatory framework for
POPs substances, introduced.
Forestation of 20,300 hectares
through the Soil Conservation
projects. As a result, Moldsilva –
the State Forestry Agency, is
receiving regular carbon
payments for an estimated total
of 1.9 million tons of CO2 to be
sequestered by 2017. The
Projects have supported the
implementation of a national
competitive grant scheme for
participating communities that
provided grants to more than 50
localities for capacity building
activities aimed at improving
management of more than 6,000
hectares of community land
(mostly pastures).
The Community Forestry Project
has contributed to the forestation
of 10,600 hectares and is now
awaiting validation under the
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) Clean Development
Mechanism procedures. Around
600 thousand tons of CO2 are
estimated to be sequestered. A
national competitive grant
scheme for participating
communities to provide grant
funding for localized capacity
building and improvements in
forest and pasture management.
Increased awareness of
environmental issues in agroindustry and among farmers

26

through the Ag Pollution Control
Project:

58 percent of people
surveyed aware of
environmental issues in
agriculture (while a
percentage evaluation of the
achievement is not possible
due to the absence of a
target, the increase in public
awareness of environmental
issues in agriculture is
significant).

Enhanced ability of the State
Hydro-meteorological Center to
forecast severe weather and
improve Moldova’s capacity to
prepare for and respond to
natural disasters, as measured by:

More accurate and specific
forecasting of weather
conditions;

Expanded lead-time of
weather warnings to users,
particularly Department of
Exceptional Situations
(DES);

Strengthened capacity to
coordinate response to
emergencies.

Pillar III. Improving Public Sector Governance
Country Goals

Improved performance of civil servants.

Improved quality of regulatory services.

Sound policies developed, approved, and implemented by the GoM.

Overall fiscal discipline and resource allocation improved (as evidenced by IMF monitoring and assessment).
Issues and obstacles

Systematic performance appraisal for civil servants linked to career development is not being practiced.

27





The pay system is fragmented and opaque due to multiple supplements, does not motivate consistent performance and professional development, and is not competitive
in the labor market.
Citizens are dissatisfied with long waits, poor customer service, and convoluted procedures of services provided by government regulatory agencies (issuing permits,
licenses, certificates)
The National Development Strategy is adopted, its management has moved from the Ministry of Economy to the Government Office, initial capacity building skills for
policy review and coordination have begun, but the procedures, methodologies and skills for drafting policies and linking them to higher level policy goals are lacking.
Budget management information is fragmented and is not readily available to decision makers.
Public financial decisions rely on overly centralized, command-oriented management and financial controls, and undeveloped audit systems.
An effective public procurement system depends on Public Procurement Law which accords to international standards, effective secondary legislation and an efficient
and effective authorizing environment.
Provision of public services to citizens and businesses is slow, bureaucratic and corrupt.



There is no strategic framework or common infrastructure for e-Government, which results in duplications, increased operational costs and risks of data loss.







Strategic Goal 8: Building a professional civil service
CPS Outcomes
Merit system and ethics
improved for civil servants.
Basic compliance with the EU
civil service assessment
requirements achieved.

Performance management
system in the civil service
implemented; annual
performance ratings fall into
each category of ratings.

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Progress to date

Percentage of vacancies filled
through competitive merit-based
selection improved from 50
percent to 80 percent.
Turnover percentage of newly
recruited civil servants over the 5
year period decreased.
Number of qualified civil
servants applying to vacant
positions in the government
increased.

New civil service classification
and grading system developed.
Increasing trend of competition
based employment at the central
government level during 20072010.

Regulation on civil service
performance management
adopted and enforced at the level
of central public administration
authorities.
Compulsory requirements for
receiving a regulatory service are
revised and redundant
requirements abolished; business
processes of regulatory services
redesigned; performance of civil
servants in regulatory agencies
improved as assessed by periodic
client satisfaction survey.

Personnel performance appraisal
system introduced in 2009 and
applied in 2009 and 2010. 86
percent of civil servants
participated in the performance
evaluation exercise in
2009/2010.

CPS Instruments and Partners
Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Economic Recovery DPO
(including CRW allocation)
Planned Lending:
Competitiveness DPO
Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA—
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (DFID,
SIDA, Dutch)
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Country Systems Assessment
Country Economic
Memorandum
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Planned AAA:
Structural reform follow-up work

28

The structure of the civil service
pay improved by incorporating
supplementary payments into the
base pay and allowing for less
than 20 percent performance
bonus.
Improvement of pay adequacy
and wage bill management, as
measured by CPIA rating #15.d
(from 2.5 to at least 3.0).

New civil service remuneration
act (based on grading that
reflects job classification criteria)
approved and implemented as of
2010.
Average civil service
remuneration increases relative
to private sector wages, reaching
at least 80 percent of
corresponding labor market avg.

Revision and endorsement of the
payroll scheme in 20 out of 24
Central Government authorities
during 2010.

Strategic Goal 9: Increased capacity of the public sector to develop and implement public policies
CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

The new sector policies are
aligned with NDS, budgeted, and
their impact assessed prior to
government approval. Any issue
on policy impacts are cleared at a
technical level prior to policy
decision-making by the GO with
ministries.

The legal and methodological
basis for policy process approved
and implementation started.

Sector policies are reflected in
the Medium-term Budget
Framework (MTBF).
Government Action Plan is
aligned with the National
Development Strategy, other
strategic documents and
budgeted in line with the MTBF.

Improvement of policy
coordination and responsiveness,
as measured by increased CPIA
indicator from 3.5 to at least 4.0.

Central policy coordination
capacity in the GO improved
through proper staffing and
training.

Progress to date
Methodologies for National
Development Strategy
preparation have been approved
and applied.

Policy coordination improved
through institutional restructuring; State Chancellery
policy coordination function
introduced in 2008 increased the
efficiency of the policy
coordination efforts at the
Central Government level;
Capacity of Policy, Strategic
Planning and Aid Coordination
Department strengthened.
A system of ex-ante policy
impact analysis has been
developed and introduced in
selected policy areas.

Impact assessment methodology
developed and respective civil
servants trained.

Methodology for the
development of Institutional
Development Plan completed,
approved and applied at the level
of central government.

Ministries and agencies are
required to issue (and publish on
their web sites) annual results
reports according to methodology
approved by the Government.

29

CPS Instruments and Partners
Planned Lending:
Competitiveness DPO
Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA—
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (DFID,
SIDA, Dutch)
Planned AAA:
Structural reform follow-up work

Strategic Goal 10: Increased transparency and accountability in the management of public monies
CPS Outcomes
Improvement of budget
classification system, as
measured by improved PEFA
rating (baseline rating - C,
expected rating - A).

Improved effectiveness of
external audit (PEFA baseline
rating C+, expected rating - at
least B).

Milestones

Revised CPS Outcomes and
Milestones

Progress to date
Despite the fiscal situation, 2009
budget deficit target met, and
2010 budget performance better
than agreed under IMF program.
MoF approved new integrated
budget classification and chart of
accounts compliant with GFS
2001. Implementation will be
through FMIS, on which
progress has been slow though if
now kept on track should be
implemented in time for 2012
budget preparation process.
National Internal Audit
Standards introduced; Public
Internal Financial Control
legislation approved.

New budget classification is
integrated with the unified chart
of accounts and aligned with
COFOG and GFS2001
standards.

Five Performance Audit Pilots
successfully completed by the
Court of Accounts in 2009 and
results of two published.

Public internal financial control
and audit system based on EU
model established.
Institutional capacity of the
Court of Accounts to perform
external audit function
strengthened.

Increased competition in public
procurement (increase in percent
of value of all awarded contracts
awarded through competitive
process).

Public Procurement Law passed.
Brought substantial
improvements in the legislative
framework and public
procurement in line with
international standards and
practices.
AMRPPHA restructured in late
2009 and new Public
Procurement Agency (PPA)
established under the Ministry of
Finance.
The public procurement system
of Moldova assessed in 2010 by

All required secondary
procurement legislation in place,
public procurement department
strengthened (AMRPPHA),
electronic procurement system
implemented, and appropriate
amendments introduced into the
primary legislation (PPL).

30

CPS Instruments and Partners
Ongoing Lending:
Public Financial Management
Project
Governance e-Transformation
Project
Planned Lending:
Public Financial Management 2
Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA—
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (DFID,
SIDA, Dutch)
Strategic Development of the
Court of Accounts (DFID,
Dutch)
Dutch Grant for Co-financing of
the PFM Project
Successor Grant for PFM Project
(SIDA)
Training Capacity Building and
Training related to Management
of Public Finances (SIDA)
IDF Grant for Capacity Building
in Moldova Public Sector
Accounting Project
e-Transformation Trust Fund
(Dutch)
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Country Systems Assessment
Country Economic
Memorandum
Policy Notes for the Government
of Moldova
Country Procurement
Assessment Report (CPAR)
Public Expenditure Review 2
Public Expenditure Review 2011

using OECD/DAC methodology
based on four main pillars and
twelve indicators.
There are still deficiencies in the
legislative and institutional
framework, which could be
addressed by amending the
Public Procurement Law,
completing missing secondary
regulations, including standard
bidding documents and standard
forms of contracts, improving the
existing website of the Public
Procurement Agency to make it
fully functional to ensure greater
transparency, developing
guidance notes to and manuals to
improve contract administration,
improving existing training
programs, and ensuring
independent complaint handling
mechanism.
The use of single source
procurement decreased
significantly.
Electronic Government
Procurement (e-GP) readiness
assessment conducted as part of
CPAR. First phase of the e-GP
application developed by
contracting a private software
development company.
However, lack of financial
resources and no final decision
regarding the e-GP business
model delayed the
implementation of the system.
Improved capacity and
management of ICT in the public
sector:
 Governance center set up and
operational (staff trained;
public support for e-

31

Moldova e-development TA
Citizen Report Card 2010
A&A ROSC Follow-up
Planned AAA:
Public Financial Management
TA
Apps for good governance in
Moldova (Third Party
Monitoring Window - CSF
Demand for Good Governance)
IDF for Public Procurement
PEFA (led by the EC)

government increased from
53 to 60 percent; percentage
of cost recovery of the e-GC
increased from 0 to 20
percent).
 e-transformation enabling
environment present,
including the policy, legal
and regulatory frameworks
(100 data sets available on the
Open Government Data
website; 2 institutions making
datasets available through
OGD);
Improved service delivery and
transparency in the public sector:
 Shared e-Government
infrastructure established
(percentage of civil servants
using shared e-government
infrastructure increased to 5
percent; number of
Government databases with
central backup increased to
5).
 e-services developed (number
of transactions completed
through Government services
portal increased to 100,000
by 2013; average processing
time for public services
(business licenses) decreased
to 3 days by 2013).

32

ANNEX 2: LIST OF ACTIVE BANK-ADMINISTERED TRUST FUNDS IN MOLDOVA
( Figures in thousands of USD )
TF #
TF053065
TF054017
TF055170
TF055175
TF055875
TF056111
TF056601
TF056815
TF057273
TF057662
TF058159
TF092641

TF093088
TF093288
TF093407
TF093408
TF093702
TF093720
TF094297
TF094801
TF094952
TF095950
TF096087
TF097442
TF097543
TF097665
TF097883
TF097895
TF098049
TF098414
TF098462
TF099088
TF099216
Total

Trust Fund Name
PCF-MOLDOVA:SOIL CONSERVATION PROJECT
TRAINING CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING RELATED TO
MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC FINANCES (CF UNDER TF054016)
DUTCH GRANT FOR CO-FINANCING OF THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT PROJECT
PHRD-MOLDOVA: COMPETITIVENESS ENHANCEMENT PROJECT
GEF FSP-MOLDOVA: POPS STOCKPILES MANAGEMENT AND
DESTRUCTION PROJECT
CDCF - MOLDOVA BIOMASS HEATING ERPA
MDTF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE SUPPORT TO PUBLIC
ADMINISTRATION REFORM OF MOLDOVA
BCF - MOLDOVA SOIL CONSERVATION ERPA
SUPPORT TO RISP 2
MDTF FOR STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE CoA
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA: IDF GRANT FOR CAPACITY BUILDING IN
MOLDOVA PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTING PROJECT
MD: HEALTH SERVICES AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE ADDITIONAL
FINANCING GRANT
COMMUNITY SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINABLE AND
INTEGRATED FOREST MANAGEMENT AND CARBON SEQUESTRATION
THROUGH FORESTATIO N.
MOLDOVA DUTCH TA-TF FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN POST-CONFLICT REGIONS
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN POST-CONFLICT REGIONS (BANK
EXECUTED)
PREVENTING HEPATITIS B&C IN MOLDOVA
PREVENTING HEPATITIS B&C IN MOLDOVA (BANK-EXECUTED)
MD - EFA FTI SPN - CF
Successor Swedish Grant for Public Finance Management Project
Moldova Regional Development and Social Protection Project
Swedish Grant for Second Additional Financing for the Moldova
Social Investment Fund II Project
Impacts of the International Financial Crisis on Workers’
Remittances, Migration, and Poverty in Moldova.
GFDRR: MOLDOVA POST-DISASTER (FLOOD) NEEDS ASSESSMENT
GFDRR: Moldova Disaster and Climate Risk Management CB
Moldova Health
ECSPE - Shared Growth Moldova
Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement Technical Assistance
PPIAF: CHISINAU ENERGY SUPPLY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
Moldova Food Security AAA
Leadership Development Program for Moldovan Officials on ICT for
Improved Governance and Growth
MOLDOVA ESREI TF: SUPERVISION OF RECIPIENT ACTIVITIES
Regional Education for All-Fast Tract Initiative Education Program
Development Fund (EPDF)

Net Grant
Amount
4,550.00

Funds Disb.

Closing Date

Donor Name

Exec. By

1,523.91

12/31/2013

MULTIPLE DONORS

Recipient

2,209.58

1,556.65

12/31/2011

Recipient

4,350.03
4,500.00

3,302.65
2,887.25

12/31/2011
6/30/2012

SIDA
Netherlands - Minister for
Europ. Affairs & Intern. Coop.
Japan - Ministry of Finance

Recipient
Recipient

6,350.00
1,969.04

6,336.43
286.95

12/31/2010
7/15/2016

MULTIPLE DONORS
MULTIPLE DONORS

Recipient
Recipient

6,150.00
2,478.00
7,272.44
2,786.60

4,404.09
776.67
6,082.27
2,629.50

12/31/2012
12/31/2015
4/30/2012
6/30/2011

MULTIPLE DONORS
MULTIPLE DONORS
SIDA
MULTIPLE DONORS

Recipient
Recipient
Recipient
Recipient

160.00

156.24

12/31/2010

IBRD 1818 H Street, NW

Recipient

7,000.00

6,472.66

8/31/2011

IBRD 1818 H Street, NW

Recipient

975.90

264.87

4/2/2013

Recipient

3,184.59
1,950.00

1,239.21
480.91

6/30/2011
3/17/2013

Japan - Ministry of Finance
Netherlands - Minister for
Europ. Affairs & Intern. Coop.
Japan - Ministry of Finance

Recipient
Recipient

50.00
1,383.76
26.00
160.08
2,791.60
16,549.15

4.22
684.25
24.04
110.11
2,450.16
6,194.90

12/15/2011
5/5/2012
5/5/2012
2/28/2011
6/30/2011
6/30/2011

Japan - Ministry of Finance
Japan - Ministry of Finance
Japan - Ministry of Finance
MULTIPLE DONORS
SIDA
EU-Commission

Bank
Recipient
Bank
Bank
Recipient
Recipient

2,531.65

2,301.98

12/31/2010

SIDA

Recipient

97.00
100.00
100.00
200.00
45.00
150.00
75.00
320.00

0.00
93.45
4.30
46.28
29.82
39.72
0.00
8.54

12/30/2011
2/28/2011
6/30/2011
12/30/2012
4/30/2011
6/30/2011
6/30/2011
6/30/2013

MULTIPLE
MULTIPLE
MULTIPLE
IFC
MULTIPLE
MULTIPLE
MULTIPLE
MULTIPLE

DONORS
DONORS
DONORS
DONORS

Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank

120.00
238.96

5.95
0.00

9/30/2011
12/31/2012

MULTIPLE DONORS
SIDA

Bank
Bank

80.00
80,904.38

0.00
50,397.98

6/30/2011

MULTIPLE DONORS

Bank

33

DONORS
DONORS
DONORS

ANNEX 3: DEVELOPMENT PARTNER COMMITMENTS BY SECTOR, CONSULTATIVE GROUP: MOLDOVA PARTNERSHIP
FORUM, MARCH 2010
Sector*

Partners**
2010

Not yet allocated

Civil Service
Anti-Corruption
Fiscal And Administrative
Decentralization
Judiciary
E-Government
Business Environment
Agriculture

Infrastructure
Regional Development

Education

Health

Social Protection
Budget Support

Other Sector

2011

2012
Czech Republic, Finland,
Romania, Slovakia, Sweden, EU,
UN, World Bank

2013
Czech Republic, Finland,
Romania, EU, UN, World Bank

Czech Republic, Romania,
Slovakia, Sweden, UK, EU
Czech Republic, France,
Hungary, Sweden, Netherlands,
UK, UN
Sweden, US,

Czech Republic, Finland,
Romania, Slovakia, Sweden, EU

France, Sweden, UN
US

France, UN

France, UN

Sweden, Netherlands, US,
Finland, UK, US, UN
UN, World Bank
Sweden, Netherlands, UK, EU,
US, UN

Sweden, Netherlands, US, UN
Finland, US, UN
UN

Sweden, Netherlands, UN
Finland, UN

Finland

Sweden, EU, US, UN
Switzerland, US, UN, World
Bank

Sweden, EU, UN

EU

US, UN

US, UN

Finland, Sweden, Switzerland,
US, EBRD, EIB, World Bank
EU

Finland, Switzerland, US, EBRD,
EIB
EU

Switzerland, US
EU

France, Netherlands, EU, UN

France, EU, UN

France, EU

Luxembourg, Switzerland, UN,
Global Fund

Switzerland, UN, Global Fund

Switzerland, UN, Global Fund

Finland, Netherlands, UN

Finland, UN

Switzerland, US, UN
Czech Republic, Finland,
Sweden, EU, Switzerland, US,
EBRD, EIB, World Bank
Hungary, Sweden, UK, EU
Czech Republic, France,
Netherlands, EU, UN, World
Bank
Finland, Hungary, Luxembourg,
Switzerland, UN, World Bank,
Global Fund
Czech Republic, Finland,
Hungary, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, UK, US, UN, World
Bank
Poland, Netherlands, UK, EU,
World Bank, IMF
Denmark, Finland, France,
Sweden, Netherlands, EU, UN,
World Bank

Finland, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, US, UN
Netherlands, EU, World Bank,
IMF

Netherlands, IMF

Finland, Sweden, Netherlands,
EU, UN

Denmark, Sweden, Netherlands,
EU, UN

Denmark, EU, UN

* Sectors are the chapters of the document "Rethink Moldova", prepared by the Government for the Consultative Group meeting Moldova Partnership Forum, 24th March 2010, against which
indicative pledges were made.
** These are partners who made pledges at the Consultative Group meeting; a number of other partners are also active in Moldova including Austria, China, Germany, Japan, Lithuania and Turkey.

34

ANNEX 4: STANDARD CPS ANNEXES

Annex A1- Moldova
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS
Prepared for all CASs/Progress Reports, but included in Board version of Progress Reports Only
As Of Date 3/15/2011

Forecast in Last CAS
Economy (CY)
Growth rates (%)
GDP
Exports
Imports

2008 a

2009 b

2010 b

Actual
2011 b

2009 c

Current CAS Forecast

2010__ c

2011 a

2012 b

2013 b

2014 b

6.5
11.1
14.6

3.5
3.0
0.0

5.0
5.0
2.0

5.0
5.0
2.0

-6.0
-12.1
-23.6

6.9
12.8
13.7

3.5
8.7
7.3

4.5
7.7
6.7

5.0
8.7
7.0

4.5
9.1
6.2

Inflation (%)

12.8

7.8

7.8

7.8

0.0

7.4

8

6.1

5.4

4.6

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance
Gross investment

-18.9
33.5

-19.2
30.1

-17.0
31.4

-16.2
32.0

-8.5
21.7

-8.3
24.1

-10
24.9

-8.4
25.0

-8.1
25.6

-7.9
26.2

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financing

-0.5
1.6

-1.5
3.1

-1.0
3.0

-1.0
3.0

-6.4
5.0

-2.5
4.8

-1.9
3.6

-0.7
4.4

-0.4
4.7

-0.7
2.8

International reserves
(as months of imports)

3.3

3.2

3.3

3.4

4.4

4.5

4

4.2

4.2

4.3

a. Estimated year
b. Projected year
c. Actual outcome

35

Moldova at a glance

5/9/11

M o ldo va

Euro pe &
Central
A sia

Lo wer
middle
inco me

3.8
..
-0.1
..

403
23,549
0.3
64

3,767
31,923
1.2
40

5.6
1,480
3,010

2,772
6,880
13,297

7,682
2,039
4,502

-6.0
-5.9

4.0
3.6

7.5
6.3

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

2
12
..
..
..

4
9
69
20
..

..
..
68
44
25

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

99
98
..
..

99
97
100
98

87
73
109
105

..
..

95
89

86
50

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2009

(2009)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
6

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 9 )

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

1995

Moldova (..)

N e t A id F lo ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2009

(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
Euro pean Co mmissio n
United States
Sweden

..

10

123

299

..
..
..

0
9
0

5
35
2

83
36
14

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

..
..

0.4
..

9.4
..

4.5
79

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds
..
..

788.5
13.5

31.2
27.3

0.0
2.2

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

0.0
..

12.4
100

11.1
107

2008

Europe & Central Asia

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

2000

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 9
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

4.0
..

4.4
3,593

..
1,288

3.8
5,438

0.8
2.7

..
-9.6

..
5.6

(% o f GDP )
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

36.1
36.7
36.0
27.2

29.0
21.7
16.3
49.2

10.1
13.1
12.6
76.8

..
..
..
..

-11.2
-13.6
-7.1
0.7

-1.0
-1.4
1.6
10.6

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

..
..
..

57.5
15.1
24.9

91.4
10.3
23.9

88.3
22.1
23.1

..
..
..

9.9
-12.4
-15.5

8.1
5.2
8.9

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

..
..
..

48.2
50.6
58.1

49.8
75.4
16.3

36.9
73.5
17.6

..
..

1.0
5.9

10.0
11.5

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2008.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

36

Moldova
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

477
793
-331

1,329
3,273
-1,988

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-98
-7.6

-465
-8.5

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

179

1,211

Reserves, including go ld

218

1,480

Voice and accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law
Control of corruption
0
2009

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

31.9
25.0
34.7

38.3
31.3
40.3

Overall surplus/deficit

-2.6

-6.3

25

50

..
..

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000
86.1

2008
85.7

18

97

3.2

4.2

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

1,693
150
–

3,457
387
–

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

131.4
18.1

63.6
12.0

127
117

0
0

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)
CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)
GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

77
..
..
252
2.3

75
..
1.4
275
..

0.86

1.3

2.1

2.7

694

910

Composition of total external debt, 2009
Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)
IDA, 332
IBRD,
110
IMF, 154
Other multilateral, 71

Short-term,
1,318

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

Bilateral, 265

Private, 1,207

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
A ccess to /co st o f financing
Tax rates
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–

10
7.0
5

2000

2009

..
..
3.2
30.6

2000

2009

(US$ millio ns)
IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

191
6
5
11

110
0
18
4

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

103
30
1

332
21
6

35
19
1

16
16
0

0

7

3
3

73
6

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt

40.4
37.2

M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

..
17.0

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

37

5/9/11

Millennium Development Goals

Moldova

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

M o ldo v a

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
17.0
..
..
..

19 9 5
15.1
..
..
..

2000
33.0
..
..
..

2008
2.4
..
..
..

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

89
..
94
..

..
94
81
..

..
98
82
..

..
91
88
..

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

105
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
..
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
..
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
35

..
..
59

0.1
..
53

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
..
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
..
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
..
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
5.4
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
1.7

..
..
..
..
2.6
1.5

..
..
..
..
0.9
2.1

..
..
..
1.4
1.3
2.7

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

13.1
0.0
0.0
0.2

14.2
3.4
1.3
1.5

30.7
66.7
23.4
11.4

10.6
0.0
0.0
..

0.4
..
70

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

25

100

120
100

75
80
60

50

40
25

0

20
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2008

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio (..)
Fixed + mobile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education (..)

Moldova (..)

Europe & Central Asia

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

38

Internet users

5/9/11

CAS Annex B2 - Moldova
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 3/15/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2008

2009

2010

2011

14
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.8

12
3.3
25.0
8.6
25.0
8.6
23.8

13
3.9
15.4
7.3
15.4
7.3
28.6

11
4.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.7

N
1200.1
85.7

N
169.9
28.31

N
643.2
107.2

Y
917.8
152.96

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
23
7
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
448.4
66.1
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
18.2
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
17.9
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

39

Annex B3
Moldova: IFC Investment Operations Program

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
ELECTRIC POWER
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
UTILITIES
Total

2008

2009

2010

2011*

10.00
10.00

7.00
7.00

30.00
30.00

23.82
23.82

100

50
50

58.02

100

100

41.98
100

100
100

100
100

58.02
41.98
100

100
100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
50
Guarantee
Loan
50
100
Total

* Data as of March 01,2011

40

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Non-lending Services - Moldova
As Of Date 3/15/2011

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience

a

Objective

b

Recent completions
Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova

FY09

14

G, D, B

K, PS, PD

Pension Policy Note

FY09

34

G, D

K, PS, PD

Poverty Update and TA

FY09

115

G, D, B

K, PS

Moldova Telecom Sector Assistance

FY09

111

G, D, B

K, PS
K, PS

PSD/FSD Dialogue

FY09

33

G, D

MTDS Moldova

FY10

55

G, D

K, PS

District Heating Restructuring Study

FY10

166

G, D, B

K, PS

Country Procurement Assessment Report

FY10

101

G, D, B

K, PS, PD

Public Expenditure Review 2

FY10

143

G, D, B

K, PS, PD

Moldova e-development TA

FY10

44

G, D

K, PS

A&A ROSC follow-up

FY11

9

G, D

K, PS

Country Economic Memorandum

FY11

342

G, D, B, PD

K, PD, PS

Agricultural Policy Revision and Budget TA

FY11

104

G, D, B

K, PS

Public Expenditure Review 2011

FY11

111

G, D, B

K, PS, PD

Financial Sector Monitoring TA

FY11

114

G, D, B

K, PS

Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA

FY11

140

G, D, B

K, PS

FY11-12

320

G, D, B

K, PS

Applications for good governance - Civil
Society Fund Demand for Good Governance

FY11

2.5

G, D, B

K, PS

Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of
Agricultural Systems in Moldova TA

FY11

15

G, D, B, PD

K, PS, PD

Underway

Moldova Food Security TA

____________
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

41

Moldova - Key Economic Indicators
Annex B6

Indicator

2004

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

National accounts (as % of GDP)
a

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

20

17

12

11

10

10

9

9

9

Industry

16

16

15

14

13

12

12

12

11

Services

64

67

73

75

77

78

78

79

80

110
25
2
23

114
28
2
26

112
34
3
31

114
34
2
32

109
26
4
22

116
27
4
23

112
26
4
22

110
26
4
22

108
26
4
22

51
92

45
92

47
97

41
94

37
73

45
89

45
85

45
83

46
82

-10

-14

-12

-14

-9

-16

-12

-10

-8

21

21

26

23

19

17

18

19

20

2988

3408

4402

6055

5403

5314

5882

6450

7074

820

960

1090

1420

1460

1620

1660

1780

1980

4.8
3.7

3.1
1.0

7.8
7.6

-6.5
-6.0

4.0
-1.3

3.5
4.9

4.0
5.5

5.0
5.9

4.2
4.7
6.2

7.9
7.1
6.4

-6.4
-12.6
-13.4

5.1
3.1
3.4

4.5
5.3
5.5

5.1
5.5
5.6

6.1
5.3
5.2

Gross domestic product

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
b

Exports (GNFS)
Imports (GNFS)

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings

c

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 96 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.5
Gross Domestic Income
3.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 96 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.0
6.0
Total consumption
7.4
12.2
Private consumption
7.9
10.8

100

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
b

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
b

Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reserves

d

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR96 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

1528
1104

1542
1053

1998
1373

2483
1646

2000
1332

2385
1592

2643
1746

2918
1916

3273
2161

2739
2295
-1211
567
-285

3129
2644
-1587
800
-387

4308
3676
-2310
1219
-674

5691
4866
-3208
1623
-987

3989
3276
-1989
1221
-465

4721
3890
-2336
1382
-620

5002
4101
-2359
1451
-589

5333
4361
-2415
1514
-541

5788
4736
-2515
1607
-576

225
74
-10
84
114

243
116
-14
130
169

522
372
14
358
309

691
388
8
380
360

121
-31
-7
-25
174

190
326
52
274
96

291
342
130
211
235

436
213
121
91
173

415
243
48
196
145

-129

-141

-529

-452

201

8

-279

-192

-228

-40.5

-46.6

-52.5

-53.0

-36.8

-44.0

-40.1

-37.4

-35.6

12.2
20.4
-15.6
22.9

-25.3
-33.6
34.2
9.4

9.1
1.3
45.9
24.4

-1.6
-3.5
22.6
12.5

-3.2
21.0
-54.9
-28.0

13.0
12.5
14.9
4.8

8.2
9.5
2.6
7.7

7.2
7.9
4.2
7.0

9.2
10.1
5.1
7.2

(Continued)

42

Moldova - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator
Indicator

2004

2005

Actual
2006
2007

2008

Estimate
2009

2010

Projected
2011
2012

2013

e

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Current revenues
38.1
Current expenditures
30.7
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
7.4
Capital expenditure
6.4
Foreign financing
-0.1
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR96 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
f

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

39.9
32.4
7.4
7.7
-0.5

41.0
34.5
6.5
7.4
0.2

40.0
34.5
5.5
7.1
0.1

38.6
40.6
-2.0
5.0
3.7

40.5
40.4
0.1
5.1
1.6

41.0
39.7
1.3
5.3
2.8

41.4
38.6
2.8
5.1
2.4

41.5
37.9
3.7
5.0
1.2

42.0
35.0
155.1

43.7
23.6
103.1

51.2
39.8
110.8

50.4
15.9
119.3

54.4
3.2
5387.0

50.0
1.7
-43.8

50.0
11.8
-16.6

50.0
10.8
75.1

50.0
10.8
76.9

82.4
277.6
29.7

106.3
298.3
35.6

124.4
328.5
37.9

150.5
387.6
38.8

129.4
359.7
36.0

137.1
408.0
33.6

139.1
399.3
34.8

142.3
397.0
35.9

147.0
402.1
36.6

114.3

114.3

99.5

74.4

86.5

81.7

90.7

97.1

100.4

11.9
9.3

12.7
13.4

12.3
15.8

12.7
9.3

0.0
2.0

14.5
6.5

4.1
8.0

3.9
6.5

4.0
5.5

a. GDP at
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

43

Moldova - Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B7

Indicator

2004

2005

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2006
2007

Estimated
2009
2010

2008

Projected
2012

2011

2013

2053

2417

3203

3787

3457

3751

4086

4283

4485

69

370

383

399

-46

467

335

196

202

267

335

338

481

387

395

437

518

656

83.4
68.7
10.8
10.2

87.9
70.9
12.2
10.0

90.2
72.8
9.5
9.1

85.7
62.5
10.9
8.2

107.4
64.0
12.0
9.6

100.5
70.6
10.6
0.0

100.9
69.5
10.8
0.0

96.8
66.4
11.7
0.0

92.6
63.4
13.6
0.0

22.1
78.3

21.9
62.8

28.2
69.2

28.2
70.5

23.7
53.1

26.5
65.7

27.5
65.8

23.0
69.9

16.4
70.4

a

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)
a

Net disbursements (US$m)
Total debt service (TDS)
a

(US$m)
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
b

TDO/XGS
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
c

DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
d
IDA TDO (US$m)

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.5

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

161

151

141

129

110

90

70

51

31

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

209

242

292

312

332

373

434

493

547

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

44

B8 (IFC) for Moldova
Moldova
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed
**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

2008
2011
2010
1999/00/01
2009
2001/10
2004

Bostavan
Chisinau
Maib
Orange moldova
Pc bank moldova
Uf moldova
Victoriabank

0
10
15
0
7
17.14
0.5

1.34
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1.62
0
0
0

49.64

1.34

1.62

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding
Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
5
0
4
7.14
0.5

1.34
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1.62
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

16.64

1.34

1.62

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

45

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

CAS Annex B8 - Moldova
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3/15/2011

Closed Projects

29

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

140.41
0.00
143.03
136.86
283.44
136.86

Total Undisbursed (Active)

91.87

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

91.87

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P099841
P115634
P040558
P095250
P089124
P107612
P082916
P090340
P090673
P100929
P079314
Overall Result

AVIAN FLU - MD
DISASTER & CLIMATE RISK MGT
ENERGY 2
HEALTH SERVICES AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
MD Competitiveness Enhancement
NATIONAL WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION
PUB FIN MGMT TA
QUAL EDUC IN RUR AREAS OF MD
RISP (APL #2)
ROAD SECTOR PROG SUPPORT
SIF 2

Development
Objectives

S
S
S
MS
S
MS
S
S
S
S
MS

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MS

2006
2011
2004
2007
2006
2008
2005
2006
2006
2007
2004

46

IBRD

IDA

8.00
10.00
45.00
17.00
33.80
14.00
8.55
10.00
31.00
16.00
45.00
238.35

GRANT

Cancel.

11.03
11.03

Undisb.

0.76
10.35
6.86
9.11
14.81
9.50
7.79
3.42
8.22
3.18
17.86
91.87

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.17
0.05
-7.50
5.98
-9.64
5.19
7.50
2.27
-8.81
13.24
-7.29
1.17

-2.18
3.73
4.21
-0.94
3.65
-0.38
1.93
3.75
13.78

