Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 265 13-MK

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
August 14,2003

South East Europe Country Unit (ECCU4)
Europe and Central Asia Region

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Unit of currency: Macedonian Denar (DEN) 53.88 DEN = US$l.O (at August 8,2003)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

A A A Analytical and Advisory Assistance
CAS
Country Assistance Strategy
CARDS Community Assistance for Reconstruction,
Development, and Stabilization
CDF Comprehensive Development Framework
C E M Country Economic Memorandum
CFAA Country Financial Accountability Assessment
CPAR Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Review
CPR
Civil Service
cs
DFID UK’s Department for International
Development
Development Objective
DO
Democratic Union for Integration
DUI
EBF Extra-Budgetary Fund
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
ECA Europe and Central Asia
ESW Economic Sector Work
European Union
EU
Foreign Direct Investment
FDI
FESAL Financial and Enterprise Sector Adjustment
Loan
FIAS Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Federal Republic o f Yugoslavia
FRY
FYR Former Yugoslav Republic o f
FSAP Financial Sector Assessment Project
Financial Sector Development
FSD
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
Household Budget Survey
HBS
Health Insurance Fund
HIF
I B R D International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
International Development Association
IDA
International Finance Corporation
IFC
International Monetary Fund
IMF
Implementation Progress
IP
I-PRSP Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

V i c e President:
Country Director:
Team Leader:

IRRP

Irrigation Rehabilitation and Restructuring
Project
LIL
Learning and Innovation Loan
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
N A T O North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NBM National Bank o f Macedonia
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NSPR National Strategy for Poverty Reduction
OED Operations Evaluation Department
PDIF Pension and Disability Insurance Fund
PEIR Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
PHARE EU assistance program to pre-accession
countries.
PRGF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
PSAL Programmatic Structural Adjustment Loan
PSMAC Public Sector Management Adjustment
Credit
PSMAL Public Sector Management Adjustment Loan
Q A G Quality Assurance Group
SAA
Stabilization and Association Agreement
S A 0 State Audit Office
SBA
Stand B y Arrangement
SD
Social Development
SDSM Social Democratic Alliance o f Macedonia
SEED Southeast Europe Enterprise Development
SFRY Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
SME SmallNedium Enterprise
SOE
State-Owned Enterprise
TSA
Treasury Single Account
TSS
Transitional Support Strategy
TTFSE Trade and Transport Facilitation in Southeastern
Europe
UN
United Nations
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID US Agency for International Development
WBI
World Bank Institute
WLSG Working Level Steering Group
W T O World Trade Organization

Shigeo Katsu
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Tim Gilbo

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
TABLEOF CONTENTS

..................................................................................................................
I
. Introduction .....................................................................................................................
I1. The Country Context ......................................................................................................

1

Political Developments ...........................................................................................................
Recent economic developments .............................................................................................
Medium term prospects ..........................................................................................................

1
3
6

Executive Summary

.
I V.

................................................
Key Development Challenges in FYR Macedonia......................................................

I11 The Government’s Agenda of Policies and Programs

i

1

8

10

Promoting the efficient management of public resources and tackling corruption ..............11
Promoting the creation of jobs through sustainable private sector driven growth ...............13
Promoting reconciliation. building human capital and protecting the most vulnerable ....... 15

V

.

The Bank’s Partnership with FYR Macedonia and the New IBRD Assistance
Strategy

...........................................................................................................................

17

Progress under the 1998 CAS and the 2001 TSS ................................................................. 18
The objectives o f the new CAS, and how progress towards them w i l l be measured...........20
The new IBRD program ....................................................................................................... 21
Lending scenarios and triggers ............................................................................................. 27
28
Creditworthiness and exposure indicators............................................................................

. Coordination with Partners and Civil Society............................................................
VI1. Risks to the Success of the Bank’s program ...............................................................
VI11.Concluding Remarks .....................................................................................................
VI

29

32
33

Index o f Tables

Table 1.
Table 2.
Table 3.
Table 4.
Table 5.
Table 6,
Table 7 .

Selected Macroeconomic Indicators 1992-2002
Macroeconomic Projections 2002-2005
Lending Results under the TSS
Portfolio Status
CAS Outcomes, Indicators and Benchmarks
The Planned IBRD Assistance Program FY04-06
Triggers for the FY04-06 Lending Program

4
7
19
21
22
25
28

Index of Boxes

Box 1.
Box 2.
Box 3.
Box 4.

The Ohrid Agreement
The Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union
Recent Diagnostic Studies and Surveys in FYR Macedonia
Incorporating the Views o f C i v i l Society into the CAS

Annexes

Annex A. Lending Portfolio - Maturity b y Objective
Annex A2. FYR Macedonia - At A Glance
Annex B2. Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3. I B R D A D A Program Summary
Annex B 3 (IFC & MIGA) Program Summary
Annex B4. Summary o f Nonlending Services
Annex B6. K e y Economic Indicators
Annex B7. Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8. Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex BS(1FC). Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9. CAS Program Matrix
Annex B l0. Summary o f Development Priorities

3
9
11
31

Executive Summary
1.
This is the first IBRD only Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia (FYR Macedonia). This CAS, covering FY04-06, follows a
Transitional Support Strategy (TSS) that was discussed by the Board on September 13, 2001.
The TSS outlined a program o f Bank assistance to support the post conflict priorities o f the
country as i t emerged from an internal conflict in 2001. The TSS program covered FY02, but
was extended to cover FY03 when macroeconomic performance and progress on structural
reforms deteriorated in the lead up to the elections in September o f 2002. This CAS presents an
IBRD program o f support for the period FY04-06, which seeks to build on the markedly
improved macroeconomic management and structural reform progress since the elections. I t
outlines a highly selective program o f investment and adjustment lending o f up to US$165
million, complemented b y a substantial body o f diagnostic and fiduciary work. The IBRD
program would focus on promoting the effective management of public resources, tackling
corruption, creating the conditions for private sector led growth, and ensuring an effective safety
net i s in place for the most vulnerable Macedonians.
2.
Key issues for discussion by the Board. The IBRD support program would scale up the
Bank’s support and aims to take advantage o f the stability in FYR Macedonia and the region
which now exists. Key issues which the Executive Directors may wish to consider include:
I s the timing appropriate for the Bank to move forward with a new program o f IBRD
financial support considering FYR Macedonia’s recent history of conflict and the
ongoing challenges o f maintaining social cohesion?

D o the priorities outlined for support b y the Bank promise the most effective use o f the
Bank’s resources, in consideration o f the broader set o f development challenges
identified and lessons learned b y the Bank since 1998?
I s the proposed framework for monitoring the results o f the C A S appropriate and
feasible, considering that efforts to develop a formal national development strategy are at
an early stage?
3.
A new multi-ethnic coalition government came to power in November 2002 with a
mandate to implement the peace agreement that ended the 2001 conflict (known as the Ohrid
Agreement), and to tackle corruption, create jobs and address poverty. Following concerted
action by the Government the macroeconomic outlook has improved, and agreement has been
reached with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on a reform program supported b y a Stand
B y Arrangement (approved April 30, 2003). The Bank portfolio, which had deteriorated during
the 2001 crisis, has now returned to health, and implementation i s proceeding well.
4.
Internal and regional peace offers a window of opportunity. For the first time since
FYR Macedonia’s independence in 1991 both the regional and internal environments are calm,
offering an opportunity to achieve sustainable growth. While FYR Macedonia does not have a
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) or a National Development Strategy, the Ohrid
Agreement o f August 2001 and the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with the
European Union (EU), which was signed in April 2001, together form a strong country-owned
framework for the development agenda. The Ohrid Agreement provides the political framework
through which the divisions in Macedonian society can be addressed and social cohesion

i

improved. However, the agreement i s complex, and implementation w i l l require overcoming
significant economic and political challenges. EU membership remains an overarching longterm goal, and the SAA provides strong incentives to overcoming political differences that have
stymied economic reform in the past. The SAA calls for the gradual harmonization o f
Macedonian laws and institutions with those o f the European Union, as well as setting specific
timetables for the reduction o f trade barriers between FYR Macedonia, the EU, and other S A A
countries.
Increased regional economic integration can spur growth and reduce poverty. Over
5.
the last half-decade, economic growth in FRY Macedonia has been inconsistent. Significant
foreign investment flows have not materialized, and unemployment has remained high. An
improved regional environment and FYR Macedonia’s strategic geographic location offer an
opportunity for increased economic integration within the region and with the EU, which would
help spur investment, improve the competitiveness o f the private sector, and drive growth. To
better understand and address the challenge o f transforming growth into poverty reduction, there
i s a need to build an accurate, agreed baseline understanding o f poverty, the capacity to
objectively monitor poverty over time, and develop the mechanisms b y which poverty analysis
can inform policy.

6.
Despite the recent crises that hindered development, including the 1999 Kosovo crisis
and the 2001 internal conflict, progress has been made on the economic reform agenda. This
includes improvements in the health o f the financial sector, and, to a lesser extent, the
management o f public resources. Key economic challenges are to further improve public sector
management, particularly to foster the transparency and efficiency o f public expenditure and to
professionalize the civil service. Further efforts to improve the investment climate in order to
attract increased foreign and domestic investment w i l l also be critical to long-term growth.
Improvements in the efficiency and targeting o f the social safety net w i l l also be important to
address poverty in the short-term.
7.
The program is selective and results can be monitored. The IBRD program o f support
has been coordinated with other development partners, with whom the Bank w i l l be working
closely during implementation. Case triggers have been carefully chosen to ensure a graduated
program o f support consistent with the lessons learned over recent years. A priority set o f
measurable outcomes has been selected, based on the Bank’s comparative advantage and past
and planned involvement, that can be used to track the effectiveness o f the CAS program.

Risks. N o t all o f the risks to the success o f the CAS program can be mitigated b y the
Bank. The threat o f renewed political turmoil and ethnic violence, though modest and
diminishing, w i l l remain, especially considering the difficulties that may be encountered in
implementing the Ohrid Agreement and continuing uncertainty as to the future o f neighboring
Kosovo. The difficult economic reform agenda that lies ahead may also create social stresses
that could translate into waning political commitment on the part o f the Government. The
selective and closely coordinated nature o f the Bank’s interventions over the CAS period also
imply a reliance on the effective performance of development partners, both in tandem with
Bank projects and in other key sectors where the Bank w i l l not be involved.
8.

I.

Introduction

1.
This i s the first IBRD only CAS for FYR Macedonia, defining a program o f Bank
assistance for the period FY04-06. The last full CAS was prepared in 1998, which outlined a
support program for FY99-01, based on a blend o f IDA and IBRD resources. A progress
report was prepared in 1999 when an emergency scenario was triggered b y the Kosovo crisis
(see below). While FYR Macedonia graduated from IDA on July 1, 2001, the Bank prepared
a TSS in August o f that year in response to the outbreak o f an internal conflict. The TSS,
which covered FY02, outlined exceptional access to a further IDA allocation o f US$35
million on hardened terms. The coverage o f the TSS was extended through FY03 because o f
delays in implementation due to continuing political instability which slowed reform progress
in the lead up to the parliamentary election in September 2002.

2.
Despite the recent crises, FYR Macedonia now has an opportunity to regain the
economic momentum that i t had established in the latter part o f the last decade. An improved
regional climate and increased impetus for integration with the EU can combine to build on
the substantial, albeit inconsistent, progress that has been made towards transforming the
Macedonian economy since independence in 199 1. FYR Macedonia can establish a virtuous
cycle in which ongoing ethnic reconciliation and growing social stability lays the basis for
stronger economic growth, reduced unemployment, and fewer households living in poverty.
Improving the quality and accountability o f public institutions w i l l be a fundamental
challenge, necessary both to underpin reconciliation and also to attract badly needed domestic
and foreign investment. FYR Macedonia needs to grasp the opportunity afforded b y i t s
strategic location in South East Europe and i t s considerable progress towards economic
transformation to date, and aggressively pursue the integration o f i t s economy with those o f
i t s neighbors and with the EU. FYR Macedonia w i l l need to foster a competitive and
dynamic private sector to take advantage o f improved access to regional markets.

11.

T h e Country Context

Political Developments

3.
The regional environment has improved, but risks remain. For the first time since
independence in 1991, FYR Macedonia faces both regional and domestic environments o f
relative political stability. The breakup o f the former Socialist Federal Republic o f
Yugoslavia (SFRY), which began when Slovenia declared independence in 1991, resulted in a
series o f conflicts throughout the decade between and within the constituent republics o f the
SFRY Although FYR Macedonia escaped hostilities within i t s borders until 2001, tensions
were often high throughout the 1990s due to spillover effects o f nearby conflicts. The country
was under particular pressure because o f i t s multi-ethnic makeup, and United Nation (UN)
forces were present in the country from 1992 through 1999 to help preserve the new state.*
During the same period, intermittent closing o f borders to the north and the south isolated

.'

~

I

The SFRY consisted of present day Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia and
Montenegro.
According to the 1994 census, the population consists of ethnic Macedonians (66.6 percent), ethnic Albanians
(22.7 percent), ethnic Turks, (3.9 percent), ethnic Serbs (2.0 percent), Roma (2.3 percent), and some other small
minority communities.

'

1

FYR Macedonia geographically and strangled international trade f l o w s 3 Then, in 1999, a
crackdown b y forces o f the Federal Republic o f Yugoslavia (FRY)4 on an armed ethnic
Albanian insurgency in the Serbian province o f Kosovo pushed about 350,000 refugees across
the border into FYR Macedonia (the equivalent o f 17 percent o f the country’s population).
The Kosovo crisis severely strained internal stability and economic management in FYR
Macedonia, severing key trade and transport links to the north and presenting a considerable
humanitarian challenge in managing and caring for Kosovar refugees. With the military
intervention and financial assistance o f the international community there was an early end to
hostilities, most refugees quickly returned home, and the Macedonian economy rapidly
recovered.
4.
Domestic peace has been re-established. In early 2001, fighting erupted between
Macedonian government forces and ethnic Albanian rebels in the northwest region o f FYR
Macedonia. As fighting spread to the outskirts o f the capital, a full-blown civil war was
feared. However, in August 2001, an internationally mediated ceasefire led to the disarming
o f insurgents overseen b y the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), a Presidential
amnesty for most combatants, and a peace agreement signed b y the leaders o f the major
political parties. This General Framework Agreement for Peace (also known as the Ohrid
Agreement, after the town where i t was negotiated) provided for the cessation of hostilities
and the increased protection o f the rights o f ethnic Albanians and other minority groups.
(Box 1). A small NATO protective force entered the country to lead the disarmament effort
and monitor security developments, which became a EU-led military peacekeeping mission in
March 2003. B y 2003, violence had subsided in the conflict-affected areas, most displaced
persons had returned home, and the police had established an active presence in most
communities.

A positive political environment now exists. The outcome o f the September 2002
5.
parliamentary elections places FYR Macedonia in a good position to take advantage o f the
opportunity that the improved regional security environment offers. The elections were
conducted peacefully and were endorsed b y international monitors as free and fair. The
Together for Macedonia coalition, headed b y the Social Democratic Alliance o f Macedonia
(SDSM), won 60 o f the 120 seats in Parliament. As has been the case with all governments
since independence, the winning ethnic Macedonian party opted to include in the Government
one o f the ethnic Albanian parties. In this case a coalition was formed with the Democratic
Union for Integration (DUI),founded b y a leader o f the 2001 insurgency, which had swept the
election among ethnic Albanian voters and contributed a further 16 seats to the Government.
The SDSM/DUI victory represented a popular backlash against corruption and irregular
public spending which had ballooned in the public sector in 2001 and 2002. The coalition
came to power with a mandate to re-impose the rule o f law, fight corruption, reduce
unemployment, and alleviate poverty.

Disagreement with neighboring Greece over the use o f the name “Republic of Macedonia” led to a trade
blockade during 1994-1995, and internationalsanctions against the Federal Republic o f Yugoslavia (now Serbia
and Montenegro) imposed in 1992 (and a ban on transshipment o f products through the country in 1993) were
not lifted until 2001.
4
FRY adopted a new constitution in 2003 and changed i t s name to ‘Serbia and Montenegro’.

L

Box 1. The Ohrid Agreement
The General Framework Agreement for Peace (the Ohrid Agreement) was signed on August 13, 2001 by the
leaders of the four main political parties in FYR Macedonia at the time, representing ethnic Macedonians and
ethnic Albanians. I t set out specific reforms and protections aimed at strengthening the rights of minority
communities, especially ethnic Albanians. The Ohrid Agreement institutes a minority veto over certain categories
o f legislation, including laws that directly affect culture, use of language, education, local government and
personal documentation, and provides for affirmative action in public employment, The agreement also mandates
the increased use of the Albanian language in public affairs and decentralization o f the responsibility for many
government functions to the municipalities.
The amendments to the Constitution required by the Ohrid Agreement were adopted by the Parliament on
November 16, 2001 (almost two months later than anticipated). After considerable debate and delay the new Law
on Local Self-Government was adopted by the Assembly on January 24, 2002. The Law assigns local
governments responsibility for establishing and financing primary schools, providing social care for the disabled,
and other social categories, and providing primary health care and health protection for persons without health
insurance. The transitional provisions o f the law anticipate an implementation period of two years, specifying that
existing sector-specific laws should be harmonized by the end of 2003.
An important aspect of the Ohrid Agreement from an economic perspective i s that i t includes a commitment to
create ‘equitable’ representation o f minorities in the public administration, addressing present imbalances. This
will require the employment o f under represented minorities, which w i l l be difficult to fulfill while containing
wage spending. This challenge will be amplified by the need to decompress wage structures in public
employment. Improving the representation of minorities will also compound difficulties in implementing
regulations intended to create a professional, merit-based civil service. The achievement of civil service reform
objectives will be further complicated by the reduction in central government employment and increase in local
government employment implied by decentralization.

6.

The Stabilization and Association Process o f the EU and the Stability Pact, both
created following the 1999 Kosovo conflict, provide strong integrating forces that are
fostering increasing economic and political ties in the region, under the broader framework o f
harmonization with Europe. However, the unresolved final status o f Kosovo remains a
potential flashpoint for ethnic tensions and continues to constrain the regional economic and
political outlook.
Recent economic developments

7.
Macroeconomic stability has been maintained since the mid 1990s. FYR Macedonia
was the least developed o f the republics o f the SFRY, and i t s economy had been contracting
for more than six years at the time o f independence in 199 1. Macroeconomic instability in the
early years, which saw output collapse b y about 20 percent and the fiscal deficit balloon to 13
percent o f GDP, was countered by a stabilization program beginning in 1994. This program
succeeded in bringing inflation down to single digit levels and reducing the fiscal deficit to
1.4 percent o f GDP by 1996, largely through sharp cuts in transfers and subsidies and
rescheduling of external debt. Over the next couple o f years the pace o f economic growth
picked up, price stability was preserved, and fiscal balance was largely achieved b y 1997.
Importantly, government expenditure was slashed by nearly 10 percent o f GDP between 1994
and 1998, although this achievement was subsequently undermined b y the expenditure
demands of the 2001 conflict. (Table 1.)
8.
Recent crises have disrupted growth. The 1999 Kosovo crisis resulted in a doubledigit rate o f decline of industrial production, and a severe deterioration o f the fiscal balance.

3

However, the swift resolution of the crisis allowed for a quick recovery, with higher exports
and consumption resulting in GDP growth o f 4.3 percent in 1999, and donor aid helping close
the fiscal gap. The current account deficit fell to just below 1 percent o f GDP as official and
private transfers surged. B y 2000 exports had recovered to their 1998 level, and the economy
registered i t s highest growth rate since independence (4.5 percent). In addition, the
authorities returned to their program of structural reforms that had stalled during the crisis.
As a result o f this quick turnaround, overall performance for 1995-2000 remained quite
positive. The economy grew in this period b y 14.4 percent, with the industrial sector taking
the lead with an 18.6 percent growth, driven b y revival o f the iron and steel industry, and
textiles. Services followed with a 12.9 percent growth rate (mostly under the influence o f the
developing telecommunication and transport sectors) while output in agriculture grew b y 8.4
percent.
9.
The 2001 civil conflict disrupted this positive economic momentum. While direct
conflict damage was limited, output contracted by 4.5 percent as opposed to forecast GDP
growth o f 6 percent. Investment activity dropped markedly, and the fiscal and external deficits
widened significantly as security related expenditures surged and exports and transfers
plummeted. In 2002, the recovery o f the economy was slower than expected, with investment
remaining sluggish, while higher private consumption was offset b y depressed exports and
surging imports. The fiscal deficit remained high (at 5.7 percent o f GDP), partly because o f
ongoing security needs but mostly because o f increased spending in the run-up to the
September 2002 parliamentary elections. The failure o f exports to recover drove a worsening
current account deficit, moving f r o m 6.8 percent o f GDP in 2001 to 8.7 percent in 2002.

10.
Significant investmentflows have not materialized. Apart from a spike in 2001 from
the sale o f the telephone company (Maktel), foreign direct investment (FDI) has remained at
l o w levels. Privatization, although rapid, has generally favored insiders, which has
significantly restricted post-privatization restructuring.
M u c h o f the enterprise sector
continues to generate losses, while the newly emerging private sector i s s t i l l too small and
fragmented to generate significant growth or job creation. While more successful transition
economies saw massive inflows o f investment and capital from developed neighbor countries,
both FDI and domestic investment in FYR Macedonia have been constrained b y the riskiness
o f the region, lingering domestic problems with the investment climate, and heightened
perceptions o f domestic political risk.
Table 1. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators 1992-2002
1992

GDP growth (5%)
Inflation
Fiscal Balance
Revenues
Expenditures
Current Account
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Investment

1993

1994

1995

1996

-6.6
1690.7

-7.5
349.8

-1.8
121.8

-1.1
15.9

-9.8
39.3
49.1

-13.4
40.2
53.6
-3.2
0.0
17.9

-2.7
43.1
45.8
-7.8
0.7
15.5

-0.7
38.3
39.0
-6.7
0.2
20.8

0.0
15.6

Sotrrcri: National Bank of Macedonia, State Statistical Office, Ministry

of Finance

A

1997

1.2
1.4
3.0
4.4
(in % of GDP)
-1.4
-0.4
35.7
34.8
37.1
35.1
-7.7
-7.7
0.3
0.4
20.1
21.0

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

3.4
0.8

4.3
-1.1

4.5
5.8

-4.5
5.5

0.7
1.8

-1.7
33.3
35.0
-7.5
3.3
22.3

0.0
35.4
35.4
-0.9
0.9
19.7

2.5
36.6
34.1
-2.1
4.9
21.4

-6.3
34.4
40.8
-6.8
12.9
18.3

-5.7
36.1
41.8
-8.7
2.1
21.9

11.
Unemployment has remained very high. FYR Macedonia has had high rates o f
unemployment since the late 1960s which have worsened with the transition to a market
e ~ o n o m y . ~The Labor Force Survey indicates that about one-third o f the workforce i s
unemployed, although other evidence argues that few adults are completely idle. Many
households have turned to subsistence agriculture and petty trade, staving off poverty, while
jobs in the formal sector have continued to disappear. Labor market flexibility has improved
through significant reforms o f the legal and administrative framework for employment, but
growth so far has simply not been sufficient to spur j o b creation that would absorb significant
numbers o f those without work.
Poverty is a moderate problem in FYR Macedonia.
From an international
12.
perspective, poverty in FYR Macedonia i s moderate, with 7.5 percent o f the population with
per capita consumption below the international standard o f $2.15 per day in 2000.6 Data from
the 2000 official Household Budget Survey (HBS) indicate moderate relative poverty, with 20
percent o f the population falling below 60 percent o f median equivalent income. The
household data also reveals the following:

Significant gaps exist in our knowledge o f p ~ v e r t y .These
~
include a lack of data on (i)
the regional poverty profile; (ii)
the non-income dimensions o f poverty; (iii)
the ethnic
disaggregation o f poverty; (iv) the informal coping mechanisms o f the poor; and (v) the
gender dimensions o f poverty.
Poverty i s persistent. Modest but volatile growth since 1996 has been countered b y
rising inequality o f incomes over the same period, leaving poverty rates unchanged
during 1996-2000 (as measured against constant real national standards).8
Unemployment and underemployment are high, and are strongly correlated with
poverty. The poverty risks o f households with unemployed have been rising
throughout 1996-2000. Poverty i s also very strongly correlated with poor educational
outcomes.
Widespread rural poverty and pockets of urban poverty persist. Consumption poverty
i s higher in rural areas, which also hosted most o f the poor through the 1996-2000
period. There are pockets o f poverty in urban areas, especially in urban slums, and the
geographical concentration o f poverty i s partly in areas where ethnic tensions are the
highest.
Complex demographics and the regional dispersion o f living standards make poverty
hard to measure and monitor. Given a variety of living arrangements varying from
Significant rates of unemployment were a distinguishing feature of the Yugoslav socialist system.
In ECA, US$2.15 i s used as the absolute poverty line instead of $1 due to heating costs.
A 1999 Poverty Assessment supported by the Bank was based mostly on data from 1996 and earlier. The
Macedonian authorities produced an Interim-Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) in 2000 and later a
National Strategy for Poverty Reduction (NSPR). The former government had begun work on a PRSP, but
decided, once FYR Macedonia became ineiigible for I D A and PRGF resources, to reduce the scope of work.
The resulting strategy was presented by the new government to donors in December 2002. The new government
has indicated a desire to work with the Bank and other partners on developing the NSPR further.
Poverty measured using an inflation adjusted consumption basket has been relatively constant, with a 12
percent increase i n real personal consumption between 1996-2000 which was fully offset by worsening income
distribution.

’
*

5

extended multigenerational households with 15-20 members to nuclear families and
single elderly people, coupled with ethnic and cultural diversity, any diagnosis o f
poverty i s extremely sensitive to data quality and measurement techniques.
13.
Recent policy performance has been encouraging. Despite poor outcomes in
attracting investment and reducing unemployment, economic management has improved in
2003. The IMF Board approved a Stand B y Arrangement to support the Government’s
macroeconomic program at the end o f April 2003, which w i l l run until the end o f June 2004.
Under the program, the authorities plan significant fiscal adjustment, which w i l l reverse the
deterioration experienced in 200 1 and 2002. Though challenging to implement, the program
lays out a sustainable fiscal path for the medium term.
Medium term prospects
14.
Integration into the regional and EU markets will be key to growth. The
Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU w i l l promote greater flows o f
goods and services b y reducing tariff and other trade barriers, providing an enormous market
for Macedonian producers and stimulating competition in the domestic market. Perhaps more
importantly, the S A A aims to accelerate the alignment o f policies, legislation and institutions
with those o f the EU. This alignment should spark higher FDI flows and higher domestic
investment, fueling stronger growth. As a small, landlocked economy in a strategic
geographic position, FYR Macedonia must strive to become an open and l o w cost goods and
capital transshipment center linking Turkey, Greece, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro,
To attract foreign investment and increase the
Albania and other EU countries.
competitiveness o f the economy, FYR Macedonia must aggressively work to remove the
regulatory and procedural barriers currently inhibiting the flow o f goods, services, capital and
information across i t s borders. While the SAA and recent World Trade Organization (WTO)
membership commit FYR Macedonia to a schedule o f trade liberalization, there remain
significant procedural and administrative constraints to the successful integration o f the
Macedonian economy with the region and the EU.

15.
Assuming continuing improvements in regional and domestic stability and strong
policy performance, the medium-term outlook i s positive. With good structural reform
progress and an external environment conducive to improved trade and capital flows,
economic growth i s projected to strengthen to 4.5 percent by 2005 (Table 2).9

9

These projections assume achieving the high case reform scenario with corresponding IBRD support as
outlined in Section V.

6

T a b l e 2. Macroeconomic Projections 2002-2005
Actual

Projected _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

2002
Gross Domestic Product
Inflation
Fiscal Balance
Revenues
Expenditures
Current Account
Foreign D i r e c t Investment
Gross Domestic Investmei

2003
(in %)

0.7
1.8

3 .O
2.6
(in % o f GDP)
-5.7
-1.9
36.1
32.9
41.8
34.8
-8.7
-6.8
2.1
2.4
21.9
23.0

2004

2005
4.0
2.1

4.5
2.1

-1.1
33.4
34.5
-6.9
2 .I
23.5

-0.6
33.0
33.6
-6.5
2.8
24.4

16.
Zncreased investment is critical to the medium-term outlook. Increased regional
integration w i l l promote the emergence o f a more efficient and competitive business
environment. Sustained economic growth w i l l require higher investment levels and concerted
efforts to improve the productivity and the efficiency o f allocation o f factors o f production,
particularly o f investment capital and assets such as land. In addition to poor results in
attracting foreign investment, financial intermediation o f domestic savings in FYR Macedonia
i s low, due primarily to poor judicial protection o f creditor rights, unclear systems for
recording title, transfer and collateralization o f land, and a history o f political interference in
the operations o f the enterprise and financial sectors. To achieve projected growth outcomes,
improvements in the investment climate w i l l be needed to restore investment to pre-crisis
levels o f around 27 percent o f GDP b y 2005. This implies a significant increase in both
domestic savings and financial intermediation, combined with rising confidence o f foreign
investors.

17.

There is significant untapped potential in the Macedonian labor force. While labor
intensive growth i s needed to reduce unemployment and improve l i v i n g standards in the
short-term, human capital development must remain a priority. Special attention w i l l need to
be paid to education and health, to generate rising labor productivity over the long term, as
well as further reform and consistent enforcement o f labor regulations and taxes. Reform o f
the overall regulatory environment for the private sector w i l l be crucial, as limited prospects
for significant restructuring and productivity gains among former State-Owned Enterprises
(SOEs) w i l l mean that opportunities for increased labor utilization w i l l need to be largely
generated b y small and medium enterprises (SMEs). As economic borders disappear in the
medium-term, the Macedonian economy w i l l need to diversify f r o m i t s reliance on traditional
sectors such as steel and textiles towards more human capital intensive activities. The
emergence o f new, dynamic, SMEs in the service sector capable o f fully exploiting FYR
Macedonia’s strategic location and historic strengths, such as in engineering, w i l l be
particularly important in this regard.

18.
External Debt and Creditworthiness. While current projections indicate that with
proper management, external debt should not create sustainability problems in the mediumterm, these projections hinge on a return to sustainable growth o f output and o f exports. At
the end of 2002, FYR Macedonia’s external debt stood at $1.4 billion, or 39 percent of GDP.
7

The country is, thus, rated as less-indebted b y the Bank, although the share of preferred creditor
debt remains high (at 20 percent of GDP and 51 percent of total debt). Liquidity remains
relatively comfortable, with a short-term debt to reserves ratio o f 28 percent and import cover o f
4.2 months o f imports, despite the extremely weak performance o f exports in the last two
years. Although external debt increased rapidly in the period up to 1998, i t has since
stabilized at around 40 percent o f GDP. The structure o f external debt i s relatively favorable,
with liabilities based on concessional lending accounting for around one-quarter o f total debt
outstanding. Liabilities towards private and commercial creditors accounts for just over onequarter o f total external debt, and short-term debt i s less than 6 percent o f the total. Close to
86 percent o f the total debt outstanding i s public and publicly-guaranteed, with the majority
being obligations o f the central government. In addition, even domestic public debt i s
denominated almost entirely in foreign currency.

111.

The Government’s Agenda of Policies and Programs

19.
Although FYR Macedonia does not have a formal national development strategy, the
policy agenda o f the Government was clearly articulated in i t s political platform leading into
the 2002 elections. The four pillars of the platform, political and social stability, poverty
reduction, j o b creation, and tackling corruption, enjoy broad support throughout FYR
Macedonia. Several detailed policy documents have been issued including on macroeconomic
policy, the fight against corruption, support for SMEs, and labor markets. More generally,
development policy i s underpinned b y the implementation o f two agreements: the Ohrid
Agreement, and the SAA with the European Union (Box 2).

Political and social stability. The governing coalition has stressed the need to move
ahead rapidly with implementation o f the Ohrid Agreement as a means to maintain
political and social stability, without which FYR Macedonia w i l l suffer further economic
stagnation. Implementing the Ohrid Agreement simultaneously with a macroeconomic
r e f o m program underpinned b y fiscal consolidation w i l l be challenging. Some of the
requirements o f the Ohrid Agreement, such as increasing the use o f the Albanian language
in public affairs, have proven relatively easy to implement. However, other elements,
such as the decentralization o f many functions and services and increasing minority
employment in the public administration, present important challenges. Maintaining
stability w i l l also require the government to aggressively tackle organized crime that has
flourished, particularly in areas where public order broke down during the 2001 conflict.
Creating jobs. The poor performance of the formal labor market and high rates o f
registered unemployment in FYR Macedonia have been major factors undercutting
commitment to reform b y the public and the Government (particularly restructuring o f
state enterprises and c i v i l service reform). Creating jobs w i l l first and foremost require
robust economic growth driven b y a revitalized private sector. Structural reforms aimed
at aligning Macedonian legislation and institutions with those o f the EU - guided b y the
S A A - and an improved domestic investment climate w i l l be essential in this regard.
Poverty reduction. Robust economic growth w i l l also be necessary for sustained poverty
reduction, but attention w i l l have to be paid to the quality o f growth. The Government has
indicated a willingness to work with the Bank to develop mechanisms to better measure

8

poverty outcomes and monitor progress over time, and i t i s expected that as progress i s
made government policy w i l l be increasingly informed and directed b y poverty outcomes.
Again, the poverty reduction agenda w i l l be strongly aligned with Macedonian aims to
integrate more closely w i t h the institutions o f the EU.
0

Tackling corruption. Although official corruption has been a feature o f Macedonian
administrations since the days o f the SFRY, the problem appears to have ballooned in the
period between the signing o f the Ohrid Agreement and the 2002 elections. Political
patronage and interference in the operation o f the private sector also appear as serious
impediments to the development o f an efficient market system and serve as deterrents to
investment. Tackling corruption was a key plank in the electoral platform o f the
Government, and the authorities have demonstrated a commitment to this priority b y
moving quickly to reform the Customs Agency and to initiate proceedings against a
number o f officials suspected o f corruption.

Box 2. The Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU
FYR Macedonia, along with four other countries in the region (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and
Montenegro and Albania), receives substantial EU support aimed at advancing the reform process in the country
in order to enable it to draw closer to the EU and to integrate into i t s structures. T o this end, the EU designed a
regional concept for these countries, the "stabilization and association process", and i t developed a new, tailormade category o f agreements for the relevant group o f countries, the SAA.
FYR Macedonia i s a pioneer country for the SAA. The General Affairs Council of the EU issued the required
negotiating mandate on 24 January 2000, and negotiations were successfully concluded on 24 November 2000
with the initialing o f the Agreement. The S A A was signed in Luxembourg on 9 April 2001 but remains to be
ratified by the national parliaments o f all the EU member states.

~

The trade section o f the Agreement entered into force separately as an interim agreement effective from June,
2001. This confers upon F Y R Macedonia asymmetric preferential trade access to the EU, representing a crucial
step forward given that the EU i s i t s most important trading partner with a 42 percent share of the country's
overall trade volume.
The interim agreement envisages the step-by-step establishment o f a free trade area within ten years after entry
into force o f the agreement, i.e. b y June 201 1 at the latest. Sensitive products, in particular in agriculture and
fisheries, are subject to special transitional rules during the first few years, to be lifted or adapted as the
implementation o f the agreement continues.
With the SAA, FYR Macedonia w i l l have at i t s disposal an instrument enabling the country to achieve the
gradual alignment o f laws, institutions, and policies with the "acquis communautaire". Such alignment should
enable higher FDI flows, better access to markets, and higher growth. The S A A i s in many ways similar to the
Europe Agreements, which have been concluded with today's candidate countries from Central and Eastern
Europe. Moreover, it earmarks funds for FYR Macedonia within the framework of the EU Community
Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilization Program (CARDS), which i s designed to support
the stabilization and association process.

9

IV.

Key Development Challenges and Opportunities in FYR Macedonia

20. Achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in FYR Macedonia. FYR
Macedonia i s generally o n track to meet the main human development MDG targets by 2015,
but i t needs to focus on the sub-national level and small pockets o f the population with larger
disparities in MDG indicators. MDG targets are likely to be met on child mortality, maternal
mortality (where rates are already very low), and tuberculosis control. Although the
prevalence o f H I V / A I D S i s low, there i s a substantial risk o f future outbreaks, given growth in
some of the transmission mechanisms in the region such as intravenous drug use and
commercial sex activity. The country may be able to meet the MDG on school completion
but i s unlikely to achieve sufficient progress on equality in schools, due to significant demand
issues related to minorities such as Albanians and Roma, particularly with regard to girls in
these minority groups. Information i s currently insufficient to judge whether the MDG on
nutrition w i l l be met. There i s also insufficient data to assess whether FYR Macedonia w i l l
meet the MDG targets for access to safe drinking water and improving the lives o f slum
dwellers.
21.
The Bank and its partners have completed a significant body of analytic work.
Existing analytic work serves as a good basis for understanding and prioritizing the
development challenges in FYR Macedonia at the sectoral level, according to their likely
impacts on long-term growth and poverty reduction (Box 3)." Challenges may be grouped
under three broad themes, which have also been chosen as the objectives for the Bank's
strategic response: (i)
promoting the efficient management o f public resources and tackling
corruption; (ii)promoting the creation of jobs through sustainable private sector driven
growth; and (iii)promoting reconciliation, building human capital and protecting the most
vulnerable.
Promoting the efficient management of public resources and tackling corruption.

22.
Public expenditure management has improved, but much remains to be done. A
critical weakness which remains in public expenditure management, and which has been a
major opportunity for corruption and misuse o f public resources in the past, i s that five ExtraBudgetary Funds" (EBFs), which together comprise some 40 percent o f total government
spending, operate outside o f the central government budget and the treasury and with weak
oversight and financial controls. Of these, the Pension and Disability Fund and the Health
Insurance Fund are the largest. A focus o f the public sector management reform agenda w i l l
necessarily be to improve the financial sustainability, accountability and transparency o f the
operations o f the EBFs over the coming years.

IO

The formulation of the CAS has benefited significantly from a Country Economic Memorandum which i s
currently being finalized for circulation to the Board.
iI
The five EBFs are the Health Insurance Fund, the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, the Agriculture
Fund, the Road Fund, and the Employment Fund.

10

23.
Numerous weaknesses in public resource management were identified b y the Bank’s
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR), and many were addressed in a revised
Law on Budget and Financial Management, approved in 2000, followed b y other enabling
legislation. These efforts have improved the budget development process, however budget
preparation i s s t i l l not sufficiently guided b y agreed macro-fiscal strategy and policy
priorities. Policy planning and development in the Ministry o f Finance has improved, but
increased capacity needs to be developed in line ministries. As a matter o f priority, the
government needs to begin work on the establishment o f a multi-year budgeting framework,
the lack o f which represents a major risk to budget formulation. On the budget execution
side, the implementation o f an effective treasury system has represented an important step
forward. The current lack o f control o f commitments b y budget users remains a problem,
although a treasury systems upgrade planned for September 2003 would address this
weakness.
Box 3. Recent Diagnostic Studies and Surveys in FYR Macedonia
Core Fiduciary/Diagnostic Work
Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR)
Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR)
Country Portfolio Review
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)
National Bank of Macedonia (NBM) Safeguards Assessment
Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix
Country Economic Memorandum
Other Country Studies
Human Development Report
Macedonia Statistical System: Global Assessment
Barriers to SME Development in Bosnia, Macedonia and Slovenia
Education Sector Update
Agricultural Sector Update
Fiscal Decentralization Policy Note
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes - Accounting and
Auditing
FYR Macedonia Gender Background Note
Gender Discussion Note
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Administrative Barriers to Investment Study
Regional Studies
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey
Trade Policies and Institutions in the Countries o f South Eastern Europe
Institutional Reform for Investment and Growth in South Eastern Europe
Regional Energy Strategy - South East Europe

Agency
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB
IMF
IMF
WB

UNDP
EC-PHARE
EC-PHARE
WB
WB
WB
WB/IMF

Date

1999
April 2002
June 2002
Nov. 2002
July 2003
June 2003
April 2003
due Sept. 2003
Annual
July 2001
Aug 2001
June 2002
Oct. 2002
Mar 2003
June 2003

WB
WB
WB/IMF
IFC-FIAS

due Sept. 2003
due Sept 2003
due Sept 2003
due Oct. 2003

EBRDNB
WB
WB
WB

2003
2003
due 2003
due 2003

24.
Fiduciary controls over public finances need to be strengthened. The new L a w on
Budgets provided for the establishment o f internal audit units by first line budget users. T o
date, progress on this key fiduciary control has been limited. Internal audit functions have
only been established in the Ministry o f Finance and in the Public Revenue Office, and these
remain under resourced. The external audit function was established in 1999 as the State

11

Audit Office (SAO), w i t h a legislative basis in the 1999 L a w on State Audits. While the SA0
has made good progress, particularly over the last two years, and produces audits o f sound
quality, i t currently has the resources to audit only around 10 percent of the audit universe
annually. l2 I t also faces a significant challenge in implementing internationally accepted
auditing standards and processes.
25.
The civil service and broader public sector employment structures require
significant reform. Uncontrolled growth o f the public wage bill i s a major risk to fiscal
sustainability in FYR Macedonia. The c i v i l service salary structure i s also highly compressed
and represents an obstacle to attracting and retaining skilled staff. The Government’s human
resource management reform agenda encompasses two broad areas: c i v i l service (CS) reform,
and pay and employment reform throughout the rest o f the public a d m i n i ~ t r a t i o n . ’ ~Progress
has been made on CS reform, including the passage o f and subsequent revision o f a new Law
on C i v i l Servants and recent enforcement efforts. However, the proposed decompression o f
c i v i l service salaries has been repeatedly postponed due to fiscal constraints.
26.
Inappropriate public sector interventions in business have continued, although no
longer primarily because of state ownership. Public ownership i s no longer a serious
constraint to private sector performance - more than 100 SOEs are to be sold or closed b y
end-2003, which w i l l essentially conclude privatization. However numerous autonomous
agencies l4and as many as 500 enterprises with government shareholding or other legal
responsibility remain o f concern. These entities present governance challenges as they
operate under minimal government supervision. Moreover, they could present a fiscal
problem, since liabilities may eventually fall onto the public purse. Public sector distortions
in recent years have included the uneven enforcement o f laws and policies, including taxes
and duties, continued tolerance by government o f arrears, and the provision o f implicit
guarantees and subsidies. This behavior reflects typically nepotism and corruption and
creates a distorted playing field for private investors. Moreover, under these circumstances
competitive pressure for efficient resource reallocation in the private sector barely exists. A
key challenge over the coming years, and one which the government i s now beginning to
address, w i l l be to realign the notion of the appropriate role o f the state in the economy.
27.
Decentralization will test the provision of basic services. The new L a w on Local
Self-Government (January 2002) sets out, in broad terms, a very substantial functional
decentralization, w i t h the provision o f key services to become the responsibility o f municipal
governments. Maintaining the uninterrupted provision o f core services, in particular
education, health, and social welfare, w i l l be challenging as decentralization progresses. The
current 124 municipalities have diverse size, population, and financial and management
l2The law requires that 240 of the total 1,752 budget entities be audited annually, with the remainer requiring
triennial audits.
I’ The “rest of the public administration” includes (i) non-CS positions within the central government; (ii)
employment financed through the various Funds (Health Insurance Fund, Employment Fund, Pension and
Disability Insurance Fund, Road Fund), (iii) sub-national government employment, and (v) public enterprises
and state-owned enterprises. The CS comprises, in addition, about 10,000 to 12,000 positions, and the public
administration as a whole i s estimated to have about 125,000 employees.
l4These include the Civil Aviation Administration, the Commodity Reserves Agency, the Free Economic Zone
Agency, the Investment Development Agency, the Privatization Agency, and the Telecommunications Agency.

12

capacities, which w i l l complicate assigning new responsibilities to them. Decentralization
reforms are also likely to bring about significant changes in the responsibilities and funding o f
municipal utilities.
Promoting the creation of jobs through sustainable private sector driven growth.

28.
Privatization has not resulted in large productivity gains. About 60 percent o f all
privatizations in FYR Macedonia have been to insiders through management-employee buyouts. As a result the enterprise sector remains inefficient, poorly managed and generally not
competitive. FYR Macedonia has been a relatively poor performer in terms o f attracting
foreign direct investment, with net FDI inflows under 1 percent o f GDP throughout most of
the 1990s. Improving this situation in the medium to long-term, w i l l require addressing the
poor businesshegulatory environment, the lack o f management s k i l l s and business linkages in
enterprises, and operational inefficiencies o f the banking sector. Recent work b y the Bank
and the IMF also indicates that the observance o f auditing and accounting standards in FYR
Macedonia i s particularly poor, and contributes to the overall climate o f poor fiduciary control
and the potential for corruption in both the public and private sectors.
29.
Uncertainty over land title is a brake on the private sector. The recent Foreign
Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) study indicated that problems with the purchase of and
construction on real-estate were rated as the most significant administrative barrier to
investment in FYR Macedonia. Unclear property rights constrain collateral and mortgage
financing and acts as a brake on private sector activity. W o r k has commenced on establishing
a modern real estate cadastre and the development o f modern and transparent processes for
title transfer and permits; however, only about 40 percent o f the territory o f FYR Macedonia
has thus far been registered in the new system, and only two out o f 1,870 cadastral
municipalities have been completely covered.
30.
Theflnancial sector has improved, but is under-developed. The banking system i s
characterized b y a lack o f competition, high deposit and lending rates, and a limited appetite
for lending. However, the overall health o f the system has been greatly improved in recent
years through improvement o f the regulatory and supervisory framework and the resolution o f
a number o f problem banks. Nevertheless, significant weaknesses remain such as a legacy o f
non-performing loans, and a high degree o f euro-ization, with the result that 40 percent o f
loans to the private sector are in foreign currency. The legal and institutional infrastructure
underlying the financial system can be improved, especially through strengthening o f the
judicial system, which has hitherto impeded the enforcement o f general contractual and
property rights. The remainder o f the financial system i s also underdeveloped: for example,
while there are seven insurance companies, the largest controls about 90 percent o f the
insurance market, and insurance supervision i s particularly weak. FYR Macedonia has a
stock exchange, but with limited listings and little liquidity. There are no fixed income
markets outside o f National Bank o f Macedonia bills and special issues o f government bonds
on non-market terms, although the Government plans to initiate a T-bill market b y the end o f
the year.
31.
Reform of the judicial system is a priority. The judicial system in FYR Macedonia
suffers from systemic. problems including weak enforcement o f creditor and property rights,

13

high levels o f politicization at all levels in the courts, and a lack o f accountability o f judges.
There i s widespread frustration in the business community at the lack of commercial
understanding on the part o f the judges. Judicial rulings are appealed with great frequency,
and some judges resort to delaying or adjourning hearings unnecessarily, in order to avoid
having to address complex commercial issues. There i s also a significant problem with
enforcement o f court orders, with the courts exercising so little authority that the support o f
the other state institutions such as the police cannot be assured.
32.
Energy supplies are threatened in the medium term. FYR Macedonia i s one of the
poorest countries in South East Europe in energy resources and w i l l become even poorer as
the country exhausts i t s main lignite reserves around 2010. Unless alternative fuel supplies are
obtained, this w i l l result in the closing o f the lignite-fired plant at Bitola, which accounts for
about 70 percent o f current electricity supply. Large investments in electricity infrastructure
are needed to diversify electricity supply and increase integration into the South East Europe
Regional Energy Market, and eventually into the EU electricity market. However, for
investment to materialize on the scale needed, an appropriate policy environment w i l l need to
be developed to allow for increasing commercialization and private sector participation in the
energy market, especially in the electricity .sub-sector. Opportunity also exists to improve the
efficiency o f energy usage in FYR Macedonia, which has high energy consumption relative to
GDP, and to develop the country’s significant renewable energy resources (mostly small
hydropower and geothermal). While electricity pricing currently allows for profitable
generation and supply, the tariff structure requires review to provide incentives for new
generation (including using renewables) and energy conservation. System distribution losses
are currently at 18 percent, which i s high and needs to be sharply reduced.

33.
The transport sector is crucial for successful regional integration.
FYR
Macedonia’s strategic location makes i t a keystone for land transport between Turkey,
Greece, Bulgaria and the rest o f Europe. The efficient and effective operation o f the roads
and railways, as well as border crossings and the customs system, which link the Macedonian
economy to the region w i l l become increasingly important to realizing the country’s growth
potential. Currently, the operation o f both the road and railway networks i s controlled b y
inefficient SOEs, which run at losses and constitute either direct or contingent liabilities on
the budget. In addition, existing infrastructure i s degrading as scarce resources are diverted to
subsidize poorly targeted services and support overstaffed agencies at the expense of
maintenance. The customs service and border crossing points have been notorious centers o f
corruption; however, forceful action b y the Government and new investments in infrastructure
and customs practices are beginning to bear fruit. Restructuring o f transport links, including
improving the possibilities for private sector participation, w i l l also be crucial for
harmonization with EU institutions under the SAA. On the regional level, FYR Macedonia
must work with i t s neighbors to increase cooperation between the customs agencies in South
East Europe, harmonize procedures, and increase transparency.
Rural development has been limited. In general, agriculture suffers from the same
34.
impediments to private sector growth as the rest o f the economy. In addition, productivity i s
l o w due to the combination o f inefficiently small farm lot sizes and lack o f investment. As in
other sectors, banks generally will not lend against land because o f uncertainty o f land title.
With competition increasing as trade barriers are progressively reduced under the SAA, there

14

i s a need for market-driven farm restructuring to rationalize the state owned agricultural
enterprises (Agrokombinats) and other users o f public land. Comprehensive irrigation sector
reform, including the development of a national irrigation plan and mechanisms to ensure
sustainability o f the entities that own and operate the extensive existing irrigation
infrastructure network i s also badly needed. Furthermore, the commodity reserve system
continues to distort incentives and stifle competition.

35.
Environmental challenges are substantial. FYR Macedonia faces significant
environmental challenges, particularly in water resource management. Recent successful
collaboration with neighboring Albania on the implementation o f a GEF supported project to
improve the management o f Lake Ohrid’s water resources provides a good model for future
efforts in this area. The Vardar River, which supplies about 75 percent FYR Macedonia’s
total water resources, i s polluted b y untreated urban and industrial waste, which i s but one
issue in a larger set of transboundary water management issues that FYR Macedonia has with
neighboring Greece. The level of Lake Dojran, a tectonic lake shared by Greece and FYR
Macedonia, has fallen dramatically in recent years, due largely to extensive irrigation in i t s
catchment area in Greece. Without concerted action, Lake Dojran w i l l certainly dry up in the
near future with irreversible biodiversity loss. Such asymmetries between the national fresh
water conservation priorities of neighboring countries w i l l need to be addressed in a
consultative cross border manner, which could be greatly assisted b y further GEF
involvement.

36.

Cultural heritage and tourism offer opportunities. In addition to i t s varied and
beautiful landscape, FYR Macedonia’s location at the crossroads between Slavic, Greek,
Turkish and Albanian cultures has endowed the country w i t h a particularly rich cultural
heritage. Features such as Greek, Roman, and Byzantine ruins, and villages rich in vernacular
architecture offer opportunities for tourism development. A recent assessment o f tourism
opportunities, supported b y the Bank, was optimistic about both internal and external tourism
potential and highlighted significant advantages that FYR Macedonia could leverage to attract
tourists at relatively l o w cost. However, the assessment also underscored weaknesses that
have hindered tourism development, such as the absence o f a government strategy for
tourism, unclear property rights which constrains private investment, and scarce statistical
data.

Promoting reconciliation, building human capital and protecting the most vulnerable
Maintaining social cohesion remains a challenge. The Kosovo crisis and the civil
37.
conflict o f 2001 eroded social cohesion and elevated the importance o f inter-ethnic relations
in the ongoing political debate. There are substantial social and economic differences
between FYR Macedonia’s ethnic communities, rural and urban populations and, more
generally, between sub-regions o f the country. While the implementation of some provisions
o f the Ohrid agreement has begun to promote reconciliation and reintegration o f communities,
there remains a substantial unfinished agenda to promote social inclusion. In particular,
variations in educational attainment across gender and ethnicity, important barometers for the
economic status o f current and future generations, are a cause for concern.

15

38.
The quality and relevance of education needs to be improved. International tests rate
Macedonian education outcomes among the poorest in Europe in sciences and mathematics in
grade 8 and also in literacy in grade 4. Most local and international experts consider the
curricula overloaded and highly demanding in terms o f the factual knowledge that must be
absorbed by students, while failing to develop better problem-solving and knowledge
acquisition skills that are needed in a modern competitive economy. While the primary
completion rate i s 90 percent, this average conceals large disparities among ethnic groups, b y
region, b y urban versus rural and b y income level. Participation in pre-primary education
demonstrates similar disparities, particularly among ethnic groups. l5As i s common in other
countries in the region, the educational outcomes o f girls from minority groups i s a critical
issue. Recent studies o f the Roma communities in Skopje confirmed that school enrollment
among all school-age Roma children i s alarmingly low, with between 31 and 37 percent o f
school age children not attending school. Children born into poor households often are
trapped in a vicious circle in which the low income o f their families translates into
unsatisfactory educational attainment and achievement, which reduces their future earning
potential.
Financing of the health system is tenuous. While FYR Macedonia spends a
39.
relatively high share o f i t s GDP on health16, in practice the availability o f health care i s
inadequate for those who cannot afford to pay for drugs and informal payments or for private
doctors' fees. Inefficiency and corruption in the state Health Insurance Fund (HIF) and stateowned healthcare institutions i s a major source o f poor performance in the health system. In
recent years, corruption in HIF management and procurement became increasingly blatant,
despite regular State Audit Office audits documenting illegality and poor financial control.
Efforts at reform have been tentative, though progress has occurred in some areas. For
example, the HIF now contracts with private as well as public primary care providers. While
the quality o f primary care has been improved in some places through training, the stateowned network o f healthcare providers has adopted unsustainable expenditure cutting
measures in an effort to stay in balance as revenues have fallen. This was exacerbated b y
politically-driven new hiring and the concentration o f limited resources in specialized services
and tertiary health care, while buildings and equipment deteriorated and primary care was
neglected.
The pension system needs further reform. In 2002, the total expenditures o f the
40.
Pension and Disability Insurance Fund (PDIF) amounted to 10.8 percent o f GDP, and the
fund required transfers from general revenues o f about 3.0 percent o f GDP. The structural
deficit in the PDIF i s expected to grow into the future. Reform w i l l need to include
parametric changes, along with efforts to improve administration through strengthened
accounting and improved internal controls. In addition, institutional capacity in the areas o f
strategic planning, business process development, human resource management and
communication needs further development.

15

Participation i s 90 percent among ethnic Macedonians, 54 percent among ethnic Albanians, and 37 percent
among ethnic Turks.
At about 6.5-7 percent o f GDP in public spending plus 2-3 percent o f GDP in private spending.

''

16

41.
Along with the changes in the current system, legislation was passed in 2000 to
implement a mandatory second pillar pension, intended to improve the long-term
sustainability o f the pension system. This pillar would be mandatory for new entrants to the
labor market and voluntary for persons who are already in the workforce.
The
implementation o f a two pillar system faces a number o f significant challenges including
creating the fiscal space necessary to capitalize the second pillar, creating adequate financial
instruments for investment, and ensuring that the institutional framework established i s cost
effective and consistent with sound governance principles and long-term financial return
objectives.
The social safety net is poorly coordinated. The Macedonian system o f social
42.
protection includes a mixture of cash benefits, unemployment support, social services and
institutional care. Although the Government has introduced legislative changes in recent
years in most areas o f social assistance, the programs are s t i l l facing fiscal pressures due to a
large and increasing number o f beneficiaries, falling contributions, and generous benefits in
some areas. There are also contradictions in legislation and confusion in the regulations
governing the administration o f social protection policy. This situation has arisen largely
from a history o f reactive and piece-meal approaches to the development and design of social
policy objectives and social administration, with little consideration given to administrative
requirements of programs, or linkages between programs. There i s a need to target assistance
programs more effectively, and to ensure policy and administrative consistency across
programs.
Urban slums are a substantial problem. I t i s estimated that there are about 100
43 *
slum settlements in FYR Macedonia, in which perhaps 20 percent o f the total urban
population lives. Skopje has 27 settlements with an estimated population o f 80,000
inhabitants. Typically, these communities lack sustainable access to basic infrastructure such
as safe drinking water, sanitation and solid waste disposal, and most households lack secure
tenure. Most households do not own the land on which their houses are built and do not have
building permits. According to estimates, every fourth house in these areas was built without
land ownership title, although no official data are available to confirm the extent o f this
problem.

V.

The Bank’s Partnership with FYR Macedonia and the New IBRD
Assistance Strategy

44.
FYR Macedonia has been a member of the World Bank since 1993. This i s the third
full CAS for FYR Macedonia since i t joined the World Bank group. Since FY94, ten IBRD
loans totaling US$192 million and fifteen IDA credits totaling US$240 million have been
approved. The last full CAS was prepared in 1998 and outlined a support program for FY9901. The Board discussed a CAS progress report in June 2000, which summarized progress
and updated the Bank’s business plan to respond to the 1999 Kosovo crisis. However, the
implementation o f the CAS was severely disrupted b y the 2001 civil conflict. Following the
outbreak o f violence that year, a TSS was prepared which outlined a post-conflict program of
assistance. While FYR Macedonia graduated from IDA eligibility on July 1, 2001, the TSS
included exceptional access to a further US$35 million of IDA resources on hardened terms,
in conjunction with US$15 million in IBRD lending through FY02.

Progress under the 1998 CAS and the 2001 TSS.
45.
The 1998 CAS and the 2000 Progress Report. The 1998 CAS outlined a program in
support of three core objectives (i)
promoting private sector growth and job creation; (ii)
enhancing the efficiency o f the state; and (iii)
alleviating poverty and developing human
capital. The 2000 CAS Progress Report detailed mixed results in progress towards achieving
these objectives, due largely to delays in preparation o f some o f the operations outlined under
the CAS as a result of the 1999 Kosovo crisis. The Report noted that at that time the
authorities were 12-18 months behind schedule on the structural reform agenda laid out in the
CAS. Progress in enterprise reform had been particularly slow, and investment had not
picked up as anticipated. While some gains had been made in strengthening the financial
sector, particularly through the privatization o f the largest state-owned bank, the rescheduling
o f the Bank’s proposed Financial and Enterprise Adjustment Loan I1 (FESAL 11) from FY99
to FYOl reflected significant slippage in enterprise sector reform. Moreover, no lending at all
took place in FYOO17,and the planned Public Sector Management Credit (PSMAC) had to be
rescheduled until FYOl as the attention o f the Government was diverted from public sector
reform (subsequently slipping further - see Table 4). However, during this period a first
Poverty Assessment was completed, which provided a more complete picture o f the nature o f
poverty in FYR Macedonia, and very substantial progress was made towards improving
primary health indicators through the continued implementation o f the F Y 9 6 Health Sector
Transition project. The Education project proposed in the initial CAS was dropped in the
Progress Report to make way for new operations in response to the Kosovo crisis.
46.
Reform accelerated in 2000 as the after-effects o f the Kosovo crisis dissipated, and
implementation o f the revised CAS program was largely successful prior to the 2001 civil
conflict. The TSS reported that all operations outlined in the progress report were delivered,
with the exception o f the PSMAC. Importantly, the FESAL I1operation went forward which,
together with the Social Support project and support from other donors, provided new impetus
to enterprise restructuring and financial sector strengthening. While the 200 1 crisis resulted
in further disruption and delays, the substantial improvements in the stability o f the financial
sector and the successful resolution o f a majority o f large state-owned enterprises remain
perhaps the most significant achievements of the 1998 CAS program.18 T w o flexible
operations approved in June 2001 under the CAS, the Community Development and Culture
LIL and the Children and Youth LIL, also played an important role in promoting activities to
improve social cohesion.

47.
Results under the TSS. The TSS outlined a one yearlg program o f post-conflict Bank
support primarily geared towards achieving four post-conflict priorities, namely (i)
meeting
balance o f payments needs; (ii)
reconstruction; (iii)
strengthening social cohesion; and (iv)
supporting decentralization. A lending program o f four new operations was planned, which
consisted o f two operations originally envisaged under the 2000 CAS Progress Report, and
two new operations to respond to the post-conflict scenario (Table 3). The impact o f the TSS
program again were mixed. The Emergency Economic Recovery Credit played an important
17

A small Mini-hydro Power Global Environment Facility (GEF) Grant was approved in FYOO.
Although no Operations Evaluation Department (OED) Country Assistance Evaluation has been completed for
FYR Macedonia, the FESAL I1 was rated Highly Satisfactory in a Quality at Entry Review by QAG.
19
The effective period of the TSS was extended through FY03 following further program delays in FY02.

18

role in coordinating donor balance o f payments support to allow a quick recovery of the
economy immediately after the conflict. However, while the Board approved the PSMAC in
FY02, i t was not signed because of deterioration o f the macroeconomic framework in the lead
up to the September 2002 elections. The Education project (originally planned to be US$15
million o f IBRD) was not delivered because i t s design needed to be modified in response to
the new challenges o f the Ohrid Agreement.*’ The continuing support for the Ohrid
Agreement, the peaceful transfer o f power following the 2002 elections, and continued
macroeconomic stability do indicate that the progress towards achieving the objectives o f the
TSS i s continuing.
Lessons learned implementing the 1998 CAS and the TSS. The disruptions to the
48.
Table 3. Lending Results under the TSS

I

50

Total

1 3 5 1 0 1

35

I

Bank’s partnership with FYR Macedonia that resulted from the 1999 Kosovo crisis, the 2001
civil conflict and, to a lesser extent, the political turmoil in the lead-up to the 2002 elections,
have had an important impact on the design o f the new CAS. Recent experience in FYR
Macedonia i s consistent with the conclusions o f OED evaluations of post-conflict assistance
and adjustment lending and i s reflected in the design o f the CAS. A Country Portfolio
Review (CPR) in late 2002 also provided specific recommendations for addressing systemic
implementation issues and for strengthening implementation arrangements and portfolio
management to reduce the risks in project execution. Key lessons learned include:
The reshaping o f the program in response to the Kosovo crisis to include more flexible
instruments o f support was appropriate and successful. The initiation o f two LILs
focused on promoting social cohesion and an accompanying post-conflict grant
implemented at the community level did help to mitigate the risks o f spillover effects
o f the conflict.
A sound macroeconomic framework i s a critical element o f adjustment programs.
While the suspension of the Bank’s adjustment support in 2002 did strain policy
dialogue with the authorities at the time, in the medium term this action served to
preserve the credibility o f the program and allow for a successful resumption o f the
reform agenda once the political environment had improved.

The Education Project i s now included as an FY04 operation under this CAS. As the Dutch government has
indicated a desire to co-finance the IBRD project with a US$10 million grant, the planned IBRD amount has
been reduced to US$5 million.

2o

19

Implementation experience with infrastructure projects has been mixed. While the
Irrigation Rehabilitation and Restructuring (IRRP), Trade and Transport Facilitation
TTFSE), and the Water Utility Improvement projects were adversely impacted b y the
crises (with the latter eventually being cancelled), progress under the Power Sector
Improvement (and i t s complementary GEF supported project) and the Transport
Sector project has been satisfactory. Increased attention has been paid to evaluating
the implementation risks o f infrastructure projects proposed in the new CAS.
Decentralization o f portfolio and project management to the country office allowed for
increased supervision effort and intensified sectoral policy dialogue.
Current status of the Bank’s portfolio. Following the CPR, an action plan was
49.
developed for implementation b y both the Bank and the Government to improve the portfolio
quality and identify constraints and opportunities to be addressed in the new CAS program.
The CPR highlighted implementation delays and variable performance o f the portfolio (which
includes TSS operations as well as operations initiated under the 1998 CAS and 2000
Progress Report) that resulted from the security concerns and macroeconomic and political
uncertainty following the 1999 Kosovo crisis and the 2001 civil conflict. Implementation of
some investment operations, notably the IRRP and the TTFSE, was badly affected b y the
crises. Implementation o f the CPR action plan has yielded substantial results, with the status
of the portfolio improving considerably in the last six months. (Table 4) 21

T h e objectives of the n e w CAS, and h o w progress towards t h e m w i l l b e measured.

50,
The analysis o f FYR Macedonia’s development challenges in Section I V has been
developed collaboratively b y the Bank and the Government, based on the overarching twopronged framework provided by the Ohrid Agreement and the SAA. The objectives of the
to promote the efficient management of
new CAS are drawn from this assessment, namely: (i)
public resources and tackle corruption; (ii)
to promote the creation o f jobs through sustainable
to promote social cohesion, build human capital, and
private sector driven growth; and (iii)
protect the most vulnerable.
5 1.
Results of the CAS will be measurable. A limited set o f priority outcomes, indicators,
benchmarks and targets have been selected from the broader group outlined in the Country
Program Matrix (Annex B9), which w i l l be used b y the Bank and the Government to assess
progress towards achieving the CAS objectives. This monitoring framework focuses on
sectors in which the Bank has comparative advantage and has been involved in the past, and
the new IBRD CAS program has been designed to achieve these outcomes as steps towards
FYR Macedonia’s longer-term development goals (Table 5). The outcome targets are based
on the full implementation o f a strong reform lending scenario (paragraph 65).
Table 4. Portfolio Status
Project

End
2002
Status

Mid
2003
Status

2 1 A l l projects are now rated as satisfactory on DO and I P apart from the IRRP, which i s in the process o f being
restructured following the successful completion o f a time bound action plan agreed in December 2002.

20

Trade and Transport
Facilitation
Water Utility
Improvement
Irrigation
Rehabilitation and
Restructuring
Public Sector
Management
Adjustment Credit
(PSMAC)
Community
Development

U

S

Second Financial and
Enterprise Sector
Adjustment Loan
(FESAL 11)
Power System

S

S

S

S

Community
Development and
Culture

S

S

U
U

U

S

S

Significant attention by the government has resulted in markedly
improved implementaiion o f the TTFSE.
The Bank agreed with the Government to cancel this project in

1

late 2002.

A time-bound action plan for restructuring of this project was
successfully completed in July 2003. Documents proposing the
restructuring o f this project are under preparation.
Although approved by the Board on April 9, 2002, signing was
delayed by the lack of an appropriate macroeconomic framework.
Following improvements in 2003, the credit was signed on M a y 5,
2003 and disbursed on May 30,2003.
Signing was delayed by the 2002 election process, but after
concerted action by the Government the project became effective
in April 2003
Disbursement o f the second tranche, which had been delayed by
the lack of an appropriate macroeconomic framework, proceeded
on July 28, 2003.
Implementationof this project has proceeded relatively smoothly,
as has an associated GEF suDDorted Droiect.
Although impeded by the 2001 security crisis, implementationhas
accelerated and the project i s expected to close on schedule in
June 2004.
The project has proceeded smoothly in parallel with progress
towards the resolution of loss making enterprises supported by the
well.
Despite some initial implementation problems, progress has
accelerated in 2003,

The ZBRD assistance program is selective. There are substantial and competing
52.
priorities for development assistance in FYR Macedonia. The Bank w i l l rely heavily on
development partners to take the lead in some sectors, in particular those in which the SAA

agenda and the complementary EU CARDS program w i l l be focused. This approach has
resulted in a more concentrated program and further emphasized reliance on the Bank’s
partners (paragraph 74). To this end, the new CAS program does not include assistance for
rural development, direct support to the enterprise/SME sector, health service delivery, or
capacity building at the municipal level.

21

Table 5. CAS Outcomes, Indicators and Benchmarks
Long Term Goal

3fficient and
ransparent
nanagement of
3ublic resources

Sustainable private
sector driven growth
and reduced
unemployment

Reduced poverty
and improved social
cohesion.

Short-term CAS
Outcome

Intermediate Indicator

All EBFs fully
integrated into the
budget preparation
and reporting
systems and using
the Treasury
Single Account
(TSA)
Adequate external
audit coverage o f
budget users and
EBFs to assure
integrity o f public
finances
More efficient
financial
intermediation by
the banking sector.

Vumber o f EBF's
ntegrated into the budget
,reparation and reporting
systems and TSA (or
ibolished).

1

5

4nnual audit coverage o f
mblic accounts

10 %

Reduction i n average loan
spreads.

Increased private
sector participation
i n infrastructure.

Increased use of
improved data to
inform policy
debate.

Base
line

End
FY06
Target

Bank I 1
Recent
Instruments
PEIR
CFAA
PSMAC

ruments
FY04-06 CAS
Program
% M A L I1
?SAL I& I1
PEIR Update

25 %

PEIR
CFAA
CPAR
PSMAC

PSMAL I1
PSAL I& I1
PEIR Update
CPAR Update

-9%

67%

FESAL I1

Number of private
investmentdpartnerships
i n roads, railway and
energy.

0

2

Power project
TTFSE project
Transport
Project

Public access to agreed
poverty monitoring
datasets.

No
access

Public
access

Poverty
Assessment
(2000)

PSAL I& I1
FSAP
Financial Sector
Devt. project
Land Registration
project
LegaVJudicial
Diagnostic
Regulatory and
Judicial Reform
project
Energy Sector
Strategy
Transport
restructuring
project
Electric Power
Development
project
Poverty
Assessment.
PSAL I& I1

The new IBRD program

53.

The new IBRD program described below i s designed to support a program o f strong
structural reform that would enable the achievement o f both the CAS outcomes and the
macroeconomic outcomes projected in Table 2. Proposed new IBRD instruments have been
chosen in consideration of existing Bank support through the current active portfolio (Annex
A). In a strong reform scenario, structural adjustment lending w i l l be combined with
supporting investment operations and complementary diagnostic work to strengthen the
institutions o f public governance and create the conditions in which the private sector can
flourish. A programmatic approach to adjustment lending would be developed, based on
lessons learned implementing the 1998 CAS and the 2001 TSS. The adjustment lending
program would be backed by targeted investment operations which w i l l provide the necessary
technical expertise and physical investments to implement policy reforms under the program.

22

To promote the efficient management of public resources and tackle corruption.

54.
Building on the achievements o f the existing program through the PSMAC, the
PEIR, the C F A A and the CPAR, a set o f new Bank interventions i s planned to further
strengthen the management o f public resources and to tackle corruption. Support of the
public sector management reform program w i l l be continued with a Public Sector
Management Adjustment Loan ZZ (PSMAL ZZ) in FY04 which w i l l support reform of the
Health Insurance Fund and the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, as well as further
measures to consolidate improvements in budgetary planning and execution such as the
implementation of control over commitments b y budget entities. Reform o f the existing
instruments o f social protection to improve targeting, eliminate adverse incentives affecting
the labor market, and reduce the fiscal drain on government finances w i l l also be supported.
Technical assistance to implement these reforms, along with required information technology
improvements, w i l l be provided through a complementary Health and Social Protection
Administration project, also planned for FY04.22 Since progressively deeper reform of public
administration w i l l continue through the CAS period, the Bank w i l l look to define with the
Government a programmatic approach, to commence with a first Programmatic Structural
Adjustment Loan (PSAL Z) in FY05, to be followed b y a second operation PSAL ZZ in FY06.
The PSAL program i s planned to support both the improvement o f public sector management
and reforms to improve the investment climate. In FY06, a Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review (PEZR) Update and a Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR) Update are also planned to review progress and inform development o f a subsequent
CAS.

55.
While improvements in the transport sector are essential for regional integration and
growth, a primary objective o f the Bank’s Transport Sector Restructuring project planned
for FY04 i s to restructure the two principal SOEs that dominate the sector - Macedonian
Railways and Makedonijapat (Roads)- to facilitate the opening o f the transport sector to
private sector investment. The restructuring i s also necessary for compliance with EU
directives as mandated b y the SAA, and to reduce the drain on public finances caused b y
mounting losses. The Bank w i l l look to invest in restructuring and regulatory development o f
the sector to complement proposed investments b y the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) and other private sector entities in the new operating companies
formed for the railways and roads. This work w i l l seek to scale up and ensure sustainability
o f the substantial progress made through the Bank’s existing Transport Sector Project, which
i s due to close in FY04. At the regional level, the Trade and Transport in South East Europe
(TTFSE) initiative w i l l continue to work to improve trade links and customs harmonization.
To promote the creation of jobs through sustainable private sector driven growth.
56.
To a large extent the success o f the CAS w i l l depend on a rebound in private sector
activity and growth. As with the public sector reform program, the Bank’s support to this
objective w i l l be anchored on structural adjustment lending, specifically through the PSAL Z
and PSAL ZZ supported program. Extensive work w i l l be completed through FY04 and FY05

’*The Health and Social Protection Administration project i s likely to be co-financed by the Government o f the
Netherlands.

23

to define a multi-year program o f reforms aimed to stimulate the private sector, which i s
likely to include measures to improve the business environment, further strengthen the
broader financial sector, and to complete the process o f resolution o f SOEs and other entities
which has progressed well to date under the F E S A L program.23 The adjustment program
would be supported b y a series o f complementary and linked investment operations as
described below.

57.
The recently completed C E M highlighted the lack o f secure t i t l e over land as a key
constraint to the growth of the private sector, a finding supported b y a FIAS survey. To
address this issue a Land Registration project i s planned for delivery in FY05, which w i l l
seek to support the completion o f a real estate cadastre and the building o f institutional
capacity to support land title transfer and land use monitoring. This project, informed b y an
Urban Slums Analysis in FY04, w i l l also seek to improve the security o f land use rights
and/or title for the residents o f urban slums. The operation would be supported as necessary
b y structural conditionality in the P S A L program. A Legal and Judicial Diagnostic study i s
also planned to collate the findings o f the Financial Sector Assessment Project (FSAP), the
FIAS study and other work, which have identified significant weaknesses in the judicial
system that adversely affect creditor and property rights, as well as generally undermining the
rule o f law. The diagnostic would also look to inventory the substantial programs o f donor
support in the sector. On the basis o f this diagnostic a Regulatory and Judicial Reform
project i s planned for FY06. This project may include upgrading the quality and access to
justice through raising judicial competence and discipline, as well as to support the
implementation of structural measures to strengthen the authority o f the courts and
enforcement, de-politicize the office of the public prosecutor, and promote transparency in the
functioning of the courts.

58.
The Bank and the IMF w i l l complete the FSAP in FY04, and this w i l l inform the
design o f a Financial Sector Development project proposed in FY05. The project would aim
to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework for the financial sector, particularly
those for the insurance and pension systems. In addition, the project could help implement
policies to improve intermediation to the S M E sector and the economy in general, and may
also seek to address development o f regulatory capacity in other sectors. As background
analytic work (especially the FSAP and the LegaYJudicial Diagnostic) i s completed and the
design o f the P S A L program advances, the timing o f the proposed Financial Sector
Development project and the Regulatory and Judicial Reform project may be interchanged
depending on readiness for implementation.

59.
Following on from the C E M that was produced in FY03, two CEM follow-up policy
notes, which are planned in FY04 to inform the design o f the PSAL program. These notes
w i l l seek to build on the knowledge o f the labor market and growth dynamics provided b y the
C E M and are likely to focus on priority policy topics such as the role o f government in public
enterprises and parastatals, and the gray economy. A PEIR Update and a CPAR Update are
also planned in F Y 0 6 to assess progress and inform the design o f a subsequent CAS.

23

The FESAL I1 i s scheduled to close on December 3 1, 2003.

24

Table 6. The Planned IBRD Assistance Program FY04-06
FY04
Lending

Low Case

LIS$m

Base Case

Zducation Access
mprovement Project

Zducation Access
mprovement Project

lealth and Social
'rotection Administration

ESW/AAA

High Case

YS$m

5a

3ducation Access
mprovement

15

'Iealth and Social
'rotection Administration

15

'SMAL I1

30

rransport Restructuring

15

:EM Follow Up
Votes

:EM Follow Up Notes

:EM Follow Up Notes
FSAP

?YAP

FSAP
Fnergy Sector Strategy

Tnergy Sector
Ttrategy

Land Registration

Energy Sector Strategy
Poverty Assessment

Assessment

poverty Assessment

FY05

/S$m
-

15

Lending

Land Registration
Financial Sector
Development

15

PSAL I

15

15

Land Registration

15

Financial Sector
Development

15

Water Resources
Management (GEF)b

ES W/AAA

Poverty Assessment

Poverty Assessment

LegaUJudicial
Diagnostic

LegaWJudicial Diagnostic

LegaUJudicial Diagnostic

Social Services Delivery
Study

Social Services Delivery
Study

Regulatory and Judicial
Reform

FY06
Lending

Electric Power
Development

Poverty Assessment
ITA)
PEIR Update
CPAR Update
Social Development
Update

Total

Water Resources
Management (GEF)b

Poverty Assessment

Social Services
Delivery Study

ES W/AAA

Urban Slums Analysis

15

PSAL I1

15

25

Regulatory and Judicial
Reform

15

Electric Power
Development

Poverty Assessment (TA)

Poverty Assessment (TA)

PEIR Update

PEIR Update

CPAR Update

CPAR Update

Social Development
Update

Social Development
Update

20

90

a. Expected to be co-financed by a US$10 m grant from the Government of the Netherlands.
An application for GEF financing will be presented in FY05.

b.

25

25

165

60.
The Bank w i l l complete an Energy Sector Strategy in FY04, which w i l l seek to pull
together previous work b y various partners, and w i l l integrate the proposed development of
the sector in FYR Macedonia with the region through complementary work proceeding
This work will inform the design o f an Electric Power
concurrently at a regional
Development project in FY06. Through this project the Bank w i l l seek to catalyze
partnerships with other institutions and the private sector, as well as reducing electricity losses
in distribution. This operation w i l l take advantage of the Bank’s unique position to overcome
obstacles to private sector involvement in infrastructureprovision.
61.
The Bank w i l l also seek to follow up on the successful implementation of the GEF
financed Lake Ohrid Conservation project, which has facilitated cross-border environmental
cooperation between Albania and FYR Macedonia. A project proposal for further GEF
support to address transboundary water management issues w i l l be submitted in FY05.
To promote social cohesion, build human capital, and protect the most vulnerable
62.
A critical outcome o f the CAS upon which the long-term reduction o f poverty depends
i s improved capacity to understand and track the impacts of policy on poverty and progress
towards achieving the MDGs. The Bank i s planning a comprehensive intervention under the
CAS, through a Programmatic Poverty Assessment over three years, which w i l l aim not only
to collate and provide analysis of poverty data, but also to build the capacity of national
institutions to collect and analyze data. Imminent results o f the November 2002 census w i l l
allow for the formulation o f a new sampling frame and renewed analysis of poverty data from
previous years. This w i l l not be sufficient to deliver a robust poverty assessment due to some
existing data deficiencies, but w i l l provide a much more accurate poverty profile than
currently available. The Bank’s poverty team w i l l then work with local institutions to define
a strategy to produce regular poverty monitoring reports. The FY04 Urban Slums Analysis
will complement the poverty work and seek to address a dearth o f knowledge concerning the
status of urban slums in FYR Macedonia and develop a strategy towards the achievement of
the relevant MDG targets.
’

63.
The Government’s primary vehicle for improving social cohesion i s the Ohrid
Agreement and, in March 2002, donors pledged some US$274 million in assistance towards
supporting the implementation o f the Agreement. Much of this assistance i s directed towards
programs of technical capacity building at the municipal level, and thus the Bank w i l l not
focus i t s resources in this area. The Bank will, however, be looking to support specific
sectoral elements of the decentralization process and seek to mitigate against critical risks,
such as a breakdown in the delivery of key services. In FY03 the Bank completed a policy
note which outlined the challenges facing the education sector in the face of
de~entralization~~,
and the planned Education Access Improvement project in FY04 w i l l
focus on improving the quality o f primary and secondary education in FYR Macedonia while
piloting new financing arrangements. The project w i l l also seek to improve the access of
minority groups (especially girls) to primary education through school-based initiatives,
24 A proposal for a horizontal Adaptable Program Loan supporting integration of the energy sector in the South
East Europe sub-region i s currently being formulated.
l 5 Toward an Education Strategy for the Twenty First Century. World Bank, 2002

26

which remains a key weakness in FYR Macedonia’s progress towards the Millennium
Development Goal o f universal primary education. During implementation the project w i l l
seek opportunities to further support access o f Roma to education from the Roma Education
Fund, which i s expected to be operational in 2005.26 A Social Services Delivery Study i s also
planned in FY05 to review the causes of inequity and gaps in access to social services, in the
context o f the changes taking place as a consequence o f the Ohrid Agreement, and in light of
the findings o f the Poverty Assessment. A Social Development Update i s also planned for
FY06 to identify emerging challenges related to social cohesion as the implementation of the
Ohrid Agreement proceeds. The Bank w i l l also continue to support the broader reconciliation
agenda through i t s existing portfolio, in particular through the Children and Youth
Development and the Community Development projects under implementation.
64.
Through the adjustment lending program - the PSMAL I1 and the subsequent P S A L I
and I1- and the Health and Social Protection Administration project the Bank w i l l also assist
the government with a redesign o f the existing social protection system to improve targeting
o f the safety net and provide better coverage o f the poorest. The improvements in the
transparency and accountability o f health service delivery expected under the project w i l l also
be important to improving access to and quality o f health care for the most vulnerable. The
Bank w i l l be working closely with the government to implement pension reform to improve
the long term financial sustainability o f the pension system, while mitigating the significant
risks that exist.
Lending scenarios and triggers

65.
Lending scenarios. In light o f FYR Macedonia’s creditworthiness for IBRD
borrowing (see below) as well as the lessons learned from the previous CAS and TSS, under a
high casehtrong reform scenario the CAS proposes an IBRD lending envelope for the FY0406 period up to a maximum of US$165 million, o f which around 35 percent would be
adjustment lending. This lending scenario would seek to support the Government’s efforts to
implement a strong program o f difficult structural reforms. Based on lessons learned,
investment operations whose success relies upon achievement o f difficult and politically
unpopular measures have also been included in the strong reform case - such as Transport
Restructuring. A base case o f up to US$90 million in investment lending would constitute an
intermediate scenario. Investment operations planned for the base case, while designed to
have high development impact, would support the steady implementation o f institutional
reforms, and are o f medium to moderate risk. The low case scenario envisages very limited
investment lending o f up to US$20 million in education and land registration.
66.
Lending case triggers. At the outset o f the CAS, FYR Macedonia i s considered to be
in the base case, but with continued strong policy performance i t i s expected that a strong
r e f o r d h i g h case lending scenario can be achieved in FY04. The strong reform scenario
would require the continued maintenance of a satisfactory macroeconomic framework as well
as the achievement o f key structural measures, which have been carefully selected as
indicators o f commitment to move ahead with difficult reforms (Table 7). Triggers also
~

An initiative to support the ‘Decade o f Roma Inclusion’ beginning in 2005 was announced at a conference
“Roma in an Expanding Europe: Challenges for the Future” hosted by the Government o f Hungary in Budapest
in July 2003.

26

21

Table 7. Triggers for the FY04-06 Lending Program
Base Case

High Case

Maximum two problem projects in the
portfolio

Maximum one problem project in the portfolio.

include the implementation o f important fiduciary controls. Under the strong reform scenario
agreed CAS outcomes detailed in Table 5 w i l l be closely monitored to ensure reform
performance i s sustained and continued high case lending would be warranted. Achievement
of the conditionality of the P S A L program, to be defined in FY05, w i l l also provide a strong
basis for monitoring structural performance. Portfolio status triggers have also been included,
which would ensure that a deterioration in portfolio quality would result in a downgrading of
the lending scenario. In the event that an appropriate macroeconomic framework was not
maintained, the transparency and accountability o f the HIF were to deteriorate, or the
portfolio quality to deteriorate, the l o w case scenario would be triggered. Were renewed
insecurity to significantly constrain the Bank’s ability to supervise projects such that
successful implementation o f even a l o w case scenario became impossible, the CAS would be
suspended, and the Board would be consulted concerning an appropriate response.
Creditworthiness and exposure indicators.

67.
Creditworthiness Indicators. In comparison with other post-conflict countries, FYR
Macedonia compares favorably on many indicators o f macroeconomic performance and
indebtedness, despite the deterioration in the fiscal and current accounts over 2001-02. This
belies at least two important considerations from a creditworthiness perspective. First i s the
critical importance o f political developments underpinning the country’s prospects and debt

28

service capacity. Second i s the high level o f preferred creditor debt, which increases risks to
IBRD in the event o f external financing difficulties. Failure to fully implement the Ohrid
Agreement or a resurgence in ethnic tensions or open conflict could lead to a rapid deterioration
in creditworthiness, particularly if broad donor support i s withdrawn. So too fiscal slippage
leading to a rapid build-up o f public debt represents a risk. Over the medium-term, an
improvement in creditworthiness depends on increased political stability, implementation o f
structural reforms, and reduced dependence on official financing.
68.
Exposure Guidelines. IBRD exposure at end-CY02 was $138 million, or 0.1 percent
of the total portfolio. The preferred creditor to public debt service ratio (45 percent in 2003)
breaches the Bank’s guideline of 35 percent, but i t i s expected to fall further under current
projections. The IBRD debt service ratio (1.1 percent) and share o f public debt service (11
percent) currently remain well within the exposure guidelines o f 4 percent and 20 percent,
respectively.

VI.

Coordination with Partners and Civil Society

69.

The role of the Country Office in portfolio management has been strengthened.
Building on the recommendations o f the CPR, responsibility for monitoring o f the Bank’s
portfolio has been progressively shifted to the Country Office in Skopje. The office has a
strong cadre o f local professional sector staff, which has also enabled the progressive transfer
o f task management responsibilities to the field. Country Unit oversight o f portfolio
performance has also been devolved to the field, under the overall responsibility of the
Country Manager, which has enhanced supervision capacity and facilitated recent
improvement in health o f the portfolio. The capacity o f the Country Office has been
augmented through the procurement certification o f one staff member, who w i l l become the
focal point for preliminary procurement actions. Financial management and disbursement
coverage o f the FYR Macedonia portfolio has also been devolved to regional offices, which
has improved fiduciary and administrative oversight.
Linkages and Coordination with ZFC. While this i s not a joint CAS, the IBRD
70.
strategy relies on the complementary engagement o f IFC. I F C has played an important role in
stabilizing the banking sector through an investment in and subsequent rehabilitation support
to Stopanska Banka, which holds about 40 percent o f total assets in the banking sector, and
w i l l continue to focus on strengthening o f financial markets. IFC w i l l continue to emphasize
creating and expanding financing institutions targeting micro- and small and medium-scale
enterprises. Through the Southeast Europe Enterprise Development Facility (SEED), I F C i s
also assisting SMEs to prepare sound financing proposals and i s providing core enterpriselevel support, business and entrepreneurial s k i l l s training, information exchange, and
networking. Through IFC’s recent equity investment in ProBusiness Bank, A.D., Skopje,
micro and small enterprises clients w i l l be exposed to best practice standards in areas such as
disclosure o f financial information, and environmental and social considerations when
appraising potential investments. Also, I F C w i l l continue to assist small and medium
enterprises b y providing equity capital through i t s investment in an equity fund. I F C w i l l also
seek to partner with the Bank in i t s efforts to develop the leasing, insurance and capital market
sectors.

29

7 1.
The IBRD strategy aims to attract strategic investors into key infrastructure sectors,
and IFC w i l l have an important role to play in this regard. IFC has already participated with a
US$50 million investment (convertible bonds) in Macedonian Telecommunications, the stateowned provider o f fixed and cellular telecommunication services. In the medium term, IFC
w i l l focus on priority regional infrastructure projects, and to this end I F C i s working, together
with U.S. Agency for International Development, to develop a Balkans Infrastructure
Development Facility, to facilitate private sector participation in infrastructure projects in
Balkans. In the enterprise sector, I F C has to date invested in five projects for a total o f US$32
million and w i l l continue to support viable export-oriented enterprises.
72.
The role of MZGA and the WBZ. MIGA i s likely to play an important role in the
achievement o f the CAS objectives, especially in infrastructure and the enterprise sector. To
date, MIGA has facilitated some US$30.7 million in foreign direct investment into FYR
Macedonia, through a guarantee issued in April 2000 covering war and civil disturbance risks
to an equity investment in a cement company located in Skopje. MIGA i s expecting to
increase i t s capacity to guarantee projects in FYR Macedonia b y partnering with public and
private counterparts on co- and reinsurance, to support eligible projects, including complex
infrastructure projects such as those expected in energy, railways and roads. MIGA w i l l also
look for opportunities for future technical assistance activities to support investment
promotion and w i l l continue to publicize investment opportunities through i t s online services,
particularly PrivatizationLink and FDI Xchange. WBI w i l l also be active in FYR Macedonia
and i s planning a series o f distance learning and in-country events to build capacity and
promote debate concerning the Roma, investment climate, private-public partnerships, and
other development topics.
73.
Civil society participation in preparation of the CAS. In the absence of a PRSP or
Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF), incorporating the views o f a broad spectrum
o f stakeholders into the CAS has been challenging. The Bank’s Country Office supervised a
series o f consultations with representatives o f civil society to solicit the views o f stakeholders
concerning the World Bank Group in FYR Macedonia and also to learn the respondents’
views on a set o f wider topics including perceptions of key developmental challenges (Box 4).
The surveys also included questions about the importance o f EU accession and
decentralization to gain insight into the ownership o f the population o f the S A A and Ohrid
Agreement agendas.
74.
The Bank’s donor partners have been closely involved in preparation of the CAS.
Close dialogue led b y the Country Office in Skopje has resulted in a high degree of
coordination and integration o f the Bank’s proposed program with those o f i t s partners. A
donor focus group was established to assist CAS preparation, which has served to help the
Bank pursue a selective approach while avoiding neglect o f core priorities. The Bank’s major
donor partners include the EU (through the CARDS program implemented b y the European
Agency for Reconstruction supporting the priorities o f the SAA), USAID, United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development (DFID), and a strategic financing partnership with
the Government o f the Netherlands. Close coordination o f programs i s particularly important
in education, public sector management, trade facilitation, social protection reform and
judicial reform, where complementary donor activities are planned to provide comprehensive
assistance. The Bank’s support for infrastructure - through projects in transport restructuring,

30

Box 4. Incorporating the Views of Civil Society into the CAS.
The consultation process consisted o f several quantitative and qualitative feedback instruments: (i) a
quantitative baseline survey carried out in February 2003 to evaluate awareness o f the Bank and i t ’ s
activities and opinions about key development challenges on which the CAS should focus, (ii)a program of
in-depth Interviews conducted with 20 pre-selected individuals (experts from different fields and prominent
people) familiar with the activities o f the World Bank in FYR Macedonia (February-March 2003), and (iii)
24 focus groups (10-12 participants each), ten o f which were held in Skopje and the rest in cities around the
country. Focus groups consisted o f representatives o f local government, non-governmental organizations,
academia, students, private sector and union representatives. Parliamentarians, donors and media formed
separate focus groups. A summary report o f the public consultation was completed in April o f 2003. The
report suggest that they key areas for focus o f the Bank strategy should include:
Reducing unemployment and supporting investment i n industry.
Reform o f the public administration and anti-corruption activities.
Reform of the pension system.
Reform o f the public health insurance system.
Reform o f the education system.
Building a strategy for export development.
The report also detailed participant’s views about monitoring o f the Bank’s development strategy.
Corruption emerged as a key concern across a broad spectrum o f participants, and as a result improved
transparency i n government has been selected as a core targeted outcome o f the CAS, along with monitoring
indicators.

energy, and trade and transport facilitation - w i l l also be closely interlinked with those o f
other donors and multilateral banks. In some sectors other donors w i l l take the lead, including
rural development (led b y the EU), SME development (led by EU, USAID, and IFC), and
environment (led b y the EU - with possible GEF support).

75.
The Bank program i s also designed to complement the government’s program
supported b y the IMF SBA. Bank staff have worked closely with the IMF to coordinate
conditionality and reform priorities, and the resulting S B A supported program and planned
Bank structural and technical support are mutually reinforcing. K e y areas o f cooperation
include public sector management reform in general, and especially civil service reform,
improving budgetary management (including the EBFs), and financial sector regulation and
restructuring.

76.
The Bank will work with the Government to strengthen donor coordination. The
Bank and the EU co-chairs the High Level Steering Group for South East Europe and i t s
working level counterpart, the Working Level Steering Group (WLSG). The WLSG has
played a key role in coordinating donor efforts to promote peace and stability through the
implementation o f the Ohrid Agreement, and in harmonizing donor positions. These efforts
have been supported by the joint Bank-European Commission office in Brussels, which has
been central to monitoring o f donor flows. With the improved situation in FYR Macedonia
shifting the focus to longer term development efforts rather than post-conflict assistance, the
Government has begun to take a more central role in coordination efforts. The joint office in
Brussels has been working with the Ministry o f Finance to transfer the assistance monitoring
function, and new mechanisms for ensuring the coordination o f developmental priorities
between ministries, and, hence, with donors, are expected to be developed soon. This

31

function w i l l necessarily closely relate to efforts to introduce a multi-year strategic planning
and budgeting process.

VII.

Risks to the Success o f the Bank’s program

77.
Political risks are substantial. The Ohrid Agreement i s to some extent unwieldy and
complex, but i t s implementation i s politically essential for the preservation o f peace between
ethnic groups in FYR Macedonia. Peace and stability, in turn, are absolute prerequisites for the
achievement o f the CAS objectives, and the broader goal o f poverty reduction. Renewed ethnic
division and instability could result if the implementation o f the Ohrid Agreement appears to
stall. The unresolved status o f Kosovo also remains a source o f potential conflict in the region.
The Bank i s not well placed to mitigate such risks. However, ongoing assistance to overcome
the technical difficulties o f implementation o f the Agreement i s proving helpful.
78.
There are also political risks associated with the implementation o f the proposed
reform program. Given already high unemployment, i t w i l l be particularly difficult to sustain
political support for unpopular reforms, including reforms o f the public administration and
parastatals, pension and labor market reforms, and enterprise restructuring. Instability in the
government coalition could result in reform delays. Given recent history, foreign investors are
likely to remain particularly sensitive to even temporary setbacks, and a negative shift in
sentiment could undermine needed FDI inflows, donor support, and growth. The Bank can
mitigate such risks, b y working closely with the government to ensure that complementary
supporting programs are in place to minimize adverse short-term social impacts o f the reform
program supported b y the CAS. Such considerations w i l l be especially important for the
proposed restructuring o f SOEs and the reforms to the social protection system and labor
markets.
Macroeconomic vulnerabilities also exist. Entering the CAS period, the global
79.
economic outlook has major uncertainties. Slower than expected growth in FYR Macedonia’s
main trading partners or higher than expected world o i l prices would undercut domestic
growth. Fiscal revenues would be affected, as would the sustainability o f the country’s
expenditure policy over the medium term, making ongoing reforms more difficult to afford.
Declines in international business confidence, particularly due to further instability in the
region, could limit flows o f international capital, again undercutting the country’s growth
scenario. Slower than expected reform progress could also result in poorer growth outcomes
than forecast. In the event o f a downside scenario, the structure o f public debt could leave
FYR Macedonia vulnerable.

The selective Bank program will rely on sustained donor coordination. A selective
80.
approach b y the Bank necessarily entails risks that other partners may not perform as expected,
which may leave Bank interventions isolated and ineffective. The Bank program w i l l be closely
coordinated with those o f other donors, on a component basis, in the areas o f public sector
management reform, education, infrastructure, financial sector development and regulatory and
judicial reform. Moreover, the Bank w i l l rely on its donor partners to take the lead in key
sectors such as S M E development. rural development, and democracy and rule o f law. The
effectiveness o f the Bank’s programs in achieving the CAS outcomes w i l l be reliant on the

32

effective delivery o f support programmed b y other donors, and vice versa. The strengthening
o f the role o f the Bank’s Country Office and continued close dialogue with partners w i l l
mitigate this risk. Close contact in the field w i l l endeavor to ensure the Bank w i l l have
sufficient warning and flexibility to adapt i t s interventions should the programs o f donor
partners change or be constrained.

VIII. Concluding Remarks
8 1.
The planned program of IBRD assistance to FYR Macedonia over the next three years
presents an important opportunity for the country to benefit from scaled-up Bank assistance at
a critical time. FYR Macedonia faces significant challenges to overcome the internal
divisions and conflict that have prevented poverty reduction in recent years, as well as to
complete the transformation o f i t s economy that began over ten years ago. The S A A process
and the prospects o f eventual EU membership provide a powerful framework to guide i t s
efforts, and the Bank i s well placed to support this agenda in coordination with other donors.
Through implementation o f the S A A and the Ohrid Agreement, as well as broader structural
reforms o f the economy, the Government can make significant progress towards putting in
place the policies and program that w i l l reduce poverty over the medium term, and the IBRD
support program outlined above w i l l be vital to this effort.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

b y Shengman Zhang
Managing Director
Washington, D.C.
September 9,2003

33

E

.=

Macedonia, FYR at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL

2002
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Macedonia,
FYR

EuroDe &
Central
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

2.0
1,700
3.5

475
1,960
930

2,164
1,240
2,677

0.5
1.o

0.1
0.6

1.o
1.2

60
73
13
6
99

63
69
20

103
104
102

90
3
102
103
101

46
69
33
11
80
15
107
107
107

1/21/04

Development diamond‘

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1996-02

Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
Per
capita

Most recent estlmate (latest year available, 1996-02)

Poverty (“A of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (“A of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (“A of population)
Illiteracy (“A ofpopulation age 1.54
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

I

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source
W

u

V

d

Macedonia, FYR
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1982

1992

2001

2002

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic InvestmenffGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

2.3
15.6
54.3
16.6
14.8

3.4
18.3
42.4
5.2
14.0

3.7
21.9
36.8
0.5
13.1

Current account balance/GDP
interest payments/GDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicekxports
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debtlexports

-0.8

-6.8
1.6
41.4
12.8

-8.7
1.3
43.5
11.1

2001

2002

2002-06

0.9
0.2
4.1

-4.5
-4.9
-15.7

0.7
0.6
-4.4

4.1
3.5
6.5

1982

1992

2001

2002

17.1
39.8
32.9
43.2

11.7
32.1
20.3
56.1

12.1
29.7
18.6
58.2

63.9
19.5
53.3

70.0
24.8
55.5

76.7
22.8
58.2

1982-92 1992-02

2001

2002

-0.2
0.2
-1.8
1.9

-10.8
-6.4
-3.9
-1.6

2.3
-4.8
-5.6
3.9

2.0
3.1
3.4
7.9

-10.0
29.7
-17.9
-15.3

8.3
2.4
7.7
10.7

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(“A of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Private consumption
General government consumption
imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

1982-92 1992-02

..
..
..

Economic ratios*

Trade

Indebtedness
-Macedonia, FYR
Lower-m/ddie-incomegroup

. _

I Growth of investment and GDP (%)
20
10

0
.10
20

-

- __.

Growth of exports and imports (%)
40 -

-

*n‘-

Exports

*Imports

Note: 2002 data are preliminaly estimates. Group data are through 2001.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will

be incomplete.

I

I
I

Macedonia, FYR
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1992

2001

2002

1,690.7
1,271.8

5.5
3.6

1.9
1.4

-9.8

34.2
-2.5
-6.3

35.9
-1.3
-5.7

1992

2001

2002

1,199

1,154
37
65
825
1,688
194
234
284

1,112
35
75
778
1,963
246
241
407

69
79
87

71
81
88

1992

2001

2002

1,259
1,236
23

1,395
1,934
-539

1,364
2,156
-792

0

Net income
Net current transfers

-72
30

-39
343

-31
498

4

Current account balance

-19

-235

-324

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

79
-60

318
-82

194
131

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

60
5.1

775
68.0

735
64.4

1992

2001

2002

1,423
124
254

1,613
138
304

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

194
12
2

167
12

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

-27
23
442
0

-22
25
77
1

24
23
4
19
10
10

15
33
6
28
7
21

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1982

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit
TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Raw materials
Food
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1982

144
1,198
112
127
85

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=1OO)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DeveloDment Economics

1982

1982

0

1

I

Inflation (%)

I

“--“““GDP

deflator

I

-0’CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
2.500

~

T

2,000
1,500

1,000
500
0
98

97

98

!E Exports

1

00

99

01

02

w Imports

Current account balance to GDP (%)
1

2
3
5
6
7
8

9

Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)
G: 64 A: 138

304

F 501

C 67

A - IBRD
B . IDA
C . IMF

D - Other multilateral

E -Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

1/21104

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1982

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Raw materials
Food
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

2001

2002

1,690.7
1,271.8

5.5
3.6

1.9
1.4

10

Government finance
(x of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusideficit
TRADE

1992

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1982

-9.8

35.9
-1.3
-5.7

1992

2001

2002

1,199

1,154
37
65
825
1,688
194
234
284

1,112
35
75
778
1,963
246
241
407

69
79
87

71
81
88

2001

2002

144
1,198
112
127
85

1982

1992

1,395
1,934
-539

1,364
2,156
-792

Net income
Net current transfers

-72
30

-39
343

-31
498

Current account balance

-19

-235

-324

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

79
-60

318
-82

194
131

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

60
5.1

775
68.0

735
64.4

1992

2001

2002

1,423
124
254

1,613
138
304

Total debt service
iBRD
IDA

194
12
2

167
12
1

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

-27
23
442
0

-22
25
77
1

24
23
4
19
10
10

15
33
6
28
7
21

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

4
0

34.2
-2.5
-6.3

1,259
1,236
23

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

6
2

Export price index (1995=?00)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

8

1982

0

00

2

I

sjl"mrXXI_

GDP deflator

01

02

-.oICPI

I

I

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
2,500

2 000
1 500

1000
500
0
96

97

98

99

Exports

~

00

02

01

Imports

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
1

2
3
4

5
6
7
8

9

Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)
G: 64 A: 138

304
F 501

C 67

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C . IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

1/21/04

I

C A S Annex B2 - Macedonia, FYR
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
-Indicator
-

FY03-

FYOl

FY02

Number o f Projects under implementation"
Average Implementation Period (years)b
Percent of Problem Projects b y Number"'"
Percent o f Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management

13
.2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.2

13
.2.5
15.4
16.2
15.4
16.2
29.3

8
3.2
12.5
8.3
25.0
29.4
30.5

CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision resources (total US$ thousands)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

No
85 1
65.4

No
856
65.8

Yes
83 1
103.8

Portfolio Assessment

Memorandum item
Projects evaluated by OED by Number
Projects evaluated by OED by Amount (US$millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU b y Number
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a

Since FYSO
13
374.9
30.8
5.7

Last five
FYs
7
113.9
42.9
18.8

As shown i n the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
Average age o f projects in the Banks country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
d As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning o f the
year: investment projects only.

CAS Annex B3 - IBRDDDA Program Summary
As of 07/31/03
Pronosed IBRD Base Case Lending Proerama
Fiscal
Year

2004

2005

Project ID

Education Access Improvement
Health and Social Protection
Administration

a.

5 .O
15.0

Strategic Rewardsb
(H/M/L)

Implementation Risksb
(H/M/L)

H
H

M
M

Result

20.0

Land Registration
Financial Sector Development

15.0
15.0
30.0

H
M

M
L

Judicial Reform
Electric Power Development

Result

15.0
25.0
40.0

H
M

H
M

Overall Result

90.0

Result
2006

US$(M)

Macedonia, FYR

This table presents the planned program for the period July 2003 until June 2006 - i.e. FY04-06

b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to
be high (H), moderate (M),or low (L).

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for FYR Macedonia, f o r m

-

FYR Macedonia, form IFC and M I G A Program, FY 2000-2003

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)

FINANCE & INSURANCE
TEXTILES, APPAREL & LEATHER

Total

2000

200 1

2002

2003

4.61

5.21

5.30

3.2

100

100

100

100

100

89
11

100

100

100

100

100

18.80

17.00

9.90

0.00

100
100

100

100

Investment instrument( %)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

100

C A S Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Macedonia FYR
As of Q7l31JQ3

Product
Recent Completions
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Education Sector Update
Agriculture Sector Update
Country Portfolio Review
Country Economic Memorandum
Fiscal Decentralization Policy note
Report on the Observance of Standards and
Codes
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Administrative Barriers to Investment
(FIAS)

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$OOO)

Audience"

Objectiveb

FY02
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

406
93
126
315
40
176
41
42

G,D,B,PD
GD,B
G,D,B,PD
G,D,B,PD
G,B
G,B,D,PD
G,B,D
G,B

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD
PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

FY03

80

G,B,D,PD

KG, PS

FY03

-

G,B,D,PD

KG,PS,PD

Underway
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Poverty Assessment
Energy Sector Strategy
CEM follow up notes

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04

197
441
80
90

G,B
G,D,B,PD
G,BD
G,B,D

KG, PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS

Planned
Legal Judicial Diagnostic
Social Services Delivery Study
PEIR Update
CPAR Update
Social Develooment Uodate

FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06

50
100
185
80
80

G,BD
G,D,B,PD
G,D,B,PD
GD,B
G,D,B,PD

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD

a.
b.

Government, Donor, Bank, Public Dissemination
Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem Solving

Annex B6
Page 1 of 3

-

Macedonia, FYR Key Economic Indicators
'

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'

(base case)

Actual
1999
2000

1998

Estimated
2002

2001

Projected
2004
2005

2003

2006

100
13

100
13

100
12

100
12

100
12

100
13

100
13

100
12

100
12

Industry

34

33

34

32

30

30

30

30

30

Services

53

55

54

56

58

57

57

57

57

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

93
17
5
13

90
17
4
12

93
16
3
13

95
15
4
11

99
15
3
12

94
17
3
14

94
15
3
12

93
15
3
12

92
15
3
12

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

41
56

42
52

48
62

42
55

37
58

35
52

36
51

37
51

37
51

Agriculture

Gross domestic savings

7

10

7

5

1

6

6

7

8

Gross national savings'

16

21

23

14

13

16

15

16

17

3571

3673

3587

3437

3712

4356

4402

4534

4670

1920

1830

1830

1700

1700

1880

2080

2210

2240

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1996 prices)
3.4
4.3
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross domestic income
3.0
5.5

4.5
4.5

-4.5
-4.8

0.7
-0.8

3.0
3.1

3.0
3.6

3 .O
3.2

3.0
3.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1996 prices)
4.1
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.9
2.8
6.2
4.1
Total consumption
2.3
4.2
Private consumption
2.1
8.4

-4.9
-3.3
-10.4

0.6
6.8
8.2

1.a
-2.9
3.0

2.5
2.9
2.0

2.5
1.6
3.5

2.5
1.5
0.2

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$,Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

1441
1292

1463
1190

1636
1321

1395
1153

1364
1110

1519
1236

1582
1276

1662
1331

1744
1386

hports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

2016
1807
-575
350
-269

1917
1686
-454
464
-32

2279
201 1
-643
614
-75

1934
1677
-539
343
-235

2156
1878
-792
498
-324

226 1
1967
-742
500
-298

2263
1967
-68 1
442
-279

2326
2026
-664
444
-273

2380
2075
-635
450
-252

Net private foreign direct investment

Long-termloans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incI. errors & ommissions)

118
222
89
133
-2

32
62
109
-46
67

176
25
67
-42
125

442
-82
-27
-55
-42

77
2
-17
20
114

105
2
110
-108
216

90
2
74
-72
188

90
2
65
-63
194

100
2
94
-9 1
180

Change in reservesd

-69

-128

-250

-82

131

-25

-2

-13

-30

-16.1

-12.4

-17.9

-15.7

-2 1.3

-17.0

-15.5

-14.6

-13.6

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)

Annex 66
Page 2 of 3

Real annual growth rates ( YR96 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

-2.3
0.8
4.3
29.9

-7.4
1.8
-12.5
-1.5

15.3
0.1
35.1
10.7

-9.1
-15.9
-17.6
-29.6

-4.0
2.4
-3.9
3.3

4.5
17.6
-0.8
-1.5

3.8
2.8
4.5
1.5

3.0
2.8
3.3
1.7

(Continued)

3 .O
2.8
3.2
1.3

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3

-

Macedonia, FYR K e y Economic Indicators
(base case, continued)

Indicator

1998

Public finance (as 9'0 of GDP at market prices)e
33.2
Current revenues
33.3
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
0.0
1.8
Capital expenditure
0.7
Foreign financing

Actual
1999
2000

2001

Estimate
2002

2003

Projected
2004
2005

2006

35.3
33.2
2.1
2.2
2.1

36.4
30.6
5.8
3.5
1.5

34.2
36.7
-2.5
4.1
-1.8

35.9
37.2
-1.3
4.6
0.9

32.6
31.6
1.o
3.0
2.9

33.1
31.4
1.7
2.9
2.1

32.7
30.3
2.4
2.9
1.7

32.6
31.0
1.6
2.9
2.5

16.0
14.9
144.4

19.4
29.7
-11.4

21.5
25.6
-101.1

34.1
56.7
-11.2

30.5
-8.6
29.4

31.3
8.7
157.5

32.3
9.5
98.9

33.3
9.6
98.9

34.5
9.7
98.9

Price indices( YR96 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise t e r m of trade index

76.2
68.9
110.6

74.8
64.9
115.2

72.0
69.1
104.1

69.0
79.1
87.2

69.3
89.1
77.8

73.7
94.4
78.1

73.3
92.7
79.1

74.2
93.6
79.3

75.1
94.3
79.6

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

85.7

85.1

86.6

87.1

87.4

80.7

82.2

83.5

84.5

0.8
1.4

-1.1
2.8

5.8
8.2

5.5
3.6

1.9
1.4

2.8
3.0

2.2
3.0

2.8
3.0

2.8
3.0

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex 87
Page 1 of 1

-

Macedonia, FYR Key Exposure Indicators
(base case)

Indicator

1998

Actual
1999
2000

Estimated
2002

2001

Projected
2004
2005

2003

2006

148 1

1430

1464

1423

1613

1659

1764

1869

1977

Net disbursements (US$?#

170

61

51

-14

11

166

105

107

108

Total debt service (TDS)

158

158

138

197

234

187

194

200

224

(8)
TDOEGS~

96.9

91.4

83.3

93.9

107.0

100.8

101.9

102.8

103.9

TDOiGDP

41.5

38.9

40.8

41.4

43.5

38.1

40.1

41.2

42.3

TDSKGS

10.3

10.1

7.9

13.0

15.5

11.4

11.2

11.0

11.8

ConcessionabTDO

17.1

21.3

23.0

23.0

25.2

34.0

37.3

38.1

37.9

8.0

7.0

10.6

11.3

12.1

10.7

33.5

30.1

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

(US$m)"
Debt and debt service indicators

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

8.9

10.6

13.9

45.6

64.0

78.9

53.2

61.8

44.5

41.2

DS (8)'
IBRD DSEGS

IBRD TDO

(us$m)d

0.6

0.7

0.6

0.8

0.8

108

110

116

124

138

1.2

1.1
163

186

1.2
209

1.3
223

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio ( 8 )

IDA TDO (us$mId

0

0

0

0

0

0

181

223

249

254

304

339

42

46

34

23

24

16

5

5

19

29

31

34

0.0
~.

0.0
..

19.0

19.0

19.0

0.3

345

IFC (US$m)'
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity'
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed debt, use of IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for InternationalSettlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. IFC data i s as of June 30 of each year.

344

34 I

PI
cu

cu

0

0

B

1

J

L!t

Q
E

.m

I

I

I

L

3

C

f!

L
I

I

I

I

0

5

L

P

I

I----I;

Ij c r ,

, w

@L3

: 3

I

P

0

d

I

c

M

2

c

M

3
a,

g

Y

c

.-M

-0

-

a

z

;
L

9,

E

.Y

h

E
0

5
C
cd

-x
.-

Y

m
s

0-

.I
e

cd
0

a

%

4

.e

;L"

E
0

.Y
e

0

a

2

8 .$ .$
L

a L L

-0
O

L

a-0
0

0

8 '2 8 8

