Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
For official use only
Report No. 27108- IND

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

AND THE
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

INDONESIA
October 29,2003

Country Management Unit Indonesia
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Department
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used b y recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

CURRENCY E Q U I V A L E N T S
Currency unit: Rupiah (Rp) as of October 23,2003
$1= Rp 8,500

FISCAL YEAR
Until March 3 1,2000: April 1 to March 3 1
Until December 3 1,2000: April 1 to December 3 1
F r o m January 1,2001: January 1t o December 3 1

~

~~

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leaders

: Mr. Jemal-ud-din Kassum
: Mr. Andrew D. Steer
: Mr. Jehan Arulpragasam and

M s . Jessica Poppele

The International Finance Corporation
Executive Vice President
Director, East Asia and Pacific Department
Task Team
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Executive Vice President
Director
Task Team

: Mr. Peter L.Woicke
: Mr. Javed Hamid
: Mr. Omar Chaudry
: Mr. Motomichi Ikawa

: M s . Ana Teresa Gutierrez-San Martin
: Ms. Judith Pearce

FOR OFFICLAL USE ONLY
Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

CONTENTS

.................................................................................
COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES .........................................

1

A . POLITICAL. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
CONTEXT AND CHALLENGES..........................................

1

B. INDONESIA’S
NEW
ECONOMIC
POLICY PACKAGE:
THESHORT-TERM AGENDA......................

5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

C. l hEMERGING
~
PRSP: A MEDNM-TEM FRAMEWORK
FOR POVERTY
REDUCTION...............8

D. ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK. EXTERNALENVIRONMENT AND FINANCING
NEEDS
............................

8

..

THE WORLD BANK IN INDONESIA: LEARNING FROM RECENT EXPERIENCE 10
A . LESSONS
FROM THE TRANSITION

PERIOD ..............................................................................

10

B. THE SPECIAL PROBLEM OF CORRVPTION...............................................................................

11

...............................................................

THE BANK GROUP’S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

FOCUS
..................................................................

A . THE WORLD BANKGROUP’S
STRATEGIC

Objective I:
I m p r o v i n g the Climate f o r High Quality Investment ....................................

16
16
16

Objective 11: M a l u n g Service D e l i v e r y Responsive to the Needs o f the Poor ..................2 1

.

The Core Issue of Govemance-Defining

Selectivity ......................................................

..................................

B BUSINESS
PLATFORMS-HOW
THEWORLDBANKWILL DELIVER

25

27

The Community D r i v e n Development Platform ...............................................................

28

The Local Services Platform .............................................................................................

30

The Public Utility Platform ...............................................................................................

31

The “National” Lending Platform .....................................................................................

32

................................................................

33

DELIVERING THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM

A . MANAGING
THE PORTFOLIOAND MONITORING
FOR RESULTS
..............................................

33

MAKING ....................................................

34

c . LENDING SCENARIOS, TRIGGERS AND BANKEXPOSVRE........................................................

37

D. IFC AND MIGA PROGRAMS
..................................................................................................

42

B. BUILDING CAPACITY AND I”GDECISION

E. PAR~VERSHIPS
....................................................................................................................... 43

...................................................................................................................

MANAGING RISKS

45

This document has a restricted distribution and may b e used b y recipients only in
the performance o f their official duties I t s contents may n o t be otherwise disclosed
without W o r l d Bank authorization.

.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

ANNEXES
A 1: K e y Economic and Program Indicators
A2: Indonesia at a Glance
B2: Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3: Bank Group Program Summary-Base Case Lending Program
B3: Bank Group Fact Sheet-IFC and MIGA Program
B4: Summary o f Non-lending Services
B5: Social Indicators
B6: K e y Economic Indicators
B7: K e y Exposure Indicators
B8: Operations Portfolio
B8: Statement of IFC’s H e l d and Disbursed Portfolio
B9: CAS Program Matrix
B 10: CAS Summary o f Development Priorities
B 11: K e y Environmental Indicators
C. Macroeconomic Performance and Prospects
D. Poverty Profile & Analytical Agenda
E. Summary o f C A S Consultations
F. Environment
G. Proposed Program o f I F C & MIGA

TABLES
Table 1: Progress towards Achieving the Millennium Development Goals .................................. . 4
Table 2: Government Policy Performance under Last CAS .........................................................
12
17
Table 3: Improving Investment Climate for Poverty Reduction: Targeted Results.. ....................
Table 4: Making Services Work for the Poor: Targeted Results .................................................. 23
Table 5: Governance: Targeted Results ........................................................................................ 25
Table 6: Indonesia C A S FY04--FY07: Expected Lending (US$ million) .................................... 29
Table 7: The Performance o f the Banks Portfolio during the Last C A S Period (percentages) ... 33
Table 8: AAA Indicative K e y Outputs By Theme ........................................................................ 36
38
Table 9: Indonesia C A S Trigger Matrix FY04-FY06 ................................................................
Table 10: Expected Lending FY04-07 .......................................................................................... 42

BOXES
B o x 1: Lessons from OED Reviews and the Last CAS ................................................................
B o x 2: CAS Consultations Highlight Indonesia’s Development Challenges ...............................
B o x 3. The Program for Eastern Indonesia Sh4E Assistance (PENSA) .......................................
Box 4: Support for Poor Rural Households and Farmers .............................................................
Box 5: Improving Service Delivery Through Greater Accountability.. .......................................
B o x 6: The Challenge o f Forest Resources Management in Indonesia ........................................
Box 7: Framework for Achievement o f the “Enhanced” Base Case.............................................
Box 8: Fiduciary Environment: Progress and Next Steps .............................................................

11
13
19
21
22
29
39
40

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

FIGURES
Figure 1: A Snapshot of Indonesia’s Economy...............................................................................
Figure 2: Indonesia Country Policy and Institutional Assessment .................................................
Figure 3: The CAS Framework .....................................................................................................
Figure 4: Total External and IBRD Debt Outstanding..................................................................

MAP (IBRD No. 30903R4)

2
6
16
41

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ACC
ADB
ASEM
AusAID
BCP
BKPM
BPK
BPS
BRI
CAS
CDD
CGI
CFAA
COREMAP
CPAR
CPI
CPIA
CPPR
DFID
DPRDs
EFF
ESW
FATF
FDI
FEAT1
FY
GDP
GDS
GEG
GO1
IAIS
IBRA
IBRD
ICRG
IDA
IEDF
IFC
ILGRP
IMF
INT
IOSCO

IPO
I-PRSP

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Anti-conuption Commission
Asian Development Bank
Asia-Europe Meetings
Australian InternationalDevelopment
Agency
Business Continuity Plan
Chairman of Investment Coordinating Board
Supreme Audit Board
Indonesian Bureau of Statistics
Bank Rakyat Indonesia
Country Assistance Strategy
Community Demand Driven
Consultative Group on Indonesia
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management
Project
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Consumer Price Index
Country Performance Institutional
Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Department for InternationalDevelopment
(United Kingdom)
Local Parliaments
Extended Fund Facility
Economic Sector Work
Financial Action Task Force
Foreign Direct Investment
Farmer Empowerment through Agriculture
Technology & Information Project
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Govemance and Decentralization Survey
Good Environmental Govemance
Govemment of Indonesia
Intemational Association of Insurance
Supervisors
Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency
InternationalBank for ReconstructionAnd
Development
Intemational Country Risk Guide
Intemational Development Association
Indonesia Eastem Development Facility
Intemational Finance Corporation
Initiative for Local Govemance Reform
Project
Intemational Monetary Fund
Dep. of Institutional Integrity
InternationalOrganization of Securities
Commissions
Initial Public Offering
Indonesian Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper

JBIC
JICA
JITF
KDP
KKN
KPPU
LO1
MDG
M&E
MFA
MIGA
MOF
NGO
NPPO
OED
PDAM
PENSA
PER
PERDAs
PERPAMSI
PGN
PHP
PLN
PPA
PROPENAS
PROPER
PRSP
QAE
QAG
REPETA
ROSC
SME
SOEs
STPDN
TA
TIMMS
UNDP
UPP
USDRP
WASPOLA
WBI
WDR
WHO
WISMP
WSSLIC

Japan Bank for InternationalCooperation
Japan Intemational CooperationAgency
Jakarta Initiative Task Force
Kecamatan Development Project
Corruption, Collusion, Nepotism
Business Competition Supervisory
Commission
Letter o f Intent
Millennium Development Goals
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multi Fiber Agreement
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Finance
Non Govemment Organization
National Public Procurement Office
Operations Evaluation Department
Water Utility
Program for Eastem Indonesia SME
Assistance
Public Expenditure Review
Peraturan Daerah (local regulations)
Association of Water Enterprises
State Gas Company
Provincial Health Projects
State Electricity Company
Participatory Poverty Assessments
GO1 five-year plan
Programfor Pollution Control Evaluation
and Rating
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Quality Assessment Evaluation
Quality Assurance Group
Annual Development Plan
Report on Observance of Standards and
Codes
Small- and Medium-size Enterprise
State-owned Enterprises
Public Administration Institute of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
Technical Assistance
Third Intemational Mathematics and Science
Study
United Nations Development Fund
Urban Poverty Project
Urban Sector Development Reform Program
Water Supply and Sanitation Policy
Formulation and Action Planning Project
World Bank Institute
World Development Report
World Health Organization
Water Resources and Irrigation Reform
ImplementationProject
The Water Supply and Sanitation for LowIncome Communities

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

i

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Country Context. Indonesia continues i t s transition from an autocratic, centralized state to a
democratic, decentralized one. I t has successfully regained macroeconomic and political stability, but
economic growth remains below 4 percent, poverty reduction remains a challenge, and governance
concerns continue to cloud i t s achievements. Public debt has declined from 100 percent o f GDP to 72
percent, inflation i s now below 7 percent, and income poverty has fallen from 27 percent in 1999 to 16
percent today. However, 110 million people still live on less than $2 a day, and remain vulnerable to
falling back into severe poverty. Indonesia continues to under-perform its neighbors in access to quality
health, education and other basic services, as reflected in the MDG indicators. Weak governance
institutions are keeping investors away and undermining service provision, especially to the poor.
Indonesia has undertaken refonns that could lead to a more effective and accountable government, and a
restoration o f growth. But sound implementation i s now needed to turn the promise into reality.
ii. The Government’s Reform Program. Following i t s decision not to renew the IMF program after
2003,’ the Government prepared a comprehensive package o f policy reforms through the end of 2004.
This “letter o f intent to the Indonesian people” provides an agenda o f time-bound actions, covering
macroeconomic management, financial sector reform, and policies to help raise investment and reduce
poverty. The package i s ambitious - especially for an election year -- but represents an important effort to
spur the momentum o f reforms, and serves as a mechanism to monitor the Government’s progress on the
basis o f i t s own stated benchmarks. With steady progress on t h i s reform package, and an effective PRSP,’
growth over the CAS period i s expected to reach 5 percent b y 2006, enabling poverty to decline to 11
percent b y 2007.

...

The Bank Group Strategy. Further progress in reducing poverty i s prevented by two major
factors-low investment, and weak service provision-which in turn are caused primarily b y problems o f
governance. The Bank Group’s entire efforts -- in the form o f analytical and advisory services, lending,
I F C and MIGA activities, and donor coordination -- w i l l be to help address these problems.
111.

Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment. Bank Group support w i l l be directed to
address five key areas that are essential to raise the rate o f investment from its current level o f 20
percent o f GDP: deepening macroeconomic stability, building a stronger financial sector,
fostering a competitive private sector, building Indonesia’s infrastructure, and creating income
opportunities for poor households and farmers.
Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Needs of the Poor, Weak service delivery i s
undermining Indonesia’s goal o f improving the quality o f life o f i t s citizens and the attainment o f
i t s MDGs. Bank Group support w i l l thus be devoted to help revamp the management and
accountability systems for service delivery to make providers more directly accountable to their
clients. Focus w i l l be given to implementing the principles of the World Development Report
2004, especially in health and education, but also in agricultural research, extension and
irrigation, and in public services in general.
The Core Issue of Governance. Advances in governance w i l l be needed to address both CAS
objectives. Four areas w i l l be given priority: (i)
making development planning more responsive to
‘The IMF w i l l engage in post-program monitoring beginning in 2004.

2As a blend country, Indonesia’s PRSP preparation i s not directly linked to IDA access and was therefore not a prerequisite for Bank CAS preparation. Indonesia’s I-PRSP was circulated to the Board in March 2003, and i t s full
PRSP i s due to be completed in mid-2004.

..

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

11

constituents; (ii)
improving public financial management; (iii)
strengthening the accountability of
local governments under a more coherent decentralization framework; and (iv) enhancing the
public credibility, impartiality and accessibility o f the justice sector. Selectivity in the Bank’s
activities w i l l be determined less b y sectoral priorities than by the opportunity to make progress
in these areas. Corruption poses a special problem in Indonesia, and the country team aims to
integrate governance and corruption issues through the entire Indonesia program, shaping how
projects are selected, designed, implemented and monitored.
v.
Business Platforms-How the World Bank will Deliver. Indonesia’s massive decentralization
calls for a new approach to the delivery o f development assistance. The Bank w i l l leverage the projects it
finances with analytical work, policy advice, technical assistance, strategic partnerships and capacity
building to systematically increase standards o f governance at each level o f government the Bank
engages. Four business platforms are envisioned:
0

The Community Driven Development Platform: about 25 percent o f all lending (about $200 million
per year) would be allocated to scale up this successful program.
The Local Services Platform: about 40 percent o f lending would be allocated to help create
accountability at the district and provincial levels.

0

The Public Utility Platform: about 15 percent of lending would help support investments in good
corporate governance and efficiency in water supply and energy.

0

The National Lending Platform: about 20 percent o f lending would be allocated to address central
problems.

The CAS Framework

vi.
Scale of World Bank Activities. Through these platforms the Bank proposes a Base case with
lending in the range o f $450 - $850 million, including $230 million in IDA resources. The Base case
assumes continued, but incremental, progress on the Economic Policy Package. Evidence o f decisive
momentum in implementing the reform package could lead to an “enhanced” Base case, in which the
Bank would offer an adjustment loan in late 2004. The actual amount of Base case lending would also
depend on the number of districts and utilities that qualify through their governance reforms for Bank
assistance. The CAS also includes a High case o f up to $1.4 billion, and a L o w case o f less than $300

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

...

111

million. The High case triggers have all been selected from the Government’s Economic Policy Package
as those most important to achieving target outcomes in the three CAS areas and putting the country on a
path to stronger growth and better living standards.
vii. Program Delivery-Portfolio Management, Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA), and
Partnerships. Despite challenges o f portfolio management across a large country with significant
corruption risks, portfolio performance has improved with commitments at risk down from 39 percent
(FY02) to 12 percent (FY03), and disbursements remaining above 20 percent. Portfolio risks w i l l be
managed b y building external monitoring mechanisms into project designs, requiring anti-corruption
strategies for each project and using the platform approach to maximize the effectiveness o f supervision.
The platforms w i l l also bring more coherence to capacity building activities with the World Bank Institute
taking a strong role. The AAA program i s being thematically developed around the CAS objectives to
stay focused on results. Finally, partnerships w i l l play a large role in the success o f the platforms, through
support for critical analytical, M & E, and capacity building contributions, and in support o f specific
sectoral reform programs through grant financing, TA and analytical inputs.
viii. International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Association
( M I G A ) Programs. IFC’s activities, including the new S M E Facility (PENSA), are directed to help the
private sector and contribute to sustained economic growth and poverty alleviation, b y focusing on: (i)
strengthening o f banks; (ii)
deepening the financial sector; (iii)
supporting export-oriented companies,
mainly in the agribusiness sector; (iv) supporting infrastructure investments in power and
telecommunications; and (v) supporting SMEs. MIGA i s proposing to support privatization through the
provision o f political risk guarantees to foreign investors, to provide support to the investment promotion
agency, and to undertake a comprehensive benchmarking study o f Indonesia.
ix.
Managing Risks. The program i s designed to mitigate risks that could limit the effectiveness of
Bank support. These risks include, a lack o f political w i l l to address governance issues, macroeconomic
shocks arising from domestic or international factors, including a financial sector crisis; political and
security instability threatening a loss o f confidence, disruption in Bank activities, and a potential risk to
Bank staff; stalled decentralization undermining the effectiveness of local governments; challenges to the
Bank’s reputation and credibility stemming from continued public concerns about corruption and the
impact o f donor assistance. Risk management measures are described for each risk area.
X.

The following four issues are suggested for Board discussion:

0

Poverty reduction: Does the proposed Bank program adequately support poverty reduction as
measured by MDG indicators?

0

Corruption: I s the proposed approach to address corruption, including putting governance at the
core o f the World Bank strategy, appropriate and adequate?

0

Trigger framework: D o Directors agree with the proposed approach to base the trigger
framework on the Government’s Economic Policy Package o f reforms, while leaving flexibility
to adjust the indicators o f progress in-line with actions that become priorities for the new
Government?

0

“Enhanced” Base case Adjustment Loan: I s the proposed approach for providing an adjustment
loan based on progress towards the high case appropriate?

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

1

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES
A. POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
CONTEXT AND CHALLENGES
1.
Indonesia continues i t s transition from an autocratic, centralized state to a
democratic, decentralized one. In the five years since President Soeharto’ s resignation and the
fall o f the N e w Order regime, Indonesia’s democracy has gained much ground. A multiplicity o f
voices i s being heard from c i v i l society, political parties, and the academic community, and
communicated through a burgeoning and relatively free local media. Indonesia’s Parliament has
seen i t s role increase dramatically, and i s now actively engaged in the policy debate and
providing an institutional check on the executive branch. After a rocky start, the political arena
has stabilized over the past two years. Recent constitutional and legal changes have been passed
that should further strengthen democratic accountability b y paving the way for the first direct
election o f a President next year and phasing out o f the military from Parliament. The successful
implementation o f the Big Bang decentralization as o f 2001 has transferred considerable
authority over public expenditures and public service delivery to over 400 local governments in
the hopes o f improving responsiveness to client needs. There are clear signs that decentralization
i s enhancing participation in decision-making in the most reform-minded regions.
2.
Macroeconomic stability has been restored, and poverty has been reduced to near
pre-crisis levels (Figure 1). The Rupiah has strengthened f r o m over 10,000 per dollar at the start
o f the previous CAS period to 8,500 now, inflation has been brought down to below 7 percent,
interest rates have fallen accordingly, and the stock market has risen sharply over the past year.
Fiscal consolidation has been impressive, as the budget deficit has been reduced by two-thirds to
an expected 1.9 percent o f GDP in 2003, and 1.3 percent3 in 2004, primarily through cuts in
untargeted fuel subsidies. Government debt to GDP has fallen from almost 100 percent in 1999
to some 72 percent now, and total external debt has shown similar trends. Progress in structural
reforms, notably bank sales and asset recoveries by BRA, the bank restructuring agency, have
supported the macroeconomic gains. (See Annex C o n macroeconomic performance and
prospects.) This stabilization o f the economy supported a strong reduction in income p ~ v e r t y , ~
which fell from over 27 percent o f the population in 1999 to 16 percent in 2002, in part because a
stronger Rupiah made key staples, including rice, more affordable after the crisis spike.

3.
Nevertheless, the reduction of poverty remains a critical challenge for Indonesia.
Despite progress since the crisis, the number o f poor in Indonesia continues to be high: currently
double that o f the entire population o f Australia. Moreover, while 6.7 percent o f the population
live below $1 per day, over 110 million people (53 percent o f the population) l i v e on less than $2
per day, and about that many remain highly vulnerable to falling under Indonesia’s poverty line.
Eastern Indonesia continues to lag far behind the rest o f the country, but there are also pockets o f
poverty within all regions, and the high population density o f Java and Sumatra means that most
o f the poor in fact live on these islands. Female workers are three times more likely than men to

The World Bank estimate o f a fiscal deficit of 1.3 percent in 2004, compared to the Government’s estimate o f 1.2
percent i s due to the World Bank’s projection o f nominal GDP being slightly lower than the Government’s
projection.
4

As measured through expenditures.

2

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Figure 1: A Snapshot of Indonesia's Economy
Market sentiment continues to improve

And inflation and interest rates are falling

(Rupiah/$ exchange rate and Jakarta Stock Exchange index)
Slack Index (1983=100)

(SBI interest rate and CPI inflation)

Exchange rate

1

Source: Bank Indonesia, BPS

Source: Bank Indonesia, BPS

Fiscal consolidation continues

Andpoverty is down from crisis highs

(Government budget deficit, percent of GDP)

5%

(Poverty headcount ratio, percent)

poverty incidence (I)
30% 3

1

25% -

4%

20% -

3%

16.0%

15% -

2%
1%

lo
5%
%:

0%

2001

M 0

2002

2003

2004

Source: MOF, staff estimates

0%

1996

M 2

Source: BPS and staff estimates

But growth remains modest

And the investment outlook is subdued

(GDP, Consumption, and Investment growth, percent)
&;th

1999

rate)

(Investment to GDP ratio, percent)

31%

1

6%
4%

2%
0%
-2 %

1

GDP

zooo

Source: BPS

2001 2002

Private consumption

200020012002

Inveslment

zooo

2001 2002

15%

1
1996

Source: BPS

1991

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

3

have earnings below one dollar a day and have a lower chance o f graduating from l o w pay jobs.
Looking beyond income poverty, Indonesians continue to suffer in many ways. Progress in
ensuring access to basic health, education, water, and sanitation services (e.g. as measured b y
births attended b y traditional healers, child enrollment, household access to sanitation and to
water), improvements have been slow. These are also reflected in poor MDG outcomes,
particularly in health (see Table l),
relative to countries within the region. Women in particular
suffer problems o f access to quality services and bear the consequences: Indonesia’s maternal
mortality rate i s two times greater than the Philippines and five times greater than Vietnam.
Where public services are available-in education and health, for example-they are often of
poor quality as evidenced b y student test scores and the high prevalence o f communicable
diseases such as TB. In addition, while Indonesia i s doing well on educating young girls,
democratization has so far reduced women’s representation in Parliament, and this trend i s also
being played out at the local level where local laws are being issued that discriminate against
women. (See Annex D for a fuller poverty profile.)

4.
The achievements of the past few years continue to be clouded by widespread
concerns about governance and corruption across Indonesian society. The high hopes that

the Refomzasi movement would break the hold o f the vested interests and the corruption,
collusion, and nepotism that characterized the later years o f the Soeharto era have not been
realized. Few have been held to account for the theft o f public resources, and there are signs that
“money politics” i s at work allowing old elites to reacquire their previous assets, and new elites
to consolidate their positions. While corruption captures headlines, the issues created b y
Indonesia’s weak institutions have wider implications. The “please your boss”, upward-looking
accountability and reward system o f Indonesia’s centralized N e w Order c i v i l service lingers on
at the expense o f citizen participation and accountability for results. The perception that
corruption i s s t i l l entrenched in the political system has damaged Indonesia’s investment climate
and generated popular resentment and resignation. The uneven burden that corruption and poor
governance place on poor families raises serious issues o f equity and fairness. Indeed, addressing
governance was identified in the Bank’s 2001 Poverty Report as the single-most important
agenda for reducing poverty in all i t s dimensions. M a n y senior Indonesians recognize that the
“crisis o f governance” i s becoming a “crisis o f development”, and that a whole new mindset i s
needed, including tools, instruments and capabilities o f a modern, responsive government.

5.
Unlike many other countries facing similar governance problems, Indonesia has
begun to undertake important structural reforms that could ultimately lead to more
transparent and accountable government. An ambitious program o f electoral reforms has

been introduced that will, over the coming few years make policymakers at all levels o f
government directly beholden to voters. The mid-2004 national elections w i l l be an important
first test. Will “money politics” rule the day? Or will direct election o f the President and
parliamentarians spark greater responsiveness to public demands for integrity and good
governance? In addition, a radical decentralization has brought responsibility for public
expenditures and public service provision down to a level where government i s likely to be more
responsive to client demand. The legal framework for a more transparent system o f public
expenditure management i s making progress with structural reforms soon to follow. And an
institutional infrastructure i s slowly being put into place to handle corruption cases.

4

Indonesia Countly Assistance Strategy

Table 1: Progress towards Achieving the Millennium Development Goals

PoDulationbelow 1 dollar a dav (%) a
I
Share of poorest quintile in National consumption
Prevalence of underweight children
(under 5 years of age, %) ‘
Proportion o f population below minimum level o f energy
consumption

1

Net enrollment rate in primary school

I

I

Ratio ofboys to girls

L

I

20.6
0.086

I

I

all

hare of women i n wage employment in non-agricultur

I

6.7
0.0843

I

33.6
n.a.

Progress towards Goal

I

Achieved
No change

37

26

n.a.

On track, but slipping

70

65

20

Slow progress

92.5

88.3

No change

93.2d

I

Junior secondary
Senior secondary

Poorest
quintile

2002

1990

1.13d
1.21d
30d

I

I

I

I

1.04
1.12
32

I

I

1

0.99
1.14
31

I

I

1

On track

I

I

Nochange

I

Detenoration

-.Improve maternal health
,

,

aternal mortality ratio‘ (per 100,000 live births)
oDortionof births attended bv skilled health Dersonnel

.Combat HIV aids, malaria and other diseases
ontraceptiveprevalence
among
- married women aged
- 10-50)

.

Ensure Environmental Sustainability
ProDortion of land covered bv forest

I
I
I

1
I

425k
39.6

52.2d

63”

I
I
I

I
I

373
67

‘

53.3

57’

I

1
I

n.a.
46

52.2

n.a.

I

I

I
I

Improving slowly
Improving
- but low
No change

Worsening

I

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

5

6.
But these bold reforms-in significant respects as far-reaching as any country in
transition-have been undermined by weak implementation. As a result, the gap between the
promise and the reality o f reform in Indonesia has been large. Yet i t i s important to recognize
that there i s much to work with in seeking to support Indonesia’s future reform path. The legal
framework for necessary structural reforms i s in place; the challenge i s more narrowly focused
on strengthening the incentives for effective implementation. Despite a vibrant arena o f political
competition, the major parties tend to agree on the basic thrust o f reform pointing towards more
direct accountability, greater transparency and more responsible financial management. This
suggests that there i s a strong foundation for reform in the coming years even though there
remains much work to be done to harness the bold initiatives o f the Reformasi period into
effective institutional and behavioral change.

7.
This mixed s t o r y - o f solid progress in economic policy-making, and halting
progress on governance issues-is captured in the Country Performance Institutional
Assessment (CPIA) ratings. Figure 2 shows that the good progress in macroeconomic policy
and reasonable progress in structural policies i s only beginning t o be matched by progress in
social indicators and in indicators o f governance. While for most indicators Indonesia i s well
ahead o f the average for IDA countries, performance on property rights and governance,
transparency and accountability, and external debt management are lagging. Moreover, the fact
that neither investment levels nor (broadly) the quality o f public services have returned to their
pre-crisis levels-in
spite o f impressive improvements in the macroeconomic context and
opportunities provided by decentralization-is
a reflection o f the weaknesses o f public
institutions, a lack o f transparency and accountability, and corruption.
8.
Finally, Indonesia i s not yet free from risks to political and social stability, against
which democracy, growth and poverty reduction remain the best weapons. The recent
resumption o f military action in Aceh demonstrates that so far, decentralization and special
autonomy, have not resolved separatist tensions. At the same time, extremist Islamic movements
both within Indonesia and across the region, though representing a small minority, continue to
pose a heavy burden o f terrorism threats. The t w i n threats o f separatism and terrorism raise
concerns about security and uncertainty that impose high costs on the population and dampen the
response o f investors to Indonesia’s strong macroeconomic achievements. At the same time,
these twin threats underlie a continued powerful political role for the military that weakens some
o f the recent gains in establishing greater transparency and accountability in the political system.

B. INDONESIA’S
NEW
ECONOMIC
POLICYPACKAGE:
THESHORT-TERM AGENDA

9.
The Government has decided not to renew the IMF program when it expires at the
end of 2003, and in its place has announced a package of policy actions for the next
eighteen months. Following much discussion among politicians, cabinet members, academic
economists and c i v i l society groups, President Megawati Soekarnoputri announced the
Government’s decision in her budget speech to the nation on August 15, 2003.5 In place o f the

The IMF will continue to be strongly engaged through i t s “Post Program Monitoring” missions.

6

Zndonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Figure 2: Indonesia Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Good progress on macro and structural, but limited progress on govemance and social.. .

1 MacrOecOnOmic Balances

2 Fiscal

20 Tranwarency & Accountability

19 Public Administration,

s

18 RevenueMobilization
17 Budget Management

16 Property RightsandGovernance

15 Poverty Analyss

%

14 Social Protection

\-

12 Equityof PubIicRewurceU

Indonesia 2003

11 Gender

- - Indonesia 1999

ssJ
Maximum

Generally better than the IDA average in all areas but govemance and debt..

-Indonesia 2003 - - IDA average 2002

Maximum

Indonesia 2003 are preliminary ratings.

Letter Of Intent (LOI) which the Government prepared periodically for the IMF under i t s
program, the Government has prepared a new time-bound package o f economic policies, that
w i l l guide policy direction through 2004, covering the period o f the elections and installation o f a
new administration. The package, signed b y the President on September 15, covers three areas-

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

7

macroeconomic management, financial sector reform, and policies to restore investment and
growth.
0

Further Macroeconomic Consolidation. The Government’s aim i s t o reduce the fiscal
deficit to zero by 2006, and the public debt to GDP to “safe levels” (the State Finances
law specifies a level below 60 percent o f G D P - e q u a l to the so-called “Maastricht”
norms). Measures to modernize the tax system include revisions o f taxation laws,
expanding the large taxpayers’ office, and reforms o f the customs office. Measures to
increase efficiency in spending include revised procedures o n government procurement,
establishment o f a separate treasury and a treasury single account, and implementing
regulations for budget preparation and government accounting standards. The plan calls
for further reductions in untargeted fuel subsidies-and limiting these to household
kerosene, a fuel mainly used by the poor. The program includes privatization o f 10 state
enterprises-an
ambitious target for an election year-and
a revamp o f
intergovernmental fiscal relations.
Deeper Financial Sector Reform. Government plans include policies to solidify a
financial sector safety net, continue bank restructuring, strengthen state bank
governance, and improve capital market supervision. A “white paper” o n the financial
safety net would be prepared, a deposit insurance law submitted to Parliament, and the
“lender of last resort” role o f Bank Indonesia would be amended. Specific actions on
bank restructuring include further sales o f B R A banks and assets, and introduction o f
risk-adjusted capital adequacy rules. State banks would be strengthened by appointment
o f independent commissioners, and by improving credit and risk management systems,
and by launching an P O for Bank BRI. Capital markets would be placed on a firmer
footing b y enforcement o f capital adequacy standards, regulation o f the mutual funds
business, and consolidation and improved regulation in the insurance and pension sector.
The anti-money laundering law has been revised to abide by FATF guidelines, and an
anti-money laundering task force w i l l be created.

0

An Improved Investment Climate. Actions promised b y the Government draw from
consultations with the business community, and seek to begin to address deep seated
constraints, such as corruption, the lack o f a trusted legal system, the lack of access to
land tenure, and the lack o f adequate physical infrastructure as well as more immediate
regulatory and labor issues. The Government w i l l set up an Investment and Trade Team
to identify and address constraints, and monitor progress. Specific actions include a
revision o f the investment law, a review o f the negative l i s t o f sectors barred for foreign
investors, and acceleration o f tax refunds for exporters. The Anti-Corruption
Commission w i l l begin operation, a judiciary commission in charge o f the appointment
o f judges w i l l be established, and the law on the attorney general’s office w i l l be revised.
The bankruptcy law w i l l be revised, and the commercial court in charge o f application o f
that law w i l l be strengthened. T o improve investment and management o f physical
infrastructure, additional public funds w i l l be allocated; and private investment w i l l be
facilitated through revisions to the Transport Law, and the creation o f an independent
supervisor for the electricity market. The Government commits t o improving service
delivery to investors by improving tax and customs administration, and by requiring all
agencies with services to the public to publish service delivery standards.

8

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

10.

The Economic Policy Package has been received domestically and internationally as
ambitious but welcomed. B y announcing actions and dates, the Government has opened itself
to public scrutiny and made itself accountable in an unprecedented manner. Existing planning
documents, such as the five-year plan (PROPENAS) and annual plan (REPETA), discuss
development objectives and l i s t loosely related development spending programs, but do not
include concrete time-bound actions, with allocated responsibilities. The new package can be
criticized as containing too many items and being unfocused, and i t s success w i l l only become
evident over the coming months. Monitoring units are being established within Government and
outside, and the Bank will support the Government’s efforts to refine the program, and w i l l
provide support for i t s implementation. Base and High case triggers for the Bank’s program are
taken from the Government’s policy package, and i t w i l l also be the focus o f the next
Consultative Group meeting in December 2003.

C. THEEMERGING
PRSP: A MEDIUM-TERMFRAMEWORK
FOR POVERTY
REDUCTION
11.
A Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), scheduled for completion in M a y
2004, i s expected to build on the Economic Package, and lay out a comprehensive mediumterm development program for poverty reduction. In early 2003 Indonesia finalized i t s
Interim PRSP, which provided a broad road-map and timetable for developing the full PRSP.6
The I-PRSP (circulated to the Boards o f the Bank and Fund in March 2003) was consulted
broadly with c i v i l society and across the country. Consensus was developed on four fundamental
creating opportunities; (ii)
empowerment; (iii)
human capital
themes for the national PRSP: (i)
and capacity development; and (iv) social protection. Four multi-stakeholder Task Forces are
charged with putting substance behind these areas through a program o f analytics and policy
development. A Core PRSP Team, under the leadership o f the Coordinating Minister for Social
Development, i s responsible for the overall strategy, and for seeking to link the strategy to the
medium term plan and budgetary framework. A series o f district-level poverty-reduction
strategies, based on participatory poverty assessments (PPAs), are also being prepared. The CAS
has been designed to be fully consistent with the emerging PRSP, and has been prepared in
consultation with the PRSP Core Team. The CAS Progress Report, to be prepared at the end o f
2004, w i l l propose fine tuning o f the CAS, in light o f the full PRSP and the concerns o f the new
Government.
D. ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK,
EXTERNAL
ENVIRONMENT
A N D FINANCING
NEEDS
12.
A gradual increase in growth characterizes the Base case economic outlook.
Supported by a recovering international economy, and a slow but steady improvement in the
investment climate, Indonesia’s GDP growth rate i s expected to reach 5 percent b y 2006, up
from the 3.5 percent in 2003, and broadly similar rates over the last C A S period. Inflation i s
expected to drop further to some 5 percent per annum and domestic interest rates to drop in line.
Under this scenario, the poverty rate would fall from 16 percent in 2002 t o 11 percent in 2007,
less than half the 27 percent i t was in 1999. The external environment i s likely to be slightly
more supportive of Indonesia’s growth than over the past years: the most recent World Bank

As a blend country, Indonesia’s PRSP preparation i s not directly linked to IDA access and was therefore not a prerequisite for Bank CAS preparation. Indonesia’s I-PRSP was circulated to the Board in March 2003.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

9

projections envision a pick-up in the rate of global GDP growth and o f world trade.7 Indonesia
w i l l face increasing competition on traditional markets, particularly from China, and that
competition w i l l intensify after expiry of the MFA agreement in 2005. At the same time, China
w i l l be a rapidly growing export market for Indonesia in the years ahead and, on balance, we
therefore expect continued export growth. The real exchange rate, while having appreciated in
recent years, remains below i t s pre-crisis levels. Nevertheless, a competitive exchange rate w i l l
be necessary to underpin Indonesia’s trade competitiveness.8 Imports w i l l grow faster, as a result
of recovering investment, and the current account surplus i s thus expected to gradually decline
from the record $7.5 billion, or 4.3 percent of GDP in 2002. (For more detail on macroeconomic
performance and prospects, see Annex D.)

13.

Our Base case projections include gradual increases in investment rates and factor
productivity, which in turn are predicated on continued sound macroeconomic
performance and a moderate improvement in the investment climate. We expect the
Government to continue fiscal consolidation, although at a more moderate pace than the
Government itself projects. We assume a balanced budget by 2007, down from 1.9 percent
projected for 2003. Consolidation w i l l not only come from further cuts in fuel subsidies-already
down from over 5 percent of GDP in 2001 to 1.4 percent of GDP projected for 2003-but also
from an increase in non-oil tax revenues on the back of accelerated revenue administration
reforms. The Government debt to GDP ratio w i l l continue to fall through 2007 from 67 percent
by the end of this year to below 50 percent by 2007 given the debt repayment schedule, exchange
rate assumptions, and nominal GDP growth. Likewise, the total external debt to GDP ratio,
which had dropped to 76 percent in 2002 i s projected to continue to decline to about 40 percent
in 2007. We expect investments as a share of GDP to gradually rise from 20 percent now to 22
percent in 2007.

14.
Despite further fiscal consolidation, financing needs will be particularly high in the
first two years of the CAS period. With the expiration of the IMF EFF arrangement, Paris Club
rescheduling ceases at the end of 2003, adding some $3 billion in additional financing needs. In
addition, an increasing share of bank re-capitalization bonds w i l l fall due over the coming years,
while B R A asset recoveries are tailing off, as are privatization receipts. As a result, higher
financing i s required to support a public investment program that complements private
investment. With respect to domestic financing, the Government w i l l look to the domestic bond
market and a draw-down in deposits. However, increased foreign-financed disbursement w i l l
also be required as one important element in bringing about enhanced investment levels and
growth. Foreign financed disbursements on the order of US$3 billion w i l l be required annually
over this period, relative to a level of $2.3 billion per annum over the last three years, excluding
Paris Club.

’

The World Bank’s Global Development Prospects 2004 publication envisages world GDP growth climbing from 2
percent in 2003 to 3 percent in 2004-2005, and regional (East Asia and Pacific) growth rates rising to 6.6-6.7 percent
in 2004-2005. World trade volume i s expected to increase from 4.6 percent in 2003 to 8 percent in 2004-2005.
Bank projections anticipate a real exchange depreciation of about 1.2 percent annually over the CAS period.

10

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

THE WORLD BANKI N INDONESIA: LEARNING
FROM
RECENT
EXPERIENCE
A. LESSONS
FROM THE TRANSITIONPERIOD
15.
In the aftermath of the economic crisis, the World Bank was seen by many as part
of the problem rather than the solution. To many Indonesians the Bank was associated with
the Soeharto Government, which i t had supported through loans and policy advice for 32 years.
The Bank was a contributor to Indonesia’s external debt, perhaps the country’s most visible
economic problem in the post crisis years, without being able to contribute to debt rescheduling
or debt reduction. And the Bank’s reputation was damaged as i t was perceived to have failed to
take a stand against corruption, while lending large sums of money in support of the Soeharto
regime. As of mid-2000, the Bank had $11.8 billion of IBRD funds outstanding to Indonesia. To
many NGOs this was a millstone around Indonesia’s neck. And to the Bank’s risk managers, this
posed one of the most risky parts of the overall portfolio.
16.
Over the last few years, the Bank has sought to actively confront these issues,
making progress and learning important lessons. First, our debt exposure to Indonesia has
been lowered. In agreement with the Government, lending was reduced dramatically from an
average of $ 1.3 billion per year before the crisis, to about $450 million over the last three years.
As a result the Bank’s exposure to Indonesia has dropped by some $1.5 billion, and w i l l fall by a
further $700 million in FY04. Second, as the Bank’s portfolio has shrunk, portfolio performance
has picked up. Consolidation, project restructuring and intensive supervision have helped
portfolio performance recover from i t s FY02 post-decentralization dip. Commitments at risk,
which reached 39 percent in FY02, dropped to 12 percent b y end FY03. Third, the Bank shifted
i t s focus (and i t s reputation) towards a major expansion of our work on community-driven
development programs, governance and anti-corruption (see Section B), and engagement with
civil society.

17.
Recent project outcomes have been mixed. Recent OED ratings largely apply to
projects that began before the crisis, and thus teach lessons about the need to be flexible at times
of stress. O f the 30 projects closed in FY00-02, 60 percent were rated moderately satisfactory or
above, while 37 percent were rated moderately unsatisfactory or below. Problems identified
understandably included lack of counterpart funding and more generally a lack of ownership on
the part of Government during the transition period. Lack of supervision from central
Government and from the Bank was identified in several situations, as was more generally the
break-down of traditional top-down project design and administration. During the past CAS
period, therefore, an effort has been made to introduce a new generation o f projects, giving much
greater emphasis to participatory approaches, being sensitive to the capacities at local and central
levels of Government, and introducing mechanisms for local level accountability. Some of the
lessons from the past CAS period are summarized in Box 1.
18.
Indonesia remained in the Base case throughout the last CAS period, but has now
broadly achieved the High case. Triggers for the High case gave emphasis to the continuation
of the post-crisis reforms. Table 2 summarizes progress made over the past three years on both

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

11

Box 1: Lessons from OED Reviews and the Last CAS
The lessons from the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) review of the Bank’s role leading up to the crisis,* which
informed the last CAS, continue to provide a foundation for the Bank’s program:
In the area of structural reforms, the Country Assistance Note recommended:

Strengthening Bank support to the Government in improving governance by improving fiscmudget transparency,
strengthening oversight and voice mechanisms, enhancing transparency in the incentive framework, and reforming
the civil service.
Concerted effort, including ESW, to help restore banking sector soundness.
Updating poverty and distribution data and re-thinking long-term intra-sectoral commitments, with the aim of
supporting poverty alleviation more directly.
T h i s CAS has integrated these lessons:
I t calls direct attention to Indonesia’s poor governance and corruption and, through the innovation of operational
platforms, i s mainstreamingsupport for improving transparency, oversight and voice whle continuing to pursue civil
service reform.

Poverty and income distribution data have been updated, and this CAS puts forward an intensive analytical program
on poverty. (See Annex D). Community Driven Development efforts, which comprised over 50 percent of new
commitments under the last CAS and channeled funds directly to grass-roots development projects selected by
villagers, including the poor, are supporting poverty alleviation more directly. T h i s CAS aims to build from this
promising foundation.
Intensive Bank support, including through ESW, will continue to help strengthen the financial sector.
A more recent OED Project Performance Assessment** which draws lessons from the Bank’s crisis-response adjustment and
TA loans, has informed the assumptions which define this CAS: In a country with deeply rooted and widespread governance
issues, and where authorities are not committed to deep govemance reforms, the ability to affect fundamental reforms with
adjustment and technical assistance support has been limited:
Under t h i s CAS the use of adjustment lending will continue to be very limited and only be employed in support of
government-drivenreform efforts.
The overall CAS program and the High case triggers have been aligned to the Govemment’s program to support
ownership and effective implementation.
T h i s CAS also learns from other experience and lessons drawn from the last CAS period:
Close partnerships with donor partners and civil society, such as through the CGI process and Partnership for
Govemance Reform, enhances our effectiveness, as does current high quality collaboration with the Fund.
Decentralization i s for real and affects everything we do. It poses real opportunities and real challenges which, going
forward, we must address centrally in our strategy.
More systematic monitoring and evaluation of the impacts of our interventions i s essential to an innovative program
such as ours. T h i s requires priority going forward.
Strong analytical work continues to be a strength of the Bank and i s appreciated by the client and our partners.
Increasingi t s leverage to better inform the design of operational interventions and affect policy change i s key.

* OED Country Assistance Note, February, 1999

** Draft Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR), July 31,2003
the triggers and related measures in which the Bank Group provided technical support. B y the
end of FY03 only one High case trigger-the issuance of a new Procurement decree-remained
unmet. This progress, however, must be tempered by the fact that much s t i l l remains to be done
on the reform agenda, and implementation of policies and laws remains a serious issue.

B. THESPECIAL PROBLEM
OF CORRUPTION
M o r e than 5 years after the fall of Soeharto, the salience of the issue of corruption
19.
has not diminished. Though i t i s nearly impossible to compare the actual levels of corruption

12

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Table 2: Government Policy Performance under Last CAS
Action Area
Bank and Corporate
Restructuring

Macroeconomic
Stability

GO1 Action and Progress To Date
(High case trigger conditions highlighted in bold)
IBRA sold $45 billion in distressed banking system debt.

3 banks were privatized, but around 50% of banking assets remain publicly owned
Jakarta Initiative Task Force (JITF) met corporate restructuringtargets.
Parliament approved amendment to the Anti-Money Laundering Law in Sept. 2003.
Budget deficit down to an expected 1.9% of GDP in 2003.
Rupiah strengthened from over lO,OOO/US$ in July 2000 to 8,500 in Sept. 2003.
C P I inflation brought down from 12% in 2001 to below 7 % in 2003.
Public debt to GDP fell from almost 100% in 1999 to 72% in June 2003.

Pro-Poor Policies

Rice tariff remained below 30 percent ad-valorem equivalent, but non-tariff measures remain
and Bulog’s expanding role may jeopardize rice price support

Land policy managementclarified through PresidentialDecree 34/2003, but implementation
regulationsyet to be prepared and adopted.
Fuel subsidies reduced from over 5% of GDP in 2000 to 1.5% in 2003, but compensating safety
net programs were poorly targeted and monitored.
I-PRSP completed in March 2003. PRSP to be completedby mid-2004.
Competitive Private
Sector Development

Privatization of SOEs, despite commitments announced by the Government, remains
controversial-little action taken to date.
Competition agency (KPPU) established, but enforcement needs strengthening.
Some backtracking on the open trade regime, e.g., sugar restrictions.

Infrastructure
Bottlenecks

Oil and Gas Law passed in 2001, but issuance of implementingregulations i s slow.
Electricity Law passed in Sept. 2002, but regulatory body not yet established.
Disputes with 26 out of 27 Independent Power Producers settled.

Tariff increases in electricity and telecommunications, but prices s t i l l inadequate to attract
investors.
Legal and Judicial
Reforms

Governance audit of the Supreme Court completed and follow-up ongoing.

Civil Service Reforms

Civil servants smoothly transferredto the regions following decentralization, but no progress
made on a comprehensive civil service reform.

Public Procurement
and Financial
Management

State Finance Law passed in March 2003, but treasury and audit laws s t i l l in draft.

Management of
Decentralization
Process

Smooth implementation o f law 22 on decentralization, but conflicting implementationrules and
sectoral laws need attention.
Intergovernmentalfiscal framework put in place (law 25), but revenue raising remains overly
centralizedand equity issues linger.

Audit of Attorney General’s office completed, but no follow-up action.
Anticorruption Commission (ACC) Law passed in Dec. 2002, but ACC s t i l l not functional

Public Procurement Decree has been drafted and is awaiting presidential approval, and legal
framework s t i l l needs revision.

under the N e w Order and Reformasi regimes-including the impact o f decentralization-it
is
clear that corruption has become less predictable in this more competitive and uncertain
environment. Moreover, the unfulfilled expectations that Refonnasi would quickly bring a new
integrity to public l i f e has generated resentment, fuelling perceptions that corruption has become
endemic in the new system. For the Bank Group, corruption has become a triple threat: i t
undermines progress on the country’s broad development objectives, i t remains a serious risk to
the effectiveness o f our programs, and i t continues to weaken public credibility in development
assistance overall, which i s s t i l l too often portrayed within segments o f the community as
contributing to the problem.

13

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

A central lesson of the Bank Group’s experience in Indonesia i s that our entire

20.

success will be judged by the contribution that our programs are seen to make towards
greater transparency and accountability, and by the standards of integrity with which we
implement these programs. This has consistently been one o f the main messages o f our
enhanced CAS consultations with c i v i l society (see B o x 2) and the Indonesia Country Team’s
own self-assessment o f the Bank’s objectives over the next several years. Since the crisis, the
Bank has responded to the triple threat o f corruption by scaling back our lending, while seeking
to build a capacity to act as a catalyst for anti-corruption reforms, cultivating partnerships to
promote good governance, and strengthening the team’s own capacity for mitigating corruption
risks to our projects. M u c h has been achieved in each o f these areas, providing a stronger
foundation for the Bank to respond to Indonesia’s increased need for development assistance.
Box 2: CAS Consultations Highlight Indonesia’s Development Challenges
As part o f the preparation of this CAS, extensive consultations with various civil society representatives, both in Jakarta and
in the regions, through focus groups, interviews and feedback sessions, highlighted priority development issues that
participants thought the Bank should address. (See Annex E). They closely mirror and validate the key challenges posed
above. First , participants saw “KKN” (corruption, collusion and nepotism) as the country’s core problem. As i t was put by
one participant, “corruption i s the real root of poverty in this country”. Many called for particular attention to legal reform as
a relateddevelopment priority. Second, participants stressed the need to alleviate poverty, especially throughjob creation and
economic growth. Third, consultations raised the need to improve essential services-especially in education and health-as
a key development priority. With regard to service delivery, concerns were raised about corruption and quality. Fourth,
related to both growth and governance, Indonesians felt there was a need to pay more attention to improving agriculture and
environmentalmanagement.

Going forward, the Bank Group will integrate four key anti-corruption principles
21.
across its entire program in Indonesia:
0

A clear and consistent voice raising corruption concerns and promoting feasible

responses across all sectors of our operations. In the past three years the Bank
invested considerable efforts in assisting the development of the Partnership for
Governance Reform-an Indonesian-led, multi-donor supported effort t o raise awareness
o f and devise solutions to governance problems. The Bank i s complementing this work
by raising i t s o w n voice on corruption through analytical and advisory work. In October
2003 a multi-sector Bank report dissecting “how corruption works” in a wide range o f
areas was launched, and televised nationally.’ This i s being followed up b y expenditure
reviews and expenditure tracking targeted at key breeding grounds of corruption, more
core diagnostic reports, and detailed studies o f the effects of participation and
transparency on corruption outcomes in community level programs. At the same time,
the Bank has supported national-level reforms in procurement and financial management
(see Table 2). The Bank w i l l help the Government persevere in fending-off special
interests to create a national procurement function and modernize i t s procurement law.
W e w i l l also support the Government to implement the agenda that has been codified in
the recent State Finance L a w (and soon to be passed Treasury and Audit laws).
Project selection to open multiple entry points in the fight against corruption.
Instead of relying on the development o f an overarching anti-corruption program or anti-

’Combating corruption in Indonesia:
Discussion Draft.

Enhancing Accountability for Development, World Bank, October 20, 2003

14

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

corruption institution, the Bank’s projects described in the pages ahead have been chosen
to open up multiple anti-corruption entry points at different levels of government and
across different sectors. CDD projects promote participatory planning and monitoring to
reduce corruption in village level governments. District level projects w i l l seek to select
kabupaten (districts) and kota (municipalities) with a demonstrated commitment to
greater accountability and transparency and work with them to improve their financial
management and pro-poor planning capacity. Justice sector work w i l l target both
enhancing access to justice for the poor as well as providing technical assistance to the
new central institutions designed to fight corruption. The Bank w i l l respond in particular
to partners with a demonstrated track record of commitment to anti-corruption reforms.

Mechanisms to mitigate corruption risks for all projects through empowerment,
participation and transparency. The lessons of our successful CDD projects in
Indonesia demonstrate the impact of smart project design for reducing corruption risks
and getting more development impact for less investment. Direct client participation in
the selection and implementation of projects engages citizens as monitors with a direct
incentive to reveal corruption problems. Public disclosure requirements at key stages of
the project make asset diversion more difficult and build public credibility behind the
project. Enhanced supervision through project facilitators in the community linked to
national networks has been particularly successful in revealing corruption allegations. To
ensure smart project designs, all projects are required to devise an Anti-Corruption Plan,
assessing risks of corruption inherent in the project and proposing design and
supervision mechanisms to mitigate those risks.
Pre-emptive audits, vigorous investigation and follow-up to allegations of
corruption in Bank projects, and public disclosure of the results. Having created
better mechanisms to detect and handle corruption allegations in our projects, the Bank
i s now receiving and investigating considerably more corruption complaints. I t i s also
proactively uncovering the methods and systems that allow corruption to flourish in each
sector. Professionals from the Department of Institutional Integrity (INT) w i l l continue
to be brought in to investigate corruption allegations, and they w i l l be supplemented b y
local investigative staff. Where misuse of funds has been confirmed, the Bank w i l l
declare mis-procurement, seek return of affected funds, blacklist offending contractors,
and encourage the pursuit of appropriate disciplinary and legal action. Where
satisfactory progress i s not being made in responding to corruption allegations the Bank
w i l l discontinue further operations in the relevant sector, region, or government agency.
Public disclosure of corruption cases w i l l be made on the Bank’s Indonesia website,
within the l i m i t s of safeguarding the Bank’s investigative and sanctions process,
protecting the identity of individuals, and respecting domestic legal due process.

22.
The Country Team has invested unprecedented resources into mainstreaming anticorruption throughout our program. The Indonesia Country Office i s the only mission
worldwide with a Senior Governance Adviser to coordinate our anti-corruption dialogue, oversee
governance-related operations, advise projects on governance and anti-corruption strategies, and
develop a comprehensive research agenda and monitoring framework on governance. A strong
field-based Operations Services Unit team has been put in place to lead the movement towards a
systematic and effective supervision of fiduciary practices during project implementation. An in-

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

15

house Anti-Corruption Committee has been established with representation across the sectors,
and from our field-based legal staff, to serve as a focal point for integrating anti-corruption
mechanisms into project design, review procurement and corruption allegations, and liaise with
our internal investigations unit. Full-time staff members are now being assigned to assist task
teams in the design of anti-corruption strategies, and in the investigation of possible corruption
within our portfolio. I t i s important to recognize, of course, that while this strong combination of
preventative, investigative and corrective measures i s expected to significantly reduce the risk
and incidence of corruption, in the near term i t may not result in fewer cases o f corruption being
identified. More important than the number of cases i s the extent to which the Bank’s practices
ensure greater integrity within our own portfolio and lead to broader improved practices within
Indonesia.

16

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

THE BANKGROUP'S
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
A. THE WORLD BANKGROUP'S
STRATEGIC FOCUS

23.
For the coming CAS period the Bank Group will continue to focus i t s program on
those areas most crucial to poverty reduction. A t present there are two primary constraints to
further reductions in poverty. These are: first, inadequate productive employment opportunities,
which result from low investment and a weak investment climate; and second, the lack of quality
service delivery to poor people. Progress in these two areas, in turn, i s being compromised by the
underlying problem o f weak governance. The World Bank Group's strategy w i l l be to address
the objectives of strengthening the investment climate and service delivery including, critically,
the key issue of governance. Four delivery platforms - corresponding to the community, local,
public utility, and national levels (see next section) - w i l l be used to deliver results in these areas
(see results matrix in Annex B9).
Figure 3: The CAS Framework

Objective I: Improving the Climatefor High Quality Investment

24.
A weak investment climate i s undermining Indonesia's future. Indonesia's economy
has been growing over the past three years at a rate of less than 4 percent per year-lower than
what i s needed to absorb the 2.0-2.5 million new entrants in the labor force every year.
Unemployment i s rising and wages in the informal sector are stagnant. At root i s the lack of
investment that at the time of the crisis declined from around 30 percent of GDP to around 20
percent, where i t has remained since. While maintaining the gains of macroeconomic stability
will continue to be critical through the elections and the next CAS period, deepening the
financial sector, fostering a regulatory and institutional environment conducive to private sector
growth, building the infrastructure for growth, and ensuring that growth benefits the poor will be
fundamental. The Bank Group's support w i l l thus be focused in five areas, with improved

17

Indonesia Countly Assistance Strategy

governance being an underlying theme throughout. Indicators for monitoring success are
provided in Table 3.

Table 3: Improving Investment Climate for Poverty Reduction: Targeted Results
Strategic, Longer Term Country
Outcomes

Illustrative Indicators of Indonesia’s Success
which This CAS Aims To Impact

Maintain macroeconomic stability

Decrease in tax arrears
Deficit o f 1.2% o f GDP in 2004,0.6% in 2005

Stronger and diversifiedfinancial sector
with more equitable access

Financial safety net i s implemented (deposit insurance, lender o f last resort
established)
Indonesia in broad compliance w i t h intemational standards (such as BCPs,
IOSCO, IAIS)
No. o f SMEs and poorer households with increased access to micro-finance

Supportive environment for competitive
private sector

Reduced time for approval o f new businesses (from 168 days currently)
Reduced clearance time in customs
Improved corporate govemance as verified by ROSC
Improved competition in key industries (e.g. telecom, o i l and gas, power)
Investment climate in 40 regions participating in local services platform
projects above the national average

Refurbished infrastructure

Improved tariff structure for gas sector
Improved institutional arrangements for toll roads
Partial privatization o f key infrastructure SOEs

Sustainable income creating
op~o*unaiesforpoorerhouseholds

Land rights policies and legislation are reformed

2.5 million new titles issued in project-assisted areas
30,000 villageskities w i t h improved access to roads, bridges, irrigation and
other infrastructure through participatory planning and financing
Increase in productivity yields o f agricultural irrigated land & food security in
70 project-assisted districts

25.
Maintaining macroeconomic stability. In addition to continuing i t s ongoing
macroeconomic monitoring and advice, the Bank w i l l help strengthen the governance of
institutions that are critical to underpin macroeconomic stability and growth. Under preparation,
jointly with the IMF, i s a project to support reform of the Ministry of Finance, including public
financial management and tax and customs administration. Public expenditure reviews are
planned for FY05 and FY07, and support for debt management w i l l be provided through an
ASEM grant. Advisory services for the wind-down of IBRA w i l l be provided, and establishment
of a sound safety net w i l l be supported.
26.
Building a stronger financial sector. Bank Group activities in the financial sector w i l l
gradually move from past emphasis on crisis response and management towards a medium-term
focus on overall financial sector development and reform-including
non-bank financial
institutions, capital markets, rural and micro-finance, and improving access of the poor to
financial services.
Strengthening the banking sector. Advisory services for wind-down of IBRA and postIBRA institutions, reform of state-owned banks, improvements to regulation and
supervision, and establishment of a safety net w i l l be supported. Technical assistance to

18

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

enhance financial sector s k i l l s w i l l be provided. Ongoing financial sector monitoring w i l l
form part of the AAA agenda.
0

0

0

0

Creating a diversified financial sector. The Bank w i l l support non-bank financial
institutions-including capital markets, insurance, and pensions-and their regulation
and supervision through technical assistance, advisory services, and AAA. A lending
project to support capital market infrastructure in FY05 i s under discussion. A
comprehensive strategy for reform of non-bank financial institutions and a diagnosis of
the pension system w i l l form part of the AAA agenda.
Zmproving access of the poor to financial services. Micro-finance delivery i s currently
supported through the ongoing CDD and rural area development projects. A microfinance project as well as analytical work w i l l support increased linkages of these
institutions with the formal financial sector and work with commercial banks to increase
their outreach in rural areas.
Anti-money laundering. The Bank w i l l coordinate with other donors and provide
advisory services and AAA to support Indonesia in implementing i t s recently revised
anti-money laundering legislation.
Joint ZFC-Bank activities. IFC and the Bank w i l l work together to assist in the
development of financial market infrastructure such as credit bureaus, and key market
segments such as housing finance and securitization.

27.
Fostering a competitive private sector. Integrating private sector involvement into
Bank projects as well as activities aimed at developing the private sector in a decentralized
environment will be areas of key focus. Bank Group support w i l l include:
Building the institutions for a competitive economy. A policy-based loan programmed
for FY05 linked to significant progress in the Government’s Economic Policy Package
w i l l support improvements in the regulatory environment that w i l l enhance private sector
competition. Support w i l l also be aligned to improve competition in key industries,
including support for the regulatory bodies in electricity, telecommunications, o i l and
gas. Ongoing power projects, as well as a new domestic gas project w i l l promote
unbundling and enhanced competition in the power sectors. The Bank w i l l also seek
greater clarity and predictability in the enforcement of environmental regulations,
through support to the Government’s Good Environmental Governance (GEG) Program.
Monitoring the investment climate and promoting dialogue. A program of national,
local and rural business climate surveys i s currently being set up, and w i l l be supported
by diagnostic work on private sector constraints, including a Diagnostic Trade
Integration Study and a Domestic Trade Study. The national-level Private Sector Forum
w i l l continue to be organized by the IFC in the context of the Consultative Group
meetings to enhance the dialogue between the Government and the private sector.
Current topics include, for example, private investment in the power sector, mining,
banking, the role of the commercial courts and corporate governance. At the local level,

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

19

the Bank w i l l support improving the business climate through dialogue between private
sector, including small-scale entrepreneurs, and the local government.
Strengthening corporate governance and key oversight institutions. Corporate sector
monitoring w i l l form part of the AAA agenda. Assistance w i l l continue to be provided to
institutions such as the Competition Agency, the Corporate Directors’ Institute, and
auditing and accounting bodies, and a review of corporate governance i s being
completed.
Support for SME development. The IFC’s new Program for Eastern Indonesia S M E
Assistance (PENSA) w i l l be the Bank Group’s main vehicle capacity building for S M E s
(see Box 3). I t w i l l be supported by business climate programs through the Bank’s
decentralized governance programs (see section B).
Box 3. The Programfor Eastern Indonesia SME Assistance (PENSA)
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) account for the vast majority o f employment in Indonesia, yet they operate in an
uncertain and often unhelpful environment. There are 17 million legally registered enterprises in Indonesia, almost all o f
which have less than 20 employees each. Those able to produce for a niche market, adapting quality and cost to market
demand, have high growth potential, as evident in the rapid growth o f exports o f SMEs. The growth opportunities for
Indonesian SMEs are a critical component to Indonesia’s economy, investment climate and political stability. For these
reasons, the I F C has initiated PENSA, a five year program funded at approximately US$20 million by Australia, Canada,
Japan, the Netherlands and IFC. With offices in Denpasar, Balikpapan, Makassar, Surabaya and Jakarta i t aims to stimulate
the growth o f small scale enterprises in the region. I t w i l l pay special attention to promoting sustainable, value-added
upstream and downstream product and market relationships between SMEs and larger core businesses, access to finance to
SMEs and improving the investment climate. PENSA’s five offices concentrate on different aspects o f S M E development
(e.g. extractive industries, handicraft and furniture manufacturing, agribusiness processing, finance, and policy reform and
deregulation). Key to PENSA’s approach i s building the capacity o f local consultants and institutions.

28.

Building Indonesia’s infrastructure. The lack of investment in infrastructure over the
past five years i s a major threat to Indonesia’s economic prospects. Competitiveness i s being
undermined due to congestion costs; the prospect of power shortages hangs over Java. Over 40
percent of households, mostly rural, still do not have power connections. Only 15 percent of
households have access to piped drinking water, let alone to public sewage systems (1.3 percent
of the urban population, the lowest in coverage in Asia). The Bank Group i s heavily committed
to help confront these challenges, through analytical and advisory services and financing.
Supporting a strategic framework for infrastructure. A major infrastructure strategy,
prepared b y the Bank in consultation with the Government, w i l l be completed by end2003, and w i l l guide the Bank’s national-level policy dialogue and future engagement. A
key feature of our support w i l l be the development of sound implementing regulations
for newly passed laws, and clarity of delineation of agency roles at national and regional
levels. Implementation o f the on-going Private Participation in Infrastructure TA loan
w i l l leverage private investment in the infrastructure sector.
Providing power for growth. Working closely with the Asian Development Bank and
others, the Bank’s focus in energy w i l l be on completing the implementation of the legal
and policy framework to help attract private investors and to complete the restructuring
of the electricity and gas entities. A Bank project i s supporting the restructuring of the
state electricity utility (PLN) and the implementation of an appropriately sustainable
tariff framework. Supported b y a FY05 Domestic Gas Restructuring Project, the

20

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

restructuring of the state gas utility (PGN) would be completed and the pricing of natural
gas would be rationalized and implemented. The access to electricity outside Java - Bali
would be increased through a proposed Rural Electrification project that i s under
discussion for FY06.
Building national transportation and communications infrastructure. In addition to
several projects that support information technology systems, the Bank has several
projects in the current portfolio that support the development of road infrastructure. The
Bank w i l l provide further support through the proposed Strategic Roads Infrastructure
Project which will support capacity expansion in heavily trafficked corridors, principally
in Java. Continued technical support for improvements in the institutional context for toll
road development would be provided.
Building sub-national infrastructure within a decentralizedframework. The proposed
Second Eastern Indonesia Transport Project w i l l finance improvements in roads and
other transport facilities that w i l l support and promote growth in less developed regions.
The East Java Regional Development and Reform Project w i l l build capacity for
decentralized management of sub-national infrastructure and finance targeted investment
in provincial and multi-jurisdictional infrastructure. The Urban Sector Reform and
Development Program (1 & 2) w i l l support local government level infrastructure
development.
Improving the quality and coverage of water and sanitation. Indonesia’s 300 semiautonomous water utilities (PDAMs) were already struggling in 1997, when they were
devastated b y the financial crisis. As a result, coverage rates for water supply have been
dropping throughout Indonesia in both urban and rural areas during the past six years,
making the achievement of the MDG in this area unlikely. Bank support, through two
projects, w i l l be provided by working with progressive PDAMs selected through a
competitive process. Support for rural water supply w i l l build on advances made by
government in community based water supply and sanitation for rural areas.
Approximately 2000 villages w i l l benefit from these programs (WSSLIC 2 & 3).

32.

Creating income opportunities for poorer households and farmers. In addition to the
constraints posed b y inadequate local infrastructure, poorer households also suffer from
uncertain property rights, pressure to move to marginalized land and to resort to unsustainable
resource management practices (whether i t be forests or coasts). They have limited access to
capital and limited access to the justice system. As many of these issues hold back rural and
urban poor alike, a number of Bank programs are active in both settings. The Land Management
Program (FY05) w i l l critically focus on developing a national land policy, improving land tenure
security, improving local government capacity in land management functions, and enhancing the
efficiency, transparency and service delivery of land titling and registration. C D D programs seek
to enhance incomes of both villagers and slum dwellers through participation in decision making
and access to resources for poor men and women. The Bank’s poverty AAA agenda w i l l have a
particular focus in identifying the constraints to growth in investment and incomes for poorer
households as well as reducing risks to these households. For example, analysis i s being
undertaken on the scope for foreign earnings to improve the welfare of female migrant workers,
while support i s also being provided to government for services to protect these women from the

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

21

risks and abuse they face. Likewise, the Bank w i l l improve access to sustainable micro-finance
through i t s new micro-finance project and components of proposed annual C D D projects. At the
same time, the program i s addressing the particular challenges faced b y the 65 percent o f
Indonesia’s poor who rely, at least in part, on agriculture for their livelihood with activities
focused on raising on-farm and off-farm incomes (see B o x 4).
Box 4: Support for Poor Rural Households and Farmers
Getting agriculture moving will be critical to alleviating rural poverty in Indonesia, which despite recent improvements,
remains at four times the level of urban poverty. At the same time, the continued structural shift in rural households’ incomes
out of agriculture and into non-farm activities, will remain important in the overall poverty reduction strategy. Accordingly,
this CAS significantly increases Bank support for agriculture and rural development, as compared to the past five years since
the crisis. However, the earlier foundation for growth of the agriculture sector has weakened, and new directions are needed
for revitalizing sector expansion. Growth was built on rice and on private plantation investment off-Java through the 1990s.
In the future, gains in agricultural productivity will come from high value commodities (smallholder estate crops,
horticulture, livestock, fisheries). Currently, these comprise around 55 percent of agricultural production, but will likely
account for 80 percent of the growth in output. Rice i s still important (26 percent of agricultural production), but will
unlikely account for much of the incremental output. Accordingly, the CAS i s focused on supporting sector growth in these
new directions- i t aims to enhance agricultural productivity, increase the role of producer organizations in marketing and
commodity value chains, strengthen agriculture’s l i n k s to the rural economy, and focus on the Government’s role in
supportingthe transition.
Benefits of on-going projects will be realized during the coming CAS period, and in cases these are expected to be scaled up
through follow-on projects. An on-going Decentralization of Agricultural and Forestry Extension Services Project, which
pilots empowering small shareholders to drive the agricultural services agenda in 16 districts, will be scaled up in the
proposed FEAT1project, which will also tighten links to revitalized public agricultural research and commerciaUagribusiness
sector. IFC’s PENSA program will compliment these efforts by fostering l i n k s between farming communities and agroprocessing. The CDD platform will beef-up i t s focus on the needs of smallholders and engage with and support emerging
farmer organizations. The enabling environment to support increased diversification in the rural economy, will by supported
by accelerated land titling (Land Management Project); better rural infrastructure-both in the watedimgation sector
(WISMP 1 and 2) and for rural accesdroads (through CDD and ILGRP); and strengthen Government capacity (particularly at
the decentralized level) to better deliver essential services, and rein in the explosion of local taxes and fees that burden small
farmers and impede domestic commodity markets (ILGRP). In the coastal areas, the Bank will continue to support a national
effort to engage communities in collaborative management of coral reef ecosystems (COREMAP 2), and support targeted
poverty alleviation in poor coastal fishing communities, through the proposed Marginal Fishing Communities Project.
Finally, the Catchment Protection Project would integrate community forestry with possible mobilization o f carbon finance.
Recent and planned analytical and policy work will continue to underpin these directions in project design and investment
decentralization of land administration as well as the broader framework of land policy;
focus. Recent outputs addressed: (i)
micro/rural finance policy. Planned work on
(ii) rural producer organizations and their emerging capacity and roles; (iii)
District level governance, on the rural investment climate survey, commodity value chains, and sources of rural incomes, will
contribute to pipeline projects and policy dialogue.

Objective ZZ: Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Needs of the Poor

33.
Provision of essential services must improve if Indonesia i s to reach its Millennium
Development Goals. The obstacles to better outcomes across a range o f services have many
common elements. High on the l i s t i s the legacy o f Indonesia’s centralized development planning
and service delivery systems, which improved overall access to basic services but fell short in
ensuring quality and relevance and in reaching the most vulnerable. Decentralization and
community empowerment offer important new opportunities for service improvement, although
in the near-term they may create extra costs. The Bank Group i s willing to step up i t s support to
improve service delivery within the new context. Central t o success will be to establish
mechanisms for improved accountability on the part o f service providers, whether schools,
agricultural research, or water companies - to the citizens they serve. B o x 5 describes how these
principles, which are described in the WDR 2004 (Making Services Work for the Poor), w i l l be
put into practice in our work. Education and health are described in the paragraphs below, but
the same principles apply to agricultural extension, irrigation services, village level infrastructure

22

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Box 5: Improving Service Delivery Through Greater Accountability
The Bank Group’s program to improve service delivery draws from the WDR 2004 framework. Central here i s to make the
service providers - schools, clinics, extension services, public works departments, license agencies etc - accountable to those
who are supposed to benefit from these services. T h e chart below shows three “routes of accountability”:
The “long” route, whereby citizens give feedback (very indirectly) through central govemment.

The “medium” route, whereby under Indonesia’s decentralization,local govemments have the responsibility for
many services, and are thus the channel for citizens’ voice on service quality.
The “short” route, whereby users give direct feedback (and decision-making) to the provider.
In i t s support for improved services the Bank will be seeking to strengthen each of these routes o f accountability to improve
service delivery - and each project proposal will be assessed in the light of this framework. Particularly important will be a
systematic emphasis on the “short route”, the bottom arrow below -- making providers more directly accountable to clients
and citizens, and supporting community organizations that can articulate their needs and hold providers to deliver.
Interventions will foster the responsiveness of providers to clients - whether they be parent-teacher associations, water-user
associations, or farmers associations. Most directly, villagers will be involved in direct decision-making in how public funds
are spent in all CDD projects.

Accountability l i n k s through local govemment will also be given a much greater emphasis than under earlier central
govemment managed projects. T h i s i s the essence of the Local Govemment Platform, discussed in the next section. Our
efforts will focus on governance reforms that, for example, enhance participatory processes in planning, transparent budgets,
and citizen monitoring through the development of watch-dog citizen forums, media training etc. Our projects will also
support benchmarking and performance ratings of local govemments and providers to this end. The AAA agenda will
strengthen the accountability to clients of govemment and providers alike, through monitoring surveys such as public
expenditure tracking surveys and facility level surveys.
The central govemment also has a crucial role to play - and we will continue to provide support to enhance the policy
framework for service delivery. For example, opening up service delivery to include competition will be important to
enhanced service responsiveness. The Bank will provide support to build a financial flow database to foster transparency and
accountability between the center and local govemments.
PATHS OF
ACCOUNTABILITY

and many other services equally, and w i l l be addressed in the same manner under Bank
programs. Indicators to be monitored are summarized in Table 4.

23

Indonesia Countly Assistance Strategy

Table 4: Making Services Work for the Poor: Targeted Results
Strategic, Longer T e r m Country
Outcomes

Illustrative Indicators of Indonesia’s Success which
this CAS Aims To Impact

Accelerate attainment of key
MDGs in education and health

In Bank-assisted provinces, improved quality coverage and utilization of basic health
and education services, especially for the poorest 40%

Better education outcomes for the
poor

Increase in enrollment rates at the jr. secondary school level
Increase in completion rates at the primary & jr. secondary school levels
Improvements in test scores, using intemational standards

Improved health outcomes for the
poor

Increased percentage o f deliveries assisted by trained health workers
Increased percentage of childhood immunizations
Improved nutritional status, especially for children under 5
Increased percentage o f households with access to safe drinking water and sanitation
in 2000 villages and 20 urban areas.

Better Education for All

34.
Until the economic crisis Indonesia made great strides in increasing primary school
enrollment rates through massive investment programs, but has since lost ground. The
challenges now are: to address the special needs o f the remaining 10 percent o f poor and
vulnerable school-aged children who are not yet in school or drop out early, to ensure that those
who start school complete at least the primary cycle, and to increase the number o f students who
make the transition from primary to secondary levels. Moreover, quality at all levels needs to be
improved-Indonesia
ranks third f r o m the bottom o f countries who participated in the latest
international mathematics and sciences standardized tests (TIMMS). Specific constraints include
weak accountability o f education providers to parents and communities, under-funding o f nonsalary recurrent expenditures, the weak s k i l l s o f teachers and administrators, and the perverse
incentives guiding their work. Indonesia’s recent decision to move dramatically and decisively
f r o m heavy central control o f service provision to one where districts take the lead role has
presented both an opportunity and a challenge.

35.
The Bank i s shifting its focus from support to generalized access to primary
education to address quality and completion issues in basic education. The seven projects
currently in the portfolio, both in primary and secondary education, have been restructured to
change the way services are managed and delivered top-to-bottom: roles for central, provincial
and local governments are being clarified; budgeting, financing, planning and management
procedures are being made more transparent and accountable while communities are being given
a larger role; and new policies o n teacher management and performance are being rolled out. In
order to investigate the implications for the whole system in the new decentralized environment,
the Government asked the Bank and other donors undertook an Education Sector Review which
i s now being reviewed by Government and i s expected to guide i t s strategy and, in turn, that o f
the Bank and other donors going forward. A FY06 project w i l l focus o n improving the
management and effectiveness o f the educational system in a decentralized context, including
support to enhance capacity both at the district level which i s the new focal point o f provision, as
well as at the central/provincial levels. The latter have to change their roles f r o m that o f direct
provider to facilitator, regulator and steward o f functions such as assessment, quality monitoring,
and curriculum development. Providing suitable educational opportunities for marginalized
youth, including drop-outs, i s a pressing social and economic issue-and o f particular relevance

24

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

to poorer households-that w i l l be addressed in a Community Based Education for Marginal
Youth project. In addition, the Bank i s helping the Government develop approaches to jump-start
education where conflict has disrupted services and w i l l continue to expand CDD in ways that
w i l l improve the voice o f parents and community leaders in education provision.

Improving Health Outcomes

36.
Poor delivery of health, nutrition, clean water and sanitation services contributes to
poor health indicators, which represent an important part of multi-dimensional poverty in
Indonesia. Indonesia’s high maternal mortality ratio (about 370 deaths per 100,000 live births) i s
nine times, and i t s under-five mortality rate five times, that o f Malaysia. The proportion o f
children being immunized today i s lower than in 1990, and about one-quarter o f all children
under five are underweight. A critical issue i s under-funding: total health spending in 2002 was
equivalent to 2.7 percent o f GDP, half of what WHO recommends as a minimum requirement,
and much of i t from private sources. But health i s also vexed by other institutional and
management issues impeding better service delivery that are similar to those holding back
education. In a random spot-check, the absenteeism rate o f public health workers at primary care
facilities was found to be as high as 42 percent. L i k e with education, these issues w i l l have to be
addressed in a decentralized environment. Moreover, in health, the private sector i s playing an
increasingly important role in service delivery, even for the poor.

37.
The Bank’s support will be targeted to help build capacity within the new
decentralized system, particularly in areas where Indonesia i s lagging (such as maternal
health, child health, and nutrition). The Bank got an early start in helping the Ministry o f Health
clarify the roles o f the center, province and local government through a series o f Provincial
Health Projects (PHPs). On-going and planned projects in the health sector are aimed at raising
the capacity o f district health administrations and making service planning and delivery
procedures more participatory and accountable. This i s done by better tracking o f fund-use,
developing better frameworks for both public and private service provision and helping districts
to match health goals with adequate funding. The Bank w i l l help elevate the policy dialogue and
awareness on HIV/AIDS, addressing analytical and funding gaps as required to do so. In
addition, i t i s providing technical inputs to the Government’s new long-term nutrition strategy
which w i l l also feed into the design o f the next (fourth) PHP. The Bank also recognizes the need
for efforts beyond the health sector to attain health outcomes. Among these, the Bank’s
community driven development and local level project platforms provide potential frameworks
for multi-sectoral approaches to achieving improved health outcomes for the poor. For example,
WSSLIC 2, a water and sanitation project, includes health awareness campaigns. Similarly the
local services platform (see section B) w i l l include support for the government’s Good
Environment Governance program-contributing to better health through a cleaner environment.
The Bank w i l l also help the Government expand the successful PROPER program-which uses
public disclosure o f industry performance to promote behavior change with regard to water
pollution-to
other geographic areas and other media. (Annex F delineates the state o f
Indonesia’s environment and the cross-cutting measures this C A S employs to mainstream
support for environmental protection.)

25

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

The Core Issue of Governance-Defining

Selectivity

38.
Selectivity in the Bank’s activities and the volume of Base case lending will be
determined by opportunities to help improve governance. Investment needs in today’s
Indonesia are vast, and the choice of where to allocate Bank activities - and how much -will be
made on where there i s scope for achieving, demonstrating and multiplying governance
improvements. Rather than proposing a set of stand-alone governance and anti-corruption
projects, these issues w i l l be central to all aspects of the program. The entire lending and AAA
program has been designed to foster transparency and accountability through two
by enhancing the demand for good governance through greater
complementary approaches: (i)
public participation in policy-malung and policy-monitoring processes across different levels of
government, and (ii)
b y strengthening the institutions that are accountable for implementing the
impressive body o f laws to improve governance already passed during the Refomasi period. In
the cases where there i s willingness to reform, the Bank i s coming in with support. Where
commitment i s s t i l l lacking, the Bank w i l l wait on lending-thus the large Base case lending
range (see para. 59). The goal of the program i s to help Indonesia address what might be
described as an increasing “accountability gap,” i.e. the perception that the tremendous gains in
transparency and democratic competition since the fall of the New Order have not been matched
by genuine government accountability for demonstrable results in restoring integrity to the public
sector and reducing corruption. This i s a very ambitious goal that w i l l only be implemented over
the long term, but the Bank’s program i s designed to expand only in areas where support can be
provided for demonstrated momentum in reforms towards this goal. Indicators to be monitored
are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5: Governance: Targeted Results
Strategic, Longer Term Country
Outcomes

Illustrative Indicators of Indonesia’s Success which
this CAS Aims To Impact

Development planning made
more responsive to constituents

Core group o f 40 regions participating in local services platform records significant
improvements in governance outcomes
One third o f all villages in Indonesia engage in a participatory approach to
development planning, execution, and oversight

Well-regulated and transparent
system of
public financial
management at all government
levels

Improved performance o f tax and customs collection (e.g., increased revenue to
GDP, increase in registered tax payers, reduced tax arrears, and reduced clearance
time in customs)
0

More effective implementation of
decentralization

Clarification o f functions for each level of government through implementing
regulations for Laws 22 and 25
0

Establishment of a credible and
impartial justice sector

Reduced leakage in expenditure flows to end-users

Increased transparency o f finances, laws, and regulations at the district level through
establishment o f an accessible regional financial information system and a
mechanism for cataloguing, reviewing, and publishing PERDAS
Significant improvement in corruption perception measures, and improved public
satisfaction with the judiciary in project-assisted areas as measuredb y public opinion
surveys
Full compliance with wealth declarations b y public officials as established by law
Doubling o f the share o f cases investigated as a result o f irregularities revealed in
BPK audits
Increased percentage of poorer households and SMEs using legal, paralegal and
altemative disuute mechanism in at least 40 districts

26

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

39.
Creating demand for good governance at the local level. At the local level, the Bank’s
expanding CDD work, which i s planned to reach more than 30,000 villages and urban
communities across the country b y the end of the CAS period, i s built around the principle of
letting communities decide the best use of development funds and giving them the power and
s k i l l s to monitor their investments. Supporting AAA work and extensive monitoring efforts for
such programs as KDP and the Urban Poverty Projects are designed to ensure that the lessons of
this participatory approach to investments “spill over” into the broader decision-making
processes at the community level. In the coming CAS period, the Bank w i l l take this demandside approach up to the next level of the system, through extensive interactions at the district and
provincial levels. B y encouraging public participation in the process of choice and
implementation, Bank projects are designed to foster genuine community ownership of programs
and, hence, stronger incentives for citizens to hold their district and provincial governments
accountable for honest and effective implementation of those programs. Similar participatory
mechanisms are integrated into many of the Bank’s sectoral operations, such as WSSLIC,
WISMP, COREMAP, Catchment Protection, FEATI, and PHP, where the users of the relevant
services are extensively engaged in both decision-making and monitoring of investment
programs.

40.

Supporting the momentum for reform at the national level. The Bank w i l l continue to
contribute to the development of the Partnership for Governance Reform, a unique collaboration
among civil society, government, and multiple donors to promote a high profile “center of
excellence” on good governance through research, experimentation, capacity-building and
advocacy. Beyond the Partnership, the Bank w i l l seek opportunities to collaborate with a new
range of organizations within civil society that have generally been overlooked in previous
years-the large professional and mass-based associations with the membership and influence to
build momentum for governance reforms. The national Islamic associations Nahdlatul Ulama
and Muhammadiyah-with nearly 60 million members between them-have shown a strong
interest in using their extensive grass-roots networks, educational establishments, and national
authority to promote governance reform. Business and trade associations, trade unions, and
chambers of commerce are also promising partners to help advance the governance agenda and
enhance accountability through monitoring policy outcomes, especially in the area of the
investment climate. All these efforts w i l l require the Bank to take a higher profile in the policy
dialogue on governance, which i s planned through the addition of focused policy notes, a
quarterly publication for monitoring development, and communications outreach to enhance the
Bank’s traditional range of longer term, in-depth research and diagnostic products.

41.

Developing the institutions of good governance: financial management and the civil
service. A high priority w i l l continue to be given to improving financial management systems,
both at the national level (through ongoing TA and a FY05 project to support Ministry of
Finance reform) and through virtually all of our operations at the local level. Recent
developments in internet technologies w i l l be taken into account. C i v i l service reform i s less
advanced and likely to be delayed further during the upcoming election period. However, the
Bank w i l l seek to strengthen our operational engagement on this issue through support for a
comprehensive restructuring of the faculty and curriculum of one of the main training institutes
for the civil service-STPDN. This capacity-building project, which i s currently under discussion,
i s intended as an entry-point for strengthening the Bank’s work in civil service reform after the

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

27

2004 elections. The Bank will also emphasize support for local level experiments in
implementing civil service reform.

42.
Developing the institutions of good governance: the legal system. The Government’s
Economic Policy Package lays out a concrete timeframe for a number of long-delayed
institutional reforms in the justice sector, including the establishment of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and the Judicial Commission, and revision of the law on the Attorney General’s
Office. The Bank w i l l incorporate these benchmarks into its lending triggers and w i l l offer
technical assistance and support to these institutions. More broadly, the Supreme Court has
launched the results of a comprehensive blueprint to reform all aspects of the management of the
court system, including judicial education, personnel and financial management of courts,
functioning of the Judicial Commission and creation of an Anti-Corruption Court. The ambitious
blueprint was developed through an unusual collaboration between a civil society organizationthe Indonesian Institute for an Independent Judiciary-and the leadership of the Supreme Court. I t
w i l l serve as an important mechanism for coordinating potential donor assistance in the justice
sector. At the same time, the Bank w i l l push forward with a new initiative to enhance access to
the justice system for communities and the poor. Drawing lessons from a wide-ranging study of
corruption cases in the Bank’s CDD projects, this Justice for the Poor program w i l l seek to
integrate into the C D D portfolio initiatives to strengthen alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms, develop a network of community paralegals and legal assistance, lower the
geographical and financial barriers to court access, and promote legal literacy.

43.

Measuring and tracking results. A fundamental component of improving accountability
i s enhancing the capacity to measure results. The Bank has pioneered efforts to measure
governance, and Indonesia w i l l continue to be an important country for implementing and
expanding monitoring techniques. The Governance and Decentralization Survey (GDS) first
implemented in 2001 w i l l be repeated to compare governance outcomes at both the national level
and in individual districts with a concentration of Bank projects. An investment climate survey i s
currently in the field and w i l l provide comparative data both within Indonesia and across East
Asia on the governance problems faced b y firms. A comprehensive program for monitoring
corruption in our community development program i s currently being implemented. Indonesia
w i l l also become a focus for developing a broader system for public expenditure tracking at the
local level to enhance accountability over public resources. The broad participation of
representatives of civil society in these monitoring efforts w i l l be essential to their effectiveness
and sustainability. The AAA program will include a major effort to bring all of these monitoring
efforts at the local level together in a high profile, easily accessible format that w i l l allow
different users to track governance outcomes, including impact on services for the poor, across
Indonesia’s diverse regions.

B. BUSINESSPLATFORMS-HOW
THEWORLDBANKWILL DELIVER
44.
T w o factors-Indonesia’s
decentralization, and our commitment to improved
transparency and effectiveness in the use of Bank funds-call for new delivery
mechanisms. The top-down provision of public services of the New Order regime i s no longer

an option for Indonesia or the Bank. Decentralization of responsibility to local levels forces a
new way o f doing business, posing significant challenges but offering great opportunities for
more transparent and responsive service delivery and channels to improve investment climate.

28

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

The key w i l l be to find, for each level of government, mechanisms that w i l l ensure transparency
of resource use and accountability of policy makers and service providers to users (including
businesses large and small) and to build capacity for their use.

45.

The goal i s to use World Bank supported projects, leveraged b y AAA, partnerships
and capacity building activities, to systematically increase standards of governance at each
level of government at which we work so that we have an impact on poverty reduction. This
w i l l be done through agreeing upon standards-covering information disclosure, participation,
financial management, procurement, and expenditure planning, etc.-and
allowing local
governments to request participation in the project. This approach has already proved highly
successful at the community level, and i s now particularly important at the district level, where
Underpinning this approach to our poverty
most local government spending authority now lies. lo
reduction focus are two factors: the fact that there are the highest numbers of poor in the most
densely populated areas of the country (within district inequalities are greater than across district
inequalities; see Annex D); and the fact that solving problems often requires governance reforms
at several levels of government, as illustrated in Box 6 for Forestry. I t w i l l take some years
before the majority of the over 400 districts are able to raise their governance standards
adequately, but the Bank believes that early investment and capacity building in those districts
showing genuine willingness to change, w i l l help to create a groundswell of reform. For those
districts not included in this “early reformers” category the Bank would continue to provide
support through the CDD programs and carefully supervised sectoral programs. The CDD
approach w i l l be the instrument b y which we can provide support while further enhancing
governance at the community level in poorer districts that are not well governed, including such
districts that may be in lagging regions of the country. Four broad “platforms” are envisaged for
the coming CAS period.
The Community Driven Development Platform: Scaling Up a Successful Program

46.
The past three years have seen a major advance in the design and successful
implementation of CDD programs in rural (KDP) and urban (UPP) areas. The third KDP
loadcredit for $250 million was approved by the Board in June, and the Government has asked
us to scale up the UPP program to a nationwide program in the current year (UPP3). These
programs are effectively directing resources to small-scale investments, identified b y poor
communities, to improve their own livelihoods. Although the first funds under these projects
were committed as recently as 1998, when Indonesia was s t i l l reeling from the economic crisis,
the outputs and outcomes to date are already impressive.” Field surveys and external
independent evaluations done in connection with one of the programs, KDP, have all pointed to:
greater community participation in the planning, decision-making and use of development funds,
especially for women and poorer villagers; high economic rates of return for small-scale
infrastructure; improved access to quality infrastructure and to neighboring villages, local
markets, schools and other public facilities across every income spectrum for villagers; opening
lo
The Bank w i l l continue to work with Sectoral Ministries to build and support capacity and systems for appropriate
management functions at each level of government, including the province. However, since the bulk of development
funds w i l l increasingly be administered b y district governments, it i s at that level that the Bank w i l l help the
Government make the big push for governance and financial management improvements.

Generally, outcome results can be expected within 5-7 years and long-term impact i s only clear after 7-10 years.

29

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Box 6: T h e Challenge o f Forest Resources Management in Indonesia
Some 75 percent o f Indonesia’s poor live in rural areas and probably half o f these are affected b y what happens inside state forest
lands, which make up 60 percent o f the country’s land area. However, Indonesia faces a challenge o f staggering proportions over
the coming years in managing its forest resources, and w i l l need to deal with issues such as legal and illegal over-exploitation and
clearing o f natural forests; regularization o f misclassified land uses and forest state boundaries; heavy subsidies, overcapacity and
indebtedness for the wood-processing sector; institutional reform in response to the increasing emphasis placed on
decentralization and good govemance.
Over the coming years, the Bank will draw upon its delivery “platforms” to support efforts to improve governance in the
forestry sector by:
0

Extending decentralized natural resources govemance to include participation o f local communities in decision making
for forest land resources upon which their livelihoods depend.

0

Developing community-driven development (CDD) opportunities for direct and sustainable comanagement o f forestry
resources in public lands b y village communities, ranging from licensed management to natural resources stewardship.

0

0

0

Strengthening analytical capacity for reform o f sectoral and related policies and institutions coupled with effective
outreach o f the resulting knowledge.
Supporting specific high profile initiatives as catalysts for reform towards good forest govemance (e.g. Forest Law
Enforcement and Governance) and transparency instruments such as the publication of annual forest cover changes
Mainstreaming forest resource management lessons into Bank and other initiatives in some cases helping to bridge
artificial divides that are often beset inter-institutional relationships that are key to sustainable forest land (and
resources) management.

up of businesses and transport services due to new roads-19,000
kilometers-bridges, and
piers; increase in agricultural production due to irrigation projects-now over 2,000; time
savings in travel particularly with roads and new bridge construction, as well as due to ease of
access to new water supply systems. These programs are now active in about 40 percent of
communities (rural villages and urban wards) in the country. Transparency, inclusive
participatory approaches and accountability are their hallmarks. These programs appear to be
enhancing competition in local service delivery, helping break the information monopoly at the
local level, and strengthening local level reform constituencies. A key result has been the
enhanced participation and empowerment of women in decision-making, as well as in project
implementation and supervision. An important part of the success of these programs has been
strong M&E and feedback mechanisms which allow lessons to be taken up while programs are
being implemented and in follow-on operations. For example, poor repayment of revolving funds
in KDP led to a complete re-think and narrowing of that component under KDP 2 and 3.
Table 6: Indonesia CAS FY04--FY07: Expected Lending (US$ million)
CDD

Local Services

Utilities

National

Total

FY04

255

270

0

0

525

FY05

45

175

50

530*

800*

FY06

200

465

100

85

850

FY07

240

310

300

0

850

Total FY04-07

740

1220

450

615

3025

Share to Total FY04-07

25 %

40%

15%

20%

100%

Note: Table shows base case, reflecting expected delivery o f investment projects.

*This includes the $200 million adjustment loan as a “national” project in FY05. Eligibility for t h i s loan
would depend on achievement o f the “enhanced” Base case as discussed in paragraph 62.

30

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

47.

In the coming CAS period the Bank plans to invest around $200 million per year in
this promising program. A deepening of the program in the coming three years i s expected to
see (i)
stronger links with the private sector; (ii)
establishment of a stronger legal basis for the
model, to ensure sustainability; (iii)
the use of this approach to address needs of specific
communities-such as in conflict affected areas, forests and coastal communities; and (iv) even
greater emphasis on M&E systems. Moreover, the Government i s most interested in large-scale
programs which work to reduce poverty. Emphasis w i l l also be given to building accountability
links “upward” to the district level.

The Local Services Platform: Creating Accountability
at the District and Provincial Level

48.

As a result of the decentralization of 2001, the main development challenges defined
in this CAS have become, to a large extent, challenges at the district level. Decentralization
has passed the bulk of authority, responsibility, and public funding for services to district
governments. Advancing reforms in these areas, as well as building momentum for improving
governance, w i l l require substantial engagement with district, and in some cases provincial
governments. But with over 400 districts and tremendous variation as to their capacity, their
commitment to reform and their governance environment, the Bank requires a strategic
framework for assistance at this level. Over the past two years the Bank has invested heavilythrough district-focused sectoral projects, as well as through AAA and Trust Funded TA-in
analyzing capacity and constraints, and in piloting appropriate mechanisms for service planning
and financing, as well as, higher standards o f client responsiveness and transparency at the
district (and provincial) level. In the coming CAS period, we expect to build upon this
knowledge base as more development assistance i s channeled directly to the district level,
through continued sectoral projects but increasingly through a broader local services platform.

49.

The local services platform i s built around four key principles:
Define selection criteria to determine levels of Bank engagement with districts
based o n clear standards of governance reform. In this CAS period, the Bank w i l l
launch two local governance projects (for rural and urban localities, respectively) that are
designed to eventually set the framework for our local level assistance. These projectsILGRP and USDRP-are structured to select districts with a demonstrated commitment
to an agenda of governance reforms and then to assist those districts in reaching
governance standards along with investments in their own development and poverty
alleviation objectives. Districts w i l l compete to gain entry into these projects through
their own programs o f governance reform. These programs w i l l cover information
transparency, participation, financial management, procurement, including pilots in
using electronic systems, and pro-poor public expenditure management. Exit criteria w i l l
also be established to encourage sustainable reform efforts. The projects w i l l eventually
serve as the Bank’s main mechanism for selecting districts for potential long-term
relationships.
0

Maximize complementarities across Bank projects in selected districts to promote a
critical mass of reforms. Though the Bank currently has projects across a very wide
range of districts, the goal of the district services platform i s to eventually bundle diverse

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

31

Bank assistance instruments in selected districts o n the basis o f their adherence to good
governance standards. Where feasible, sectoral programs in health, education, roads,
land management and the like could be channeled to reform-minded districts to take
advantage o f the proven benefits o f good governance for aid effectiveness. Such a
critical mass approach to reforms would take advantage o f the synergies across different
Bank instruments, and facilitate innovative supervision approaches. Over time only
districts willing to embark upon more systematic reform programs would be eligible for
Bank funds for sectoral programs (although access to C D D funding would continue).
Access to Bank funds would thus be self-selecting and competitive.
0

0

Integrate capacity building into project designs. The success o f Indonesia’s ambitious
decentralization w i l l depend fundamentally on the ability to build capacity among the 2.5
million c i v i l servants who were transferred to local governments in 2001, and among the
new local legislatures (DPRDs) now charged with determining spending priorities,
managing service provision and establishing the legal and regulatory framework within
their jurisdictions. Capacity building efforts need to go beyond local administrations to
encompass DPRDs, media and c i v i l society groups to enhance accountability at the local
level, including special initiatives to increase the active participation o f women.
Experience has shown that stand-alone capacity-building projects have had limited
success in Indonesia. Instead, Bank teams w i l l advise Government o n approaches for
better integrating capacity-building efforts into project designs in close collaboration
with WBI and the bi-lateral donors that have been active in these areas. A current
example i s WSSLIC 2, which has a $6.5 million capacity building technical assistance
grant component funded b y AusAID.
Encourage cross-district sharing of best practices, with the aim of replication. T o
encourage districts to learn from each other, as well as to foster competition in reaching
good governance standards, i t i s necessary to identify key measures o f performance and
to disseminate those measures widely. A cluster o f AAA tasks w i l l monitor and
disseminate experiences at the local level, using extensive survey work, structured case
studies, scorecards for service quality and user satisfaction, and easy-to-use tools to
access information across districts. The role o f the province level w i l l be defined and
strengthened, particularly in the planning and monitoring o f networked services such as
health and roads.
The Public Utility Platform: Demanding Good
Corporate Governance and Efficiency

50.

Analogous to the approach at the district level, Bank Group funding for water and
energy utilities would be allocated on a competitive basis. The failure to reform the 300 water
utilities led the Bank to withdraw support for the sector for the past eight years, and limit support
to technical assistance to “rescue” utilities post-crisis. N o w a spirit o f competition i s emerging,
and many local governments are recognizing the need to apply sound governance procedures to
the water utilities they own. Under design i s a series o f Bank operations that would allocate
funds o n a competitive basis to those utilities demonstrating the greatest willingness to improve
governance with a view to improving their fiscal sustainability and to expand their coverage and
responsiveness so that the poor are better serviced. This w i l l be further supported b y WBI

32

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

assistance to Indonesia’s Association o f Water Enterprises (PERPAMSI) to build i t s capacity in
supporting i t s members to improve service to customers. Within this new spirit in Indonesia we
hope to create a demonstration effect, whereby governance and service standards would be
improved.

The “National” Lending Platform: Addressing Central Problems
51.
In selective instances, i t w i l l be interventions at the national level that w i l l be most
effective in getting the results desired in our strategic areas. In all areas o f work the Bank w i l l
continue to engage strongly with the central government, including through central components
o f district focused projects or through stand alone initiatives. An essential element o f the Bank’s
support to Indonesia under this CAS i s continued policy and analytical advice to central
government through i t s AAA program. (See Section IV. B). Critical in this regard w i l l be the
Bank’s continued engagement and advice in the area of fiscal and administrative
decentralization, with close links to the development o f our sub-national lending program. With
respect to lending at the national level, three areas w i l l receive special focus:
For national level governance reforms, such as projects to reform the customs and tax
administration and public financial management.
For high priority national level infrastructure (e.g. national roads o n Java).
For programs for which central government has retained responsibility, or where central
management i s essential for effective implementation, such as in higher education and
micro-finance.

33

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

DELIVERING
THE WORLD BANKPROGRAM
A. MANAGING THE PORTFOLIO AND MONITORING
FOR R E S U L T S
52.
Portfolio performance i s improving. A sharp improvement in the aftermath o f the crisis
was followed by another decline as a result o f the uncertainties associated with decentralization.
However, recently performance has picked up. Undisbursed commitments at risk dropped from
39 percent in FY02 to 12 percent last year. The number o f problem projects has gradually
declined as a result o f performance improvements and cancellation o f projects that could not be
restructured. The negative impact that the decentralization program had on the portfolio i s slowly
waning, partly as Bank projects have been designed and restructured according to new local
administrative structures. Disbursements have generally remained strong. A record high
disbursement ratio was achieved in FYOl through a portfolio restructuring that brought down
undisbursed commitments and reallocated funds to new priorities. Since then, disbursements
have remained above 20 percent (see Table 7). The joint Country Portfolio Performance Review,
which involves the World Bank, the ADB and JBIC, also contributed to better portfolio
performance. The proactivity and realism indices remain above Bank targets. QAG assessments
for Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision o f projects in Indonesia (overall about 60
projects since 1997) have registered overall satisfactory and above ratings. Areas requiring
special attention were identified as risk assessment and r i s k mitigating strategies at QAE. Project
teams are now paying greater attention to these areas during new project design. Similarly,
learning f r o m QAG findings, the country team i s giving special attention to the supervision of
risky projects and making sure project ratings are kept current with developments, especially as
they relate to the achievement o f results.
Table 7: T h e Performance o f the Bank's Portfolio during
the Last C A S Period (percentages)
FY99

FYOO

FYOl

FY02

FY03

Percent problem projects

26

19

11

23

12

Realism Index

95

86

86

79

71

Proactivity Index

78

89

100

100

82

Disbursement ratio

13

21

32

23

23

Projects at Risk

28

2

13

29

17

Commitments at Risk

27

14

7

39

12

Over-aged projects ratio

0

2

0

4

5

Portfolio Indicators

53.
T h e size o f the Indonesia portfolio has declined b y a third over the last C A S period.
The portfolio declined f r o m 61 projects with $2.8 billion in undisbursed commitments (end
FYOO) to 40 projects w i t h $1.8 billion in undisbursed balance (end FY03). Under the Base case,
the portfolio i s expected to "bottom-out" in FY05 at around 35 projects before returning to
around 40 projects by end o f FY07. Disbursements on investment lending w i l l likely follow a
s i m i l a r pattern, hovering around $375 million per year in FY04-05 and then growing to over
$450 m i l l i o n by FY07. T o quickly address emerging problems in ongoing projects, the Bank w i l l
continue to engage Quality Enhancement Reviews (QERs) for risky projects, monitor

34

Indonesia Countrj Assistance Strategy

supervision quality, and follow-up more consistently with agreed project-specific action plans.
Timely project restructuring and loan cancellation w i l l be vigorously pursued for projects with
persistent problems.

54.
Supervision of the Bank program poses major challenges and requires innovative
solutions. The portfolio i s spread geographically across many islands in local communities with

widely different levels of development and project implementation capacities. Moreover, many
of our projects are multi-sectoral, generating additional complexities. For effective supervision in
this context, each project needs to have clear benchmarks and performance criteria to permit a
high degree of self-supervision of input use and outcomes. Our experience with CDD projects
shows that supervision can be built into projects by empowering consultants and facilitators to
identify implementation problems as they arise and to assist the executing agencies in resolving
them. The platform approach holds out the possibility that Bank teams could supervise broader
portfolios of projects in specific regions. Supervision w i l l engage other donors, NGOs, and local
agencies. The Bank i s also planning to open regional satellite offices (initially in conjunction
with the IFC’s PENSA program) which w i l l facilitate supervision, monitoring and capacity
building activities.

55.
This C A S i s designed to help the Government achieve specific, measurable results
over the C A S period. These results, in turn, w i l l support the Government’s own development
and poverty reduction objectives. Tables 3-5 and Annex B9, which l i s t specific outcomes which
the CAS w i l l impact, are a first step in putting in place the infrastructure to make that happen.
The Bank i s now launching a comprehensive program to give a stronger results focus to all
project-based monitoring and evaluation and major AAA efforts, drawing from and helping to
develop the country’s own M&E tools. The program would help to develop better ways to
aggregate these into program-level monitoring systems which would feed into regular
discussions with Government. A dedicated M&E advisor has been brought on-board who,
working closely with Government and the country team, w i l l elaborate Annex B 9 into a M&E
framework, strategy and work-plan for the country team. This w i l l include, a complete review
and retrofit of M&E systems in ongoing projects. In many cases the f i r s t step w i l l be more
systematic collection of base-line data. This exercise i s expected to lead to some minor revisions
of the specific results to which this CAS w i l l contribute which would be reported, along with
more comprehensive baseline data in the planned CAS Progress Report.
B. BUILDING CAPACITY AND INFORMING DECISION
MAKING THEA A A AND WBI PROGRAMS
56.
F o u r “breakthrough” areas. The AAA and capacity building programs w i l l be
organized around four key areas where we feel decisive breakthroughs in our level of knowledge
are necessary to achieve the CAS outcomes. These themes serve to coordinate a large number of
specific tasks to ensure that the research and assistance program in each area i s targeted to a
broader set o f outcomes with strong links to our lending program. This work w i l l draw upon and
be supplemented b y a special program of poverty analysis supported b y DFID (see Annex D).
Improving the investment climate. This theme brings together all AAA, WBI and TA
activities under the first CAS pillar. I t would identify constraints to growth and job
creation, especially among the poor. Special efforts w i l l be made to set up a

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

35

comprehensive monitoring framework to track the quality o f the investment climate over
time as a key element in monitoring progress in implementation o f the Government’s
Economic Policy Package. A major investment climate and governance survey i s
planned.
0

0

0

Making services work better for the poor. Building on the WDR 2004 and our analytical
support for the Government’s PRSP process, this breakthrough task aims at generating
innovative ideas for service delivery in Indonesia, including analyzing the critical
accountability relationships in service delivery and impact analysis o f public spending
with a view t o improving service delivery, especially among the poor, at every level of
administration. Regular poverty updates w i l l i n f o r m much o f the work in this area, as
well as studies in the areas o f education, environment, and land policy.
Making local governments work. This theme i s designed to address knowledge gaps in
our understanding o f developments at the district and provincial level t o inform our local
government platform. I t w i l l focus on building the basis for assessing and comparing the
performance o f local governments across a number o f different dimensions. The goal i s
to disseminate this information widely to encourage districts to compete with each other
to enhance their reputation and attract investment and other advantages. This theme w i l l
bring together in easily accessible formats household surveys, detailed case studies,
reviews o f local level regulations and laws, and data o n local revenues and expenditure.
Improving governance. This theme w i l l focus o n the more systemic problems o f
governance and corruption in Indonesia, including institutional reform and capacity
building for key institutions such as the Supreme Court and national and local
Parliaments. Support w i l l also be provided for the Partnership for Governance Reform to
strengthen i t s capacity to serve as a national center o f excellence on governance issues.
In addition to analytical work on governance issues at the national level, this theme w i l l
also include detailed studies of the impact o f participation and transparency on
development outcomes and conflict prevention at the community level through
assessments o f the Bank’s CDD projects.

57.
The Bank will invest more in dissemination and outreach to reach diverse
audiences. The potential audience for the Bank’s AAA program is much broader and more
heterogeneous than in the past, calling for a more thoughtful approach t o dissemination and a
wider palette o f products. For the coming year a series o f short, focused briefing notes covering
around 20 key topics are under preparation as a means o f placing development challenges on the
agenda o f the policy debate, and informing the new Government. In addition, a new outreach
strategy i s under preparation that would manage more actively the dissemination o f our policy
messages across the country program. The team w i l l also develop a Quarterly Economic and
Social Review as a means to track developments more frequently and as a vehicle for more highprofile dissemination o f findings.
58.
Capacity building at the local level. Existing programs include large capacity building
programs at the community level, which w i l l be continued. These are designed to help villagers,
especially women and marginalized populations, participate in the development and
implementation o f projects for improving their communities and livelihoods, including the

36

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Table 8: AAA Indicative Key Outputs By Theme
FY04
Improving the Investment
Climate

FY05

FY06

Averting an Infrastructure
Crisis

Sources o f Growth

Domestic Trade Barriers
Study

Trade and Competitiveness

Non-Bank Financial
Institutions Strategy

Pension Diagnostic

Investment Climate Survey

Local InvestmentClimate
Survey

InvestmentClimate Survey

Corporate Responsibility
Project (WBI)
Making Services Work
Better for the Poor

Education Sector Strategy

Support for PROPER
program

Environmental and
decentralization

Land Policy Dialogue

Poverty Update
PRSP Support (including
WBI)

Poverty Update
PRSP Implementation

IntegratedWater Resource
Management (WBI)
Making Local Govemments
Work

Improving Govemance

Core Diagnostics

Govemance and
DecentralizationSurvey

Regional Regulations
Review

Govemance and
Decentralization Survey.

Environmental Scorecards
for Local Govemments

Local Taxes and Levies
Review

Regional Expenditure
Tracking

Study of Local Parliaments

Local Service Delivery
Standards

Local Parliament T A

ExpenditureTracking Report

High Courts TA

Participatory Review of
IntergovemmentalFiscal
Relations (WBI)

Anti-corruption in CDD

Decentralization- Urban
Program (WBI)

Justice for the Poor

CFAA

PER

CPAR

CGI Brief/DPR

CGI BrieflDPR

CGI Brief/DPR

Poverty Assessment
Note: WBI activities beyond FY04 are still under discussion,

procurement and bookkeeping s k i l l s necessary to implement and monitor those projects. A major
new push w i l l be required at the district and provincial levels, where capacity building w i l l be
focused on training the trainers on key governance issues such as financial management and
service delivery standards and development o f networks for peer learning across districts. In
addition, programs w i l l include training of local legislatures and media to play a stronger
accountability role in their communities. Most such activities w i l l be embedded in the new
projects. WBI w i l l play an important role in implementing these capacity building programs, as
well as ensuring better coordination of donor efforts.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

37

c. LENDING
SCENARIOS, TRIGGERS
A N D BANKEXPOSURE
59.
Base case lending of $450-$850 million per year, of which I D A would account for
around $230 million. (See Annex B3). This level i s well below lending during the 1990s,
which averaged $1.3 billion, but higher than the Base case of the last CAS, which was set at
$400 million. Under the last CAS, however, Indonesia has now broadly achieved the High case
triggers, and would thus be eligible for $1 billion lending per year. The proposed Base case
would include a higher FY04-07 IDA allocation of SDRSOO million and assumes continued IDA
access beyond IDA 13. Access to potentially higher borrowing in the Base case, including more
IDA, reflects progress in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms, and overty strategy
preparation, as well as large financing needs and continued weak credit ratings. Actual lending
amounts would depend primarily on progress in building the local services platform, how
quickly local governments are willing and able to take up reforms, and the ability to prepare high
quality operations in a timely manner. I f reforms and capacity building move more slowly,
lending levels would be toward the bottom end of the range.
60.
The Base case i s premised on continued but incremental reforms that lead to
gradual improvements in governance and the investment climate. Under this scenario
Indonesia would remain politically stable through the elections and the transition to a new
Government. The country would make gradual, although not always linear, progress in key
areas, preparing Indonesia for higher growth in the following CAS period. Greater attention to
governance programs in select districts, accompanied by modest improvements at the national
level in line with the Economic Policy Package, would be reflected in pockets of improvement in
service delivery, a moderately improved investment climate, leading to slightly higher
investment rates, which in turn would (barring external shocks) cause GDP to grow at 4-5
percent annually, and enable poverty to fall from 16 percent in 2002 to 12 percent in 2007. This
scenario also envisions Indonesia maintaining macro-stability, increasing development
expenditures gradually, while meeting fiscal targets laid out in the State Finances Law and
lowering its debt-to-GDP below 60 percent b y end 2006 (see Table 9).
61.
In the event of sharply accelerated reform, High case lending of up to $1.4 billion
per year is proposed, of which I D A would account for around $365 million. This case would
require strong measures in the areas of governance and the investment climate that would result
in a more immediate resumption of higher growth rates and more decisive action and results in
reducing poverty. Table 9 presents the framework which w i l l be used to determine achievement
of the High case. The indicative measures (in parentheses) describe the types of measures that
w i l l be used to gauge performance. Quantitative indicators from data sources listed in the note to
Table 9 w i l l also be used to assess progress. All of the indicative measures for the High case are
drawn from the Government’s new Economic Policy Package. Under this case, GDP growth rate
i s likely to rise gradually to 6 percent b y the end of the CAS period and poverty headcount rates
could fall to 10 percent in 2007 -- lower than pre-crisis levels. Annex B 3 presents an indicative
lending program under the High case. Additional support would be provided in two broad
areas -- infrastructure and economic reform. Infrastructure constraints w i l l become even more

12

The growing strength of the economy led to independent rating agencies raising Indonesia’s credit rating in 2003.
Nevertheless, the country’s rating i s s t i l l several discrete grades below minimum investment grade.

38

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Table 9: Indonesia CAS Trigger Matrix FY04-FY06
Base Case

High Case

Objectives (Indicative Measures) a

Objectives (Indicative Measures)

for Growth
Macroeconomic
stability and
creditworthiness

Maintain fiscal targets as per state
finances law (by further reduction in
and debt to
6o percent Of
GDP by 2006)b.

Investment
climate

Cutting inefficient spending (by phasing out non-kerosene
subsidy)

Maintain monetary program consistent
with inflation below 10 percent.

Reduce reliance on debt financing (by divesting majority shares
in Lippo, BII, Bank Permata; and satisfactory progress in
gradually increasing non-oil and gas tax-to-GDP ratio above 2003
projection of 12.8 percent by strengthening tax ad”istration.)b

Improve infrastructure and
infrastructure policy (by finalizing and
issuing the white paper on infrastructure).

Strengthen financial sector (by establishing a financial safety
net improving state bank governance, capital market supervision,
and insurance and pension regulation).

Coordinate action to address investment
constraints (by establishing an effective
cabinet-level investment team).

Increase private investment in power (by progress in
establishing independent regulator in the electricity market, and
continued tariff reforms).
Reduce transaction costs for business (progress in reforming
DG customs and D G tax, establishing one-stop shops for
investment approval).
..

Governance and A ti-Corruption
Public
Procurement and
Financial
management

Improve government fiduciary
management (by implementing the State
Finances Law, making progress toward
adopting Treasury and Audit laws).

Strongly improve government fiduciary management (by
issuing implementing regulations for State Finances Law;
establishing Treasury Department in MOF; establishing Treasury
Single Account; establishing NPPO; continuing special audit
program for SOEs)
Improve local fiscal accountability (by revising Law 3412000
and Law 25/1999 to limit number of local taxes and levies,
increase tax rate flexibility for local government, improve the
framework for local borrowing and increase equity o f the
intergovernmental fiscal system).

Decentralization

Improve the institutional framework for
addressing corruption cases (by making
satisfactory progress on the
operationalization o f the Anti Corruption
Commission; implementation of capacity
building program for public prosecutors
and judges; and preparation for the AntiCorruation Court).

Justice sector
and legal reform

Irk

Improve governance in the justice sector (by ensuring effective
operation of Anti Corruption Commission and the Anti
Corruption Court, establishing an effective Judicial Commission,
and adopting a reform program for AGO).

I

for the Poor

Service delivery

Improve service delivery to the poor (by increasing D A K to
support poor regions in delivering basic services, and by
publishing service standards for public service delivery units).
Improve poverty focus of public policy
and enhance open dialogue on policy
issues (by continued satisfactory progress
toward comuletinrr a uarticiuatorv PRSP).

Poverty
reduction
strategy

.

- .

. .

Improve poverty orientation of public spending (by reflecting
the PRSP in the budget).
I

ce
4id effectiveness

Improve implementation of decentralization framework to
improve effectiveness of donor aid programs (by revising
KMK 392002 to allow for better on-lending and on-granting
arrangements).

/ Refer to explanation in para. 61. In addition to the indicative measures listed above, we would look at various data sourcesamely for Investment Climate and Growth (Moody’s, S&P, Fitch, BPS, the Bank’s o w n investment climate survey, I C R G
ssessment); for Governance (BPK audits, Transparency Intemational, I C R G assessment, Kaufmann and Kraay); for Making
lervices Work for the Poor and Poverty Reduction (Susenas household survey data; M O F budget data and regional budget data;
’ER; administrative data f r o m the health and education sectors; BPS).
#/A t constant prices and exchange rate.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

39

pressing with higher economic growth. In addition, with high case policy progress, more active
support for institutional reforms would be warranted, as would program lending in support of
reforms to improve the investment climate and public procurement and financial management.
The particular reform areas that would be supported would be clarified in the CAS Progress
Report following consultations with the in-coming Government.

62.
In response to the Government’s request, a policy-based program loan supporting
the Government’s reform program i s proposed for the first half of FY05. Over the next 18
months, the Government plans to forge ahead with measures outlined in i t s Economic Policy
Package. While substantial progress i s likely, i t i s unlikely that all the High case triggers, which
w i l l require a track record of sustained policy improvement, would be reached until late FY05 or
early FY06. The proposed program loan would thus be made available under an “enhanced”
Base case situation, requiring systematic implementation of the Government’s policy package
over the coming year, particularly in the areas of improving the investment climate and
strengthening public procurement and financial management. The single tranche operation of
$200-300 million would support reforms - a subset of the High case triggers - in these specific
areas. Within these High case “outcome” areas, Box 7 provides examples of the type of
indicative measures which the Bank would use in determining eligibility for an “enhanced” base
case adjustment operation. In the fiduciary area, the loan would likely support progress in
addressing weaknesses in public procurement and financial management identified in the CPAR
and CFAA (see Box 8).

~

Achievement o f the “enhanced” Base case would give Indonesia access to an adjustment loan in FY05. At a minimum, the
Bank would expect progress towards the objectives noted in the High case trigger areas o f public procurement and financial
management and investment climate. Examples o f type o f indicators that would be used to assess performance are drawn from
actions planned under the Govemment’s own program and include:
Issue revised Presidential Decree on public procurement
Finalization o f the State treasury Law and State Audit Law
Issuance o f implementing regulations o f the State Finances Law
Establishment o f a Treasury Department in the Ministry o f Finance and a Treasury Single Account
Improvements in government debt management at central and local level
Operationalizing the National Procurement Policy Office
Progress in establishing a financial sector safety net
Establishing independent regulator in the electricity market
Effective functioning o f the Investment Team
Progress in tax administration and customs reforms

63.
Indonesia’s external debt to GDP ratio and IBRD debt-to-GDP ratio are projected
to continue to decline steadily under all proposed lending scenarios. I f lending commitments
were to gradually increase to US$850 million a year as projected under the Base case-and
remain at this level for another decade-Indonesia’s exposure to the Bank would continue to
decline. IBRD debt disbursed and outstanding would fall from about US$10.3billion at end
FY03 to about US$3.6billion in FY11. The share of Indonesia’s IBRD and IDA debt to GDP w i l l

’

40

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Box 8: Fiduciary Environment: Progress and Next Steps
Fiduciary core diagnostic reports on procurement (CPAR) and financial management (CFAA) were completed for Indonesia in
2001. While these reports highlighted major weaknesses in the public procurement system and overall fiduciary environment,
progress has been made in several areas. In particular, the CPAR recommended reform o f the legal framework and
organizational structure for procurement. The CFAA called for reform of the legal framework to anchor future reforms in
public financial management, greater clarity in the roles and responsibilities of key players in the budget process, and
strengthening of audit functions. Several important actions in these areas have been completed to date:

A draft Presidential Decree revising the existing Keppres 18/2000 has been prepared and i s now awaiting presidential
approval. I t will establish a new procurement framework that i s more consistent with intemational public procurement
practices. Establishment of a National Public Procurement Office, professionalcertification, and wider competition are
key features of this draft decree
A draft procurement law has been prepared which provides clarity on procurement policies and procedures and strong
enforcement mechanisms
Procurement training modules for intemational and national competitive bidding procedures have been prepared by the
Govemment to develop professionalprocurement expertise
A pilot e-procurement system i s being prepared by the Govemment
Laws on state finances, treasury and audit have been drafted. The new state finance law, which was passed by
Parliament in March 2003, reforms public accountability mechanisms. Passage of the remaining two laws and issuance
of the implementingregulations for all three will consolidate reforms in t h i s area
The mandate of BPK (Supreme Audit Board) has been strengthened by the new finance law and constitutional
amendments, and BPK continues to be modemizedthrough an Institutional Development Plan supported by the Bank
The Govemment has formulated a Public Sector Accounting Board to help develop and implement new and modem
accounting standards. An initial set of three draft standards and a strategy for introducing these nation-wide have been
prepared
Fundamental for further progress on the fiduciary environment will be quick and cumulative reform actions on the legal and
institutional aspects of the procurement and financial management systems, supported by capacity building for people involved
in implementing these reforms. In procurement, operationalizing the NPPO, certification of staff handling procurement, and
progress in the procurement law could signify big changes in procurement practices in the near term.

fall from about 5.1 percent in 2003 to 1.6 percent in 2012 (see Figure 4). Even under the High
case, net disbursements (from IBRD and IDA combined) would s t i l l remain negative through
FY09 and IBRD outstanding loans would decline to around $6.5 billion b y FY07. In addition,
even under modest macroeconomic assumptions that take into account overall external financing
requirements over the long term, the total external debt to GDP ratio i s projected to continue to
fall steadily, assuming present policies (see Figure 4).

64.
Low case lending of less than $300 million per year would be appropriate in the
event that progress on policy reform stalls, or if there i s back-tracking on performance. The
L o w case would include an FY04-06 IDA allocation of SDR300 million and also assumes
continued access beyond IDA13. The L o w case i s one in which the Government fails to make
progress in improving governance and the investment climate, resulting in a failure of
confidence, deteriorating or stagnant service delivery, and an increase in poverty. This would
materialize, for example, if populist pressures resulted in serious back-tracking on key reforms
already undertaken, such as in the areas of fiduciary management. Such pressures, which lead to
a weakening of fiscal, monetary, and financial discipline, would likely bring about
macroeconomic instability or a broader crisis. Back-tracking on policies that would directly harm
the poor, such as protectionist trade policies, could also precipitate the L o w case. In a low case
environment the Bank would tailor i t s response to developments and opportunities. Lending
would focus on CDD programs and other direct poverty reduction and social service
interventions that show promise.

41

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Figure 4: Total External and IBRD Debt Outstanding
Indonesia's external debt to GDP ratio

% of CDP
120%

100%
80%
60 %

40 %
20%

Actual

Projection

0%

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

BRD debt outstanding as a share of GDP

IBRD debt outstanding
(US$ billion, end-of-calendar year)
9%

8%

1

-

US$ billion

1

l4

7% -

6%
5%
4% -

6

3% 2%

O

% i , ,
, ,
,
,
,
,
,
, , , , , , , 3
CY1999 CY2001 CY2003 CY2005 CY2007 C Y W CY2011 CY2013 CY2015

2
0

CY1999 CY2001 CY2003 CY2005 CY2007 CY2009 CY2011 CY2013 CY2015

Source: staff estimates

65.
Under all three lending scenarios, IDA resources will be directed to projects that
target improving governance and reducing poverty for rapid MDG attainment. IDA w i l l
support the next generation of CDD projects, finance the flagship "local services platform", and
projects aimed at improving delivery of health, education and basic infrastructure to the poor.
The attention to improving M&E and better quantification o f results w i l l also enable clearer
assessment of IDA'S contribution to Indonesia's poverty reduction goals. (An indicative
breakdown of IDA among pipeline projects i s provided in Annex B3.)

42

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

Table 10: Expected Lending FY04-07
FY03 (actual)
IBRD
Investment
Adjustment
IDA
Total
IBRD
Investment
Adjustment
IDA
Total

*

438.5
438.5
0
145
583.5

FY04
295
295
0
230
525

FY05
Base Case
570
370
200"
230
800
High Case
885
485
400
365
1,250

FY06
620
620
0
230
850

FY07
620
620
0
230
850

CAS Period

(FY04-07)

2,105
1,905
200
920
3,025

885
885
2,950
635
635
2,050
250
250
900
365
365
1,325
1,250
1,250
4,275
Adjustment loan eligibility would depend on achievement of the "enhanced" Base case as discussed in paragraph
62.

D. IFC AND M I G A PROGRAMS

IFC Program
IFC's activities in Indonesia are directed to help the private sector and contribute to
66.
sustained economic growth and poverty alleviation. IFC's strategy focuses on: (i)
strengthening banks and other financial institutions; (ii)
deepening the financial sector b y
supporting new institutions; (iii)supporting export-oriented companies, mainly in the
agribusiness sector;
(iv) supporting investments in infrastructure,
power and
telecommunications; and (v) supporting SMEs. (See Annex G detailing IFC activities.)
67.
In the financial sector, IFC will work to recapitalize some banks where appropriate
strategic partners can be found t o upgrade operating procedures, systems, and management
practices. Potential activities could also include investments and technical assistance in the areas
o f housing finance, forfeiting, credit information (credit bureaus), and securitization. IFC w i l l
support export-oriented resource-based industries through investments in sectors such as palm o i l
plantation, where IFC can help with environmental and resettlement issues. IFC w i l l also assist
internationally competitive projects in textile, chemicals, light engineering and services serving
the domestic market. In infrastructure, IFC w i l l seek to invest in viable private sector power
generation and distribution projects and support investments in telecommunications. For S M E
development, potential IFC support includes creating a credit bureau, establishing a Project
Development Facility in the eastern islands o f Indonesia, and investing in microfinance
institutions. In the area o f social services, IFC's role would be to mobilize funds in support o f
private sector projects in health, education and housing.
M I G A Program

68.
M I G A i s proposing to support privatization through the provision of political risk
guarantees to foreign investors, to provide aftercare capacity building support to the
investment promotion agency, and to undertake a comprehensive benchmarking study.

43

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

MIGA intends to support foreign direct investment through the provision o f political risk
guarantees to investors in new projects, privatizations and modernizations o f existing projects, in
particular in the power and gas sectors. Based on the Miyazawa Initiative, MIGA intends to
provide capacity building support in the area o f investor aftercare to BKPM to help i t address the
needs o f existing investors and facilitate expansions and reinvestments. This work w i l l be
provided in a regional context beginning in FY04-05. Once suitable partners are identified,
MIGA i s also proposing to undertake a comprehensive benchmarking study designed to analyze
the competitiveness o f several sectors in Indonesia in terms o f their ability to attract FDI. (See
Annex G for further details on MIGA’s program.)

E. PARTNERSHIPS
69.
A new way of doing business. Since the economic crisis the Bank, together with
Government, other donors and key representatives o f c i v i l society and the private sector have
embarked upon a new approach to development assistance in Indonesia. There i s now wide
recognition that broad-based genuine partnerships that focus o n the problems to be solved, and
that bring together all relevant stakeholders with something to contribute to the solution are
much more likely to succeed than earlier “expert-driven” approaches. This change has been
prompted both by factors specific to Indonesia - including the multiplication o f voices and
decision-makers, and the complexity o f problems to be solved -- and b y the worldwide
recognition that participation and partnership, done right, deliver results. The new approach,
while adding short term costs, has led to genuine improvements in development effectiveness.
Our range o f partners i s broadening - to include, for example, parliamentarians, professional
associations, religious organizations and labor unions - but our engagement in such partnerships
w i l l be monitored, and judged b y i t s impact on our development effectiveness. In the coming
CAS period we are committed to deepening this process in a manner that w i l l improve our
effectiveness further. Annex B9 provides a listing o f partnerships in each o f the Bank’s areas o f
activity.

70.
Joint analytical and advisory activities. Most o f the Bank’s AAA work i s now done in
partnership with local research institutes, other donors, NGOs, and o f course Government. Such
partnerships include co-financing, joint research teams, consultant trust funds, and joint
dissemination activities. Increasingly, the Bank and i t s partners are pursuing a programmatic
approach to research and technical assistance, identifying key issue areas in Indonesia’s
development path and framing a set o f activities to provide analysis, policy recommendations
and other support. The Partnership for Governance Reform in Indonesia provides a unique
Indonesian-led vehicle, through which donors can pool their funds for legal and judicial reform,
c i v i l service reform and anti-corruption. The Strategic Poverty Partnership between the Bank
and DFID focuses on analytical work to assist in the development o f strategies and actions to
reduce poverty and vulnerability. The Dutch Government has provided significant support
through the Bank for analyzing and improving the implementation o f decentralization, and works
in close partnership with a program financed by GTZ. The Bank’s C D D work w i l l continue to
rely on a wide range o f partners including DFID for the development o f a monitoring and
evaluation framework, AusAID for support o f conflict resolution, Japan for support o f our
program for widows and other groups affected b y conflict, and Denmark to increase women’s
participation in CDD. In sensitive areas, joint teams have been fielded to implement analytical
work such as the Regional Public Expenditure Review for the war t o m Province o f Aceh in

44

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

partnership with the ADB, U S A I D and UNDP. An important new partnership on the investment
climate, led by official and private sector representatives from Japan and the U S w i l l help
monitor and advise on private sector aspects o f the Government’s new economic package. The
above are just a few examples out o f many.

71.
F r o m projects to programs through partnerships. The Bank’s program in Indonesia
depends on our capacity to leverage the Bank’s own resources with significant additional funds
from a range o f bilateral partners to deliver on our common agenda. The Bank currently manages
approximately U S $165 million in t r u s t funds from bilateral donors that are used for such
activities as co-financing, project preparation, thematic partnerships, research and technical
assistance, and consultant support. While fiduciary concerns s t i l l discourage the common
pooling o f donor funds for sectoral budget support, in a number o f key sectors joint teams are
working with Government to diagnose problems and develop sectoral strategies that w i l l then be
financed in a coordinated manner. A current example i s education, where AusAID, the ADB, the
Netherlands, EU, U N I C E F and the Bank are working with the Government to design a strategy
for the sector. Similar approaches are planned in Public Financial Management reform, microcredit, infrastructure, and HIV/AIDS. The MDGs are expected to play an increasingly valuable
role in helping donors and Government to focus on monitorable outcomes. A major baseline
report is being completed b y a multi-stakeholder working group under the leadership o f the
Government and UNICEF.

72.

A more effective consultative group process. The Consultative Group for Indonesia
(CGI), chaired by the Bank and the Government, continues to serve as the main forum for donor
coordination and policy dialogue. Meeting in-country twice yearly (including the more informal
mid-year meeting), the C G I has provided an important forum since the economic crisis for
discussing Indonesia’s special policy and financing needs. The presence o f c i v i l society and the
private sector has enriched the debate, and the creation o f C G I working groups has helped inform
the debate and focus the discussion. As Indonesia i s n o w able to begin focusing on longer term
issues, C G I members have recently agreed o n a number o f changes to improve the effectiveness
and focus o f the dialogue. Important here w i l l be an enhanced role for Government-donor
working groups throughout the year, and a set o f technical workshops prior to the main C G I
event, to enable the full plenary sessions to be more focused on genuine dialogue.
73.

Towards greater development effectiveness. Partnerships are critical for the
preparation, implementation and supervision o f Bank projects. Through all stages o f the project
cycle, partnerships enable the Bank to improve the scope, quality and effectiveness o f the
investments we finance. As examples: project preparation grants f r o m Japan play a critical role
in project development across our program; DFID i s a key partner in all stages o f the
development and implementation o f the “local level platform”; and the Dutch Government cofinances with grants the KDP and education program. Partnerships among ADB, JBIC and the
Bank are particularly important, given that these three lending institutions account for threequarters o f ODA flows, and share many common problems. In the coming months a fullyintegrated joint portfolio review w i l l be completed for the three institutions. ADB w i l l continue
to be a close ally in anti-corruption efforts, including in the planned country procurement review
up-date, and on fiscal-transfer framework issues, where work i s needed to clarify on-lending
arrangements. The partnership with ADB and JBIC on portfolio issues is complemented by
strong partnerships with the UN system on MDGs, poverty analysis and conflict-related issues.

45

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

MANAGING
RISKS
74. The highest risk to the achievement of the CAS objectives i s that the political will to
address issues of governance will not be forthcoming. Indonesia i s entering into an electoral
period in which governance and corruption are likely to be critical issues around which political
competition coalesces. While this w i l l create potential opportunities for governance reforms
which the Bank program i s designed to enhance, there remain r i s k s that political competition
could deflect the Government from implementing i t s reform program or lead to new
configurations o f political power that utilize nationalist or populist pressures to reject governance
reforms. Political instability or unrest associated with the electoral process itself cannot be ruled
out at this early stage o f Indonesia’s transition. In response to such risks, the Bank would seek to
stay engaged on governance reform through i t s direct involvement with communities in C D D
projects and through continued policy dialogue. Yet the consequences for making progress on
the country’s growth and poverty reduction goals would be seriously compromised. In addition
to this general risk to the program, a number o f more specific risks can be identified below with
appropriate Bank responses.
75.
Macroeconomic risks. A macroeconomic shock could lead to another economic crisis,
stalled or negative growth, capital flight, and increased poverty. The cause could be caused b y
domestic factors (lack o f macro discipline resulting from election pressures, weak institutional
capacity, financial sector instability etc), or external factors (commodity price shocks, escalation
o f international terrorism etc). In the case o f a domestic shock, the Bank would continue to work
in partnership with the Fund in advising the Government with a view to enhancing fiscal and
financial sector management. In the case that a crisis i s precipitated by poor governance and
economic management, the Bank would likely be in the L o w case. The CDD platform, as well as
the planned technical work the Bank does to improve the social protection and safety net
mechanisms would then be important to mitigating the impacts o f crisis on the poor. In the case
o f a sudden externally driven shock, the Bank would react quickly t o provide the Government
with technical advice and, where appropriate, balance o f payments support.
76.
Financial sector risks. Further financial sector turbulence could impose significant fiscal
costs, and putting macroeconomic and poverty reduction goals at r i s k Over half the banking
sector continues to be state-owned, making directed credit tempting, and enabling poor credit
decisions that could lead to future contingent liabilities for the government. The blanket deposit
guarantee tends to weaken market discipline, but removing i t too abruptly risks triggering a loss
o f confidence in the system. The financial and operational restructuring of many companies hurt
by the crisis i s still incomplete, posing a large risk to bank asset portfolios. Capital markets are
underdeveloped; the insurance and pensions sectors - widely known to be weak - could also
impose significant fiscal costs o n the government as part o f any restructuring efforts. The Bank,
in collaboration with other partners, w i l l continue to provide TA and policy advice, w i l l invest
in AAA and capacity building efforts to monitor developments in the financial and corporate
sectors and advise the Government on policy options on an ongoing basis.
77.
Decentralization risks. Policy reversals on decentralization could undermine our local
service delivery platform and slow disbursements overall. The main decentralization law i s
currently under review, and substantial backtracking or continued uncertainty could slow or

46

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

otherwise complicate progress in decentralization. Some central agencies are working actively
to reinstate central control adding to the uncertainty. Concerted efforts to support the
implementing regulations for decentralization w i l l be key to mitigating this risk. If necessary, a
scenario o f stalled or compromised decentralization may result in a re-weighting o f the portfolio
to centrally or community implemented projects as projects designed for local-level
implementation based on current policies are reformulated.

78.

Reputational risks. The risk to the Bank’s credibility and ability to remain effective over
the long term. Despite considerable progress in rebuilding the Bank’s reputation in Indonesia
since the crisis, there remains substantial skepticism, in particular among a segment o f c i v i l
society groups, about corruption in the handling o f foreign assistance funds, and doubts about the
value o f donor financing overall, which they see as imbued with globalization and “Washington
Consensus” ideology. M o r e broadly, challenges to the Bank’s credibility as a result o f corruption
risks could undermine our effectiveness in promoting the reform agenda, particularly in the areas
o f transparency, accountability, and integrity associated with governance. The CAS i s being
designed to face this challenge head on. Transparency and accountability measures w i l l be built
into our CAS triggers and our programs. W e w i l l deal with corruption in our own projects
vigorously and with full public disclosure.

79.

Security risks. Though terrorism has now become a global threat, Indonesia remains
among the countries more vulnerable. I f terrorist attacks continue or worsen in Indonesia, the
negative effects on general investor confidence and investment levels in Indonesia could be
considerable with an associated impact on the poverty level. Increased terrorism threats could
also spark broader political instability that might impact the Government’s attention and
commitment to economic reform or, more seriously, provoke backtracking on Indonesia’s
impressive transition to a more open, decentralized society. Indonesia’s history o f military
interference in domestic politics, and bouts o f heightened nationalism all add to the risk scenario.
In addition to the terrible costs such events might impose on the Indonesian people, they also
impact on the Bank’s capacity to deliver effective assistance through threats to the security o f
Bank staff. Though several Bank projects are designed to address some o f the underlying causes
that generate these risks, direct assistance in the fight against terrorism and related security risks
are beyond the bounds o f the Bank’s program. The Bank’s response can only be to enhance the
vigilance and sophistication o f i t s monitoring o f political and security r i s k s through better
analysis and relationship-building and to strengthen i t s crisis preparedness and response plans to
give greater confidence to local and visiting staff. In the event that these risks materialize, the
Bank w i l l respond swiftly and decisively to protect staff and their families and to preserve, to the
extent possible, those assistance operations that provide direct assistance to the poor and
vulnerable who would suffer most from the after-effects o f such events.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.
October 29, 2003

Peter Woicke

Motomichi Ikawa

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

1 of3

ANNEX c: MACROECONOMIC
PERFORMANCE AND PROSPECTS
MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCEDURING THE LAST
CAS

Moderate growth in 2000-2002. Indonesia’s average annual growth rate during 20002002 was 4 percent. Although investment grew strongly in 2000, the resumption was
short-lived. Consumption was the main engine o f growth, and private consumption was
increasingly fueled b y consumer credit. While Indonesia has gained macroeconomic and
political stability, the investment climate remained weak throughout the period.
Nominal GDP growth contributed to the decline in the government debt to GDP
ratio. The ratio improved from 88 percent in 2000 to 80 percent in 2002. During that
period, debt outstanding increased b y $6 billion, while nominal GDP increased b y $23
billion. In 2000-2002, the primary balance was well above 3 percent o f GDP on average,
however interest payments led the balance into deficits. The Government had to rely on
foreign financing to fill the deficits despite i t s efforts to collect resources through nondebt financing (e.g. privatization and B R A asset sales). The average rupiah (Rp.) to
dollar exchange rate depreciated f r o m Rp.8,400 in 2000 to Rp.9,300 in 2002, which
decreased the nominal GDP in dollars.
0

High current account surplus. The average current account surplus in 2000-2002 was
$7.5 billion. During the period, oil prices ($25.3/bbl) were higher than historical average,
which may have contributed $1.0-1.5 billion per annum to balance o f payments. In
addition, interest payments were less due to the global interest rate decline.
MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS OVER THE NEXT
CAS

T h e Base case envisions that the r e a l growth rate reaches 5 percent in 2006. The
Base case scenario assumes continued, but halting progress on reforms. This will in turn
lead to improvements in the investment climate and actual investment. As a result, the
growth rate i s likely to gradually accelerate f r o m the estimated 3.5 percent in 2003 to 5
percent in 2006. The main engine o f growth w i l l gradually switch f r o m consumption to
investment. The external environment i s likely to be supportive o f the economy.
0

Conducive investment climate and potential G D P . Indonesia needs more investment in
new production capacity as well as in maintenance o f existing capacity-both of which
require a conducive investment climate. Ongoing fiscal consolidation i s likely t o enable
the Government to increase investment in development over the C A S period. However,
the resumption o f private investment i s also critical. The improvements in
macroeconomic and political stability over the past 2 years have not yet successfully led
to actual investment. Small investment volume in recent years may have prevented not
only the growth o f new production capacity, but also the proper maintenance of existing
capacity. Unless the investment climate i s quickly improved, Indonesia’s potential
growth rate may face supply constraints.

2of3

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

0

0

Productivity growth through accelerating reforms. The increase in production
capacity i s not the only way to accelerate the growth rate. Productivity efficiency also
plays a key role. In the past 40 years, about one-third o f Indonesia’s growth was achieved
through productivity efficiency gains or TFP (total factor productivity), though this
phenomenon was less pronounced in more recent years. In order to realize the growth
rate envisioned in the CAS, productivity growth rates should be increased. Acceleration
o f reforms i s a key for productivity growth, since reforms may reduce business
transaction costs.
Demand will pick up over the CAS period. In the short-term, demand plays an
important role. The main engine o f growth w i l l gradually switch from private
consumption to investment, although the election i s likely to increase consumption and
decrease investment in 2004. External demand i s likely to be supportive for the economy
in coming years. The latest W o r l d Bank projection (Global Development Prospect 2004)
foresees the world GDP growth rate to accelerate from 1.9 percent in 2002 to 2.9-3.0
percent in 2004-2005, and world trade volume growth rate to accelerate f r o m 3 percent in
2002 to 7.9 percent in 2004-2005. These positive external factors are likely to contribute
to Indonesia’s exports and FDI inflows. For example, Indonesia’s export volume would
increase by 0.8 percent and real GDP growth rate would increase by 0.4 percent if world
trade volume were to increase b y 1 percent.

A gradual depreciation of the real exchange rate. The real exchange rate i s projected
to depreciate gradually over the CAS period. This i s partly a reaction to the appreciation
o f the rupiah since
Annex Figure C.l: Real Effective Exchange Rate

April 2001 (between
(December 1996=100)
April 2001 and July
Dec96=100
120,
2003, real exchange
110 rate appreciated by 45
percent).
However,
100
Malaysia
100 I
the real exchange rate
90i s s t i l l below the pre80 crisis level by 20
70 percent, and not out
o f line with other
M)former Asian crisis
50 countries
(Annex
c1> 4 0 Figure
30 Indonesia’s
exports
products
are still
2 0 ~
Dec- Jun- Dec- Jun- Dec- Jun- Dec- Jun- Dec- Jun- Deccompetitive in terms
01
00
01
96
97
97
98
98
99
99
00
of
prices.’
The
depreciation of the Source: IMF, staff estimates

I

rupiah

’

Phlrppmes

Jun-

02

Dec02

Jun-

03

negatively

This depends on sectors. For example, electrical products exports, one o f the main commodities, have large
imports contents and therefore the exchange rate impacts are relatively small. On the other hand, textile exports,
which have relatively large domestic contents, are affected b y the recent exchange rate movements.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

3of3

affects the government debt to GDP ratio. However, further fiscal consolidation as well
as the acceleration of growth would be able to offset this negative impact.
Fiscal consolidation continues. The Government i s committed to fiscal consolidation.
The budget i s projected to balance in 2007.2 Non-oil and gas revenues are expected to
increase through improvements in tax administration, which enable the government to
allocate more resources on development expenditures. As the government i s likely to
focus on non-debt financing (e.g. privatization and bank financing), government debt
outstanding w i l l decline, which will lead to a further reduction of the government debt to
GDP ratio. The&vernment debt to GDP ratio i s projected to decline to 49 percent in
2007.

World Bank projection. The government projects the budget will be balanced in 2006.

1 of5

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

ANNEX D: INDONESIA
POVERTY
PROFILE
AND ANALYTICAL AGENDA
POVERTY
PROFILE
Indonesia has made remarkable progress in reducing expenditure poverty in
recovering from its economic crisis but has not yet brought poverty down to precrisis levels. Whereas growth had assisted Indonesia in bringing i t s poverty headcount
index down from 60 percent in 1970 to 15.7 percent in 1996, the economic crisis resulted
in expenditure poverty rates exploding to 27 percent b y 1999. Since then, the success in
macroeconomic stabilization - by bringing inflation and the exchange rate under control
- has underpinned Indonesia’s success in lowering i t s expenditure poverty rate to 16
percent b y 2002. Maintaining macro-stability and generating faster growth through an
improved investment climate are critical to poverty reduction in Indonesia.
But poverty i s multidimensional, and looking beyond expenditure poverty shows
that the problems of poverty are serious in Indonesia and are compounded by poor
service delivery. Indeed if one considers access to basic health, education, water, and
sanitation services (e.g. as measured b y births attended by traditional healers, child
enrollment, household access to sanitation and to water), improvements have been slow.
These are also reflected in poor MDG outcomes, particularly in health (see Table 1 and as
discussed in the text), relative to countries within the region. Women in particular suffer
problems o f access to quality services and bear the consequences: Indonesia’s maternal
mortality rate i s two times greater than the Philippines and five times greater than
Vietnam. Moreover, even many expenditure non-poor households are deprived in terms
o f access to basic services as defined above. I f lack o f access to each of the above
services i s seen as a separate dimension o f poverty, as many as 53 percent o f Indonesians
would be defined as poor on the basis o f at least one such dimension o f poverty. In other
words, poor service delivery i s failing the expenditure poor and i s itself also the cause o f
poverty and deprivation in Indonesia. The problems o f the poor are not limited to the
problems o f generating income. Traditional attempts at targeted income transfers or
relying only on expanding access to credit w i l l not solve these problems. Directed efforts
to improve the delivery of basic services must thus be a critical facet of any effort to
reduce multidimensional poverty in Indonesia.
The national headcount index masks wide disparities and variations in poverty
incidence rates across the country. While the poverty rates are 15.7 percent and 4
percent on Java and Bali, the Eastern Islands lag, with poverty rates of 36.8 percent. The
severity o f poverty i s similarly more serious in the Eastern Islands in general, with the
depth o f poverty at 7.8 percent in NTT/NTB relative to 2.5 percent in Java and Bali. The
story on regional disparities and lagging regions i s tempered b y several additional facts.
First, the recovery f r o m the crisis in terms o f expenditure poverty appears to have
benefited almost all regions: indeed all but one province captured in the 2002 household
survey saw an improvement in poverty rates, including strong recoveries from some
regions in the East. Second, despite regional disparities, 78 percent o f Indonesia’s
expenditure poor live in Java, Bali, and Sumatra. Third, regional multidimensional

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

2of5

poverty maps show strong geographic correlations between expenditure poverty
measures and other measures o f poverty at the provincial level, with Nusatenggara
having l o w levels o f service access in general. Overall, Bengkulu, West Kalimantan,
Central Java, East Java and Nusa Tenggara lag behind other provinces with respect to
multidimensional, non-expenditure poverty measures. Addressing poverty in Indonesia
will not only require efforts of bringing along the lagging regions but importantly also
addressingpoverty among the poor in non-lagging regions.

There are key rural and urban dimensions to Indonesia’s poverty. Most o f
Indonesia’s poor (78 percent) live in rural areas. Here a noteworthy fact i s that whereas
65 percent o f poor households are agricultural, only 50 percent o f their income i s from
farming and 8 percent f r o m agriculture wage work. Small landholdings and lags in
productivity increases means that off-farm rural income sources are increasingly
important for these poor. While 22 percent o f the poor live in urban areas, this represents
7.6 million people. The problems o f urban poverty are largely shaped by unemployment.
Male, female and even youth unemployment rates are indeed much larger in urban areas.
Male unemployment rate among the poor in urban areas, at 7.7 percent, i s more than
three times the rate in rural areas. The female unemployment rate, at 9.4 percent among
the poor in urban areas, i s almost twice the rural rate. Poverty reduction efforts must
necessarily focus on the dual dimensions of urban and rural poverty in Indonesia, with
an emphasis on creating economic opportunities and jobs, including offifarm income
opportunities in rural areas.
A n important characteristic of poverty in Indonesia i s vulnerability to shock. The
vulnerability to falling into poverty among many Indonesian households i s simply
reflected in the clustering o f a large share o f households just above the income poverty
line. This phenomenon i s reflected by the fact that 7.4 percent o f Indonesians fall under
the dollar-a-day poverty line whereas 53.4 percent fall under the t w o dollars-a-day
poverty line. (The national poverty line i s currently approximately 1.5 dollars a day.)
Analysis has shown that the poor are vulnerable to a series o f shocks, most important o f
which are price shocks to their consumption bundle (and particularly t o rice, the main
staple of the poor), catastrophic illness o f household members, and crop failure. In
addition, ongoing analysis shows that an important source o f vulnerability among
Indonesian households is conflict and related insecurity - in many regions throughout the
country. Gender vulnerability i s also a key issue. Females, even though having similar
jobs with s i m i l a r education levels, on average earn less and have more difficulty in
securing good jobs, regardless o f sector and level o f education. Reducing vulnerability of
households to poverty will mean lifting more people further above the poverty line
through growth, mitigating the sources of vulnerability such as conflict and natural
disasters, and enhancing informal and formal coping mechanisms for households,
including through well targeted safety net programs.

3of5

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

POVERTY
ANALYSIS
Background

Indonesia has a well developed system o f surveys to monitor poverty but these are
underutilized to address policy issues. There i s n o shortage o f data on poverty.’ The data
have been mostly used to monitor changes in welfare, target expenditures across regions
and monitor benefit incidence o f government programs. The Government o f Indonesia
uses the data to support poverty monitoring and government programs, including
geographic targeting of programs’.
Importantly, there i s too little analysis of policy issues, and poverty analysis does not feed
into the policy debate and the policy making process. There have not been many studies
beyond measuring and looking at targeting issues. There have been too many trials of
poverty alleviation programs that have not been properly e ~ a l u a t e d .Several
~
gaps in
analysis are eminent, such as: What policy interventions w i l l help raise the return to the
assets, opportunities, and incomes o f the poor? In the context o f decentralization, how
can the ability o f local governments be enhanced to reach the poor? What measures w i l l
increase the voice o f people so that public and private services are made more
accountable to them? What do we learn f r o m past poverty alleviations programs, and in
the context o f fiscal consolidation, how can social protection expenditures be made more
efficient and effective in protecting the poor? Donor institutions, including the W o r l d
Bank, heavily rely on the BPS data for monitoring and analyzing government policies. In
1993 the W o r l d Bank published an analysis o f poverty, public services and p ~ v e r t yThe
.~
poverty lines that were constructed for this report have formed the basis for World Bank
poverty analysis since. The Voices of the PooJ and Community, Poverty and Livelihoods6
studies were two additional qualitative poverty analyses undertaken with W o r l d Bank
1

BPS, the Indonesian Bureau o f Statistics, fields the Susenas household survey which collects a key set o f
welfare indicators for a large sample - about 200,000 - households. Three modules are fielded along with
this survey to one third o f the sample on a rotational basis. They collect detailed information on
consumption, education, health and household welfare. Since 2003 the Susenas also includes a 10,000
household panel component. In addition to the Susenas, BPS fields a community census every 3 years
(PODES), a labor market survey every year (Sakernas), farmers terms o f trade survey every month, a
regular, agricultural and economic census every 10 years, and a mini census every 10 years in between the
regular full censuses. BPS data are accessible to the public at reasonable cost. The RAND cooperation, with
the University o f Indonesian and later Gadjah Mada University, has fielded the Indonesian Family L i f e
ranel Survey in 1993, 1997 and 2000. Data are accessible at no cost but with a substantial lag.
PODES and Susenas data are used to rate wealth o f regions and the central planning agency uses these
scores to allocate poverty programs across regions.
Although local research institutes use the data frequently, and their publications are cited widely, there i s
a lack o f cross check and peer review o f findings.
4
World Bank. 1993. “Indonesia - Public expenditures, prices and the poor.” Report 11293. Washington
D.C., and
Ravallion, Martin and Benu Bidani (1994) “How Robust I s a Poverty Profile?” World Bank Economic
Review v8, n l (January 1994): 75-102.
5
World Bank. 1999. “Indonesia: Consultations with the poor,” prepared for global synthesis workshop held
from 9/22-9/23 PREM, the World Bank. Or DFID report
DFID and World Bank. 2002. “People, Poverty and Livelihoods: Links for Sustainable Poverty Reduction
in Indonesia”.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

4of5

involvement. A Poverty Assessment b y the ADB was completed in 2000.7The last World
Bank Poverty Assessment dates back to 2001.* This report emphasized two themes that
defined the needs for a new kind of poverty strategy. First, poverty definitions need to be
redeveloped to acknowledge the broader, multidimensional, more dynamic reality of
poverty. Second, Indonesia needs a poverty strategy consistent with an empowered
populace and democratic policymaking mechanism through acknowledging that the
poverty agenda i s a governance agenda.
INDOPOV: A Poverty Analysis Program to Support this CAS
Over this CAS period, the World Bank i s seeking to strengthen the analysis of poverty in
Indonesia through the Indonesia Poverty Analysis Program (INDOPOV). This i s a three
year program of analytical, policy and operational work on poverty designed to feed into
and support the Government of Indonesia in the preparation and implementation of i t s
Poverty Reduction Strategy, as well as to enhance the poverty focus o f work within the
World Bank in Indonesia. In partnership with others, this program w i l l seek to address
key gaps in poverty analysis in Indonesia currently. INDOPOV w i l l adopt a
programmatic approach focusing on four key themes, aligned with both the CAS and the
themes chosen b y the Govenment for the preparation of the PRSP. These themes are:
Poverty analysis and policy linkages-which
w i l l undertake high quality
analytical work on poverty and vulnerability, broaden the policy debate on
poverty issues, and improve capacity for monitoring and evaluation.
Creating a pro-poor investment climate-which w i l l analyze linkages between
macroeconomic policy and poverty, quantify the constraints to pro-poor growth at
the local level, promote a better understanding of the impact o f labor market
regulation on employment creation, and help to develop strategies for outlying
and lagging regions.

Making services work for the poor-which
w i l l seek to understand the
determinants of poor development outcomes, strengthen client-provider
relationships, and explore how public spending can be made more effective in
three sectors, education, health and water and sanitation. In addition there w i l l be
a special program of work on social protection services.
Governance andpoverty - which w i l l focus on linking planning and budgeting to
poverty, understanding the determinants of pro-poor change, and determining the
poverty payoff of specific governance reforms.

A mixture of qualitative and quantitative tools w i l l be used, drawing on the many rich
sources of data in Indonesia mentioned above. In each area the work w i l l be closely
integrated with policy and operational work. Coalitions of partners w i l l be built around
the work program and the results w i l l feed into the ongoing policy dialogue in each area.
ADB. 2000. “Assessment of Poverty i n Indonesia,” Manila.

* World Bank. 2001. “Indonesia: Constructing a new Strategy for poverty reduction,” Report 23028-IND,

Washington D.C.

Indonesia Countly Assistance Strategy

5of5

Projects and platforms w i l l provide an operational home for much of the work ensuring
that results influence World Bank policy and practice.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

lof 3

ANNEX E: SUMMARY OF CAS CONSULTATIONS
Several methods were used to elicit input to the CAS from about 400 c i v i l society
representatives, including regional focus groups (conducted in five cities), thematic and
issue-specific discussions, as well as interviews with diverse stakeholders.
The in-depth interviews were held in five different regions with approximately 60
respondents, mainly important stakeholder leaders and opinion makers. The two-day
focus groups were organized in four regions, involving various segments o f c i v i l society,
including the private sector. Thematic discussions covered governance, decentralization,
micro-credit, land reform, investment climate, rural development, public service delivery,
and macroeconomic issues.
The consultations were organized between March and July 2003. Findings were
assimilated into drafts o f the CAS and discussed by the Indonesia Country Team,
including at i t s CAS planning retreat in M a y 2003.
Separately, the Bank has also undertaken CAS consultations with central and regional
governments and their development partners, all o f whom have been informed o f the
CAS time-line. These consultations were held o n different issues at critical times during

A follow-up consultation was also organized in Jakarta in October, involving
representatives from the regional groups, where the points o f recommendations from c i v i l
society were further discussed. In this follow-up consultation, c i v i l society
representatives were presented a response matrix where each o f their recommendations
were provided written response. The follow-up consultation was kindly financed by the
Norwegian Government through their trust fund.
The main recommendations from the c i v i l society and local governmental consultations
are reflected below.

MAIN
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM C I V I L SOCIETY CONSULTATIONS
Economic crisis had a damaging impact on basic infrastructure related to the lives
and needs o f the general population. In response, poverty reduction programs
must employ W o r l d Bank loan assistance to remedy this damage. These loans
should be focused on developing basic services and infrastructure, particularly in
primary education, water supply and sanitation, nutrition and basic health
services, as well as power generation and road transportation. The primary focus
should be on developing rural areas.
One o f the main challenges Indonesia must confront after the economic crisis i s
j o b creation. The World Bank should prioritize overcoming unemployment and
reducing social problems b y supporting S M E s and labor intensive sectors such as
agriculture, transportation, and infrastructure.

2of3

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

World Bank loans to regions should be based on two main considerations: (i)
that
the region has the capability to repay the loan, and (ii)that the regional
government has applied accountability and transparency principles o f governance.
The World Bank can provide incentives to kabupatens or municipalities to foster
greater accountability and transparency and improve governance. Governance
improvements can also be achieved by building capacity o f sub-national
institutions.
0

The World Bank should urge the Government of Indonesia to strengthen i t s anticorruption efforts through improved law enforcement and heavier punishment of
perpetrators. Special requirements should be integrated into loan packages to
ensure the Government o f Indonesia’s commitment to eliminating corruption,
collusion and nepotism (KKN), namely by encouraging more extensive public
involvement as a control mechanism. Corruption cases should also be announced
publicly. In the projects i t i s financing, the World Bank should apply an early
warning system that w i l l detect corruption at i t s early stage.

0

The World Bank should urge the Government to pass legislation on public
participation in the law making process, both at regional and national levels. The
freedom to access information should also be encouraged to promote disclosure

a
0

0

0

d

d

l

Every year the W o r l d Bank should publicize through easily accessible media
channels a list o f i t s ongoing projects-containing project names, locations, and
fund allocations-in
addition to relevant World Bank policies. Efforts to
disseminate information should also be focused on local levels where projects are
located. The W o r l d Bank needs to provide information o n project accountability
and transparency, in addition to supplying a mechanism for public complaints.
The World Bank’s involvement in the land sector should focus on increasing the
government’s “political will” to promote agrarian reform, particularly related to
the use, rights, and redistribution o f land, among other things.
The World Bank should not support projects that damage the environment and
natural resources, or violate the rights o f indigenous communities.
Education represents a very important investment for the future o f Indonesia. The
World Bank needs to support education b y providing grants and/or technical
assistance to comprehensively reform the national education system. The World
Bank should work to increase accessibility o f the poor to education, namely
through building and rehabilitating school buildings and providing teaching aids,
especially in rural and remote areas. This includes investing in the training of
teachers and promoting programs for the interest o f women.

0

The World Bank should support the institutional building o f media councils. In i t s
various reports, the W o r l d Bank has acknowledged the important role the media i s

~___

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

3of3

playing in development. This statement should be transformed into concrete
contributions and help in building capacity o f this sector.

MAIN
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CONSULTATIONS WITH REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS
The W o r l d Bank should urge the central Government to finalize the decrees
supporting the implementation o f the decentralization laws (Laws No. 22 and
291999). This priority i s also echoed by c i v i l society representatives. The
implementing regulations would include authority over the management o f
natural resources, forestry, mining, investment, land matters, fiscal matters, as
well as o i l and gas. There i s a noticeable need for a combined bottom-up and topdown planning process in the form o f spatial planning that unites the central
interests and local needs.
The World Bank should support capacity building initiatives within sub-national
governments, namely to improve managerial and administrative s k i l l s to help
institutions provide first-rate public service.
0

The W o r l d Bank should help the government to create minimum public service
standards for sub-national governments. Doing so would help promote
innovations and improve the quality o f public service delivery.
The W o r l d Bank should support the development o f infrastructure and basic
services in health, education, irrigation, water supply and sanitation, and roads
and transportation, in addition to supporting poverty alleviation programs to
revitalize the economy.
The World Bank should assist small and medium enterprises (SMEs) b y
developing policies and facilities that further expand broad-based economic
growth, namely through S M E credits. This priority i s also echoed by c i v i l society
representatives.

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

lof 3

ANNEX F: ENVIRONMENT
Over the years, rapid economic growth has paid rich dividends to Indonesians; however i t
has also resulted in significant environmental degradation.
While there are some significant achievements in pollution management in
Indonesia, such as the phase-out o f lead in gasoline in Jakarta and the reduction in
use o f ozone depleting substances, many challenges remain. Air Quality i s under
threat due to increasing pollution from urbanization, motorization,
industrialization and the impacts o f forest fires. Poor solid and hazardous waste
management i s degrading land, air and water, contributing to flooding (much o f
the waste finds i t s way into drainage channels) and also having an impact on
human health. Sewerage coverage i s one of the lowest in Asia, and this i s causing
widespread contamination of surface and groundwater in urbanized areas, which
i s resulting in repeated epidemics o f gastrointestinal infections and high incidence
o f typhoid.

High rates o f deforestation are driven by excessive capacity in the wood
processing industry and corruption and inefficiency in allocating and regulating
forest use. While there does appear to be a real foundation for forest policy reform
thanks to the Government’s acknowledgment o f the serious nature o f the forest
problems, progress on the ground has been insufficient to stem the rate o f forest
loss. Indonesia i s perhaps the world’s most biologically diverse country.
However, i t i s experiencing a dramatic loss in natural habitats, and i s doubtless
threatening lesser-known aquatic and terrestrial species as well. Habitat loss also
brings with i t reduction in environmental services provided by ecosystems, such
as carbon sequestration, control o f microclimate, slope stabilization, recreation
and ecotourism. The impacts o f loss o f services and natural resources are often
felt more at local level by poorer communities, who are the most dependent on
biological resources for their livelihoods and welfare.
Mining and mineral related products account for about 13 percent o f Indonesia
GDP and 19 percent total exports, with gold being the largest revenue earner. O f
the three mining types, large-scale mining has had a relatively limited impact on
the environment, and responsible international companies have improved their
environmental performance. Small scale mining, much o f i t illegal, continues to
have adverse impacts o n natural systems and on miners’ health and safety as well.
Among the most relevant issues currently facing the mining industry i s the need
to reconcile provisions made by a Presidential Decree, which gave mining priority
over other land uses, with those o f L a w 4 1 o f 1999 concerning forest
management, which essentially prohibits any surface mining in state forest land,
regardless o f i t s classification. The Ministry o f Energy and Mineral Resources and
the Ministry o f Forestry need to find a constructive way forward to deal with this
matter, especially in light o f the growth and poverty alleviation perspectives that
the issue encompasses.

Indonesia Count? Assistance Strategy

2of3

Short-term gains in economic growth and poverty reduction can be significantly
undermined b y over-exploitation and degradation o f the natural resource base and by
inappropriate handling o f pollution resulting from production processes, transportation
and consumption patterns. The resulting costs to society reflect opportunities foregone or
expenditures on mitigation, reducing net national savings. The Bank thus recognizes
environmental and natural resource management issues as key cross-cutting dimensions
o f the challenge that Indonesia faces in pursuing sustainable growth and poverty
alleviation, embedded in all three pillars o f i t s assistance strategy.

Pillar 1: Improving the investment climate. Three main issues are relevant: (i)
Support
to macroeconomic stability, and trade policy specifically, w i l l need to take into account
the role o f the forestry sector, which represents 10% o f the country’s total exports.
Under-reporting and ineffective collection o f resource fees in the sector and ineffective
management o f the Reforestation Fund are further concerns f r o m a fiscal standpoint; (ii)
One o f the pre-conditions for increasing private sector investment and promoting
competitiveness i s clarity o f regulations and their consistent, predictable enforcement.
Environment i s thus one o f the many dimensions o f the proposed reforms o f the justice
sector, c i v i l service, and financial management institutions; and (iii)Promotion o f
productive investment in rural areas may include community forestry and watershed
protection, possibly leveraging carbon finance and the payment for environmental
services. The above points w i l l be dealt with through mainstreaming in AAA, TA and
lending operations.
Pillar 2: Improving services for the poor. Environmental concerns w i l l be dealt with on
three fronts: (i)
ensuring that project impacts are minimized and that effective mitigation
and compensation measures are built into project design (through the safeguards
exploring synergies in project design (as in the use o f carbon finance or
process); (ii)
GEF funds associated with agriculture and energy projects to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions or to promote biodiversity protection); and (iii)
enhancing institutional capacity
in sectors and provinces where investment i s concentrated. The use o f strategic
environmental assessment (either sectoral or regional) can greatly facilitate the planning
process and reduce transaction costs associated to project preparation. Specifically
mainstreaming will be promoted through: (i)
USDRP, in connection with expansion o f
sewerage systems; (ii)
ICGRP, in connection with the protection o f headwaters; and (iii)
roads and energy projects.
Pillar 3: Improving governance. The Government has piloted information disclosure in
the environmental field through the PROPER Program, focusing on water pollution in
industry. I t i s proposing to scale up this initiative to cover other media and sectors. With
decentralization, the Ministry of Environment also faces the challenge o f clarifying
mandates, defining priorities for capacity building, and putting in place incentives to
promote good environmental governance in the country’s 400+ districts. The Bank’s
program w i l l seek to support Indonesia’s broader Good Environmental Governance
(GEG) Program through a stand-alone operation centered on: (i)consolidating the
PROPER and GEG Programs, which promote environmental compliance in the private
sector and at the district (kabupaten and kota) level; (ii)
improving health through
expansion o f urban environmental services (sewerage and solid waste) using matching

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

3of3

grants that would be accessed b y districts that meet GEG performance criteria; and (iii)
capacity building and development o f management tools (economic instruments,
information systems, state-of-the-environment reporting, etc) for environmental agencies.

1 of3

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

ANNEX G :PROPOSED IFC AND MIGA PROGRAM: FY04-07
IFC PROGRAM
IFC’s activities in Indonesia are directed to help the private sector, contribute to sustained
economic growth, and help improve the investment climate in the country. Indonesia’s
post-crisis economic performance has not matched that o f Malaysia, Thailand or
Philippines largely on account o f a weak investment climate. Although modest
improvements have been noted in the country’s legal,g regulatory, labor and fiscal
environments, substantial further progress i s needed to attract much needed foreign direct
investment, as well as to rejuvenate internal lending b y commercial banks.” I F C w i l l
work closely with the Bank to support the Government’s efforts in these areas, with a
particular emphasis on the development o f a healthy financial sector and the proper
functioning o f commercial courts.

IFC’s lending operations over the C A S period w i l l be aimed at supporting reputable
companies in key sectors to undertake restructuring or initiate growth activities. IFC w i l l
focus on: (i)
strengthening o f banks and other financial institutions; (ii)
deepening the
financial sector through supporting new institutions; (iii)supporting export oriented
companies, mainly in the agribusiness sector; (iv) supporting investments in
infrastructure in power and telecommunications; and (v) supporting S M E s through the
Program for Eastern Indonesia Sh4E Assistance.
In the financial sector, the slow recovery o f the fragile banlung system has contributed
to the stability o f the economy. While some large banks have been handed over to the
private sector in landmark transactions, further reform in this sector i s needed. I t i s
critical to identify and revitalize well-managed banks, help them restart lending to
creditworthy customers and reintegrate them with inter-bank and international financial
markets. Test for success would be the emergence o f a sound banking system, resolution
o f the problems o f weak banks and deepening the financial system. I F C w i l l work to
recapitalize some banks where appropriate strategic partners can be found to upgrade the
banks’ operating procedures, systems and management practices. In the area o f financial
sector institution-building, potential IFC’s activities could include investments combined
with technical assistance in the areas o f housing finance, forfaiting, credit information
(credit bureaus), and securitization. In addition, I F C w i l l work to facilitate and promote
the dialogue between the banking industry and the Government through continued
sponsorship o f the Private Sector Forum.
I F C w i l l support export oriented resource based industries through investments in
sectors such as palm o i l plantation, where IFC can help with environmental and
resettlement issues. IFC w i l l also assist internationally competitive projects in textile,
chemicals, light engineering and services serving the domestic market.

Both the Manulife and Panca Overseas cases were resolved to IFC’s satisfaction.
to 25% of Indonesian bank assets are held in Government securities. This compares to 9% in
Thailand (year-end 2002).
lo
Close

2 of3

Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy

In infrastructure, IFC w i l l seek to invest in viable private sector power generation and
distribution projects, and support investments in telecommunications. Investments in
these sectors w i l l require significant progress in investor perceptions o f the investment
climate in Indonesia. IFC’s capacity to invest and mobilize private sector financing w i l l
be constrained b y investor perceptions o f the sanctity o f contracts and progress in judicial
reform in Indonesia.

S M E development i s an important potential means o f mitigating unemployment and
helping Indonesia resume a more balanced growth path. S M E development also allows
the benefits o f this growth to be enjoyed b y a larger cross-section o f the population,
including many disadvantaged groups. IFC has recently established the Program for
Eastern Indonesia S M E Assistance to meet the need for improving business s h l l
development in the Eastern Islands. Further IFC support in this area i s expected to be: (i)
the creation o f a credit bureau in Indonesia; and (ii)investment in microfinance
institutions helping to consolidate the microfinance industry in Indonesia.

In the area o f social services, there i s an urgent need for market based solutions for the
provision o f health care and education given the pressure o n the government budget.
IFC’s role would be to mobilize funds in support o f private sector projects in health,
education and housing.
In the real sector, IFC’s support w i l l be primarily directed to reputable Indonesian
companies to assist them in concluding their corporate restructuring and redirecting their
efforts to sustainable growth. IFC w i l l support these companies in the restructuring o f
their balance sheets through the provision o f term financing (both in foreign and local
currency), as well as assistance in the adoption o f international best practices in the areas
o f management and operations.

IFC’s current portfolio in Indonesia i s US$ 530 million in 32 projects, o f which US$335
million i s for i t s own account and US$195 million i s for the account o f participant banks.
M I G A PROGRAM

MIGA’s goal in Indonesia i s to promote foreign direct investment for productive
purposes. To date, MIGA has facilitated an estimated US$3.9 billion of foreign direct
investment into Indonesia. MIGA paid a claim in the power sector in Indonesia in 2001.
Full salvage was negotiated with the Government, and the final payment was paid by
Indonesia under the claim settlement agreement in mid-June 2003 as expected.
In the coming C A S period, MIGA intends to support foreign direct investment (FDI) into
Indonesia through the provision o f political risk guarantees to investors in new projects,
privatizations and modernizations o f existing projects. A particular sectoral focus for
these guarantees will be on infrastructure, including power, and oil and gas.

MIGA w i l l continue to support Indonesia’s efforts to attract foreign direct investment by
profiling potential investment opportunities in the country through i t s online investment
services, namely PrivatizationLink and FDI Xchange. In this respect, one area o f
potential focus i s likely to be privatizations. Where appropriate partners can be found,

Indonesia Countly Assistance Strategy

3of3

MIGA w i l l support the GOI’s efforts to reenergize privatization, combining the agency’s
expertise in investor outreach and targeting and i t s information services products with indepth knowledge on the ground about the GOI’s divestiture pipeline. In addition, MIGA
w i l l leverage PrivatizationLink, IPAnet and FDIXchange, and other state of the art MIGA
information product tools to disseminate the information extensively to potential
investors.
Based on MIGA’s experience under the Miyazawa Initiative, MIGA intends to provide
Capacity Building support in the area of aftercare to B U M , the country’s investment
promotion agency, to allow i t to help meet the needs of existing investors and facilitate
expansions and reinvestments. This work w i l l be provided in a regional context,
beginning FY04-05.
Once suitable partners are identified, MIGA i s also proposing to undertake a
comprehensive focused Benchmarking Study of Indonesia. The primary objective of the
Benchmarking Study would be to analyze the competitiveness of several sectors in
Indonesia in terms of their ability to attract FDI.
The output could then be used in the short term to see how the various locations compare
in terms of costs and conditions and in terms o f industry attractiveness. This would
enable investment promotion intermediaries to focus their promotion efforts and
subsequent location recommendations according to the strengths of a community, help
them address location weaknesses, improve their knowledge of industry-specific
investment criteria, help them better understand the concept of niche opportunities, and
help determine why some disinvestment i s talung place, the understanding of all of which
i s necessary to ensure long-term sustained competitiveness.

$c o uel
0 0
ulul

cob

0 0
0 0

cow

In0

cuo

ulul

mco
coL0
ulm

m b

0 0

mul

8
8
b w
0 0
0 0

bco

coo
a 0
c9

I

I

n

n

n n

m m

99

9
r

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Indonesia at a glance
Indonesia

East
Asia &
Pacific

Lowincome

21 1.7
710
149.9

1,826
900
1,649

2,511
430
1,069

1.3
2.2

1.1
1.3

1.9
2.3

16
43
67
34
25
78
12
110
111
109

37
69
36
12
74
14
107
106
108

31
59
76
76
37
96
103
88

1982

1992

2001

2002

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic fixed investmenffGDP
Exports Of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

94.7
27.8
25.3
29.0

139.1
30.5
27.9
33.4
21.4

141.3
21.8
42.3
24.9
21 .o

172.9
20.2
35.4
21.1
18.6

Current account balanceiGDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debVGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debUGDP
Present value of debffexports

-5.6
1.6
26.5
18.1

-2.0
2.7
63.3
32.6

4.9
5.0
94.8
27.6

4.3
2.7
76.0
26.1

1982-92 1992-02

2001

2002

2003-07

2.5
1.1
3.1

3.4
2.1
1.9

3.7
2.3
-1.2

4.6
3.2
4.0

1982

1992

2001

2002

24
38
12
38

19
40
22
42

17
46
25
37

17
44
25
38

59
12
24

58
9
25

67
8
35

71
8
29

1982-92 1992-02

2001

2002

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2002
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US5 billions)

10/30/2003

Development diamond’
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1996-02
Population (“7)
Labor force (“7)

GNI

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1996-02)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (‘-7of totalpopulation)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (‘-7ofchildren under5)
Access to an improved water source (“hofpopulation)
Illiteracy (“7 ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (“7 of school-age population)
Male
Female

Access to improved water source

I

Low-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERMTRENDS

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
AgriCUltUre
Industry
MaflUfaCtUring
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
ManUfaCtUriflg
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

lndonesia

’

I

Economic ratios’
Trade
-

indebtedness

6.9
5.0
6.9

3.8
9.2
12.6
6.5

1.6
3.2
4.7
2.3

1.o
3.3
4.1
4.6

1.7
3.7
4.0
4.4

4.4
4.9
9.6
3.0

5.2
0.4
-4.7
1.9

4.4
9.0
7.7
8.1

4.7
12.8
-0.2
-8.3

*

*

Indonesia
Low-incomegroup

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
~

207

-GDI

1

*GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)

60

~

Exports

*Imports

Note: 2002 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are through 2001.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-groupaverage. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomolete.

I
I

I

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Indonesia
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflatoi

1982

..
6.1

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Fuel
Rubber
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1992

2001

7.6
5.4

11.5
10.8

2002

11.9
7.2

I

Inflation (%)
807
60

40

20
0

..

20.7
0.0
-2.9

18.6
0.6
-1.7

1982

1992

2001

2002

..

33,796
10,671
684
14,224
27,280
1,274
2,104
11,700

57,364
12,648
872
22,275
34,669
2,497
5,523
9,050

58,817
12,139
1,238
19,119
35,805
2,852
6,558
8,606

..
..
..

_.
..
..
..

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

..
~.~~~

70 000

60,000
50,000

40,000
30.000
20,000

10,000
0
96

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

97

98

99

1982

1992

2001

2002

20,251
22,716
-2,465

37,187
34,874
2,313

62,864
50,549
12,315

64,004
51,498
12,506

Net income
Net current transfers

-2,993
134

-5,664
571

-6,936
1,521

-6,881
1,826

Current account balance

-5,324

-2,780

6,900

7,451

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

3,471
1,853

4,850
-2,070

-8,278
1,378

-3,430
-4,021

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

..
661.4

2,029.9

27,890
10,260.9

31,911
9,311.2

1982

1992

2001

2002

25,133
1,735
707

88,002
10,640
814

133,849
11,435
722

131,343
10,729
794

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

3,856
207
8

12,457
1,515
22

18,212
1,753
32

17,364
1,905
33

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

92
1,067
1,401
225
0

298
3,097
2,655
1,777
146

0
615
-6,199
-5,877
1,145

0
-440
-339
-7,066
1,243

977
583
82
501
133
368

1,256
1,003
692
311
845
-533

645
585
853
-268
932
-1,200

103
419
1,065
-646
873
-1,519

1

01

02

Imports

E3 Exports

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

00

I

Current account balanceto GDP (“A)
ET

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)
A: 10,729
G: 23,706

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D -Other multilateral

8: 794

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Shod-term

~~

Development Economics

########

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 09/24/2003

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the Year (Yes/No)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
Yo of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2001

2002

2003

2004

52
4.4
11.5
7.5
13.5
9.8
32.1

47
4.6
23.4
26.3
29.8
38.9
21.8

40
4.4
12.5
7.7
17.5
12.4
22.1

39
4.5
12.8
7.7
17.9
12.5
4.0

No
5,403
85.76

Yes
4,329
72.15

Yes
4,412
83

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
227
37
20,841.2
3,499.9
21.7
36.1
16.3
22.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of the Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Indonesia

-

Indonesia IFC and M I G A Program, FY 2000-2003
IFC approvals (US$m)

2000

200 1

2002

2003

3 1.37

153.00

15.18

74.00

16

65

24
76

80

3
2
21
9

Sector (%)
Agriculture and Forestry
Finance and Insurance
Food and Beverages
Industrial and Consumer Goods
Oil, gas, and Mining
Prof., Scient., and Tech.
Textiles, Apparel, and Leather
Transportation and Warehouse
Wholes. and Retail Trade

Total

0
4
100

35
20
27
11
7

100

100

100

76
24

46
47

100

19
2
1
78
100

0
100

7
100

56.50

56.50

56.50

52.40

Investment instrument( %)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA Guarantees Gross Outstanding (US$m)

48
26
26

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program,a FY2004-2007

US$(millions)

2004

Catchment Protection (LIL)
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management (APL 2)
Initiatives for Local Governance Reform
Urban Sector Development and Reform Program
Land Management & Policy Development
Support of Conflict Ridden Areas
Urban Poverty Project 3
Eastern Indonesia Region Transport 2
Total
Expect Delivery of 5-6 Projects for $525 mln

2005

46
2a
7a
29
113
200
494

Domestic Gas Sector Restructuring

a5

Urban Water Services Improvement
Provincial Health and Nutrition
Higher Education Project

30

Strategic Roads Infrastructure
Sustaining Microfinance
Environment and Sanitation
Government Financial Management & Revenue Admin.
Adjustment Loand
Total
Expect Delivery of 7 Projects for $800 mln

65
200
20
40
120
200
560

Strategic
Rewards

3
29
32
22
32
45
67

200

Strategic Roads Infrastructure (additional amount)'

100
175

East Java Development Reform Program
2006

'

H
M
H
H
H
H
H

230

20
75
35
40

60

M
H
M
M
M
M
H
H
H

230

High Case (additional $135 million IDA will be allocated among all eligible projects)
Adjustment Loan

Implementation
Risksb

Strengthening Capacity for Decentralized Education
East Java Development Reform Program
Urban Local Government Reform 2
Water Supply & Sanit. for Low Income Communities 3
Initiatives for Local Governance Reform 2
Farmer's Empowerment & Technology
Urban Water Supply
Local Community Support Project (KDP4)

70
175
100
a0
100
40
100
50

30

Total
Expect Delivery of 8 Projects for $850 mln

715

230

50
20
50
30

50

H
M
H

H
M
H

H
H
H
H
H
M
H
H

High Case (additional $135 million IDA will be allocated among all eligible projects)
Adjustment Loan

250

H

H

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program,a FY2004-2007
US$(millions)

Yogyakarta Regional Development & Poverty Reduction
West Java Environment Management Project (APL 2 )
Energy Sector Project
2007

Energy Sector Project
Marginal Fisher's Community Development
Water Resources and Irrigation Sector Mgt. (APL 2 )
Catchment Protection 2
Community Based Education for Marginalized Youth
Health Sector Project
Umbulan Spring/Greater Surabaya Water Project
Urban Community Development Project
Provincial Health & Public Health Functions
Total
Expect Delivery of 8 Projects for $850 mln

Strategic
Rewards

Implementation
Risksb

H
M
H

M
H
H

50
70
200

200
100
70

50

50
50
60

30
25
25
40

100
100
30

50
10

760

230

H
H
H
H
M
M
M
H
M

High Case (additional $135 million IDA will be allocated among all eligible projects)
Adjustment Loan
National Roads

250
150

H
M

Other projects under discussion
Civil Service Training Reform (LIL) (FY04), Capital Markets Development (F YOS),
Information, Communication, and Techology for Devt. (FYOS), Audit Reform and Capacity Building (FY06),
Dam Safety Project 2 (FY06), Rural Electrification Project (FY06), Social Development & Inclusion (FY07),
Environment Sector Loan (FY07), Urban Transport (fY07), Land Policy & Management2 (FY07), Papua Program (FY07)

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next four FYs and includes about 20% overprogramming per FY.
b. Note that project titles are subject to modification as projects are further developed over the CAS period.
c. IBRD/IDA breakdown is indicative.
d. Adjustment loan applicable only under "enhanced" Base Case.
e. Note that under the High Case $100 million would be provided in addition to the $200 million Base Case loan.

H
M

Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

-

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services INDONESIA
Pmriiint

(FYO3-06)

Comaletion FV

Audience a

Cost /US$OOOl

Objective

Recent completions
Public Expenditure Review
Regional Public Expenditure Review
Development Policy Review
Bali Impact Monitoring
Urban Competitiveness Study
Promoting Peaceful Development in Aceh
IPRSP Support
Rural Services for the Poor
Financial Sector Strategy
PPI Framework
Road Management Study
Sectoral Perspectives on Corruption

2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2004

300
200
70
46
60
40
264
91
276
26
73
110

Government
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Donors, Public
Government, Bank, Donors, Public
Government, Bank
Government, Bank
Government
Government, Bank
Government, Bank
Government, Bank
Government, Bank
Government, Bank, Public

PS,KG
KG
PS,KG
KG
KG
PS,KG
PD
KG
PS,KG
PS,KG
PS,KG
KG

Underway*
Aceh RPER
Justice and the Poor
Education Sector Study
PRSP support
Forest Policy Strategy
Averting an Infrastructure Crisis
Mining Indonesia's Wealth Responsibly
Trade Competitiveness Study

2004
2004
2004
2004
2004
2004
2004
2004

30
150
300
250
50
300
65
260

Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Bank, Public
Government
Government, Public
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Public

PS,KG
PS,KG
PD,KG
PD,KG
PD,KG
PS,KG
PS,KG
PS,KG

2004
2004-2007***
2004-2007'**
2004-2007"'
2004
2005
2007
2007

890 11
565 12
520 /3
335 14
80
225
150
300

Government, Public
Government, Bank, Donors, Public
Government, Bank
Government, Bank
Government, Donors Public
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Bank, Public
Government

PS,KG
PS,KG
PS,KG
PS,KG
PS
KG,PD
PS,PD
PS,KG

Planned*
Policy Briefs for Incoming Government**
Investment Climate Flagship"
Local Government Reforms Flagship*'
Corruption and Legal Reforms Flagship"
CGI Brief/DPR
Poverty Assessment
Making Services Work for the Poor
Public Expenditure Review

WBI Capacity Building Program for the Government [FYO4]
Integrated Water Resource Management
Corporate Responsibility Project
Local Government Capacity Building
Participatory Review of Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations
Decentralization - Urban Program
~~

~~~~

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving (PS).
* Estimated cost only.
** Included other sub-tasks not listed in this annex. Budget ranging from $10k to $50k per task.
***Thematic tasks ongoing throughout the CAS period, with a series of deliverables. Butget for 2004 only
1/ includes sub-tasks F A , Reports, Policy Notes, and Dialogue) not listed in annex plus the Education Sector Study, Forest Policy Strategy, Averting
Infrastructure Crisis Study, and Mining Study listed under Underway tasks.
2/ includes sub-tasks (TA, Reports, Policy Notes, and Dialogue) not listed in annex plus the Trade Competitivenes Study listed under Underway tasks.

3/ includes sub-tasks (TA, Reports, Policy Notes, and Dialogue) not listed in annex.

4/ includes sub-tasks (TA, Reports, Policy Notes, and Dialogue) not listed in annex plus the Justice and the Poor study listed under Underway tasks.

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Indonesia Social Indicators
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (“A annual average for period)
Urban population (“A of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

2002

East
Asia &
Pacific

132.6
2.4
19.4
5.0

163.0
1.9
26.1
3.6

21 1.7
1.3
43.0
2.3

1,826.0
1.I
37.3
2.1

POVERTY
(“A of popu/ation)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

530
46
40

710
283
323

33.0
8.0
42.1

30.3
8.4
43.3

2.8

2.0

0.6
1.2
1.1

72
78
67

89
90
a7

93 2/
93 21
93 2/

93
92
93

39
60
32

78
90
69

76
93
67

76
90
70

26
27

68 31
60
25 2/

76
77
15

60
61

51
50
53

59
57
60

67
65
69

69
67
71

59
58
60

92
149

70
108

34
60 3/

34
44

121

478
405

368
308
450

227
175
373 41
67

184
129

312
256

230

900

1.8
2.3

80

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Group data are through 2001
I/World Bank Estimate
2/ Susenas 2002
31 Susenas 1999
4/ Health Profile of Indonesia, Ministry of Health, 2002

2,511 .O
1.9
30.8
3.5

16.0 1/
7.5 11
23.1 11

INCOMUCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (“A of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (“h of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (“A of GDP)
Education (“A of GNI)
Social security and welfare (“7 of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(“A of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(“h of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(“A under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (“A under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 7,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 popu/ation)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (“h)

Lowincome

430

1.I
2.8

ao

Annex 66
Page 1 of 1

-

Indonesia Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (% of GDP at market prices)
Gross domestic product

100
17

100
17

100
17

100
17

100
17

100
16

100
16

100
16

Industry

46

46

44

45

46

46

46

46

Services

37

37

38

38

38

38

38

38

74
22

75
22

78
20

80
20

80
20

80
21

79
22

78
22

4
18

3
19

3
17

4
16

3
17

4
17

4
18

4
18

Exports (GNFS)
Imports (GNFS)

43
33

42
35

37
30

32
27

31
26

31
26

31
26

31
26

Gross domestic savings

26

25

22

20

20

20

21

22

Gross national savings

18

21

19

17

16

17

18

19

Agriculture

Total consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment a
Private investment

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ billion at market prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

148

141

173

209

217

227

238

250

570

680

710

820

930

1,020

1,050

1,080

Real annual growth rates (%)
Gross domestic product
Gross domestic income

4.9
5.0

3.4
3.5

3.7
2.0

3.5
3.4

4.0
3.9

4.5
4.2

5.0
5.1

5.0
5.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%)
Gross domestic product
Total consumption
Private consumption

3.5
0.7
0.3

2.1
3.4
3.0

2.3
4.1
3.4

2.1
2.3
2.1

2.6
2.2
2.2

3.1
2.1
2.0

3.6
2.1
1.9

3.6
2.0
1.8

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB

70.6
65.4

62.9
57.4

64.0
58.8

67.1
61.4

67.9
62.0

69.7
63.7

73.1
67.0

76.4
70.3

Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Current account balance

55.4
40.4
15.2
8.0

50.5
34.7
12.3
6.9

51.5
35.6
12.5
7.5

56.3
40.2
10.8
5.2

57.5
40.9
10.4
3.3

59.9
42.7
9.9
3.7

62.9
45.0
10.3
2.7

65.9
47.4
10.5
2.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)

10.3

8.7

7.2

5.2

4.8

4.3

4.3

4.2

Public finance (% of GDP at market prices)
Total Revenues
Total Expenditures
o/w Current expenditures
o/w Development expenditures
Overall balance surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Foreign financing (net)
Govemment debtlGDP (excl. IMF)

19.8
21.0
18.8
2.2
-1.2
1.1
87.0

20.6
23.6
20.7
2.9
-2.9
0.7
87.5

18.6
20.4
16.9
3.4
-1.7
1.o
80.2

19.1
21.1
17.4
3.7
-1.9
0.2
67.1

17.4
18.7
15.3
3.4
-1.3
-0.8
62.1

17.8
18.7
15.1
3.6
-0.8
-0.9
51.6

18.2
18.6
14.8
3.8
-0.4
-0.9
53.3

18.6
18.6
14.6
4.0
0.0
-0.7
49.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)

59.1
15.6

58.2
13.0

54.9
4.7

58.1
16.7

58.1
10.2

58.1
9.7

58.1
10.3

58.1
10.3

66.2
3.7
9.6

63.1
11.5
10.8

76.8
11.9
7.2

68.5
6.5
6.5

68.2
6.0
6.0

69.3
5.0
5.0

69.9
5.0
5.0

70.6
5.0
5.0

Balance of Payments (US$ Billion)

Price indices( YR93 =loo)

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) e
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)
a.
b.
c.
d.

Central govemment investment while regional government investment i s included in private investment
"GNFS" denotes goods and non factor services.
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Central government.
e. "LCU" denotes local currency units. An increase in US$/LCU denotes depreciation.

Annex 87
Page 1 of 1

Indonesia - Key Exposure Indicators

Total external debt outstanding (TDO) (US$m)a

142,057

133,849

131,343

128,065

121,430

114,569

106,994

99,194

Net disbursements (US$m)a

-8,934

-8,208

-2,506

-3,278

-6,635

-6,861

-7,575

-7,800

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m) b

18,730

18,212

17,364

19,537

23,238

22,572

22,858

19,817

130.3

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGS c

192.7

201.7

195.3

183.5

175.9

164.8

144.7

TDO/GDP

95.1

94.8

76.0

61.3

55.9

50.5

44.9

39.7

TDSIXGS

31.8

27.6

26.1

29.3

34.1

33.4

32.5

27.3

lBRD exposure indicators (9%)
IBRD DS/public DS

20.9

19.6

20.3

25.1

25.1

24.3

23.5

22.4

Preferredcreditor DS/public d

36.9

53.2

57.6

61.0

52.9

51.9

53.7

53.9

2.3

2.7

2.9

2.9

3.0

2.8

2.6

2.5

11,715

11,435

10,729

9,895

8,993

7,897

6,824

5,764

714

722

794

819

904

1,004

1,121

1,259

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD "DO (USSm)
IDA TDO (US$m)
IFC (US$m) e
Loans

313

240

224

178

Equity and quasi-equity

167

157

137

128

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

75

T I

I,

51

_ I

51

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private non-guaranteed debt, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital
b. Debt services include debt services from projectednew loans.
c. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services.

d. Preferredcreditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the lMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8 (LFC)
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Indonesia
Indonesia
Statement of I F C s
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 9/30/2003
(In U S Dollars Millions)

FY Approval
2003
1994
1991
1985
2002
1997
1989
1997
1989/1991/1994/2003
1997
1998
1993/1996
1995
1997/2000/2002
1997
199511997
1990/199 1/1993/1995/1999/200112003
1992/1994/1996
1995
1997
1998/2000
1998
1993/1998
1996
1993
1997
2001
1992/1995
1997
2003
2001
2003

Company
Buana Bank
KDLC Bali
LYONMLFIbis
Manulife
P.T. Gawi
PT AdeS Alfindo
PT A g o Muko
PT Alumindo
PT Astra
PT Astra Graphia
PT Astra Otopart
PT BBL Dharmala
PT Bakrie Pipe
PT Bank NISP
PT Berlian
PT Grahawita
PT IndoRama
PT KIA Keramik
PT KIA Serpih
PT Kalimantan
PT Makro
PT Megaplast
PT Nusantara
PT Pramindo k a t
PT Samudera
PT Sayap
PT Sigma
PT Viscose
PT Wings
SMM
Sunson
Verdaine

Loan
0
0
2.01
0
11.50
0
0
11.25
0
0
0
10.29
23.71
0
6.36
0
5.01
18.82
15.00
20.00
0
5.25
7.63
0
0
5.83
0
19.77
5.06
12.00
12.41
14.00

205.90

Total Portfolio

Equity
15.00
0
0
0.32
0
6.98
2.20
0
9.54
2.00
1.07
0
0
8.59
19.94
0
11.80
0
0
15.00
3.93
2.50
0
2.13
5.00
0
3.00
0
0
0
0

n
109.00

Quasi
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9.53
5.00
0
5.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

n
19.53

Partic
0
0
2.01
0
10.00
0
0
6.00
0
0
0
19.13
0
0
13.86
0
0
55.49
49.50
2.09
0
0
5.93
0
0
2.00
0
17.50
2.13
0
7.85
0

193.49

Approvals Pending Commitment
2003
Total Pending Commitment:

PT SPA

Loan
Equity
Quasi
Partic
8.00
0
0
0
8.00

0

0

0

Loan
0

0
2.01
0
5.35
0
0
11.25
0
0
0
10.29
23.71
0
6.36
0
5.01
18.82
15.00
20.00
0
5.25
7.63
0
0
5.83
0
19.77
5.06
0
12.41

n
173.75

Equity
15.00
0
0
0.32
0
6.98
2.20
0
9.54
2.00
1.07
0
0
8.59
16.59
0
11.80
0
0
15.00
3.40
2.50
0
2.13
5.00
0
3.00
0
0
0
0

n
105.12

Quasi
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9.53
4.97
0
5.00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Partic
0
0
2.01
0
4.65
0
0
6.00
0
0
0
19.13
0
0
13.86
0
0
55.49
49.50
2.09
0
0
5.93
0
0
2.00
0
17.50
2.13
0
7.85

19.50

188.14

n

0

. . . .

0

.

.

0

0

.

.
3

. . . .

. .

. . .

.

0

.

0

.........

.

Li

0

0

.

0

0

0

0

0

.

0

s

0

o

0

0

0

7J

9
0

0

0

e,

4

*

4

8
*
c

I

Y

s!

B

s
C

.r

c

i
C

e

i

<
7
.r

+

f

ic
c

0

Q

c

!$
t

EE
.F

e
f

Q

.f
t

s

.F

(1

f

7
T
4

h

Q

{
0

a

7

I.
1

.

0

. . .

.

.

0

1

.
I

.

.

.

.

..<

I

I
t

C

..
i

$

F

+

f

iC
C

c

a
C

I
4

it
e

0

0

0

U
U

.7

5

C

c

5

f

t

.-C
(1

T
T
4

h
4

2

F
c
0

t

0

0

0

7

B

0

0

0

0

0

Annex B10
Page 1 of 1

-

CAS Annex B10 Indonesia
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area

Country
performancea

Major issue

As of September 24,2003

Country priority’

Bank priorityc

Reconciliationof
country and Bank
priorities

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reduction

Good

Develop and implement
PRSP

High

High

Economic policy
Public sector

Good
Fair

Structural reform
Decentralization/Governance/
anti-corruption

High
High

High
High

Moderate

Moderate

High

High

High

High

Fair

Decentralization

Education

Fair

Health, nutrition
& population

Fair

Quality of & access to basic
education
Quality of & access to health
services

Social protection

Good

Effective targeting

Moderate

Moderate

Fair

Rural incomes and
infrastructure

High

High

Moderate
High

Moderate
High

Gender
Human Development
Department

Environmentally &
Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development

Fair

Forests, water & sanitation

Good

Community development &
participation

Finance, Private Sector
& Infrastructure
Private sector

Fair
Fair

Bank restructuring
Corporate restructuring,
SMEs

High
Moderate

High
High

Energy & mining
Infrastructure

Fair
Poor

Policy reforms
Rebuilding

Moderate
High

Moderate
High

Financial sector

Slow progress in
privatization

a. Uses “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” or “poor.”
b. indicates principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, “rural poverty;” for education, “female secondary completion;”
for environment, “urban air pollution”).
c. Uses “low,” “moderate,” or “high.”
d. Provides explanation if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue

AnnexB11
Page 1 of 1

Indonesia: Key Environmental Indicators
Indonesia

East Asia &
Pacific

Low -Income

Population (millions)
Urban population (“’0 of total)
GDP ($ billions)
GNI per capita, Atlas method ($)

21 1.7
43
173
710

1826
37
1,665
900

251 1
31
1,082
430

Agriculture
Land area (1,000 sq. km)
Agricultural land (“’0 land area)
Irrigated land (“’0 of crop land)
Fertilizer consumption (100 grams/ha arable land)
Food production index (1989-91=loo)
Population density, rural (people/sq. km arable land)

1,812
23
14.4
1,207
117
594

15,885
48
38.4
2,286
161
640

33,031

Forests
Forest area (1,000 sq. km)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Annual deforestation (“’0, 1990-2000)

1,050
57.0
1.2

4,238
27.2
0.2

9,131
27.1
0.8

Biodiversity
Mammal species, total known
Mammal species, threatened
Bird species, total known
Bird species, threatened
Nationally protected area (“’0 land area)

436
147
1,519
114
19.7

9.2

9.2

4.2
706
-58
384
31.1

87 1
-2
760
66.2

4.0
569
-9
352
45.0

0.4
1.2
5,411
102
14

0.6
2.1
57,075
69
10

0.5
1.o
20,096
64
9

13,759

6,020

6559

2.6
93
78
69
90
55
46
69
45

81
76
67
93
46
34
72
44

90
76
70
90
44
31
72
121

23.6
5.4
0.6
12.0
1.2
0.0
1.1
0.5
4.0

36.8
9.3
2.2
3.9
0.3
0.2
1.9
0.8
22.6

22.1
8.8
2.8
6.6
0.4
0.3
1.6
0.6
6.6

Energy
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$/kg oil equiv)
Commercial energy use per capita (kg oil equiv.)
Energy imports, net (% commercial energy use)
Electric power consumption per capita (KWh)
Share of electricity generated by coal (%)
Emissions and pollution
Con emissions per unit of GDP (kg per PPP $ of GDP)
Con emission per capita (mt)
Consumption of CFCs (ODP metric tons)
Particulate matter (pop-weightedaverage-pg/m3)
Passenger cars (per 1,000 people)
Water & Sanitation
Freshwater resources per capita (cubic meters)
Freshwater withdrawal
total (%total water resources)
agriculture (% total freshwater withdrawal)
Access to improved water source (“/o total population)
rural (% rural population)
urban (% urban population)
Access to sanitation (% total population)
rural (% rural population)
urban (“’0 urban population)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

-

National accounting aggregates 2001
Gross national savings (“’0 GNI)
Consumption of fixed capital (% GNI)
Education expenditure (% GNI)
Energy depletion (% GNI)
Mineral depletion (“’0 GNI)
Net forest depletion (“’0 GNI)
Con damage (% GNI)
Particulate emission damage (% GNI)
Adjusted net savings (“’0 GNI)

25.2
663
128
510

MAP SECTION

