Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
Report No. 25790-A2

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO
THE ESECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC

April 29,2003

South Caucasus Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective March 31,2003)
Currency Unit
US$
AZM

=

-

Azerbaijan Manat (AZM)
4.905.00 AZM
us$0.0002

GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR

ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS
Advisory and Analytical Assistance
Azeri Chirag-Gunashli
Asian Development Bank
Agricultural Finance Corporation
And Development
Adaptable Program Loan
APL
Azerbaijan Manat
AZM
BEEPS Business Environment and Enterprise
Baku Stock Exchange
BSE
Banking Systems Law
BSL
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
BTC
Country Economic Memorandum
CEM
CFAA Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Commonwealthof Independent States
CIS

AAA
ACG
ADB
AFC

CIS

CPAR
CPPR
ECA
EU
FIAS
FPP
FSA
FSAP
FSTA
FY
GDP
HGA
IAS
IBRD
IBTA
IDA
IDP
IGA
IMF

Commonwealth o f Independent States

Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Europe and Central Asia
European Union
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Farm Privatization Project
Financial Sector Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Financial Sector Technical Assistance
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Host Government Agreements
InternationalAccounting Standards
InternationalBank for Reconstruction
Institution Building and Technical
Assistance
International Development Association
Internally Displaced Persons
Inter-GovernmentalAgreement
International Monetary Fund

IBRDlIDA

JSA

Joint Staff Assessment

OSCE

Organization for Security and
Cooperation In Europe

LIL
MDG
MOF
MOH
MTEF

Learning & Innovation Loan
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Health
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework

Private EnterprisePartnership
Public Expenditure Review
Performance Survey
Public InvestmentProgram
PIP
Public Procurement Law
PPL
Poverty Reduction Strategy
PRS
Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit
PRSC
Poverty Reduction Strategy Program
PRSP
Production Sharing Agreement
PSA
Private Sector Development
PSD
Structural Adjustment Credit
SAC
Small and Medium-Scale Enterprise
SME
SOCAR State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic
State-Owned Enterprise
SOE
SOFAR State Oil Fund o f Azerbaijan Republic
SPPRED State Program on Poverty Reduction and
Economic Development
SSC
State Securities Committee
PEP
PER

TA
Technical Assistance
TACIS Technical Assistance for
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID United States Agency for International
Development
WBI
World Bank Institute

The World Bank Grow Team

Vice President: Johannes F. Linn
Country Director: Donna Dowsett-Coirolo
Task Manager: Akbar NomadJudith Deane

IFC

Vice President: Assaad 3. Jabre
Director: Khosrow K. Zamani
Task Manager: Neeraj K. Jain

AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
CONTENTS

...............................................................................................
I. INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................
I1. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT ..................................................................................
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.

i
1
1

Initial Conditions and the Challenges Ahead .............................................................
1
Political Economy and Governance ........................................................................... 2
4
Poverty Profile and Millennium Development Goals................................................
Development o f O i l and Gas Reserves ......................................................................
6
Recent Macroeconomic Trends and Prospects ..........................................................
8
Risks and Creditworthiness ......................................................................................
10

I11 THE GOVERNMENT’S PROGRAM : AZERBAIJAN’S POVERTY
REDUCTION STRATEGY

12

I V THE BANK GROUP’S STRATEGY

13

.

V

.

...........................................................................................

....................................................................

Bank Group Strategy................................................................................................
Assistance Program and Triggers ............................................................................

13
23

IMPLEMENTING THE CAS

28

...............................................................................

Lessons o f The Last CAS .........................................................................................
Outcomes, Monitoring and Institutional Capacity Building ....................................
Portfolio and Fiduciary Issues .................................................................................
CAS Consultations ...................................................................................................
Partners ....................................................................................................................
Risks.........................................................................................................................

.

V I CONCLUDING REMARKS

.................................................................................

28
29
31
31
32
34
35

Figures
Figure 1: Qualitative Assessment o f the Business Environment in 1999 and 2002 ...........3
Figure 2: Azerbaijan O i l Production...................................................................................
7
a.

Tables
Table 1: Millennium Development Goals..........................................................................
Table 2: Macroeconomic Trends, 1991-2002 .....................................................................
Table 3: K e y Economic Indicators, 2001-10 ...................................................................
Table 4: Proposed Lending Program ..............................................................................
Table 5: Status o f Core Diagnostic Work .........................................................................
Table 6: CAS Triggers FY03-05 .......................................................................................
Table 7: Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks....................................................................

5
9
10
25
25
27
30

Boxes

Box 1: Institutional Framework for the State O i l Fund o f the Azerbaijan Republic ..........8
Box 2: IFC Program in Azerbaijan ................................................................................... 16
29
Box 3: Lessons Learned From The Azerbaijan Client Survey .........................................
Attachments

Attachment
Attachment
Attachment
Attachment

I- Azerbaijan: IMF-World Bank Relations
I1- MIGA and FIAS in Azerbaijan
I11- Core Labor Standards in Azerbaijan
I V - SPPRED : The Participatory Process
Annexes

Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

Al:
A2:
B2:
B3 :

Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex B10:

Key Economic and Program Indicators
Azerbaijan at a Glance
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program
IFC and MIGA Program
Summary o f Nonlending Service
Azerbaijan Social Indicators
Azerbaijan Economic Indicators
Azerbaijan Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants
CAS Program Matrix
CAS Summary o f Development Priorities

M A P o f AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC No. 27426

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.
Azerbaijan i s today one o f the seven lowest income countries o f Europe and
Central Asia. It has experienced many o f the same challenges as other CIS transition
states exacerbated by armed conflict, and a large population o f refugees and IDPs. On a
more positive note, however, Azerbaijan’s future holds tremendous promise because o f
oil and gas resources which it i s currently developing. How the country manages the
exploitation of these finite natural resources and the associated revenue boom will
determine the success o f its medium-term poverty reduction goals, set out in its PRSP.

..

Issues for Discussion. The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

11.

>
>

I s the strategy appropriately selective and aligned with the PRSP?
I s policy-based lending through PRSCs warranted to reinforce the policy dialogue?
9 I s the blend o f IBRD and IDA lending and IFC assistance appropriate?
Are the risks properly identified and mitigated to the extent possible?

>

iii. Macroeconomic and Governance Trends. After hyperinflation and severe
recession, the economy grew at nearly 9% a year during 1997-2002 while annual
inflation dropped to 0.1%. Azerbaijan by now has an impressive track record o f
stabilization with fiscal restraint and prudent monetary policy. External indebtedness i s
modest and sustainable. If oil and gas developments remain on track GDP growth could
reach double digits beyond 2005. However, oil production i s expected to peak in 201 1
and decline rapidly after 2013, absent other major discoveries. The role o f the O i l Fund
will be crucial in managing the boom, and securing more equitable growth across current
and future generations. Diversified development o f the non-oil sector i s key for
generating jobs and equity. The joint EBRD and Bank survey, BEEPS, showed
significant progress on governance and corruption issues during 1999-2002, although
much remains to be done to strengthen the business environment.
iv.
Poverty Reduction. Despite some progress in recent years, about 50% o f the
population lived in poverty in 2001 and 17% lived in extreme poverty. The incidence o f
income poverty i s greatest among households in provincial towns, although rural areas
have more limited access to services and there are significant regional variations in
poverty rates. Appropriate management o f oil resources offers promising prospects for
meeting the Millennium Development Goals.
Azerbaijan’s PRSP, known as the State Program on Poverty Reduction and
Economic Development (SPPRED), identifies six strategic pillars: (i)an enabling
environment for income-generating opportunities; (ii)macroeconomic stability; (iii)
quality o f and equity in access to health and education; (iv) infrastructure improvements
(including roads, utility services, and irrigation); (v) social protection reforms to serve the
vulnerable more effectively; and (vi) better conditions for refugees and IDPs. The
SPPRED and the MDGs serve as the organizing framework for the CAS, whose four
strategic goals are designed to underpin the six SPPRED pillars. Generally, Azerbaijan i s
on track to realize most MDGs by 20 15, with the caveat that health indicators are difficult
to measure due to data uncertainties which need to be addressed.

v.

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Straten

Page i i

The FY03-05 CAS strategy comprises four interrelated strategic goals, aiming to:
(i)
manage the o i l windfall and maintain macroeconomic stability; (ii)generate jobs and
non-oil growth (iii)
improve access to services by reversing the decline in social services
and infrastructure and (iv) help realize the oil potential to the extent and in the timeframe
envisaged by Azerbaijan’s poverty reduction program. These would be supported by a
carefully balanced combination o f policy based assistance (PRSCs) investment projects,
institution building and technical assistance, as well as analytical support.
vi.

vii.
The FY03-05 CAS Program includes eight IDA operations totaling up to $123
million and one IBRD operation o f $40 million in the Base Case. In a High Case
scenario, IDA financing would increase to up to $158 million and a second $35 m i l l i o n
IBRD operation for infrastructure would be added. The CAS triggers are calibrated
according to implementation capacity o f the Government, with the main difference
between the Base and High Cases being the scope o f reforms and pace o f implementation.
In the Base Case scenario, the prerequisites for a PRSC would be in place in early FY05.
If the reform progress and the strengthening o f governance are faster than envisaged in the
base case scenario, Bank assistance could move to the High Case, and include a first
PRSC late in FY04 and a second one in FY05. A s part o f the CAS program, IFC is
considering providing up to $150 million each in A and B loans to finance the BTC
pipeline and up to $100 million for associated o i l extraction for the A C G project.
Analytical assistance has been strong during the last year, through the PER, Poverty
Assessment, CPAR, CFAA, and Integrated Strategy and Action Plan for Trade and
Business Development, as well as an I F C supported Investors Conference focused o n
Azerbaijan’s non-oil sector. Planned work for FY03-05 includes updates o f the PER, a
CEM, an FSAP, and an Energy Sector Report, follow-on work on trade and business
environment, agro-processing, and labor markets. Portfolio performance is satisfactory,
and i s receiving increased attention, including via the decentralization o f portfolio
management responsibility to the field.

Risks. There are three categories o f risks to the strategy outlined above. Political
risks include the unresolved conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh and the possibility that a
political transition might lead to instability and/or significant shifts in policy. Ensuring
broad-based civic and political ownership o f the development strategy, through
continuation and expansion o f the consultative process o f the PRSP will help to mitigate
these risks. Economic risks are associated with o i l and gas developments, including the
possibility o f a delay in investments, changes in energy prices, and “Dutch disease’’
effects. The adoption o f a prudent fiscal stance and the stabilizing effect o f the Oil Fund,
as well as the integrated strategy for expanding the non-oil sector, are essential risk
mitigation measures. Equally important will be continuous donor engagement through
viii.

policy-based lending, as well as broad-based civic and political ownership o f the reform
process. Implementation and governance capacity present a final set o f risks to the
achievement o f the C A S objectives. Major attention i s paid to these issues as a crosscutting theme throughout the planned assistance program. Risk mitigation will include
significant attention to capacity building in all Bank Group activities, a strong focus o n
strengthening the management o f public expenditures, implementation o f action plans
resulting from the recent CFAA, CPAR and CPPR, and decentralization o f portfolio
management and important financial management and procurement functions to the field.

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The last Azerbaijan Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was discussed by the
Board on September 14, 1999 (IDA/R99-157/1 [IFC-R99-145/1). The current CAS,
covering FY03-05, was prepared jointly b y IDA and IFC, taking into account
Azerbaijan's new PRSP known as the State Program for Poverty Reduction and
Economic Development (SPPRED). I t was developed in close consultation with
government authorities, other national stakeholders and international development
partners. The next few years will be a particularly dynamic period for Azerbaijan, owing
primarily to o i l and gas sector developments. The CAS seeks to assist the country in
managing the opportunities and challenges posed b y these developments, as it begins to
implement i t s SPPRED.

11.

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT

Initial Conditions and the Challenges Ahead
2.
Although Azerbaijan's development prospects seemed bright at the dawn o f the
20th century because o f i t s oil and gas resources, subsequent events including two World
Wars and i t s absorption into the Soviet sphere were less favorable. Azerbaijan i s today
one o f the seven lowest income countries o f Europe and Central Asia. Over the last
decade it has experienced many o f the same challenges as other CIS transition economies
- severe economic contraction during the early 1990s, a concomitant deterioration in
social services and infrastructure and sharp increase in poverty, and a daunting agenda o f
reforms and institutional challenges needed to redefine the role o f the state and create the
essential underpinnings o f a market economy. In Azerbaijan's case, however, these
challenges were exacerbated by armed conflict with Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh,
which led to nearly one million internally displaced people (IDPs) and refugees, loss o f
control over some 20 percent o f the land area, and disruption o f key regional trade and
transport links. On a more positive note, however, Azerbaijan's future again holds
tremendous promise because o f new efforts to develop its significant o i l and gas
resources. H o w the country manages the exploitation o f these finite natural resources and
the associated revenue boom w i l l determine the success o f i t s medium-term poverty
reduction goals, set out in its PRSP.

3.
Although precise measures o f income and well-being during the Soviet era are
difficult for a variety o f statistical reasons, i t seems clear that Azerbaijan entered the postindependence transition period considerably poorer than many other former Soviet
republics. Azerbaijan's GDP then dropped by 63 percent during 1989-95, compared with
an average o f 42 percent in the CIS. Thus, even with economic recovery beginning in
1996 and GDP growth averaging more than 8 percent a year over 1997-2002, GDP i s s t i l l
40 percent less than in 1989 and nearly half the population remains below the national
poverty line.

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 2

4.
The signing o f a number o f Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs) with o i l
companies in the mid-1990s and initiation o f stabilization and standard reform program
marked the beginning o f a turnaround in Azerbaijan’s development prospects. These
have opened the way for investment in two major pipelines which are scheduled for
completion by around 2005: the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline will carry o i l
primarily from the Azeri, Chirag and Gunashli (ACG) oil fields in Azerbaijan to the
Turkish port o f Ceyhan on the Mediterranean Sea through Georgia, and the Shah-Deniz
pipeline will transport gas to Turkey, also through Georgia. Managing the expected
substantial, but without major new discoveries, short-lived revenue windfall resulting
from these investments, in a way that avoids the risk o f severe macroeconomic distortions
and encourages diversification and growth o f the non-oil sector, poses a complex set o f
challenges. The FY03-05 CAS will span a critical period, both in preparing for this o i l
boom and initiating implementation o f Azerbaijan’s SPPRED. The Bank Group’s
assistance program, in cooperation with those o f other international partners, will focus
on helping Azerbaijan meet these challenges.

5.
A s in other CIS countries, the tasks o f overcoming the legacy o f inefficient
production, outdated technology, monopolies, disregard for consumer preferences,
environmental neglect and the absence o f the institutions o f a market economy have
proved more difficult in Azerbaijan than initially anticipated. The record o f policy and
institutional reform has been mixed, but there clearly has been a gain in momentum since
2001. This did not stem from a need to deal with a debt or related financing crisis.
Rather, the success o f the stabilization program, growing foreign investor interest, and
the prospect and risks o f large-scale o i l revenues seem to have strengthened the
authorities’ interest in and commitment to reforms. The advent o f the SPPRED process
provided a timely opportunity for the government and other national stakeholders to
initiate a dialogue and planning o f a medium-term development strategy which
emphasizes tackling poverty and strengthening governance, with technical cooperation
from the international community. The most significant reforms have included
establishing a State O i l Fund (SOFAR); strengthening o f governance in the banking
sector; the start o f addressing implicit subsidies and the need for greater financial
transparency in the utilities sectors; some improvements in the structure o f the public
sector including consolidation o f several activities in the new Ministry o f Economic
Development; enactment o f a modern tax code; and the adoption o f more transparent
budget execution and accounting, and strengthening o f internal and external audit
capacity.
Political Economy and Governance

6.
The last few years have also seen some slow but significant developments o n the
domestic political development front in Azerbaijan. A diversified multi-party structure
has evolved, which includes opposition parties, an emerging civil society and a growing
network o f NGOs. Nonetheless, as in many other CIS countries, Azerbaijan’s executive
i s still extremely powerful vis-a-vis other branches o f government. The country’s
admission to the Council o f Europe in January 2001 marked an important benchmark in
i t s transition towards pluralistic democracy and has opened the way for monitoring

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

Page 3

implementation o f democratic commitments undertaken by the country. There has also
been an active process o f legal reform concerning the Constitutional Court, advocacy,
media, civil and criminal procedure, aimed at modernizing Azerbaijani legislation. A
national referendum on constitutional changes in August 2002 aimed to bring the
country’s basic law in line with the European Convention on Human Rights and other
commitments related to membership in the Council o f Europe. A Presidential election is
scheduled for October 2003, and the 79 year-old President Heydar Aliyev has announced
his intention to stand for re-election. The international community will provide
monitoring, to assess progress compared with the conduct o f previous elections and the
2002 national referendum.
Figure 1: Qualitative Assessment o f the Business Environment in 1999 and 2002

I

Access to Financing

Quality of Judiciary .
1-1999

Regulations

*

2002

I

Source: EBRD and World Bank, Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey, 2002. The
combined measure o f qualitative assessments of the business environment is calculated as an unweighted
average across seven dimensions. The values range from 1 to 4, with 1 indicating no obstacles to
business growth and operation, and 4 indicating major obstacles. The extremity of each axis represents a
score of 4, indicating a less favorable business environment.

7.
Regarding other dimensions o f governance, recent surveys indicate some
progress, particularly concerning corruption and the business environment. The most
comprehensive governance/investment climate surveys, including EBRD/IBRD’s
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS), the Bank Group’s
Foreign Investment Advisory Service Survey (FIAS), PRS Group’s International Country
Risk Guide and Heritage Foundation’s Economic Freedom Survey have all reported
improvements in Azerbaijan’s investment climate, particularly in the last three years,
albeit from a l o w base. The 1999 BEEPS ranked Azerbaijan at the bottom o f 20
transition economies o n measures o f state capture and administrative corruption, although
the country did considerably better on other criteria, and o n the overall Governance Index
it ranked 1lth
among the 20 countries. The 2002 BEEPS shows quite a significant
improvement, notably in those areas where Azerbaijan scored poorly in 1999. (See
Figure 1.) These trends and those reported in other surveys are encouraging, but should

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

Pane 4

not be taken as doing much more than providing a promising platform for continuing
efforts to improve the governance, anti-corruption, business environment nexus. Given
the magnitude o f the task there i s no room for complacency, and that i s the perspective
which informs this CAS and the SPPRED.

8.
Azerbaijan’s location at the crossroads o f Europe and Asia offers clear potential
for expanded trade and transit opportunities, and cooperation on regional infrastructure
and service development, but political conflicts have exacted a high price from all o f the
countries in the sub-region. Trade and other links between Azerbaijan and Armenia
remain suspended pending resolution o f the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Peace mediation
efforts are being led by the Minsk Group (including the United States, Russia and France)
o f the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Periodic dialogue
between the Presidents o f the two countries has been a positive factor, although this has
not yet led to a solution. IDA has indicated i t s willingness to support an eventual peace
accord and, if one should be agreed, a CAS update or new CAS would be prepared.
Poverty Profile and Millennium Development Goals

9.
Poverty presents a major challenge, with nearly 50 percent o f the Azeri
population o f 8 million living below the national poverty line in 200 1, and 1.3 m i l l i o n o f
them (17 percent o f the total population) living in extreme poverty. The 2001 Household
Budget Survey finds that the incidence o f income poverty i s greatest among urban
households, although rural areas are clearly more deficient in terms o f access to services
and this has led to substantial rural-urban migration. Within the urban category, poverty
incidence i s highest in provincial towns, but Baku still has the largest absolute number o f
urban poor. In rural areas there are some significant regional variations in poverty rates.
The risk o f poverty increases with household size, for both total and extreme poverty.
The age o f the household head i s a poor predictor o f the risk o f poverty. There is a weak
but positive relationship between poverty and educational attainment o f the household
head. The risk o f income poverty i s higher for households headed by unemployed
workers and pensioners. Men and women are affected in different ways by poverty and
more research is required to understand this issue and tailor appropriate solutions.
Employment data suggest that females have a higher risk o f unemployment and tend to
concentrate in the social sectors where wages are below the national average (30 percent
in health professions and 70 percent in education). Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
and refugees are particularly vulnerable, as they lack assets and are dependent o n state
transfers and donor assistance. However, there is some uncertainty about the extent o f
income poverty among the IDPs and refugees compared to the general population.
10.
With regard to non-income indicators o f poverty, Azerbaijan’s situation i s mixed.
Official health statistics compare favorably with those o f countries with a similar per
capita income, but independent survey data suggests that actual rates o f infant and
maternal mortality may be considerably higher than officially reported. Azerbaijan is
very close to achieving universal primary education, although school enrollment rates
decreased slightly during 1995-2000 almost 50 percent o f children drop out o f school by
the age o f 16-17, and quality needs to be improved at all levels. While the loss o f

Page 5

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

employment opportunities i s the primary concern of the poor, there i s also clear evidence
o f a continued deterioration in public infrastructure and services (notably gas, water
supplies and heating), especially in the rural areas.

11.
There are reasonable prospects for meeting most o f the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in Azerbaijan, although monitoring progress in several areas i s
complicated by the existence o f the aforementioned discrepancies between traditional
official data and results o f independent surveys, especially in regard to the basic health
statistics. In general, the estimates o f Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey o f 2001 provide
quite realistic information to supplement the administrative data for infant mortality,
under-5 mortality and maternal mortality. The ongoing household survey also generates
useful data for understanding changes in poverty levels. Nonetheless, the government i s
acutely aware o f the need to the strengthen national statistical capacity to monitor the
MDGs and, more broadly, the SPPRED. IDA will continue to work with U N I C E F and
the UNDP, as well as with the national PRSP coordinating unit in the Ministry o f
Economic Development, the SSC and relevant sector ministries and agencies, to help
strengthen the country’s data collection and analysis.
Table 1: M i l l e n n i u m Development Goals

poverty.

primary education.

Gender equality in
primary education.

Reducing under five
mortality by two-thirds.

Present Situation

Prospectsfor Achievement by 2015

About 50 percent o f population of
Azerbaijan lived in the poverty in 200 1
Among these, a group o f 1.3 million
persons, or 17 percent o f the total
population, lived in extreme poverty.

With projected high annual GDP
growth for 200 1-2010, the poverty
rate would drop from 50% to 30%,
assuming no change in income
distribution. Azerbaijan i s thus on
track for halving income poverty
by 2015. With better targeted social
programs and stronger job creation,
this goal could be met sooner.
The country inherited an
education system that provides
nearly universal basic education.
Sector issues relate more to quality,
than access.

Enrollment rates in basic education
(grades 1-9) are fairly close to loo%,
although drop-out rates are higher for the
poor than for non-poor. Sector concerns
relate more to quality, including the need
to build the skills and knowledge
necessary to meet the challenges o f an
increasingly globalized economy.
Surveys show no significant gender
differences in enrollment rates for basic
education (grades 1-9). Concerns relate
more to girls’ access to upper secondary
and higher education, particularly in rural
areas.
According to official data, infant mortality
i s relatively low and falling (13 deaths for
1,000 live births in 2000, compared to
about 25 in 1990). However, recent
surveys estimate that the IMR was as high
as 79 per 1,000 live births in 1996, and the
under-five mortality rate as high as 105.

Although girls drop out o f secondary
school earlier than boys and fewer
attend post-secondary education,
especially in rural areas, there is no
evidence o f gender inequality at
the primary level.
Assessing progress i s complicated
by data uncertainties. To reduce
under five mortality by 213, a 4.4% f
annual reduction i s needed between
1990-2015. Azerbaijan’s progress
has been slower at only about 0.9%
annually during 1990-2000. Thus

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

mortality by three
quarters.

HLViAlDS
Reversingthe spread o f

Reversing the spread o f
Tuberculosis

sustainability (including
halving the proportion
of people without
access to safe water).

Survey estimates place maternal mortality
at 79 deaths per 100,000 births in 1990,
while administrative statistics report a
figure as low as 9 deaths per 100,000
births in that year. In 2000, the
corresponding administrative figure i s 37
deaths for 100,000 births.

The prevalence rate of Azerbaijan citizens
infected with HIV i s believed to be low by
regional standards, although newly
reported cases doubled between 1999 and
2000. The actual extent i s not known
because o f limited coverage o f seroprevalence surveys and lack o f behavioral
surveys.
The current Tuberculosis prevalence rate
i s 50 cases per 100,000 populationwith a
high case fatality rate of 20%. Case
detection rate remains at around 30%,
much lower than the intemational
standard of 70%, with only a small
fraction of cases detected through DOTS.

According to available estimates, around
76% of all households have access to an
improved drinking water source - 93% in
urban areas and 58% in rural areas.

Pane 6
Azerbaijan is at risk for not
meeting this MDG without a
concerted effort to strengthen
primary health care and make it
accessible to the poor.
If survey data i s taken as baseline,
Azerbaijan could reduce its maternal
mortality ratio o f 79 per 100,000 live
births by 3/4 by the year 2015 with
increased public health spending and
strengthened PHC and matemal and
child health programs, especially in
rural areas. Current trends are
worrisome as even official data
show an increase in MMR.

Although the prevalence rate i s
considered to be low, the trend i s
increasing and more appropriate
survey work i s important. There is a
clear need for greater attention to
H I V / A I D S prevention and care for
Azerbaijan to meet this challenge.
According to WHO Global
Tuberculosis Control Program,
Azerbaijan i s a DOTS Category 2
country, defined as pilot phase and
less than 10% coverage. Political
commitment and additional
resources are needed to expand
coverage from the current 4% to
1OOoh in order to meet the MDG
goal of reversing the spread.
Achieving this MDG is feasible if
the Government gives sufficient
priority to rural water in its public
investment program, consistent
with the SPPRED.

was used to calculate the MDG target on a pro-rata basis, and the 201 5 target was determined in
relation to the available base year.

Development o f Oil and Gas Reserves

12.
Azerbaijan’s proven o i l reserves are conservatively estimated at 900 million tons.
Absent any major new o i l discovery, production should peak at about 65 million tons in
201 1, followed by a relatively short plateau and thereafter will decline rapidly to less than
h a l f its peak level by 2018 and then to about a quarter o f the peak level in 2024, This
hump-shaped production profile will cause a similar pattern o f rising and then decreasing
o i l revenues. For the remainder o f this decade most o f the o i l revenues will leave the
country in the form o f profit and capital repatriation or, according to current rules, be

Pane 7

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

accumulated in the O i l Fund. Therefore, while Government revenues (including Oil
Fund inflows) are projected to increase b y 180 percent in 2010 relative to 2002, a
pragmatic formulation o f the medium-term public expenditure envelope follows the
trajectory o f non-oil GDP.’ Besides the need to avoid “Dutch disease” and to ensure
revenues (through the O i l Fund) for future generations when o i l and gas resources will
have been depleted, the maximum prudent rate o f growth o f public expenditures i s also
constrained by public sector institutional capacity. The base case scenario o f IDA’S
recent Public Expenditure Review therefore envisages only a gradual increase in public
expenditure from 28.4 percent o f non-oil GDP in 2001 to 35.6 percent in 2010. The fact
that the increase in private consumption per capita is projected to be rather modest for the
rest o f the decade places an obvious premium o n careful prioritization o f poverty
reduction interventions within the framework o f Azerbaij an’s SPPRED.

Figure 2: Azerbaijan Oil Production

I

Azerbaiian’s Proiected Annual Oil Production

70
60

-

50

E

4o

2

10

.P

30
20
2002

I

2004

0 Old Oil
&g ACG Phase 1
IpACG Phase 3

m New Oil

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

m Early Oil

0 ACG Phase 2

Shah Daniz Condensate

13.
To manage this hump-shaped o i l boom, Azerbaijan has established a State Oil
Fund (SOFAR), which provides a financial mechanism for separating commercial
decisions o n o i l extraction from public spending decisions. SOFAR affords the
authorities considerable flexibility to “smooth” public expenditures over time in a manner
that can maintain monetary stability. I t also allows the Government to maintain a degree
o f continuity in fiscal programs, especially with regard to the implementation o f
committed investment projects and programs. And it aims at greater transparency in the
use o f o i l revenues. As discussed below, given the hump-shaped profile o f o i l
production, prudent o i l windfall management in Azerbaijan requires an accumulation o f
large savings in the form o f financial assets abroad, in order to avoid large and
destabilizing o i l related inflows which could fuel excessively rapid growth in government
expenditures and loss o f competitiveness o f Azerbaijan’s non-oil sectors.

’ See Azerbaijan Public Expenditure Review, Chapter I V and Annex IV.

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

Page 8

Box 1: Institutional Framework for the State Oil Fund of the Azerbaijan Republic
Supervision and Control
9 The ultimate authority over all aspects o f the Oil Fund’s activities rests with the President, who i s empowered
to liquidate and re-establish the Fund, approve the Fund’s regulations, identify its management structure, etc.
9 The three level management structure consists of the President, Executive Director, and Supervisory Board.
Members o f the Supervisory Board and the Executive Director are appointed and dismissed by the President.
> The Board consists o f key government officials (Prime Minister, ministers), two parliamentary members
(nominated by the Speaker), and academia. It i s entrusted with the functions o f internal supervision to oversee
the composition of the Oil Fund’s assets and compliance with the expenditure rules.
Investment Strategy and Operational Management of Assets
> The portfolio investment strategy i s annually approved by the President based on recommendations of the
Executive Director, taking into account recommendations o f the Supervisory Board.
9 Operational management i s delegated to the Executive Director, who chairs the Investment Board (intemal
structure ).
9 Professional portfolio managers may be contracted for a certain portion o f the Fund’s assets.
Investment portfolio guidelines determine currency composition, the balance between liquid (up to 40 percent
of the portfolio) and long-term investments, and fixed and equity income instruments. Preference i s given to
fixed income instruments, while equity income instruments (corporate securities and shares) are banned unless
a highly reputable professional investment manager i s hired to handle them.
Transparency,Accountability, and External Oversight
> The President selects a highly reputable international auditor to conduct an annual audit of the Oil Fund’s
accounts. The results from the annual report on the use o f the funds and the extemal audit report are published
in the mass media. Pursuant to the Azeri laws, the Chamber o f Auditors may also audit the Fund.
9 Quarterly reports produced by the Executive Director shall be submitted to the Supervisory Board and the
President.
9 The annual report i s prepared in coordination with the MOF. After recommendations of the Supervisory Board
are incorporated, i t shall be submitted to the President. The annual report 2001 i s posted on the official
website.
Governance of Revenues/ExpenditureRules
9 Consolidation with the state budget i s ensured through the Budget Systems Law.
9 The Parliament approves the consolidated budget expenditures and consolidated deficit.
9 All investment expenditures are to be executed through the Treasury.
9 Use o f the funds i s subject to the State Procurement Law, which governs all budgetary expenditures.
9 Investments should be in projects o f national importance; while criteria for project selection are still to be
developed, project investments have to be part of the governmental PIP and MTEF and consistent with the
PRSP.
Annual Report 2001, State Oil Fund o f the Republic o f Azerbaijan, and www.oilfund.az.

>

’

Recent Macroeconomic Trends and Prospects

14.
Table 2 summarizes overall economic performance since independence.
Household survey data suggest that the national accounts somewhat underestimated both
the level o f household consumption and GDP in the mid-l990s, but there i s little doubt
that both had declined by more than half between 1991-96. Stabilization and other
reforms initiated in 1994, coupled with the signing o f the o i l PSAs, brought about a sharp
deceleration o f inflation from 1995 and reversed the trend o f contracting GDP f r o m 1996
onwards.
15.
The o i l and gas sectors led growth during 1997-2002 and now comprise one-third
o f GDP, but more recently the non-oil economy is also showing signs o f recovery.

Pane 9

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

During 1999-2002, non-oil GDP grew more than 8 percent a year, led by construction,
which in turn benefited from o i l developments. The services sector has also benefited,
while agriculture has been boosted b y farm privatization and some reversal o f the
deterioration in irrigation. Recovery in manufacturing, however, remains elusive.
Table 2: Macroeconomic Trends, 1991-2002 (Average Annual Percentage Change)

Key Indicators

1991-1996

1997-2002

GDP
Oil GDP
Non-oil GDP

-12.8

...
...

9.1
14.5
8.3

Agriculture

-9.8

6.4

Manufacturing

-20.2

0.1

Services
Inflation (CPI)

-17.2
707

0.1

ConsolidatedFiscal Deficit
(% of GDP)

-5.7

-1.7

8.5

16.
Azerbaijan has achieved a fairly solid track record o f macroeconomic stabilization
notwithstanding the oil boom and associated capital inflows. Fiscal and monetary
policies, including notably the sterilizing o f o i l earnings through the new State O i l Fund
(SOFAR), have stabilized inflation in the l o w single digits and avoided exchange rate
appreciation. The real effective exchange rate by end-1999 was at the same level as in
1994 when the PSAs were signed, and has since depreciated by some 10 percent.
17.
Restrained fiscal policies have been at the heart o f the stabilization program.
Even excluding the substantial O i l Fund savings deposited abroad, the fiscal deficit was
no more than 2.8 percent o f GDP by 2001. There has been some progress in raising nono i l revenues, but the brunt o f fiscal restraint was borne by expenditure cuts, including
social sector spending. W h i l e controlling public expenditures in the face o f rising o i l
revenues will be even more critical for future financial stability and avoiding “Dutch
disease”, better prioritizing o f expenditures within the framework o f the SPPRED is
clearly an important issue to be addressed.
18.
Azerbaijan’s current account deficits have tended to swing sharply due to
volatility both in imports related to o i l sector investments and o i l prices. Specifically, the
current account deficit declined from over 13 percent o f GDP in 1999 to 3.6 percent in
2000 and 0.9 percent in 2001, before increasing to 12.6 percent in 2002. These deficits
were financed by FDI inflows and official borrowing. Cumulative FDI inflows mainly to
the energy sector, amounted to $3.7 billion. Cautious expenditure and borrowing policies
have meant that the present levels o f external debt are relatively l o w and considered
sustainable, as elaborated below in the discussion o f creditworthiness.
19.
Looking ahead, current account deficits will rise sharply as a consequence o f
higher imports for oil-related FDI, but this in turn will lead to large and growing o i l

Pane 10

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

exports. Recent macro projections suggest double-digit oil sector growth rates after
2005, provided oil and gas potential i s fully realized. This will depend on four major
projects: full development o f the Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli oil field; construction o f the
B T C o i l pipeline; development o f the Shah Deniz gas field; and a gas pipeline from
Baku to Turkey. Implementation o f these projects will take at least three years and
require investments on the order o f $13 billion, or more than twice 200 1 GDP, financed
primarily by external sources. With careful macroeconomic management o f the o i l
windfall and assuming a steady implementation o f structural reforms, the non-oil sector i s
projected to grow at about 9.1 percent annually during 2003-05 and then to moderate to
about 5 percent annually by the end o f this decade, as oil-related FDI dries up.2
Table 3: Key Economic Indicators, 2001-10

2002

2003-05

2006-10

10.6
3.9
12.3

9.5
11.8
9.1

10.2
25.7
5.1

61
9
52
38
14

74.3
8.0
66.2
50.2
16.0

50.6
7.7
42.9
21.7
21.2

Total DOD

1.3
30.5
28.9
-1.2
27.6
-28.9
31.6

-0.7
38.6
39.0
-17.3
13.0
-30.3
31.1

-0.7
36.9
37.6
-37.9
-6.9
-3 1.o
27.6

17.9
53.8
35.9
31.8
67.9
-36.1
25.2

Oil price US$per bbl
Exchange rate,-av. AZM/l US$

24.3
4,657

25 .O
4,834

26.0
4,893

21.0
4,893

Key Indicators

GDP at constant prices
Oil GDP at constant prices
Non-oil GDP at constant prices
Investment
Public sector’
Private sector
Oil sector
Non-oil sector

Consolidated government
balance
Revenues
Expenditure
Current account
Oil sector
Non-oil sector

Memorandum Items

2001

9.9
7.9
10.4
40
5
35
21
14

(Annual percentage change)

(Ratios to non-oil GDP, percent)

Public investment in 2002 and 2003 includes BTC loan ofAZM239 and 594 billion, respectively.
Source: World Bank staffestimates.

Risks and Creditworthiness

20.
Azerbaijan’s current level o f external debt i s relatively l o w at 20.7 percent o f
GDP and 47.6 percent o f exports, and i s projected to decline by 2010 to 15 percent o f
GDP and 24 percent o f exports. The debt service ratio (excluding IMF) relative to
exports o f goods and services was under 4.4 percent in 2002 and i s projected to decline
throughout the projection period. The O i l Fund’s assets are projected to grow from 11
percent o f GDP in 2002 to 80 percent in 2010, improving dramatically the country’s net
asset position. Continuing the track record o f cautious expenditure and borrowing
See Azerbaijan Public Expenditure Review for more details about the non-oil GDP growth projection.

Pane 11

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

policies, together with long maturities and l o w interest rates on debt, would help to
ensure external debt sustainability.

21.
At the same time, the government will need to manage potential risks to
creditworthiness which have plagued a number o f other oil exporting countries. First, the
importance of developing a strong national consensus on the country’s long-term
development goals and strategy, and o f ensuring transparency in decision-making
regarding the use of the o i l wealth towards those ends, must not be underestimated if the
risk o f misusing the o i l wealth i s to be avoided. The SPPRED and SOFAR have critical
roles to play in attenuating this risk. The former was developed in a participatory
manner, provides a good beginning towards building a long-term political compact o n
h o w o i l and gas related revenues are to be used not just this year, but for years t o come.
Maintaining the active participation o f stakeholders in SPPRED monitoring and
implementation will be critical to avoid distrust about who is benefiting from the o i l
wealth and a tendency to press for quick and non-sustainable populist solutions to
poverty reduction and development o f the non-oil sector. SOFAR’S governance
framework and proper budgeting according to the new Budget Systems L a w also provide
mechanisms to mitigate this risk.3

22.
Second, the risk o f increasing corruption will require constant vigilance. A s
mentioned earlier, Azerbaijan has made some important gains in recent years in terms o f
political, regulatory and legal reforms, and there are some independent indications o f
improvements in the business environment. However, these achievements are relatively
new and there is s t i l l a major agenda to strengthen governance. This will include inter
alia improving public sector efficiency and transparency, building capacities at the
citizen and community level to be able to utilize information and hold the government
accountable for achievements in this area, strengthening the s t i l l relatively weaker
legislative and judicial branches o f government, and ensuring orderly electoral processes
at the national, parliamentary and local levels.
23.
Finally, heavy dependency o f the economy o n o i l and gas development poses
risks to Azerbaijan’s external position and non-oil sector development. A successful
fiscal strategy would support sustainable development o f the non-oil sector, with the
medium-term public expenditure envelope following the trajectory o f non-oil GDP, thus
mitigating the negative impact on competitiveness and consequently, on non-oil sector
de~elopment.~
Accumulating the excess o i l revenues in the O i l Fund abroad will provide
for fiscal sterilization, thus avoiding excessive real exchange rate appreciation. Provided

’ See Petersen, C., and N. Budina, “Governance Framework o f Oil Funds: The Case o f Azerbaijan and

Kazakhstan,” Workshop on Petroleum Revenue Management, Conference Proceedings, World Bank, 2002.

According to production sharing agreements, profits from oil and sales are divided among the Government (the Oil
Fund), the foreign oil companies (for profit and capital repatriation), and SOCAR (the state-owned oil company). The
amounts o f profit and capital repatriation are determined by the terms and conditions of the Production Sharing
Agreements (PSAs). Capital repatriation, as determined by the currently functioning PSAs, i s calculated as 50 percent
of the profit oil, whereas the rest of the profit oil i s divided among the foreign investors, SOCAR (the state oil
company), and the Government, as specified in the agreements.

Azerbaiian Countrv Assistance Stratem

Paae 12

that the trend o f re-monetization continues, the inflation rate would remain low and under
control, implying that the nominal exchange rate would be relatively constant in the base
case projection .

24.
Essential mechanisms have been put in place and will need to be strengthened to
insulate the economy from temporary oil-price shocks. In the event o f a positive price
shock, as recently experienced, prudent fiscal policy involves saving the excess o i l
revenues to preserve economic competitiveness. The implications o f a negative price
shock would depend on its magnitude and expected duration. According to the
sensitivity analysis o f the PER, the oil price could drop to US$15 per bbl without
necessitating a major correction in the medium-term fiscal stance, and still have some,
albeit less, accumulation in the Oil Fund. Cautious fiscal policy will also be needed to
mitigate the impact o f o i l price changes on the external position. The impact o f the o i l
price changes on the balance o f payments i s dampened b y the fact that a significant
amount o f the o i l revenues do not enter the country as the foreign o i l companies
repatriate. Thus, the only significant share o f o i l revenues accrues to the Government as
fiscal revenues (Oil Fund inflows, and oil-related state budget revenues). By sterilizing
the excess revenues in the Oil Fund, the Government is further dampening the impact on
the BOP. In the event o f negative oil price changes within a reasonable range, again, the
BOP impact is likely to be dampened, as this would imply lower profit and capital
repatriation o f foreign o i l companies, as well as lower Oil Fund accumulation.
Nonetheless, an o i l price drop to below US$ 12 per bbl would put into question the
commercial viability o f the o i l and gas pipeline projects, thereby risking a substantial cut
in the FDI and a corresponding impact on the BOP. (For further discussions on risks, see
para 83.)

’

111.

THE GOVERNMENT’S PROGRAM :AZERBAIJAN’S POVERTY
REDUCTION STRATEGY

25.
Azerbaijan’s PRSP on which this C A S i s based, i s known as the SPPRED6. The
SPPRED was completed in October 2002 and is scheduled to be discussed by the Board
at the same time as the CAS. The SPPRED builds on the interim strategy (I-PRSP)
presented to the Boards o f the IMF and IDA in June 2001, and represents an important
milestone in Azerbaijan’s ongoing efforts to-klaborate a comprehensive, home grown
It marks the start o f a
strategy for poverty alleviation and economic growth.
comprehensive dialogue on the overall development strategy between the government
and all key stakeholders. As described in Attachment IVYthe SPPRED was prepared in a
participatory manner with active involvement o f civil society and all the main bilateral
and multilateral agencies providing assistance to Azerbaijan.
26.
The SPPRED identifies six key strategic aims: (i)the facilitation o f an enabling
environment for growth o f income-generating opportunities; (ii)the maintenance o f
macroeconomic stability; (iii)
the improvement in the quality o f and equity in access to
’Except a much smaller share o f profit oil that goes to SOCAR.
See Report No. 25593-AZ

Pane 13

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

basic health and education services; (iv) the improvement o f infrastructure (including
roads, delivery o f utility services, communications, irrigation); (v) the reform o f the
current system o f social protection to give more effective protection to the vulnerable;
and (vi) the improvement o f the living conditions and opportunities for the one million
refugees and Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) o f the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
Details o n the policies, objectives and actions envisaged in the SPPRED and o n those
areas where the Bank Group plans to focus i t s support are provided in Annex B9.

27.
Azerbaijan’s SPPRED and a Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) are being distributed
separately. A s the JSA notes, the SPPRED presents a credible poverty reduction strategy
and i t s broad policy priorities are appropriate and consistent with the multi-dimensional
nature o f poverty alleviation. The main areas where further progress will be needed
during implementation and subsequent updates o f the SPPRED include: (i)
improved
poverty analysis and data collection, particularly on labor market, education and health
issues, in order to facilitate targeting and monitoring o f progress towards the MDGs; and
(ii)further refinement o f costing and prioritization o f actions consistent with annual
budget envelopes, within the MTEF and PIP. A major, long-term effort at government
institutional capacity building will be essential to strengthen performance in strategy
formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and resource management.
Finally, it will be important to ensure continued and full participation o f all stakeholders
in further policy development and implementation o f the SPPRED.

IV.

THE BANK GROUP’S STRATEGY

Bank Group Strategy

28.
The Bank Group strategy for FY03-05 has been designed to support the SPPRED.
I t reflects experience with the ongoing portfolio and an assessment o f the areas in which
the Bank Group can have most impact, taking into account the activities o f Azerbaijan’s
other external partners. The Bank Group strategy covers all six o f the pillars o f
Azerbaijan’s SPPRED, but it i s organized into four strategic goals, reflecting in part, the
important role played by the IFC’s investments in the country’s o i l sector, which are a
pre-condition for the poverty reduction strategy envisaged in the SPPRED. The four
strategic goals are:

l+ Manage the oil boom to maintain macroeconomic stability, avoid “Dutch
disease” and facilitate non-oil growth, employment and pro-poor
expenditures.
l+ Generate jobs and non-oil growth by improving the business
environment and access to financial services, building SME support
infrastructure, and stimulating agriculture.
> Improve access to services by reversing the decline in social services and
assistance and in infrastructure.

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

Pane 14

3 Help realize the oil potential to the extent and in the time-frame that
SPPRED presumes.

The issues in the different sectors and areas that need attention under each o f the four
strategic goals and the role to be played by the Bank Group are outlined below.
Governance issues and capacity building are central elements o f the Bank’s program,
which cut across all four CAS areas and are being pursued in especially close cooperation
with other donors.
Strategic Goal # 1: Manacling the Oil Boom

29.
This strategic goal seeks to create a sound enabling environment for the SPPRED
and to support specific components o f i t s first two pillars, by helping to lay the
foundations for improved management o f Azerbaijan’s expected o i l and gas revenues.
The ongoing SAC I1 and accompanying IBTA I1 technical assistance credit are principal
instruments for support o f this goal, concentrating on: (a) improved, more transparent and
integrated public expenditure management, including o f extra-budgetary funds into a
consolidated budget; (b) initiation o f a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and
a public investment program (PIP); (c) establishment and functioning o f a supreme audit
institution; (d) utility reforms, especially the reduction o f implicit subsidies and
improvement o f financial viability in the energy sector; (e) improvements in the business
environment; and (f) strengthening the fiduciary framework through adoption o f action
plans based o n the FY02 CPAR and FY03 CFAA.

30.
Continuation and deepening o f the above reform program will be essential for
success in managing the o i l boom. Besides sound macroeconomic policies, and efficient
and transparent budgeting and fiduciary arrangements, this will require measures to help
address the nexus o f governance issues and the business environment, the restructuring o f
the parastatal SOCAR (which occupies a vital place straddling the o i l and non-oil
economies); financial discipline o f public enterprises; and trade, pension and labor
market reforms. The IDA would support this agenda through one or two PRSCs (one if
Azerbaijan remains in the base case and a second if i t moves into to the high case),
complemented by intensive AAA. The latter would include an FY04 Energy Sector
Report o n medium- and long-term sector development issues and use o f o i l revenues;
FY05 PER and C E M updates, and technical advisory support on balanced regional
development issues to ensure that the benefits o f the oil boom reach beyond the confines
of the Absheron peninsula. These are all areas where the Bank Group and IMF will
collaborate closely in supplying policy advice and capacity building.
Stratepic Goal # 2: Generating Jobs and Sustainable Non-oil Growth

31.
This goal corresponds to the second pillar o f the SPPRED and would assist the
government and key stakeholders in promoting non-oil trade and investment, with a
special focus o n small and medium-scale farmers and entrepreneurs. The four broad
policy components include: (a) improving the trade policy regime and market access by
creating a more export-friendly tariff structure, accelerating Azerbaijan’s accession to the

Page 15

Azerbaiian Countrv Assistance Stratem

WTO, increasing access to regional markets and the European Union; improving access
to finance; streamlining administrative procedures; (b) enhancing trade facilitation by
streamlining and strengthening customs procedures and improving the quality and
capacity o f Azerbaijan’s transportation infrastructure; (c) modernizing the overall
business environment through, inter alia improving business registration and licensing;
land acquisition and site development; labor market policies; taxation; access to credit;
support for SMEs; contract enforcement and dispute settlement; and public sector
governance; and (d) developing industry-specific strategies for improving inter-firm
cooperation, promoting innovation and quality, encouraging specialization and
strengthening supply chains.
Private Sector Development. In the context o f the SPPRED, the Government
32.
has prepared a comprehensive SME Action program, which will be supported by IDA
and the IFC, working in close cooperation. IDA will provide assistance through an FY04
Private Sector Development Project and Business Environment Survey, focusing on: (a)
key issues in the business environment, including programs to significantly improve the
effectiveness o f the publidprivate sector interface and Government services; (b)
competitiveness in domestic markets and non-oil exports, by building business-related
infrastructure to improve SME access to market information and competitiveness related
know-how;(c) developing programs to stimulate entrepreneurship and SME development;
and (d) improving access to financial services and credit, especially for SMEs and in
smaller urban and rural areas.

33.
In this context, IFC’s strategy emphasizes support for economic diversification o f
the non-oil sector (see Box 2). To this end, I F C will help catalyze FDI in non-oil sector
export activities, help generate foreign exchange earnings and contribute to the
modernization o f the country’s manufacturing base and basic infrastructure. IFC’s
strategy for the non-oil sectors involves: (a) promotion o f competition in the banking
sector, establishment o f joint ventures in the non-bank financial sector, technical
assistance to private local banks for institutional capacity building; (b) improving access
to finance through credit lines to local private banks for on-lending to SMEs; (c) efforts
to improve the business climate and reduce impediments to foreign investments; (d)
support o f agri-business and agro-processing; and (e) support for private provision o f
public services.

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

Pane 16

Box 2: IFC Program in Azerbaijan
IFC has been active in Azerbaijan since 1995 and to date has approved over US$130 million i n
financing for projects for its own account.
In addition to IFC support for the oil sector, during FY03-05, the specific non-oil activities o f IFC will be
as follows:
Credit Lines to Local Private Banks: IFC is currently processing two follow-on credit lines totaling
US$2.4 million to two local private banks.
Foreign Investors’ Conference: IFC will be organizing a foreign investor’s conference in Baku from
May 7-9,2003. This proposed conference i s a follow up to a diagnostic study on the environment for
FDI led by FIAS. The conference would help focus on the need for greater non-oil investments in
Azerbaijan and help catalyze foreign investors’ interest through a cooperative effort with the Swiss
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO).
SME Linkage Program: In connection with the BTC Pipeline investments, IFC i s considering ways
to have the local businesses (mainly SMEs) benefit from supply chain linkages to the large
investment expenditures surrounding the BTC project. IFC will first undertake an SME map detailing
the SME business environment and hurdles to growth at both the firm and institutional levels. The
map will also identify potential follow-on initiatives via workshops and seminars with the business
community. These SMEs may be funded through credit lines to the banks or a specialized SME fund,
which could have participation from private investors involved in BTC. SMEs in several oil and gas
sub-sectors will receive specific technical assistance to improve their productivity and quality
assurance in a programme funded jointly by IFC, BP, Statoil, Unocal, the AIOC Enterprise Center
and GTZ (German Development Corporation). ‘In addition, some community development programs
are also expected to ensure that a wider segment of the population i s able to benefit from the BTC
investments and training will be provided to local business development service providers which in
tum will assist SMEs.
Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) Program: IFC, through the PEP program i s expected to
engage in helping on two main fronts: i) Corporate Governance Program for the banks and their
clients; and ii)Leasing Sector Development project.
Baku Stock Exchange (BSE)/State Securities Committee (SSC) Institution Building Technical
Assistance: Capacity building program includes capital markets training to the staff o f both
institutions and market participants, simulation of IPO case, preparation o f IPO guidebook, review of
intemal rules and regulations, and public awareness seminar.
Bank Privatization Advisory - United Universal Bank (BUS bank): i s planned to be privatized in
2004. IFC has been requested by Azerbaijan’s Central Bank to assist with i t s privatization. The
project development i s planned for 2003.
Other General Manufacturing Opportunities: IFC has been approached with possibilities for a few
other manufacturing projects, to support the non-oil sector o f the economy. However, in most cases,
the local sponsor’s investment needs are too small for direct IFC involvement.
Other areas of interest to IFC include support to transparent privatization o f major industrial enterprises;
agribusiness and agro-processing, utilities infrastructure, and telecommunications. Environmental
upgrading i s also a sector where IFC would consider playing a role, should the Bank Groups broader work
in the area of preventing environmental degradation result in possible opportunities for private sector
involvement.

34.
Financial Sector Development. The SPPRED includes a comprehensive plan to
strengthen the financial sector, which will be supported by IDA and the IFC. The
banking system consists o f the International Bank o f Azerbaijan (IBA), which accounts
for 60 to 70% o f the market, followed by BUS Bank (established as a remnant o f 3
liquidated state owned banks), which has a partial banking license and 10-15 percent o f
market share. The remaining 40 banks account for about 10% o f the banking sector

Page 17

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

balance sheet and market penetration. Access to financial services outside o f Baku is
largely non-existent. The financial sector priorities include: (i)significantly improved
access to financial services and credit services for both entrepreneurs and small
businesses, especially in rural areas; (ii)increased competition in banking markets; and
(iii)further progress regarding safety and stability o f the banking system and o f nonbanking financial markets; and increased integration with regional and international
markets. Under the ongoing FY02 Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project
(FSTA), the IDA i s helping to develop a comprehensive infrastructure for the banking
system. This includes a large value and small value/bulk-payment system, a credit risk
reference bureau, a settlement and clearing system and building capacity o f the postal
system to provide access to basic financial services. This will allow banks to become
active country-wide and to introduce new banking products at l o w cost. Under FSTA, the
IDA will also assist with the work on privatization o f the two major state owned banks
and supporting introduction o f I A S in the banking system. This work will benefit from a
Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) scheduled to begin in late FY03, at the authorities’
request.

3 5.
I F C may consider getting directly involved in the privatization transaction for
B U S Bank. IFC has initiated a TA component to improve corporate governance o f banks
and stimulate the development o f smaller private banks. IFC may introduce other training
facilities for private banks. The Corporation already provides access to credit to larger
private banks and will continue to do so. In addition IFC will consider an alternative
S M E financing mechanism through the establishment o f an investment vehicle or a fund
to invest risk capital in Azeri medium-size companies. IFC intends to find other private
partners and donors for this initiative. This would introduce new products and new types
o f non-banking institutions to improve private sector access to finance. B o x 2 describes
I F C activities in areas other than the development o f oil and gas potential.
Trade Facilitation and Barriers to Trade. In FY03, both a Trade Facilitation
36.
Strategy Report and Trade Diagnostic Study were prepared for Azerbaijan; these will be
the subject o f active dissemination and consensus building in FY04 and the IDA will
continue to provide informal trade policy advisory support to the South Caucasus
countries throughout the CAS period. Aside from impediments in the overall business
environment, a variety o f administrative barriers raise effective transport costs and
penalize importers and exporters. Would-be exporters suffer from a shortage o f
information on regional and international markets and market access requirements and
the lack o f capacity to meet the demand o f quality-conscious markets. Inadequate
transport infrastructure i s another major obstacle. The Ministry o f Transport i s new;
regulatory and commercial functions are not yet properly separated; and there i s no
framework to develop an integrated transport policy and effective regulation for the
sector.

37.
Any strategy for generating jobs and economic growth needs a regional
dimension, since political tensions have led Azerbaijan and i t s neighbors to forego many
opportunities for trade and cooperation o n infra-structure. The BTC pipeline i s an
example o f the benefits that cooperation o n energy infra-structure can bring to the

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Strategy

Pane 18

countries o f the sub-region. Extending this cooperation on energy to Kazakhstan and
other Caspian neighbors offers another potential area for economic growth. Azerbaijan
could generate additional employment and economic benefits by serving as a transit
corridor for trade to Central Asia. More efforts are needed to ease trade and transport
barriers to regional trading partners, especially major potential markets such as Russia,
Turkey and Iran. To support this regional outlook, IDA is engaged in non-lending
initiatives in trade promotion and trade facilitation, in addition to multi-country initiatives
to promote regional cooperation in telecommunications, tourism and environmental
protection.
Agriculture, Irrigation and Rural Development. Agriculture contributes about
3 8.
18% o f GDP and provides income and employment for 40% o f households. Almost all
crop production comes from irrigated land. The SPPRED puts the development o f
agriculture in the context o f an integrated rural development policy including linkages to
non-farming activities such as agro-processing, industry, handicrafts, retail, distribution,
transport, construction and other aspects o f rural infrastructure, taking into account
environmental concerns.

39.
Azerbaijan has been amongst the leaders in the CIS in farm privatization and
registration of arable land. The example provided by the IDA financed Farm
Privatization Project (FPP) (FY97) spread quickly over most o f the country in an
excellent example of scaling up. Nonetheless land rights and responsibilities for pasture
and forest land remain unclear. Rehabilitation o f the large irrigation system, reliable
delivery o f water to farmers and sustainable land and water management remain major
challenges. The FPP also includes a component for irrigation rehabilitation for new
private farmers, while the FYOO Irrigation and Drainage Project i s beginning
rehabilitation of larger-scale systems infrastructure. A third ongoing project supports the
first IDA-financed Adaptable Program Loan in Azerbaijan, through an F Y 9 9 Agricultural
Development and Credit which focuses on research and extension, land registration and
credit. Major challenges in the sector include development o f sustainable irrigation and
applied research and extension systems; evolution towards higher value added crops,
livestock and agro-processing; improving rural infrastructure and social services; and
sustainable delivery o f affordable rural financial services. The proposed strategy builds
upon and deepens the significant progress under IDA-supported projects in the sector. An
FY03 Irrigation Systems Distribution Project will improve on-farm water delivery and
sustainability o f irrigation through rehabilitation, and support to water user associations
so that farmers take responsibility for operation and maintenance The second phase o f
the Agricultural Development and Credit A P L will focus o n rural finance, a unified
cadastre system and further development o f agricultural knowledge services and i s
scheduled to begin in FY06, just after the end o f this CAS period. Finally, the FY05
Rural Community Infrastructure Project will support investments in value-added
agriculture and agro-processing. Analytical work is planned to identify opportunities and
constraints in agro-processing.
40.
Environment. As noted in the JSA, the SPPRED emphasizes environmental
sustainability.
Likewise, the CAS program addresses issues o f environmental

Paae 19

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

sustainability in the gamut of its activities. Paying special attention to the rural energy
sector, the Bank has also supported specific interventions bearing on the environment.
Azerbaijan has a varied topography and climate and i s part o f the globally significant
Caucasus ecosystem, lying at a biogeographic crossroads. I t is bounded on the east by the
Caspian Sea, rich in fisheries resources as well as o i l and gas. With limited rainfall over
much o f the country, and dependent on river flows from upstream countries, it is water
stressed. Azerbaijan completed a National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) in 1998
and a Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan in 2000. In 2001, it established a Ministry o f
Environment.
41.
The IDA i s assisting capacity-building in the new Ministry o f Environment and
financing an FY98 Urgent Environment Investment Project which supports sturgeon
recovery, cleanup o f polluted industrial sites and onshore o i l fields and the strengthening
of environmental management capacity. It i s also supporting an important environmental
component in the FYOl Irrigation and Drainage Project. The regulatory framework for
environmental management and assessment i s in place but compliance needs
strengthening. Increasing rural poverty has also placed pressure on natural resources.
Through the GEF-financed Caspian Sea Environment Program, Azerbaijan i s working
with the other littoral states on improved management o f fisheries resources,
management o f coastal zones, coastal and marine biodiversity and invasive species, and
o i l spill prevention.
42.
Going forward, IDA’S strategy comprises a free-standing operation and the
following: (a) at the macro-level, to continue to support the energy reforms and improved
governance that contribute to improved environmental management; (b) to strengthen the
capacity o f the Ministry; (c) to ensure adherence to adequate environmental standards for
the energy pipelines; (d) to improve management o f irrigation and drainage water and
local water user associations ; (e) with GEF support, to pilot participatory approaches t o
sustainable forest, pasture and protected area management and promote sub-regional
cooperation in the globally significant ecosystems o f the Caucasus mountains; and ( f ) to
support sustainable delivery o f basic heating and water supply services to households at
affordable prices. The Government is also developing a comprehensive program o n
Conservation o f Bio-diversity o f the Caspian coastal zone. Feasibility studies have been
initiated to identify issues which should be addressed in a future project on improvement
of access by sturgeon to spawning grounds in the Kura River, establishment o f a
protected area in the Kura River Delta, and improvement o f the livelihood o f fishing
communities o f the Delta.
Strategic G o a l #3: Improving; Social Services a n d Infrastructure

This strategic goal pertains to the last four pillars o f the SPPRED program. It
43.
tackles both the final outcomes (improved infrastructure; access to health, education and
opportunities for IDPs) and the governance and institutional strengthening required to
make them happen. Issues o f implicit subsidies, financial condition, restructuring and
privatization o f utilities all have an important bearing o n inadequate maintenance and
investment in infiastructure. I t is proposed to address these both through adjustment

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Strategv

Pane 20

lending and sector investment projects. The restructuring o f SOCAR occupies pride o f
place. Such energy sector reforms also contribute to improved governance. An operation
to rehabilitate the electricity transmission system and to improve fuel efficiency is
planned. This would be the first IBRD financed project in Azerbaijan. The energy sector
reforms under SAC I1 provide the pre-conditions o f the success o f this proposed project.
The collapse o f institutions responsible for local level delivery and O&M for
infrastructure such as state farms requires, inter alia, the strengthening o f community
involvement and support for nascent local governments. This will be one o f the
objectives o f the proposed FY05 Rural Community Infrastructure Project, complemented
by AAA support o n municipal development issues. In education, the issues are not so
much o f access as o f poor quality. As such, teacher training, curriculum reform and
improved teaching and learning materials will be central components o f an FY03
Education A P L to support a comprehensive ten-year education reform program. Finally,
IDA has played a leading role in analytical work on pension reforms and this will be
followed by an FY04 project to support pension reform. Analytical work o n social safety
nets and labor markets is also planned. Some specific issues and elements o f the Bank’s
strategy in the many sectors involved in the provision o f infrastructure and social services
are discussed below.
44.
Energy. The policy agenda in the SPPRED is based on the Government’s detailed
program for strengthening financial discipline in the energy sector supported by SAC 11.
IDA has had two investment operations in the sector - Petroleum TA (now closed) and
Gas Rehabilitation (due to close in June). The main policy dialogue, however, has
evolved through the ongoing SAC I1 and within the context o f IFC’s plans to finance
A C G Phase 1 and BTC. Aside from the over-arching issue o f o i l revenue management,
the energy sector i s crucial for the other strategic goals o f the CAS both as an input for
non-oil growth and jobs and as a consumption item for poor households. The sector
issues include implicit subsidies (estimated at 11% o f GDP in 2001) resulting from a
combination o f non payments, tariffs which do not reflect full economic costs, tariff
cross-subsidies and excessive operating losses. These are now being addressed with
initial focus in the non-payments issue. Under SAC 11, measures are being taken t o
improve the financial viability o f these (and the water) utilities.
45.
While notable progress is being made with energy sector reforms under SAC 11,
some additional important measures are under consideration by the Government,
including a restructuring o f SOCAR, further reduction o f implicit subsidies beyond the
SAC I1 program and concomitant social assistance reform, which would be supported
through the proposed PRSC(s) There are significant environmental issues in the energy
sector with i t s outdated technologies, malfunctioning equipment, limited pollution control
mechanisms, inadequate waste management and poor quality raw materials. Moreover,
environmental degradation has been growing as many households have attempted t o cope
with reduced gas supplies by switching to fuel, wood or oil. In contrast to the
considerable emphasis o n attracting investment to the upstream o i l and gas sector, the
Government’s vigorous attention to the domestic energy sector i s more recent and the
actions, commitments and stated policies include: (a) the transfer o f the power
distribution business to the private sector; (b) actions to reduce energy sector n o n

Paae 21

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

payments; (c) proposals to increase tariffs (along with a safety net for the poor); (d) the
stated intent to transfer Azerigaz and power generation into private hands; and (e) a
commitment to restructure SOCAR.
Transport. The SPPRED actions involving the transport sector include: (i)
46.
restructuring and modernization o f sector institutions, including the newly-established
Ministry o f Transport; (ii)
rehabilitation o f the East West Highway; (iii)
improvement o f
rural roads, including their management and financing; and (iv) facilitating trade. IDA’s
on-going road project focuses on the rehabilitation o f crucial sections o f the East-west
Highway. It also includes five small pilot subprojects for rural roads. A recent Bank
study on trade and transport facilitation in the South Caucasus (TTFSC) highlighted both
the current impediments and the future potential for economic growth and increased
revenues. A strategy and action plan has been developed and a public-private committee
to support trade and transport facilitation has been established.

47.
Water. Eighty seven percent o f the residents o f Baku perceive piped water to be
unsafe. O n average, water is available in Greater Baku about 22 days per month for four
hours per day. These water shortages tend to affect lower income households more
adversely as they spend a higher proportion o f income on coping strategies. The sector’s
technical problems are tied to the financial ones o f the utilities. The Government has
begun institutional reforms in the water supply and sanitation sector, including creation
o f an independent joint stock company for Greater Baku and decentralization o f
responsibility for municipal water and wastewater services to local governments. The
reform strategy aims to eliminate implicit subsides over five years and strengthen
financial discipline. A major element in the Government’s and IDA’s strategy will be
continuation o f these reforms supported by SAC-I1 and IBTA-11.
48.
Education. The SPPRED emphasizes the importance o f improving the quality o f
education, and equity in access to it. I t supports the long term education reform program,
launched in 1999 with IDA’s support. The ongoing Education Reform LIL has piloted
some elements o f a new school curriculum; the training o f teachers in modern teaching
and learning; and new equipment for selected institutions. Azerbaijan s t i l l maintains an
extensive network o f education institutions across the country, but the quality o f physical
infrastructure, teaching and learning environment has deteriorated sharply along with
teachers’ salaries and the availability o f learning materials. At the upper secondary and
higher education levels, there are sharp drops in student enrollments, particularly for the
poor. To address these issues, and based o n the lessons learned from the ongoing LILYa
comprehensive education reform project i s currently being prepared. This new FY03
Education Project which i s being presented to the Board together with the current CAS,
will be the first phase o f an APL. Analytical work is also planned on labor market and
higher education issues.
49.
Health. An ongoing FYOl LIL in the health sector (in partnership with UNICEF)
aims at building capacity o f the Ministry to carry out health care reforms and pilot them
in selected districts. The deterioration in health care of recent years has been associated
with a sharp fall in the real salaries o f medical staff, reported rise in informal payments

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratew

Page 22

and governance problems. While data are unreliable, there are indications that decreased
access to health care, especially for the poor, has led to a worsening o f some key health
indicators. Simply increasing spending on health will not ensure improved outcomes
because o f the urgent need for a fundamental realignment o f the approach toward the
delivery o f health services. The SPPRED recommends a move towards an outpatientoriented approach with emphasis on primary health care. I D A ’ s strategy in the future
will depend partly on the results o f the Health LILYwhich will help to ascertain the
Ministry’s ability to reform health care b y making it pro-poor and oriented to primary
care. Meanwhile, the Bank is supporting the sector through informal AAA work aimed at
disseminating knowledge on health issues and their management in other countries. If
there is evidence o f serious political commitment to improving governance and outcomes
in the health sector, the Bank will explore additional ways to support the sector.

50.
Social Protection. The SPPRED rightly envisages a comprehensive reform o f
the social safety net system, including better targeting o f social protection expenditures,
and reform o f pensions. IDA has assisted in analytical work and legislation o n pension
reforms. This i s to be followed up with a Pensions & Social Assistance Project which
would assist the Government to clarify the respective roles for social insurance and social
assistance, introduce measures to make the pension system sustainable and more
equitable, and rationalize social programs focusing on providing more meaningful
assistance to the most vulnerable groups. In addition to the planned project, IDA’s
strategy in social protection consists of: (a) working with the EU team to monitor the
ongoing pilot project on means-testing; (b) reviewing with the government the possible
mechanisms for targeting, and especially proxy means-testing work; (c) supervising the
social protection and labor market components in the IBTA Iand IBTA I1 projects; (d)
assisting the work o n designing a social safety net to protect the poor from the effects o f
energy sector and associated utility reforms; (e) continuing to work on the data from the
household survey, including the analysis o f the Year 2002 results, and supporting the
continued strengthening o f the State Statistical Agency; (f) monitoring the
implementation o f the relevant social protection actions in the SAC 11; and (8)
undertaking a labor market study.
Strategic Goal ## 4: Realizing Oil and Gas Potential

51.
Underlying the macroeconomic framework and the financing o f the SPPRED is
the assumption that increased o i l and gas exports and revenues are realized as currently
scheduled. Without these revenues, the prospects for poverty reduction in Azerbaijan
would be far less promising. In this context, the fourth strategic goal provides the
underpinnings for the other three, and the Bank Group plays a key role, both in
facilitating and financing the o i l and gas development, and in ensuring that the projects’
social, environmental and macroeconomic impacts are appropriately monitored and
mitigated.
52.
The development and exploitation o f the Shah Deniz gas field for export to
Turkey i s to be assisted by EBRD. I F C together with EBRD, is considering supporting
the investments needed for the A C G Phase Iand B T C pipeline project, which will be the

Pane 23

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

primary conduit for o i l produced from ACG. IFC expects to provide up to $250 million
to finance both A C G phase I and B T C projects. The due diligence process for both
projects i s at an advanced stage and a significant amount o f work has been done and will
continue o n the environmental and social aspects o f the projects, including consultations
with affected local communities and local and international NGO’s. The project is
expected to be considered b y the Board in FY04.

53.
In the meantime, the complex production schedule and financing plan o f B T C as
well as o f the gas pipeline may require Azerbaijan to meet substantial cash calls, as
happened once for B T C in the latter part o f 2002. The Bank worked closely with the
IMF to help the Government to find alternatives to meet the cash call without
jeopardizing the principles o f the O i l Fund. In the likely event o f future cash calls, the
Bank will again work closely with the IMF to provide advice to the Government o n h o w
best to meet them.
54.
The IFC will fulfill several key roles through i t s proposed investment. IFC’s role
is to: (a) assist in mitigating political risk perceived by international investors in a crossborder project and help ensure stability o f the Project’s arrangement and operation; (b)
provide long-term financing (both directly and by mobilizing commercial bank funding
through its B loans) that i s especially needed by the smaller borrowing companies; (c)
provide a framework for the development and operation o f the project in an
environmentally and socially sustainable manner; (d) help ensure broader development
impacts by IFC’s SME and community development programs (currently being
developed to complement the Sponsors’s SME and community development programs);
(e) assist in the transparent and effective management o f the O i l Fund in Azerbaijan in
coordination with the rest o f the World Bank Group; and ( f ) act as a neutral third party in
projects, which are based upon the PSA granted by Azerbaijan, and a number o f Host
Government Agreements (HGAs) and an Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) for o i l
transport involving cooperation between three Governments, several state companies, as
well as a diverse group o f the international o i l companies.
Assistance Program and Triggers

55.
Strategic Choices. Several key strategic choices underpin the CAS. First, i s the
question o f how the Bank Group should support the management o f the o i l boom. The
planned strategy aims to do so by a combination o f policy-based lending and AAA, in
close collaboration with the IMF. Azerbaijan i s in a special turnaround situation, because
it is undergoing heavy structural adjustment whilst beginning to realize a temporary
resource boom. Policy-based lending in the form o f one or more PRSCs remains an
appropriate instrument because it brings different components in the government together
around a time-bound, actionable reform strategy in support o f the PRSP. The political
economy impact would be substantial, even though the adjustment amounts are modest.
The Government’s desire for policy-based lending, also reflects the views o f those
leading the reform efforts that this would be very helpful in bolstering reforms. I t also
represents a desire to avoid easy and frequent recourse to the Oil Fund, by instilling

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

Pane 24

discipline and strengthening systems o f public expenditure management and
prioritization before the O i l Fund is resorted to simply as a growing source o f finance.
56.
Second, with the progress made on macroeconomic stabilization and structural
reform in recent years, Azerbaijan’s creditworthiness has improved.
Further
improvements in creditworthiness are expected if the triggers for the base and high case
lending programs are met. The lending program proposed for this C A S period is
therefore based on a blend o f IDA and IBRD resources.
57.
Third, is the question o f how to exercise selectivity in the face o f the extensive
policy agenda in the PRSP/SPPRED. This involves choices on where the Bank Group
can make maximum impact, and it necessarily involves difficult trade-offs. The Bank’s
dialogue and working relationship with the relevant agencies i s an important factor in
these decisions. This, for example, underlies the decision to support education and
pension reform, but to defer more significant support for the health sector where
experience under an ongoing LIL is more recent and limited, and not yet as encouraging.
58.
Another consideration in exercising selectivity concerns what other donors are
planning to do and ongoing activities. For example, given the support to be provided to
main roads by the Asian and Islamic Development Banks, and the very recent IDA
highway project for which implementation is just starting, further lending is not
envisaged during the FY03-05 CAS period, although IDA would support rural
community infrastructure. With regard to IDPdrefugees, IDA’S assistance will be
provided through accelerated implementation o f the ongoing project and better targeting
of social assistance and selective support under sector investment projects. If there i s a
breakthrough in the resolution o f the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, the possible need for
new lending would be revisited.
59.
The FY03-05 time frame is expected to be one o f rapidly changing circumstances
in Azerbaijan during which the precise time-path, financing and impact o f o i l and gas
sector developments should become clear. FY05 i s likely to be a watershed year.
Pipelines should be coming on line; o i l revenues should begin to rise; a regional political
settlement may be closer at hand. By FY06, there will be a need to reassess the Bank’s
assistance strategy and instruments, including the mix and balance o f IBRD and IDA.
These developments will make it desirable to prepare a new assistance strategy for FY06

and beyond. Broadly, the Bank would expect to continue supporting efforts to
successfully manage the anticipated bigger o i l boom; to improve governance and to
diversify the economic base; as well as lend for the subsequent phases o f the APLs in
agriculture and education; and possible new projects in health, social protection and
delivery o f infrastructure services to less well-off households, and protection o f
biodiversity resources o f the Caspian Coastal Region.
60.
The FY03-05 Lending and AAA Program comprises eight IDA operations
totaling $123 million over FY03-05 and one IBRD operation o f $40 m i l l i o n in the Base
Case. In a High Case scenario, IDA financing would increase to $158 m i l l i o n for nine
operations, including a second PRSC. A second IBRD operation for infrastructure is also

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

Pane 25

envisaged in the High Case. A L o w Case scenario is unlikely, but should it materialize,
there would be no IBRD lending and IDA allocation would drop to $95 million.
Recently completed ESW and other analytical and advisory activities that have been
recently completed, as well as those planned in FY03-05, are shown in Annex (B4),
whilst Table 5 below pertains to the subset o f core diagnostic work.
Table 4: Proposed Lending Program

(US$ million)

HIGH CASE

BASE CASE
FY 03
Baku Water Supply
Education A P L
Irrigation 2
Subtotal:

12 I D A
18 I D A
30 I D A
60 I D A

F Y 04
PSD/SME
10 I D A
Social ProtectionlPensions 10 IDA
Energy Sector
40 IBRD
Subtotal:

20 IDAMO I B R D

F Y OS
Rural Investment
Environment
PRSC l + I B T A 3

1s I D A
8 IDA
20 I D A

Subtotal:

43 I D A

I T O T A L : 123 IDA140 IBRD

Core Diagnostic Report
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Assessment
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA)
Country Procurement Assessment Report

FY03
Baku Water Supply
Education A P L
Irrigation 2
Subtotal

l2IDA
18 I D A
30 I D A
60 I D A

FY04
PSD1SME
Social protectionlPensions
Energy Sector
PRSClIIBTA3
Subtotal:

15 I D A
15 I D A
40 I B R D
20 I D A
SO IDAMO IBRD

FYOS
20 I D A
Rural Investment
Environment
8 IDA
PRSC I I + I B T A 4
20 I D A
Infrastructure Development35 I B R D
Subtotal:
48 IDA135 IBRD
T O T A L : 158 IDA175 I B R D

Last Completed
FYOO
FY03
FY03
FY03

Next Scheduled
FY05
FY05

FY02

61.

There is broad agreement between the Bank Group and the Government about
the SPPRED and medium term development strategy, as well as the reforms needed to
achieve the country’s strategic goals. The questions concern mainly institutional capacity
and pace at which the Government will be prepared t o take o n complex and politically
demanding reforms, and the Base and High Case triggers have been designed t o reflect
these issues.
The Base Case triggers focus o n (a) the macroeconomic framework, (b)
governance and the business environment, (c) progress in implementation o f the

62.

Azerbaiian Countrv Assistance Stratem

Pane 26

SPPRED, and (d) the quality o f portfolio implementation. With regard to macroeconomic
performance, as indicated earlier, Azerbaijan has developed a strong track record o f
stabilization and prudent macro-management during the past several years, but the
prospective o i l boom poses a set o f risks which need to carefully avoided. In assessing
the quality of macroeconomic management, the Bank Group will maintain a close
dialogue with the IMF and will place particular importance on the proper integration o f
Oil Fund and any other extra-budgetary revenues into the country’s consolidated fiscal
expenditure envelope and to maintaining an overall fiscal stance geared towards
sustainable development o f the non-oil sector. The Bank would also expect to see
inflation remain in the single digits (barring major unanticipated shocks) and to observe
continued reduction o f implicit subsides to energy and water utilities in compliance with
SAC I1 monitoring indicators. Other Base Case triggers are summarized in Box 3.
Assuming satisfactory compliance with these triggers, a first PRSC in support o f
Azerbaijan’s SPPRED could be presented to the Board in FY05.
If the Government is able to accelerate significantly the pace o f structural reforms
63.
in the utilities sector and adopt a comprehensive trade and business development agenda
in FY04, the Bank would envisage moving to a High Case lending scenario with a first
PRSC in that year and a second in FY05, as well as some additional IBRD lending for
infrastructure development in FY05. The most significant High Case trigger would
involve the restructuring o f the State O i l Company o f Azerbaijan (SOCAR), which i s by
far the biggest and most important company in the country. SOCAR’s headquarters,
business unit offices and main operational facilities are dispersed throughout the country
and until recently consisted o f 171 business units grouped by type o f operations in 16
departments, within a multi-layered organizational structure, with approximately 80,000
employees. SOCAR is at the center o f the development o f Azerbaijan’s o i l and gas
reserves, with 2 1 Production Sharing Agreements involving more than 30 international
o i l and gas companies and stakes in the B T C o i l and Shah-Deniz pipeline projects. With
the present organizational structure it has been difficult to obtain the financial
transparency required by modern international standards, or to assess SOCAR’s proper
tax liabilities. In late January 2003, the Government indicated that it may wish to work
with the Bank on a program to privatize SOCAR’s non-core assets, and implement an
organizational and financial restructuring based o n International Accounting Standards.
The Bank and EBRD have agreed to provide technical assistance to prepare a
restructuring plan; this is expected to start shortly and to take about nine months, after
which full implementation would take another 12-24 months. The H i g h Case trigger
would be satisfied when a detailed design is adopted at the end o f the preparatory phase,
any legal preconditions for implementation are addressed, and the actual implementation
phase begins.
Other High Case triggers would include reduction o f implicit subsidies to
electricity, gas and water beyond the 30 percent reduction target in the SAC I1 program,
satisfactory progress in privatization o f downstream gas and water distribution, and
adoption o f an integrated trade and business development agenda. SAC I1 is supporting
the adoption o f strategies and time-bound agendas for 2003-08 for wide-ranging utility
restructuring, including separation o f regulatory and operational functions, the drafting o f
64.

Page 27

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Strategy

a modern regulatory framework, private sector participation in distribution, and improved
tariff policies. Government receipt o f bids for private participation in gas and water
distribution would indicate important progress towards implementing the strategies and
action agendas, and would thus be a trigger for the High CaseThe third main trigger with
regard to trade and business development would entail the adoption o f a program along
the lines proposed in the Bank’s forthcoming FY03 Action Plan for Trade and Business
Development, as a significant step towards achievement o f the CAS second strategic goal
o f Generating Jobs and Sustainable Non-Oil Growth. This should incline concrete steps
aimed at improving the trade policy regime, enhancing trade facilitation, modernizing the
macro-business environment and improving competitiveness at the enterprise level.
Table 6: CAS Triggers FY03-05
Outcomes
A. Base Case
framework
IGood governance and conducive

Satisfactory progress on SPPRED
implementation

]Monitoring indicators
Continuance o f sound fiscal and monetary performance, including annual
inflation in single digits and reduction in implicit subsidies to utilities in
conformity with SAC I1 monitoring indicators.
Implementation of an improved Budget Systems Law (BSL) and Treasury
systems reforms, as evidenced by 2004 budget being prepared and adopted
in accordance with BSL.
Adoption of action program based on the CPAR and CFAA, including
timeframe for implementation.
Chamber of Accounts becomes operational.
Improving business environment as indicated by periodic business surveys.
Satisfactory audits of SOFAR carried out by reputable international firms
and published annually
Key SPPRED poverty and welfare indicators well defined and monitored
with annual progress reports
Annual MTEF and PIP aligned with SPPRED objectives with respect to
public service delivery, especially health, education, essential
infrastructure development and targeted assistance to the poor.
No more than 2 projects rated Unsatisfactory and maintenance of a
satisfactory portfolio disbursement rate.

Satisfactory Portfolio
IImniementation
B. LOW cGe
Same as Base Case
Failure to meet base case triggers,
barring external shocks
C. Additional Triggers for the
High case
Accelerated progress in
Begin implementation of agreed action program on financial and corporate
implementation of structural reforms,
restructuring of the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan (SOCAR)
including governance
Program of reduction of implicit subsidies to utilities continues beyond
SAC 11.
Strengthening of transparency through regular publication of quarterly
financial and budget execution statements o f SOFAR.
Adoption of new integrated trade and business development agenda.
Privatization program of downstream utility sector on track.
Progress in Social Protection
Real annual increase in pensions and social benefits no less than real
increase in non-oil GDP.

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

V.

Pane 28

IMPLEMENTING THE CAS

Lessons o f The Last CAS

65.
Many, but not all, o f the development outcomes o f the last CAS were achieved.
The macroeconomic policy agenda and facilitation o f private sector investment in the
energy sector were highly successful. Public sector reform outcomes were more mixed.
O f the four pillars o f the public sector strategy, progress on internal and external audit
systems has been substantial, although the tempo was slow, especially during the early
years o f the CAS. Achievements in public expenditure management have gone further
than anticipated. O n the other hand, there has been only limited progress in
administrative and legal reform. I t is fair to say that reform measures proposed in some
o f these areas were very ambitious, and their political reverberations were underrated by
Bank teams, who viewed them in a more technical light.

66.
I t is noteworthy that the reform tempo picked up significantly during the second
half o f the C A S period, even though there was no significant shift in the makeup o f the
Government. This underlines the importance o f being realistic about what can be
achieved, and allowing time during project preparation and design to ensure broad
consensus and understanding o f the reforms at all levels o f government, administration
and civil society. An O E D review o f SAC 1, for instance, characterized i t s sustainability
as “fragile” due to weak government ownership. This lesson has been incorporated in the
design o f the current CAS, where a broad country ownership on overall policy direction
has been achieved through the SPPRED, and the pace o f reforms, set by the government,
will be the main determinant o f the Base Case/High Case scenarios.
67.
Both in the utility sector and the social sector, initial reform progress was slower
than anticipated, but the pace o f reform has picked up noticeably in the last t w o years.
Here, another key constraint has been the shortage o f institutional capacity, particularly in
the areas o f policy formulation, data collection and analysis. While some poverty
reduction took place during the last CAS period, there was an inadequate data base to
measure and analyze it. This critical weakness was addressed in part during the
formulation o f the PRSP/SPPRED, which was closely integrated with the preparation and
dissemination o f a full-scale poverty assessment on a collaborative basis. This will
continue to be a major area o f focus during the current CAS. (See also Box 3 o n Lessons
Learned from the Azerbaijan Client Survey.)

Page 29

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem
Box 3: Lessons Learned From The Azerbaijan Client Survey

The 2003 Client Survey in Azerbaijan points out a number of areas of strength for the Bank, as well as areas
that require more attention and exploration. Overall, respondents gave a positive assessment of the Bank’s
effectiveness. Among different stakeholders, however, ratings varied, with government officials and other
donors the most favorable, and private sector respondents the least favorable. NGO respondents were in
the middle, and reported the lowest level o f familiarity with Bank programs, among stakeholder groups.
Respondents saw the Bank as most effective in helping to bring about economic growth; ensuring that
attention is paid to the environment; helping to strengthen the financial system; and helping to reduce poverty.
They saw the Bank as less successful in strengthening the judicial system; helping to strengthen the
regulatory framework; increasing integration o f information technology; and helping to strengthen the health
sector. Respondents reported a high level of satisfaction with their personal dealings with Bank staff,
giving the staff high marks for straightforwardness, consistency, accessibility and treating clients and
stakeholders with respect. But the Bank scored lower on flexibility, both in terms o f adjusting to changing
project circumstances and in adjusting to changing country circumstances. Similarly, respondents reported a
high level o f satisfaction with the Bank’s technical competence and ability to produce “useful” knowledge,
but less with the Bank’s ability to adapt its knowledge to Azerbaijan’s needs.
The survey revealed several points that need to be hrther explored by the Country Team. One area of
concern i s the fact that the Bank received higher marks for effectively monitoring and evaluating its projects
and programs, than for safeguarding against corruption in projects. It i s also noteworthy that the Bank was
seen as an effective catalyst for discussion on issues related to poverty, but respondents were less convinced
that the Bank’s work reflects its own mission o f poverty alleviation.

Outcomes, Monitoring and Institutional Capacity Building

68.
Issues o f institutional capacity and ensuring the sustainability o f reforms will
remain in the forefront during the CAS period. I t i s worth noting that IDA projects in
Azerbaijan, while receiving generally satisfactory ratings from QAG and OED, have not
scored as well o n sustainability and institutional development as on other indicators. For
this reason, the current CAS puts particular emphasis on ensuring sustainability through
building capacity. Drawing on the lessons o f the last CAS, the achievement o f
development outcomes will be monitored through a series o f benchrnarks that relate both
to Azerbaijan’s progress in meeting SPPRED objectives and to a core subset o f
monitoring indicators that depend more specifically o n the input from Bank projects,
supported by ESW. (Table 7 ) The country program matrix (Annex B9) provides a more
detailed and comprehensive l i s t o f expected outputs.
69.
Under the framework o f the SPPRED, the Bank will work closely with the
Government, civil society and other donors to support plans for monitoring and
evaluation, based o n sample surveys as well as statistical reporting systems. Ongoing
work under the public expenditure management reform will contribute to improve the
timeliness and quality o f expenditure data. Other key areas o f focus will include the
health sector, where currently, data unreliability makes it impossible to adequately
monitor Azerbaijan’s progress in achieving the MDGs. IDA will also help in
strengthening data collection and analysis o n the economic status o f displaced
populations (both IDPs and refugees) and women, in order to make it possible to
formulate targeted policies for poverty reduction.

Pane 30

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Strategy
_.
Table 7: Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks

I CAS MONITORINCINDICA
TOR
1 CAS INSTRUMENTS
Volume o f credit to the private sector increased I FSTA (FY02)

rJERATING JOBS AND SUSTAINABLENON-OIL SECTOR GROWTH

environment for growth
o f an income generating
activities.

0

0

0

by 25%.
Tenfold increase in access points to financial
services outside Baku (from 40 to 400)
SME sector employment rises by 10%.

JXATEGIC CAS GOAL.: M NAGING THE OIL BOOM

Maintenance o f macroeconomic stability.

I

Average annual inflation rate in single digits.
All state extra budgetary resources integrated
into state budget.
Budgets after 2003 prepared, published, and
executed according to new budget law.
Internationallyacceptable audits of State Oil
Fund of Azerbaijan carried out and published
annuallv.

SAC I1 (FY02)
PER Update
IBTA I1 (FY02)
CEM Update
PRSC (FY05)

General education enrollment ratio increased
from 94% in 2001 to 98% in 2005, with 90% o f
children in grades 1-5 having free access to
textbooks.
Increase of 40% in the number of patients seen
at reformed primary health care facilities.
Decrease in energy supply disruptions resulting
from collapse of critical infrastructure.
Total subsidies in the energy and water sectors
are reduced by 35% by 2005 as compared with
2002.
Share o f Baku population trusting safety of
water supply increases from 13% to 50%.

Education Sector
Development APL
(FY03)
Health Sector LIL
(FY02)

STRATEGIC CAS GOAL: I IPROVMG SOCIAL SERVICES AND MFRASTRUCTUF

Improvement in the
quality o f and equity in
access to, basic health
and education services.

[mprovement of
infrastructure, (including
roads, delivery of utility
services,
communications,
irrigation.)

0

Reform o f the existing
system of social
protection to give more
effective protection to
the vulnerable.
0

Improvement of the
living conditions and
opportunities of the
refugees and IDP
population.

FSAP
PSD Project (FY04)
PRSC (05)
Action Plan for Trade
Diagnostic Study
Agro-processing. &
Marketing Study
IFC support for non-oil
SMEs and the financial
sector

Real annual increase in pensions and social
benefits no less than real increase in non-oil
GDP.
Majority of existing pensioners have
computerized individual records by end 2005.
Implementation of well-targeted social safety
net mechanism to compensate for cost-recovery
of utility and other services.
Increase in IDP per capita income to equal the
national average by end 2005.

Energy Sector Project
(FY04)
SAC I1
PRSC
Energy Sector Study
Irrigation Distribution
System Project (FY03)
Baku Water Supply
Supplement (FY03)
Municipal Infrastructure
Survey
Pension & Social
Assistance Project
(FY04)
PER, PER Update

Pilot Reconstruction
Project/SFDI (FY99)
Poverty Assessment

Page 31

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratem

Portfolio and Fiduciary Issues

70.
Assessments o f the Azerbaijan portfolio by the Bank’s Quality Assessment Group
(QAG) and Operations Evaluation Department (OED) have mostly been satisfactory.
Four projects were reviewed for Quality at Entry (Highways, SAC I,Pilot Reconstruction
and Agriculture Credit and Development), two for Quality o f Supervision (Petroleum TA
and Urgent Environment) and one piece o f ESW was reviewed (CPAR). All were rated
satisfactory. O f the three completed or closed projects reviewed by OED, the
Rehabilitation Credit was rated “Satisfactory”; Petroleum TA “Moderately Satisfactory”
and SAC 1 “Moderately Unsatisfactory.”

71.
At the end o f FY02, the IDA portfolio comprised 15 operations with net
commitments o f US$368.3 million and an average age o f 3.2 years, and all PSR summary
ratings were satisfactory although some projects carry several risk flags, and the pace o f
disbursement i s below the ECA regional average and needs to improve. The gap appears
mainly related to slow start-up o f new projects, with time required to build capacity o f the
newly established Project Implementation Units and effectiveness delays.
72.
The Bank i s taking several steps to strengthen portfolio implementation. First, a
CPAR was carried out in late FY02 and a CFAA in FY03. Both have resulted in action
plans which the government has broadly agreed to implement. Within the Bank,
responsibility for Portfolio Management has been decentralized to the Country Manager,
supported by the appointment in FY03 o f an internationally recruited staff member in
Baku to handle financial management issues and o f a procurement specialist in the
Georgia Country Office who w i l l also cover a part o f the Azerbaijan portfolio.
CAS Consultations

73.
Consultations on the draft F Y 2003-05 CAS were held with representatives o f the
Government and civil society in Azerbaijan from March 7-12, 2003. Meetings were held
with the Prime Minister and Council o f Ministers; Parliamentarians headed by the Deputy
Speaker; the PRSP team; NGOs; representatives o f private sector; and the donor
community.
0

0

The Government emphasized the importance o f continued cooperation with the
Bank Group in making further progress on structural reforms. W h i l e in full
agreement with the CAS program, the Government would like to see the IDPs
given support through confessional assistance programs.
Members o f the Parliament would like closer contacts with the Bank, and
suggested that rural development be given high priority. Several members o f
Parliament and o f the Government expressed their concern that Azerbaijan’s IDA
allocation continues to be low when compared on a per capita basis with other
countries from the Caucasus.

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Straten
0

0

0

0

Page 32

T h e private sector representatives found the CAS emphasis on non-oil growth
very welcome and would like to see state intervention in the private sector
reduced both in the area o f regulation and control o f state enterprises. They would
also like to see greater support to financial sector development, and expressed
their concerns about: inadequate dialogue with the Government; lack o f
information on rules and regulations; the heavy weight o f an unaccounted shadow
economy; and a slow justice system.
The national and international NGOs and other representatives o f the c i v i l
society emphasized the importance o f focusing on anti-corruption; improved
monitoring in implementation o f Bank financed projects to ensure their
effectiveness; and regional development with a particular focus o n
decentralization as a way to reduce the imbalances.
Donors expressed their confidence and support for the overall program.
However, there was a lively debate with some donors expressing concerns o n
the exclusion o f new lending for health, an SPPRED priority, while some others
supported that decision.
The SPPRED team questioned whether the SPPRED goals would be achieved
under the base case scenario. The team expressed hopes that the CAS program
could be revisited based on swift implementation o f the SPPRED.

Partners

74.
The process o f PRSP/SPPRED formulation in Azerbaijan has facilitated closer
cooperation and coordination o f efforts within the government, among donors and with
the N G O community and the private sector. The CAS foresees building upon this
collaboration with other partners. UNDP has taken the lead in the overall coordination o f
the PRSP process from the donor side, and along with GTZ has helped fund the PRSP
Secretariat, established in the Ministry o f Economic Development. ADB has provided
assistance to the Secretariat and five o f the sector working groups, as well as funding for
a workshop. EU and U S A I D supported the participation o f civil society through surveys,
participatory appraisals at the village level, and town hall meetings. Continued close
cooperation will be essential during the CAS period, since major donors are all working
to align their assistance programs with the priorities expressed in Azerbaijan’s SPPRED.

75.
IMF and the Bank have worked closely together in supporting Azerbaijan’s
reform program, in line with their respective mandates, particularly with respect t o the
management o f public finances, including the Oil Fund, utility and energy reforms, the
financial sector, and the cross-cutting issue o f governance. This close collaboration will
continue in future efforts to support Azerbaijan’s reforms and transition. (See Attachment
1 for details.)

76,
UNDP is committed to helping convert ‘black gold into human gold’ by
supporting the implementation o f the SPPRED with a special emphasis on i t s priority o f

Pane 33

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Strate=

promoting employment in the non-oil sector. UNDP has also initiated the MDG reporting
process by strengthening the Government’s new Poverty Monitoring Unit in the SPPRED
Secretariat. Other major initiatives in Ump’s principal thematic areas include public
administration reform through support to e-governance and the National I C T Strategy,
promotion o f human rights by building the capacity o f the new Office o f the Ombudsman
and environmental protection in the region through the Caspian Environment Program.
UNICEF i s also a very active and close partner in the social sectors. The health
project, in particular, i s very much a joint activity o f the Bank and UNICEF, which i s
intimately involved in its implementation. UNICEF has also worked with the Bank in the
context o f the Poverty Assessment and currently has a staff member seconded to the
Bank’s Country Office.

77.

78.
The EBRD i s another close partner and a major donor in Azerbaijan. The
EBRD’s focus has been o n improving the country’s infrastructure through investments in
the power and transport sectors, and energy sector reform. This has included assistance in
developing Azerbaijan’s o i l potential including through proposed participation in the
financing o f both the o i l and gas pipelines. In the case o f the B T C o i l pipeline, the EBRD
and IFC are working closely together. The EBRD has also been involved in bank
privatization and in the context o f PSD, in promotion o f SMEs, and improvements in the
business climate. The Bank Group has worked closely with the EBRD on these issues, as
well as on governance arrangements for the O i l Fund, where the EBRD, IMF and Bank
have all provided complementary TA.
79.
The EU is committed to supporting the SPPRED in areas matching i t s country
priorities, including support for regional integration and cooperation (through the
TRACECA program), food security and sustainable rural development, and public sector
capacity building. The indicative budget for TACIS/EU assistance for 2004-2006 i s 30
million Euros. Specific areas o f focus include institutional support for the new Ministries
of Environment and Economic Development, and Customs, and development o f
vocational training and higher education reform.
80.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) i s a comparatively new partner for
Azerbaijan and has not yet begun lending operations. However, the ADB has been active
in assisting the SPPRED process and in providing TA and preparing projects. Areas o f
focus for the ADB will be IDPs, rural development, water supply, sanitation and roads.
The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) is finalizing the formulation o f its three year
program for 2003-2005. So far it has provided concessional lending for public
infrastructure (irrigation, roads, power generation) and grants to support refugees and
IDPs. The Black Sea Trade and Development Bank (BSTDB) aims at development o f
the non-oil sector. So far it has provided trade finance to IBA and invested equity in the
new Microfinance Bank o f Azerbaijan.
81.
Japan i s a major bilateral donor whose assistance to Azerbaijan totals $US 500
million in concessional loans extended mainly to the energy sector and in grants to
various sectors including food security, health rehabilitation, sports and culture, and in

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

Pane 34

technical assistance including studies/education programs. More recently, USAID has
been able to widen i t s assistance as the result o f the waiver o f section 907 o f the foreign
assistance act which had prevented lending to the government in the absence o f a peace
deal with Armenia. In close coordination with the Bank, the US i s currently providing
assistance to the Ministry o f Finance on further development o f the Treasury system and
on the Budget Systems L a w implementation, as foreseen in SAC 11, and to the Ministry
of Tax o n tax policy. The U S i s also providing TA for the o i l and petrochemical sectors
and o n WTO accession. USAID‘s current strategic plan focuses on development o f
private enterprise, support for democratic processes and humanitarian assistance.
82.
In the area o f democracy and governance, USAID i s helping to strengthen the
electoral system, develop independent media, and establish the r u l e o f law. The UK is
also providing assistance in these areas. So are the OSCE and the Council o f Europe,
which is particularly active in the area o f judicial reforms as is Germany (GTZ and
KFW). GTZ’s bilateral cooperation program for the years 2002-2004 focuses on
development o f the private sector through business training, facilitation o f investments
and business matching, legal advice to entrepreneurs and journalists, logistical support to
the PRSP process, and economic rehabilitation o f some state owned enterprises. In
February-March 2003, GTZ will initiate a project to deal, on a pilot basis, with the issues
of mitigating the social impact o f enterprise restructuring. Switzerland has been
especially active in supporting the preparation o f SPPRED through grant financed
activities that include the forthcoming Investor’s Conference that the I F C is also involved
in assisting. France is providing support for social assistance and services and Italy has
done so for SPPRED work on the environment.
Risks
83.

There are four category o f risks to the strategy outlined above:

>

>

Risks in the external environment include the sharpening o f regional
instability, resulting from conflicts in neighboring countries (including
Iraq). For Azerbaijan, the most important source o f regional instability is
the unsolved conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh. Resumption o f hostilities
would have major economic and human costs , while a peaceful resolution
would improve the likely payoff from the CAWSPPRED strategy
significantly. The international community i s active in trying to resolve
the dispute through the OSCE’s Minsk Group. IDA has indicated i t s
willingness to assist a peace deal with help for reconstruction and more
intensive support for refugees/IDPs. In that event, a C A S update will be
prepared.
Internal political risks include the possibility that a political transition in
Azerbaijan leads to instability and/or significant shifts in policy. T o
mitigate against this risk it is important to continue and expand the
consultative elements established during SPPRED preparation, to ensure
broad-based civic and political ownership o f the development strategy.

Pane 35

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

>

An economic risk to the CAS strategy would be a decision not to go
forward with ACG I, B T C pipeline and/or the Shah Deniz gas
development due to unexpected problems, such as a significant drop in
energy prices, or difficulties in securing financing. This would have a
major impact and a serious delay would necessitate a recasting o f the
SPPRED strategy. The volatility o f energy prices represents another risk.
These risks are partially mitigated by the Government’s adoption o f a
prudent fiscal stance, and its strategy o f expanding the non-oil sector. The
first o f these risks i s also mitigated by proposed IFC involvement in the
financing package for BTC. A third risk is a slowing down or reversal o f
economic reforms that results in mismanagement o f the o i l boom and
serious “Dutch disease”. This is mitigated by the proposed policy-based
lending as well as the more broad-based civic and political ownership o f
the reform process that also serves to mitigate the political risk noted
above.

P Implementation and governance capacity i s another set o f risks. Hence,
major attention i s paid to governance and capacity building issues as a
cross-cutting theme throughout the proposed strategy, notably in the
ongoing SAC I1 and the proposed PRSC. Areas o f emphasis for capacity
building will include transparency in the management o f public
expenditures and other governance issues as captured by BEEPS. Risk
mitigation at the project level will be strengthened by measures pertaining
to portfolio implementation, including the action plans stemming from the
CFAA, CPAR and CPPR and decentralization o f important financial
management and procurement functions. The technical assistance being
provided by the Bank, especially under IBTA 11, and by other external
partners will also help to overcome implementation constraints.
VI.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

84.
Although still a low-income country, Azerbaijan has strong potential to grow
rapidly in the years ahead because o f the o i l and gas resources which it is currently
developing. These resources are considerable, but finite, peaking in about a decade and
then declining steadily. The most difficult challenge Azerbaijan faces, which is w e l l
understood by the Government, i s to avoid the path followed by many natural resource
rich countries, wherein their citizens derive little benefit from the influx o f o i l revenues.
This will require designing and implementing a policy agenda that leads to poverty
reduction and improves incomes as well as equity for current and future generations,
while maintaining macroeconomic and financial stability. Strong institutions are
essential to tackle this challenge, yet Azerbaijan has had little more than a decade in
which to build the government institutions and the civil society networks to support them.
For this reason, the Bank Group’s assistance i s essential in providing cross-country
experience, helping to build the institutional capacity and sustain the policy reforms

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Strategy

Page 36

necessary for Azerbaijan to succeed. A great deal o f work was accomplished in the
previous C A S period in terms o f building up the public expenditure framework, including
establishment o f the State O i l Fund. Still, much remains to be done to strengthen these
institutions and their oversight, and encourage development o f the non-oil sector. The
C A S period represents a window o f opportunity for vigorous engagement with
Azerbaijan, to prepare for the influx o f oil revenues, which i s expected to begin in 2005.
For Azerbaijan to achieve the ambitious goals o f poverty reduction envisaged under the
SPPRED, i t is essential that this opportunity not be lost, particularly since under current
scenarios the anticipated o i l boom will be short-lived.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

P. Woicke
Executive Vice President

Shengman Zhang
Managing Director

Washington D.C.
M a y 27,2003

Attachment I
Page 1of 8

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

Attachment I- Azerbaijan: IMF-World Bank Relations
Partnership in Azerbaijan’s Development Strategy

The Government’s poverty reduction strategy, embodied in its first full State
Program for Poverty Reduction and Economic Growth (SPPRED) is expected to be
endorsed by the IDA and IMF Boards in M a y 2003. The strategy comprises six key
the facilitation o f an enabling environment;
strategic aims identified as follows: (i)
(ii)
the maintenance o f macroeconomic stability; (iii)
the improvement in the quality
o f and equity in access to basic health and education services; (iv) the improvement
o f infrastructure (including roads, delivery o f utility services, communications,
irrigation); (v) the reform o f the current system o f social protection to give a more
targeted, but effective protection to the vulnerable; and (vi) the improvement o f the
living conditions and opportunities for the one million refugees and Internally
Displaced People (IDP) o f the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. While the PRSP’s overall
direction i s considered appropriate, weaknesses were identified related to costing,
prioritizing, and sequencing measures as well as their monitoring and evaluation.
Macroeconomic management aims at maintaining a stable economic environment
through appropriate fiscal, monetary, exchange rate, and sustainable debt policies. In
support o f these policies, the authorities are tightening payment discipline, especially
in the energy sector, hardening budget constraints for state-owned enterprises, and
pursuing enterprise and banking privatization and restructuring. Consistent
macroeconomic management o f recent years has supported the economic recovery
since 1995. Nonetheless, maintaining strong growth will depend importantly on
accelerating structural reforms to enhance private sector development and to
encourage foreign and domestic investment, particularly in the non-oil sectors o f the
economy.
The IMF has taken the lead in assisting Azerbaijan in enhancing macroeconomic
stability and related structural reform measures. In this regard, the Fund has
encouraged the authorities to continue with fiscal consolidation and to maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance. The Government has also been encouraged to
enhance governance and strengthen financial discipline in the energy sector, and to
improve the legal and regulatory environment for private sector development. The
Fund has supported Azerbaijan’s economic reform program since 1995. The
authorities were successful in achieving macroeconomic stabilization under the
economic reform program supported by the early IDA and IMF structural adjustment
arrangements, which formed the foundation for an ongoing Fund-supported program
under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), approved by the
Executive Board in July 2001, with the first review endorsed by the Board on
February 20th, 2002 and the second review scheduled for M a y 14 2003.

Attachment I
Page 2 of8

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

The World Bank has taken the lead in the policy dialogue on structural reforms,
including poverty reduction measures, public expenditures, agricultural policies,
private sector development, institution building and governance. A range o f
instruments i s used to conduct the dialogue. SAC I1 i s supporting a wide-ranging
structural reform agenda and i t s accompanying institution building and technical
assistance credit (IBTA 11) i s assisting institutional capacity building, especially of
government budget preparation and execution, privatization and utility reforms. This
broad-based policy reform approach i s combined with sector investments in
agriculture, roads, water, refugees/IDPs, environment, education, health and
domestic gas. Recent analytical and advisory assistance has included a poverty
assessment, a PER, a CPAR (procurement assessment), a C F A A (financial
accountability), pension reforms paper and ongoing exercises on trade facilitation
and mitigation o f the social costs o f utility price increases.
The next section describes the Bank program and the division o f responsibility
between the two institutions. In a number o f areas - social sectors and safety nets,
environment, governance, infrastructure, and agriculture - the Bank takes the lead in
the dialogue and there i s no cross conditionality with the IMF-supported program.
The Bank i s also leading the dialogue in private sector development and public
enterprise reform and Bank analysis serves as an input into the Fund program. In
other areas - energy, financial sector, public expenditure management, public sector,
trade and investment policy - both institutions work together and share cross
conditionality. Finally, in areas like monetary policy, tax policy and customs, the
IMF takes the lead with limited Bank involvement. (see Table 1).

I

Table 1. Bank-Fund Collaboration on Azerbaijan

Area
Macroeconomic
FrameworWManagement

Specialized Advice
from Fund

Specialized Advice
from Bank

Monetary policy,
exchange rate, fiscal
and trade policies,
economic statistics

Medium- to longterm public
expenditure
management o f oil
windfall, trade
reform.

P
Key Instruments

criteria and benchmarks
on monetary and fiscal
targets.
Bunk: SAC I1 and IBTA
I1 support o f reforms in
budget preparation and
execution, PER,
integratedtrade
development framework.

Attachment I
Pane 30f 8

Azerbaiian Country Assistance Strategy
Consolidated mediumterm budget
framework, including
the Oil Fund's
operations, budget
systems law, treasury
modernization, tax
policy and
administration,
customs, debt
management, extra
budgetary hnds

Budget systems
law, consolidated
medium-term
3udget framework,
integration o f the
3il Fund's
govemance
Framework, PIP
Zapacity building.

IMF: PRGF performance
criteria on overall
consolidated fiscal
deficit, excluding Oil
Fund revenues and
overall consolidatednonoil deficit including
quasi-fiscal activities;
performance criteria
related to rules and
legislation related to
ensuring coherent fiscal
policy.
Bank: SAC I1
conditionality on
governance o f the Oil
Fund, budget systems
law, MTEF and PIP, and
IBTA-I1 supported
activities for capacity
building.

Support to State
Customs Committee,
Ministry o f Taxes,
Ministry o f Finance

Strengthening
financial discipline in
energy sector by
unification o f domestic
and international
prices for natural gas
and o i l products,
allocation o f subsidies
to Azerenergy and
Azerigas, and
offsetting tax credits to
SOCAR, full payment
by budgetary
organizations for their
utility consumption

Support to Ministry
o f Environment,
Ministry o f
Economic
Development and
consolidation of
Agencies and
Departments, State
Procurement
Agency, Chamber
o f Accounts

IMF: PRGF performance
criteria and benchmarks
related to ongoing
administrative reforms in
customs, taxes and
finance.

Strengthening
financial discipline
in energy sector by
elimination o f
implicit subsidies
and improved
collections and
tariff policies,
privatization o f
distribution
companies,
introduction of
regulatory
framework and
agency, and
specialized advice
on oil and gas
sector development.

IMF: PRGF performance
criteria and benchmarks
related to domestic
energy prices, as well as
the incorporation of
previously quasi-fiscal
subsidies into the state
budget

Bank: technical
assistance supported by
IBTA-11.

Bank: SAC I1
conditionality on utility
reforms, especially
aimed at improving
financial viability.
PPIAFIESMAP T A on
sector restructuring and
regulations. IBTA-I and
-11 supported assistance
for privatization and in
analyzing the
environmental and social

r

Attachment I
Page 4 of 8

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Strategy

Financial Sector Reform

Strengthening the
competitiveness and
health o f the banking
system, privatization
of state-owned banks,
revision and
introduction of a new
legal framework for
the banking sector
(banking law,
bankruptcy law,
central bank law),
development of manat
financial markets,
including the market
for T-bills, safeguards
assessment of a
financial sector, FSAP

SociaVPoverty

I

mpact of such reforms
ind designing measures
o protect the poor.
Restructuring and
privatization of
large State banks,
strengthening of
ANB’s supervisory
capacity,
introduction of
electronic payment
systems, credit
rating agencies and
registries, SME
credit.

‘MF: PRGF performance
:riteria and benchmarks
in bank privatization,
ianking system law and
:entral bank law.

Public expenditure
reforms,
strengthening of
monitoring and
evaluation systems,
reform strategies
for education,
health, social
assistance and
protection as well
as pension reform
and direct
assistance to IDPs.

Bank: Conditionality in
SAC 11. Poverty
Assessment and TA for
Household and other
surveys, assistance with
design o f pension
reforms and better
targeting of social
expenditures. Project to
assist IDPs and refugees.
Education and Health
LILs aimed at improving
service delivery to the
poor.

Integrated
framework for trade
and business
development,
improving and
monitoring of the
business and
investment
environment,
streamlining
procedures for entry
and exit, enhancing
high-level
public/private
sector dialogue,
trade and transport
facilitation, SME
support, and

IMF: PRGF

Sank: SAC I1 conditions
i n the financial sector
ind the financial sector
TA credit.

I
Private Sector Development

Trade and investment
policy

Bank: enhanced publicprivate partnership
supported via SAC I1 and
IBTA 11; analytical
assistance on the nexus
o f business environment
and governance in
cooperationwith FIAS;
integrated trade and
business development
framework report. trade
and transport facilitation
report; SAC I1 and IBTA
I1supported TA on
privatization and labor

Attachment I
Pane 50f 8

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

---I
I

Other sectors

privatization o f
SOEs.

redeployment.

Strengthening rural
and agricultural
infrastructure,
transport policy and
infrastructure,
environmental
clean-up and
preservation.

Bank: investment
projects in environment,
agriculture and
highways.

IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
Areas in which the World Bank leads and there i s no direct IMF involvement

These areas are the social sectors, agriculture, infrastructure and environment. In the
social sphere, the Bank has been involved in both improving the data and analyzing
poverty as well as in helping design pension reforms, and measures to mitigate the
social impact o f utility reforms aimed at raising collections and tariffs. In education
a LIL is to be followed by an APL to improve quality. There is also an ongoing LIL
in the health sector (in partnership with UNICEF) which aims at building capacity o f
the Ministry to carry out health care reforms and pilot them in selected districts.
In infrastructure,

Bank lending to date has comprised projects for
Gas
Rehabilitation, water supply and highways. An environment project i s being
followed by assistance to build the capacity o f the new Ministry o f Environment and
mainstreaming environmental concerns across-the board, especially in the energy
sector. In Agriculture the Bank has provided credits for farm privatization, irrigation
rehabilitation and credit, extension and other agricultural services.
Areas in which the World Bank leads and its analysis serves as input into the IMF
program

The Bank leads the dialogue on structural reforms through the SAC 11, approved by
the Bank’s Board in FY02. Bank leads in the areas of:
Privatization and Private Sector Development. The Bank i s taking the lead in the
formulation o f an integrated strategy and action plan for trade and private sector
d e ~ e l o p m e n tAn
. ~ important element o f the strategy is in providing a framework to
better integrate the efforts o f key stakeholders-Le., the Government, multilateral
and bilateral donors, the private sector, and others-in promoting non-oil trade and
investment. The four broad policy components include: (i)
Improving the Trade
Policy Regime and Market Access - creating a more export-friendly tariff structure,
accelerating Azerbaijan’s accession to the WTO, increasing access to regional
7

See: Azerbaijan: Building Competitivenessfor Increased Non-Oil Trade and Investment-An
Strategv and Action Plan, World Bank, forthcoming.

Integrated

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

Attachment I
Pane 6 of 8

markets and the European Union; improving access to finance; streamlining
administrative procedures; (ii)Enhancing Trade Facilitation - streamlining and
strengthening customs procedures and improving the quality and capacity o f
Azerbaijan’s transportation infrastructure; (iii)Improving the Macro Business
Environment - the macro business environment cover a wide range o f issues
impacting o n private sector development, including improving business registration
and licensing; land acquisition and site development; labor market policies; taxation;
access t o credit; support for SMEs; contract enforcement and dispute settlement; and
public sector governance; and (iv) Developing Competitive Industry Clusters industry-specific strategies for improving inter-firm cooperation, promoting
innovation and quality, encouraging specialization and strengthening supply chains.
The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) has recently conducted a
diagnostic study o f the investment environment to determine the most important
impediments to private sector investments, and this was followed up by the CIS
Business Environment Enterprise Performance Survey 2002 (BEEPS) conducted by
the Bank and EBRI) together.

IFC’s strategy emphasizes support to the non-oil sector to help economic
diversification (see box). To this end, I F C will help catalyze FDI in non-oil sector
projects which focus on exports, help generate foreign exchange earnings and
contribute t o the modernization o f the country’s manufacturing base and basic
infrastructure. IFC’s strategy for the non-oil sectors involves: (i)promotion o f
competition in the banking sector, establishment o f joint ventures in the non-bank
financial sector, technical assistance to private local banks for institutional capacity
building; (ii)
improving access to finance through credit lines t o local private banks
for on-lending to SMEs; (iii)efforts to improve the business climate and reduce
impediments to foreign investments; (iv) support o f agri-business and agroprocessing; and (v) support for private provision o f public services.
A s for privatization, the Bank provides support for hiring o f financial technical and
legal advisors, advises on the transaction processes, and ensures that proper social
and environmental mitigation i s taken into account. The Bank is also supporting the
development o f a strategy for further industrial privatization as w e l l as for labor
redeployment. Together with the EBRD, the Bank i s also involved in the financial
and corporate restructuring o f SOCAR.
Regulatory Reforms, including approval o f draft regulations for electricity, gas, and
water sectors, separation o f regulatory and commercial functions in utilities,
transport and communications sectors, establishing an independent regulator agency
assigned with regulatory functions. In particular, all regulatory functions currently
exercised by Azal, Azeri Rail and Caspian Shipping Company will be transferred t o
the Ministry o f Transport, the commercial and regulatory functions o f the Ministry o f
Communications will be separated, and remaining regulatory functions o f SOCAR
will be transferred to the appropriate government institution.

Attachment I
Page 70f8

Azerbaijan Country Assistance Stratew

While the Bank has taken the lead in privatization and in structural reforms in the
private sector as described above, the IMF has also a strong interest in these areas
since many o f these reforms are critical to achieving macroeconomic stabilization
and enhancing growth prospects. Accordingly, there is a high degree o f consultation
and coordination between the two institutions on these matters.
Areas of shared responsibility

The Bank and the Fund are working jointly in the following three main areas,
supported by the Bank’s SAC 2, several investment and technical assistance
operations and the Fund’s PRGF:
Public Expenditure Management. This area includes public expenditure
management reforms aimed at introduction o f a medium-term expenditure
framework and public investment program, consolidation o f all extrabudgetary
resources including the O i l Fund with the state budget, modernization o f the
Treasury, strengthening the Chamber o f Accounts and supporting tax and customs
administration. Both institutions are involved in supporting treasury modernization,
while the Fund i s providing technical assistance in support o f tax and customs
operations. The Fund and the Bank work very closely together on the formulation
and implementation o f the Budget Systems L a w and recent amendments to the L a w
were submitted to Parliament as a prior action for the PRGF and second tranche
release o f SAC 11. The governance framework for the O i l Fund is another area, in
which there is very close cooperation, as well as the elimination o f all quasi-fiscal
subsidies.
Financial sector reforms. This area includes strengthening the competitiveness and
health o f the banking system, privatization o f state-owned banks, revision and
introduction o f a new legal framework for the banking sector (banking law,
bankruptcy law, central bank law), development o f manat financial markets,
including the market for T-bills and implementing IMF’s safeguards assessment’s
recommendations. Both institutions are planning to conduct a joint FSAP during
2003. In terms o f banking supervision, the IMF i s monitoring the closure and
merger o f banks that do not satisfy prudential requirements.
Utilities Reform, including measures to reduce implicit subsidies in the electricity,
gas, and water sectors, to ensure full payment by budgetary institutions their utility
bills, to improve overall utility collections, revision o f electricity and gas tariffs to
cover the true costs o f providing these services. The Fund takes the lead in seeking to
ensure that budget organizations and state-owned enterprises pay their utility bills in
full, while the Bank is taking the lead in utility and state-owned enterprise reform,
tariff revision and collections from households, regulatory reform and privatization.

Azerbaijan Countrv Assistance Stratem

Attachment I
Pane 8 of 8

Areas in which the IMF leads and its analysis serves as input into the World Bank
program

The Fund leads the dialogue on fiscal matters, setting the overall ceiling o n the
consolidated budget. In addition to the achievement o f overall fiscal targets the
Fund-supported PRGF includes performance criteria and structural benchmarks
requiring: (i)adoption o f improved regulations, in consultation with Fund staff, o n
the issuance o f VAT refunds; (ii)
establishment o f a revenue forecasting commission,
and (iii)
adoption o f the new Banking System Law.
In the budgetary area the Fund i s taking the lead on reforms o f budgetary revenues
and expenditures to (i)complete the process o f subjecting all taxpayers to the tax
legislation; (ii)improve procedures for revenue forecasting; (iii)
improve tax and
customs administration; (iv) eliminate the earmarking o f revenues for some extrabudgetary operations o f budget organizations. In these areas, as well as monetary
policy, the Bank takes into account the policy recommendations o f the IMF and
ensures that its own policy advice i s consistent.

The Bank plays a central role in advising on development o f a Medium Term
Expenditure Framework and Public Investment Program.

Attachment II
Page l o f 1

Azerbaiian Countrv Assistance Stratem

Attachment I 1 - M I G A and FIAS in Azerbaijan

MIGA has facilitated estimated foreign direct investment o f US$59.5 million into
Azerbaijan to date. MIGA’s outstanding portfolio in Azerbaijan consists o f two contract
of guarantee, one in the financial sector and one in agribusiness, representing a total gross
exposure o f U S 3 . 2 million.
In FY 2000 MIGA undertook a review o f the investment promotion structures then in
place in Azerbaijan, delivering a report to the government that stressed the need to focus

on improvements to the investment environment, and on facilitation o f non-oil industry
investment.
The government responded indicating interest in proceeding with
implementation o f the report’s recommendations. MIGA referred them to FIAS, which
conducted a Study o f the Environment for Foreign Direct Investment in cooperation with
the World Bank and the IFC. The study examined the policy, legal and regulatory,
administrative (red-tape), and institutional environments for FDI . The findings were
presented to the Government in December 2002 in a public private sector workshop.

Since the workshop, the Government has drafted a new Foreign Investment L a w taking
FIAS recommendations into consideration and has requested FIAS to provide a detailed
analysis o f the Draft. The Government has also taken a series o f steps to improve the
business environment, which will be presented to the business community at an investor
conference that i s being co-sponsored by the IFC in M a y 2003.

Ifthe Government o f Azerbaijan would like to develop a reform program to improve the
investment climate based on findings o f the FIAS Diagnostics study, MIGA and F I A S
would consider working with them in areas in their competence in cooperation with the
World Bank.

Attachment III
Countrv Assistance Strategy

Page l o f 1

Attachment I11 - Core Labor Standards in Azerbaijan

0

0

0

0

0

0

Forced Labor. The Constitution allows forced labor only under a state o f
emergency or martial law or as the result o f a court decision affecting a
condemned person. Two departments in the General Prosecutor’s office (the
Department o f Implementation o f the Labor Code and the Department for
Enforcement o f the Law on Minors) were responsible for enforcing the
prohibition on forced or bonded labor.

Azerbaijan is both a country o f origin and a transit point for trafficking in persons.
The Government is formulating a National Plan o f Action, which will, inter alia,
include amend national legislation to include specific anti-trafficking provisions.
Effective Abolition o f Child Labor. The minimum age for employment i s 16
years. The law allows children aged 14 and 15 to work with the consent o f their
parents and limits the workweek o f children between the ages o f 14 and 16 to 24
hours per week. The Ministry o f Labor and Social Security has primary
enforcement responsibility for child labor laws. With high adult unemployment,
there were few complaints o f abuses o f child labor laws.
Elimination o f Discrimination in Employment. Foreign workers are protected
under the law and enjoy the same rights as citizens. The Constitution provides for
equal rights without respect to gender, race, nationality or national origin, social
status, membership in political parties, trade unions or other public organizations.
However, h o w effectively these provisions are implemented is not clear.
Freedom o f Association and the Right to Collective Bargaining. The
Constitution provides for freedom o f association, including the right to f o r m labor
unions; however, there were some limits on this right in practice. The
overwhelming majority o f labor unions s t i l l operate as they did under the Soviet
system and remain tightly linked to the government. There were reports o f antiunion discrimination by foreign companies operating in Baku; however there
were no reports o f government anti-union discrimination. Unions were free to
form federations and to affiliate with international bodies.

The Constitution provides for the right to strike, and there were n o legal
restrictions o n this right. The law prohibits retribution against strikers. A number
o f peaceful strikes to demand salary increases or payment o f unpaid wages have
been reported in the media.

Attachment I V
Azerbaiian Country Assistance Stratem

Page l o f 2

-

Attachment I V SPPRED : The Participatory Process
The PRSP launch mission, in July 2001, consulted widely the members o f the
Government, local and international NGOs and members o f civil society o n the
full range o f poverty issues and completed i t s work with a major workshop
bringing together the Government, donors and local and international NGOs. The
workshop marked the opening o f a genuine dialogue between government
officials and civil society on issues related to poverty reduction. The international
community pledged to assist this effort, both financially and technically
0

0

0

0

0

Next steps included the establishment o f a Secretariat at the Ministry o f Economic
Development) and o f 15 Sector Working Groups whose findings would be major
inputs for the preparation o f the full PRSP (which subsequently came to be k n o w n
as SPPRED). Each group was composed o f members o f Government, NGOs,
civil society and international experts.
Participatory appraisals, financed by UNDP and the EU, took place at the village
level, first on a pilot basis and then on a larger scale, in order to bring government
officials into direct contact with civil society in five regions o f the country (Guba,
Nakhchivan, Massally, Ganja and Sheki). Interviews and regional consultations
and workshops covered 63 villages and towns engaging some 2,000 participants.
The appraisals brought into focus the phenomenon o f “new poverty” resulting
from the transition process.
USAID encouraged the process by funding a series o f T o w n Halls Meetings
aimed at continuing the dialogue between Azeri citizens and the Government.
Through the town hall meetings and participant group trainings, many “good
practices” suggested by the Bank and other IFIs were consolidated to encourage
active participation. The meetings were attended by MPs, government
representatives, NGOs and activists o f the respective regions. Coordination
between the EU, USAID and the Bank was excellent.
Encouraged by the government’s readiness to cooperate, the National NGO
Forum took the initiative to help establish a working relationship with the
government, intending to further develop it during PRSP implementation. It
replicates the sectoral working groups within the N G O forum, allowing them t o
develop alternative approaches and proposals and submit them to the Secretariat.
In addition, at least one N G O was nominated by the Forum to participate in each
o f the 15 official working groups. The Bank is encouraging the Forum to
continue to reach out to other NGOs who are not members, especially those
outside o f Baku, in order to expand participation and representation.
Sector Policy Notes (SPNs) drafted by the working groups reflected findings o f

the consultation processes and inputs from some o f the NGOs. The writing o f the

Attachment I V
Azerbaijan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 2 of 2

full report began in February 2002 and was revised after successive consultation
with members o f the Government, civil society and members o f the international
community.
0

The final draft was s presented at a widely publicized and televised Conference
chaired by President Aliyev in October. It was officially adopted by the
Government in February 2003.

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

A z e r b a i j a n at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2001

P o p u l a t i o n . m i d - y e a r (milirons)
G N i p e r C a P m (Atlas m e t h o d . U S S I
G N I ( A l i a s m e t h o d , U S S billions)

Azerbaijan

Europe I
Central
Asia

Low.
income

6 1
660
5.7

475
1.960
930

2,511
430
1,069

0 9
t u

0 1
0 6

1 9
2 3

63
69
20

31
59
76

90
3
102
103
101

76
37
103
66

1991

2000

2001

3.1
45 7

5.3
17.4
39 0
16.1
13.9

5 7
27.1
40.9
30.7
26 2

.3 6

-0.9
0.5
22 2

4125103

Life e x p e c t a n c y

A v e r a g e a n n u a l g r o w t h . 1998-01
P o p u l a t i o n 1%)
L a b o r t o r c e (%)

GNI
per
capita

M o s t r a c e n t e s t i m a t e (latest y e a r available. 1995.01)

P o v e r t y (% o f p o p u l a l i o n b e l o w n a t i o n a l P o v e r l y line)
U r b a n p o p u l a t i o n (% o f l o f a l p o p u l a l l o n J
Life e x p e c t a n c y a1 birth (years)
I n f a n t m o r t a l i t y ( p e r 1.000 live b i r l h s l
C h i l d m a l n u t r i t i o n 1% o f c h r l d r e n u n d e r t i )
A c c e s s 10 a n i m p r o v e d w a t e r s o u r c e (% o f p o p u l a l i o n )
Illiteracy (% o f p o p u l a l i o n a g e I S + )
G r o s s p r i m a r y e n r o l l m e n l (% o f s c h o o l - a g e p o p u l a l i o n )
Male
Female

50

56

72
13
17
76
95

.

-1

Gross
primary
e n rolim e nt

Access l o imoroved watersource
-Azerbaiian

96

Low-income orouo

~

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981

G D P ( U S S brtlionr)
Gross domestic investmentlGDP
E x p o r t s o 1 Q o o d s a n d services1GDP
Gross domestic savmgsIGDP
Gross national SavingsIGDP
C urrent account balancelGD P
Interest paymenlSlGDP
Total debtlGOP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value OfdebtlGDP
Present value oldebtlexports
(average a n n u a l growlh)
GDP
G D P p e r capita
E x p o r t s o f g o o d s a n d services

0 5

22 2
2 3
16 6
44.4
1981-91

STRUCTURE ofthe ECONOMY
(% o f G D P l
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

2000

2001

2001-05

-0.3

-1.3
0 1

11.1
10.2
18 5

9.0
31 8

9.9

9.8
8.9
18 1

1981

1991

2000

2001

3 1 .O
29.6
16.7

15.9
42.5

33 6

35.4

14.8
41 6
5.3
33.6

73.0
19.4
41 2

66 2
13.7
36 4

56.2
11 1
37.3

1991-01

2000

2001

-0 4

12 1
6 .2
15 3
10.3

11 1
7 4
.3.7
6.9

9 1
17 6
27.5

15 7

Private consumption
G e n e r a I g o v B m m e n t c o n s u m ptio n
I m p o r t s o f g o o d s a n d services

(average a n n u a l growlh)
~griculture
induslry
M anufacturing
Services
Private consumption
G e n e r a l government consumption
Gross domestic investment
imports o f goods a n d services

1981-91

-3 8
.10.1
10.7

10.2

6 0

11 2
13.2

Trade

.

Domestic
savings

Investment

3 5

1991-01

5 .e

E c o n o m i c ratios'

Indebtedness

I

-Azerbaijan

-L o w - m c o m e group

, so0
1.00

zao
0

1

87

88

-001

~

88

88

00

-9-GDP

G r o w t h ofexports a n d imporla (oh)

-* .16-5 37

9 9
*2.4

N o t e 2 0 0 1 d a t a are preliminary e s t i m a t e s
* T h e d i a m o n d s s h o w four k e y indicators In t h e Country (In b o l d ) c o m p a r e d with
be incomple

its

I

p r o w t h o f i n v e s t m e n t a n d G D P (%I

i n c o m e - g r o u p a v e r a g e If d a t a are m i s s i n g the d i a m o n d w i l l

01

I
I
1

Annex A2
Page 2 o f 2

Azerbaijan

~~

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1981

1991

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall sumlusldeficit
TRADE

(US%millions)
Total exports (fob)
Commodity 1
Commodity 2
Manufactures
Total imports (cifl
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1981

1991

2000

2001

1.6
12.5

1.5
2.5

21.2
2.4

-0.6

21.5
4.5
0.9

2000

2001

1,799

2.046

243
1,683

190
1,612

-GDPdeflator

Export and import l e v i s (US<mlll.)
2 500
2000

336

200

167

208
69
417

249
68
366

2000

2001

2,059
2.024
35

2,336
2,130
206

Net income
Net current transfers

-295
73

-332
77

.75

Current account balance

-187

-50

1-25

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

-282
-59

-322
-74

679.6
4,474.2

725.0
4,767.5

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1981

1991

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaVUS%)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1981

1991

2000

2001

1,170
0
216

1,269
0
259

-,

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

114
0
2

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Ofkial creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Pomolio equity

50
146
68
149

68
-11
229

27
0
27
2
26

43
0
43
2
41

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

0

I

+CPI

.

95

96

B?

Exports

w

w

sa

01

w Imports

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0 -5
-10

-1
-

-20

1-10
1-35

'

Composltlon of 2001 debt (US$ mill.)

,

156

118
0
2

A . IBRD
B . IDA
C IMF
~

0. Other multilateral

E - Bilateral

.

F Private
G - Short-term

4/25/03

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

-

CAS Annex B2 Azerbaijan
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of 01/25/03

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

Number o f Projects Under Implementation' I
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Prqjects by Number u,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount (', '
Percent o f Prqjects at Risk by Number ".'
Percent o f Prqjects at Risk by Amount ''.
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Manngement
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$OOO)
Average Supervision (US$OOO/pro,ject)

'

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Prqjects Rated U or HU by Amt

2000

2001

2002

2003

II
2.7
9. I
6.9
18.2
14.7
16.3

13
2.7
7.7
1.7
7.7
1.7
16.9

15
3.2
13.3
2.7
33.3
26.2
13.3

15
4.0
6.7
5.2
33.3
37.9
11.8

No
1,060
96

No
953
73

Yes
1,203
80

Yes
946
63

Since FY 80

3
148.5
33.3
52.2

Last Five FYs
2
87.1
50.0
89.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).

b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent o f projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

*

beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page1 o f 2

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRDADA Program Summary Azerbaijan

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program "
Fiscal year

Proj ID

usww

Strategic Rewrak b

(WML)

Implementation b
Risks (WWL)

2003

BAKU WS (SUPPLMT)
ED SECT DEV. APL
IRRIG DIST SYS & MGMT IMPROVEME
Result

12.9
18.0
30.0
60.9

M
H
M

M
M
L

2004

PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
PENSIONS
ENERGY SECTOR (IBRD)
Result

10.0
10.0
40.0
60.0

H
H
H

M
H
M

2005

ENVIRONMENT
PRSC MBTA 3
RURAL COMM. INFRASTRUCTURE

8.0
20.0
15.0

M
H
M

H
M
M

Result

43.0

AGRICULTURE APL
TRADE FACILITATION
Result

30.0
5.0
35.0

H
H

M
H

Overall Result 2003-2005

163.9

2006*

* 2006 inclined for illustrative purpose only
-3

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

~~

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & M I G A ) for Azerbaijan

Azerbaijan - I F C and M I G A Program, FY 2000-2003
2000 2001 2002 2003
IFC approvals (US$m)

0.00 0.06

1.75

100
100

100

100

00

0

0

Sector (YO)

FINANCE & INSURANCE

Total

0

00

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

65.4 40.6

0

38.0 33.2

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

m

country FinancialAccountabilityAssemrent
Trade FacilitationSlmtegy
Trade Diapxtic Study
Public EymditmReview
Poverty A5s"t
Electricity&"I
Gas, Oil &A~lvisoryTA
MaiicipalIi.lfiTlstruCtureSurvey
FYI34
M e t i n gand Agro-processingIsmStudy
Energywmstudy
R u d Inpact of UtilityPrice Changes
Financialsector Asssrtmt (FSAP)
BusinessEnvironmfflt study
HealthSector CapacityBuilding
S. CaucasusTelecorrdPPLAF(Regional)
S. CaucasusTrade Facilitation

FYo2

100

Kci ps

FY03
F'Y03
NO3
F'Y03
FY03
FY03
NO3

23
40
139
93
355
21
52

KG, PS
PD, PS
PD, PS
KG PD, PS
KG
KG
KG, ps

mo4

80
100
50
0
203
30
11
17

KG, ps
KG,
KG, PS
KG
KG, PD
KG,ps
Kci ps
PD, PS

140
44
100
72

KG
PD, KG
KG PD, PS
KG, PS

Wo4
No4
FYo4
No4
FYM
No4
FYo4

FYOS
IT05
NOS
FY05

-,

a GOvemmnt (G),donor @), Bank (B), public dismination(T?).
b. Knodedgegenetation(KG), public debate (PD), problemsolving(PS).

Annex B5
Page 1 of 2

AzerbaijanSocial Indicatots
Sam region/icome group

Iatest single year

Europe&
1970-75 1980-85 199400
POPUL4TION
Total population, mid-year (millim)
Gromthrate (%annual average for period)
h
population(%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per m)

5.7
1.9
51.5
3.9

6.7
1.6
53.6
2.9

8.0
1.o
57.3
2.0

68.1

INCOME,

GNI per capita (LE$)
Consprice index (1995-100)
Foodpriceindex(1995=100)

2001

S h e of incorrr: or consunption
Gini index
L"tquintile (%of i t " or consunption)
Hig@t qwntile (%of imor mun@ion)

36.0
6.9
43.3

Low
income

474.3
0.2
65.4
1.6

7459.8
2.0
31.9
3.6

2,010
187

410
140

4.1
4.4
8.8

1.2
3.4

49.6
55.8
42.5

600
115
105

0

Central
Asia

0.365
7.5
44.1

SOclALINDICATORS
Public expendihrre
Health(%of GDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and wlfare (%of GDP)

*:

1.o
3.4
7.5

Annex B5
Page 2 o f 2

Azerbaijan Social Indicators
Net primry school enrollment rate
(?Aofage grozqo)
Total
Male
Female

(Continued)
%
95
97

Access to an improved water source
(?Aof ppulalion)
Total
man

90

76
88
70

99
99
17

93
93

57
57

Rural

Imnunbtion rate
(?Aunder I2 mnth)

Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition( % d e r 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth

@&

Total
Male
Femle

Mortality
Infant (per 1O
, OO live births)
Under 5 (per 1O
, OO live births)
Adult (1559)
Male (per 1O
, OO population)
Female (per 1,OOO population)
Maternal (per 100,OOO live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (“A)

68
65
72

69
66
73

72
68
75

69
64
74

59
58
60

37

29

13
21

20
25

76
115

247
117

262
127

207
103
37
99

298
127

294
26 1

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than halfthe unit show Net enrollrne~~~ios
exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
txheen the estimates of school-age populationand reportedenrollment data

2002 World Developmnt Indicators CDROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

-

Azerbaijan Key Econonic Indicatm

100
20
37
36

100
18
35
43

100
18
39
39

100
16
43
35

100
15
42
34

100
14
41
32

100
17
40
34

100
17
39

36

100
16
42
34

100
14
48
30

90
37
1
36

98
36
2
34

87
29
1
28

82
19
1
18

69
27
2
25

66
42
4
38

67
56
5
52

74
57
4
53

68
48
3
45

59
42
3
38

29
53

23
55

28
42

39
38

41
37

44
51

45
68

38
69

40
56

46
46

Gross Qrrestic savings

10

2

Grw m i d savings'

13

18

31

34

33

26

32

41

11

3

13

14

26

29

27

22

27

34

3%2

4446

4581

5273

5708

6124

6882

7345

8121

9145

410

510

570

616

660

699

772

832

905

1005

10.0

7.4

11.1

9.9

10.6

9.2

8.8

10.5

13.9

9.0
18.7
16.7

6.5
14.3
12.7

10.2
13.6
14.8

9.0
-7.6
-6.1

9.7
1.3
-0.8

8.4
10.6
10.9

7.9
13.7
16.3

9.7
-1.9
-26

13.0
-4.1
-5.0

100

4.8
-3.5
-6.2

-9

1150
808

1010
678

1283
1027

2059
1799

2336
2016

2667
2305

3072
2685

2820
2398

3271
2813

4336
3837

2101
1375
-951
46
-971

2417
1716
-1407
69
-1356

1917
1433
-634
81
-601

2024
1539
35
73
-187

2130
1465
206
77
-50

3121
1823
-454
70
-769

4701
3100
-1630
77
-2016

5040
3416
-2219
84
-2544

4579
3053
-1308
90
-1727

4385
2980
-49
105
-724

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

..

2X4
2%
1591
%5
8 2 4 3 8 3 8 4 2 9 5
126
123
131
131
-44
315
253
I64
-55
-126
-177
-484

1CE
-243

222
121
140
-19
-295

1018
32
167
-135
-276

-152

-59

-74

-35

-55

-74

-71

-52

-31.7

-13.8

0.7

3.6

-7.4

-23.7

-30.2

-161

4.5

-17.5
-15.7
-25.7
9.7

-19.9
-180
-294
26.3

11.7
11.5
125
-19.8

185
36.8
420
13.2

31.8
43.6
-25.5
-24

15.2
7.7
27.0
23.7

-1.2
28
8.5
64.3

9.9
5.7
67
10.2

34.8
35.6
4.7
-10.5

45.9
63.4
1.6
-25

..

19.1
189
0.2
1.9
20

19.6
21.9
-23
1.6
26

185
19.9
-1.4
3.9
7.0

212
188
24
3.0
3.5

21.5
17.0
4.5
3.5
25

280
228
5.2
5.7
3.1

280
23.5
4.5
64
23

27.7
227
5.0
5.1
22

27.6
222
5.4
4.8
20

233
19.8
5.5
4.7
3.6

..

13.1
33.6

11.0
-86

10.9
8.7

11.0
1.9

128
7.7

128
14.8

13.6
111

14.4
13.8

14.4
164

14.1
153

..

45.7
9.3
6.0

47.8
985
4 5

61.7
la21
63.4

lc0.0
-,lOO.O
ic0.0

&3
981
87.9

84.4
101.2
8.5

9.6
101.7
95.1

80.9
101.7
n3

70.4
101.5
67.4

65.8
lW.7
a9

3.7
9.2

48
-1.0

-85

22
125

13
25

3.3
0.7

25
4. I

25
-1.9

25
0.0

25
21

1093
11
26
-14
9

ICE4
49
73
-24
224

550
207
139
68
-4

-143

59

..

-24.0

..
..

..

..
..

._

..
..
..

22

149

341
239

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1
Azerbaijan

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

- Key Exposure Indicators

1997

Actual
1998
1999

Estimate
2001
2002

2000

Projected
2004
2005

2003

2006

507

708

1038

1170

1269

1384

I452

1541

1641

1737

138

181

320

238.7

139.6

167.2

1260

123.5

131.1

130.7

78

24

86

114

118

173

141

121

103

110

43.5
12.8
6.7
23.0

67.4
15.9
2.3
23.1

78.9
22.7
6.5
29.1

50.4
19.7
4.2
33.7

50.1
20.5
4.9
35.9

47.6
20.7
4.4

45.1
20.1
5.6

51.5
19.8
5.0

47.1
19.0
3.7

37.8
17.4
2.4

0.0
87.5

0.0
53.1

0.0
48.5

0.0
49.5

0.0
64.1

0.0
63.3

0.0
68.0

0.0
78.8

0.0
82.4

0.0
81.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

disbursed (TDO) (USSm)"
Net disbursements (US$m)"

Total debt service (TDS)

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%I

TDO/XG s
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaliTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (YO)
IBRD DYpublic DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS

IBRD TDO (US$mld
O f which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (YO)

IDA TDO (US$mld

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1I 6

141

199

216

259

303

332

353

363

365

16.5

19.2

19.2

65.4

40.6

38.0

33.2

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use M l M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e . Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As Of 04/25/03
(InUS Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval Company
1999 h o c 0 Caspian
1998 herb. JV Bank
1997198
Baku Coca Cola
1999 Baku Hotel
1999 Early Oil Fin
1999 Lukoil Overseas
I999 Turkish Petrol
1999 Unocal Chirag

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
25.4
0
0 1.66 25.4
0
0 1.66
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
3.5
0
0
0
3.5
0
0
0
13.13
0
0
0 13.13
0
0
0
11.95
0
0 0.78 11.95
0
0 0.78
14.93
0
0 0.97 14.93
0
0 0.97
10.08
0
0 0.66 10.08
0
0 0.66
15.01
0
0 0.98 15.01
0
0 0.98
94

1

0

5.05

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
2002 McrofinBank h e
0 1.750
0
0
200 1 h e r JV Increase
0 0.60
0
0
Total Pending Commitment:

0

1.810

0

0

94

1

0

5.05

e,

W

m

Y

Y

-0

N

3

0

Y

o
c
p c v
m

”

u

t

3

w

e

Y

L

U

C

S m

_.

VI

.-C

E
c!

on

2

a
n
w
a
I

g

_.

m

0

Y

-0

9

-*

-a
m
C

on

.-s

e,

m

4-

-0

4x

5
0

a

a

5

...

a

fi

E

-

N

ti

s

c)

z
a

e,
f

a

2
9
-

n

d

Annex B10
Page 1 o f 2

Azerbaijan--CAS Summary o f Development Priorities

Network area

Country
performance a

Major issue h

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reduction

* Economic policy

Public sector

Fair

Excellent

Country
Bnrik
Reconcilintion
priority c priority c of country and
Bank priorities d

Distrib.of growth
espec. i n urban
areas outside
Baku.

High

Consistent track
record o f
macro stability

High

High

SAC 11, PER policy
dialogue & close
coordination with
I M F Program

Mod.

High

SAC 11, PER, CPAR,
CFAA and IBTA -11
Strengthen
govemance

High

Participatory PRSP

& CAS focusing

on non-oil sector
devel., health, ed.,
& SOC. Protection

Poor to Fair Weak
admin.
capacity

Fair

Poor social
assistance for
one -parent
households

Low

Mod.

Analytical work
through surveys
to raise
awareness

Fair

Low effectiveness

Mod.

High

Bank & Gov.
focus on
curriculum &
management
issues

Health, nutrition &
population

Poor

Corruption & low
political commitment
to reform; system
at the service o f
providers, not clients.

Low

High

Enhanced dialogue,
evidence-based
advocacy,
supporting ESW

Social protection

Low

Poorly targeted
social
assistance

High

High

Pension &
SOC.Assist.
Project

Gender

Human Development
Department
Education

-,

Annex B10
Page 2 o f 2

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development

Azerbaijan--CAS Summary o f Development Priorities
(continued)

Rural development

Fair

High transaction costs/
poorly developed
market infrastruct.

High

High

Decent. of
infrastruct. services
& marketing channels

Environment

Low

Indust. liabilities &
weak protected
area management

Mod.

Mod.

Dialogue on improved
environ. management
of indust. pollution &
protected areas

Social development

Good

Social exclusion o f IDPs
& other weak groups

High

High

Dialogue on needsbased approach to
benefits & transparency
in budgeting

Low

Community participat.
in gov. decision making

Mod.

High

Decentralization &
dialogue on CDD

Financial sector

Fair

Inadequate financ.
infrastruct., low
access & high cost o f
financ. services

High

High

SAC 11, policy
dialogue, FSTA

Private sector

Fair

Weak business
envir., poorly
functioning markets,
high barriers to SME
entry & growth

High

High

SAC 11 policy
dialogue, IBTA,
PSD project
IFC dialogue

Energy & Infrastructure

Fair

Poor financial &
managerial performance,
weak corporate governance

High

High

SACII, IBTA I1
policy dialogue,
energy project

Transport

Low

Weak corporate
governance,
management, taxation&
cot recovery & poor
condition o f nearly all
infrastructure

High

Mod.

Greater reliance on
own resources &
cost recovery

Water

Fair

Government engaged in
ambitious reform program;
too early to assess outcome

Mod.

Government relies
increasingly on private
sector

Finance, Private Sector

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g. for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary
completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution'
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "hig
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for ex ple, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing
dialogue.
.I'

MAP SECTION

