Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 32141-PH

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
April 19,2005

Philippines Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

DATE OF LAST CAS
April 2002
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(As of April 2005)

Currency Unit =

Peso

US$l.OO =

P 54

P 1.00 =

US$O.O19

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

Metric System

FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

IBRD

IFC

Vice President:

Jemal-ud-din Kassum, EAP

Assad J. Jabre, ClOVP

Country Director:
Country Manager:

Joachim von Amsberg, EACPF

Javed Hamid, CEADR
Vipul Bhagat, CEARI

Task Team
Leaders:

Susan Hume, EACPQ

Omar Chaudry, CEADR
Gerald Baldivia, CGMPG

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY (CAS)
THE PHILIPPINES

-

Fiscal Years 2006 2008

Supporting a Stronger Social Contract:
Public Institutions that Work for the Common Good
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary...................................................................................
I. Country Context and Development Challenges.................................................
Country Endowments
Development Outcomes and Challenges
Country Directions

..................................................

II. The Bank Group and Philippines Partnership
Lessons Learned and Messages from Stakeholders
Overview of Engagement Strategy
National Platform
Local Platform
Private Sector Platform

111. Delivering the Bank Group Program.. ............................................................
Managing the Portfolio
Lending
Providing Analytical and Advisory Activities and Sharing Knowledge
Partnering to Achieve Greater Impact
Managing Risks
Managing for Results
Organizing Ourselves to Deliver

-

i iii

1

16

29

Text Tables and Figures
Table 1
Table 2
Figure 3
Table 4
Figure 5
Table 6
Figure 7
Figure 8
Figure 9
Figure 10
Figure 11
Table 12
Table 13

Accounting for Growth
Competitiveness Ranking of East Asian Countries
Firms’ Perceptions of Constraints
Comparison of East Asian Countries’ Infrastructure
Distribution of Income
Student Performance on Mathematics and Science Tests
Governance Indicators Among East Asian Countries
Overview of Engagement Strategy
National Platform
Local Platform
Private Sector PlatForm
CAS Trigger Matrix FYO6-08
CAS-Level Results

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used b y recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without W o r l d B a n k authorization.

Text Boxes
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5

Millennium Development Goals: Summary of the Philippines’ Progress
Supporting Reconstruction and Development in Mindanao
Strengthening the Anticorruption Arsenal
Using Sector-Wide Approaches (SWAps) in National Program Support Operations
Reaching Out: Knowledge for Development Centers

CAS Annexes
Annex 1 CAS Completion Report
Annex 2 CAS Consultation and Client Survey Summary
Annex 3 Country Financing Parameters for the Philippines
CAS Standard Annex Tables
Annex A I Key Economic and Program Indicators
Annex A2 Country At a Glance
Annex B2 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3 Indicative List of Possible Projects
Annex 84 Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Annex 85 Key Economic Indicators
Annex B6 Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B7 Operations Portfolio
Annex B8 Statement of MIGA’s and IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9 CAS Results Framework
Annex BIO Bank Group Activities Mapped According to CAS Themes and Platforms
Annex B11 Environment Indicators
Map of the Philippines (IBRD 33466)

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
Analytical and advisory activities
ADB Asian Development Bank
APL
Adjustable Program Loan
ARCDP Agrarian Reform Communities Development
Project
ARMM Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
ASEM Asia-Europe Meeting
BIR
Bureau of Internal Revenue
BOC Bureau of Customs
CAS Country Assistance Strategy
CDD Community-Driven Development
CG
Consultative Group
CPSD Consolidated Public Sector Deficit
DA
Department of Agriculture
DAR Department of Agrarian Reform
DBM Department of Budget and Management
DENR Department of Environment and Natural
Resources
DepEd Department of Education
DOF Department of Finance
DOH Department of Health
DPL
Development Policy Lending
DPWH Department of Public Works and Highways
DSWD Department of Social Welfare and
Development
FSAP Financial Sector Assessment
FY
Fiscal year
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environmental Facility
GFI
Government Financial Institutions
GNP Gross National Product
GOCC Government-Owned and Controlled
Corporation
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
IDF
Institutional Development Fund

IFC
International Finance Corporation
IMF
International Monetary Fund
JBlC Japan Bank for International Cooperation
JSDF Japan Social Development Fund
KDC Knowledge for Development Center
LGU Local Government Unit
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MlGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MlLF Mor0 Islamic Liberation Front
MNLF Mor0 National Liberation Front
MRDP Mindanao Rural Development Project
MTPDP Medium-Term Philippine Development
Plan
MWCl Manila Water Company Incorporated
MWSS Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage
Systems
NEDA National Economic and Development
Authority
NFPS Non-Financial Public Sector
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NPC National Power Corporation
ODA Official Development Assistance
OED Operations Evaluation Department
PHRD Policy and Human Resources Development
Fund
PSALM Power Sector Assets and Liabilities
Management Corporation
QAG Quality Assurance Group
SEMP Social Expenditure Management Project
SME Small and Medium Enterprise
SWAP Sector-wide approach
TA
Technical assistance
TEEP Third Elementary Education Project
UNDP United Nations Development Program
VAT
Value-added tax
WBI
World Bank Institute

Executive Summary
Country Context and Development Challenges
i.
The Philippines enjoys a tremendous range of assets to draw upon for its
development. Government, business, and academia benefit from world-class talent and the
high level of overseas employment reflect international demand for its labor force. It is
considered one of the most biologically rich and diverse countries in the world, with
substantial mineral, oil, gas, and geothermal potential. Being located in the dynamic East
Asia region, the private sector is well-positioned to exploit trade opportunities. And, the
country benefits from a very active civil society that can be an important agent for change.

ii.
Despite these endowments, however, overall development outcomes in the Philippines
over the last decades have fallen short of potential. Per capita growth has lagged significantly
behind other East Asian countries. Relatively low domestic and foreign investment flows
reflect weaknesses in the investment climate. Firms consider macroeconomic instability,
corruption, and poor infrastructure as significant constraints. Macroeconomic instability, in
particular, is attributed to weak fiscal performance and a high level of public debt. Closely
linked to these challenges is the lack of social inclusion. Income inequality remains high,
excluding the poor from their share of the income benefits generated by growth.
iii.
The contrast between the country’s human and physical assets and its modest
development outcomes is perplexing. Ultimately, this can be explained by the limited ability
of public institutions to resist capture by special interests and to work effectively for the
common good, a sign of a frail social contract between the government and its citizens. Put
succinctly, this has created a vicious cycle of weak public services, lack of trust in the
government, and an unwillingness to provide adequate resources to it. As a result, the
Philippines has been unable to achieve its development potential.
iv.
There is widespread consensus concerning the basic institutional and political
diagnosis of the development challenges. This creates the opportunity for change. If
citizens begin to see that public institutions are improving their governance and delivery of
services, they are more likely to vest authority and provide resources to the state. A
stronger state will be able to increase social inclusion and cohesiveness. Increased
revenues will improve fiscal balances, increase investor confidence, and thus spur a
virtuous cycle of more effective public institutions, growth, and poverty reduction.
The economic and social aspects of the reform agenda supported by this CAS are
v.
inseparable. The Philippines poverty reduction strategy, in fact, is integrally embodied in the
development strategy of this CAS with its two objectives (economic growth and social
inclusion) and two levers (fiscal stability and improved governance). Higher and sustained
growth would need to be the major driver of poverty reduction through jobs and income
creation (despite the lesser effect of growth on poverty reduction under high income
inequality). With more social inclusion the poor would be empowered and enabled to
participate in the opportunities afforded by economic growth, supported by public spending
targeted to the poor as well as institutional reforms for market access and participation in
decision processes. Fiscal reforms, in turn, are essential for growth, for the prevention of
crises that inevitably would hurt the poor severely, and for building-up effective social
spending that reaches the poor. Finally, governance improvements would focus on
institutional changes that let the state deliver its core services to all citizens, especially the
poor who are often excluded.

ii

u

At the national level, ~
~
ce and f i ~ ~ n ~within
ing
gb
~ wit1 require
~
~
e

~

~

~

~

~

i

~

#

iii
tool to monitor progress, evaluate impact, and adjust accordingly. In doing so, we will apply a
key lesson: the need for the Bank Group to be realistic in what it can influence over the CAS
period in a middle-income country in which Bank Group resources are comparatively small.

Delivering the Bank Group Program
ix.
Our strategy seeks to provide the most value through the appropriate level and blend
of lending, advice, and knowledge sharing. The Bank Group’s effectiveness will depend, to
a large degree, on the extent of political appetite for reform and the pace of change. Thus,
the CAS is designed to be opportunistic in responding to reform efforts. Under any
scenario, the approach focuses on the medium-term institutional challenges and addresses
the complexity of the country’s broader development challenges.
x.
The scale of IBRD commitments will be determined by progress on fiscal reforms,
reflecting the overarching importance of fiscal adjustment in the short-term and the need to
mitigate and manage risks. If the opportunity arises, the CAS can aggressively support
urgent fiscal reforms. Assuming a scenario of modest fiscal reform, the Bank’s base case
program would fall within a range of US$450-900 million of investment lending for the threeyear CAS period. In a high case scenario, reflecting substantial and sustained fiscal
reforms, the Bank would be prepared to provide total lending, including development policy
lending (DPL), of up to US$1.8 billion over three years. Entry into the high case could occur
once a track record of policies and associated outcomes have been established, with a
reduction of the consolidated public sector deficit of 2 percent of GDP relative to 2004,
compatible with a deficit reduction of 3 percent of GDP during the 2005-07 period.
Substantial progress toward the high case would be considered in an enhanced base case,
characterized by steady progress in strengthening public sector revenues and reducing the
public sector deficit. IFC operations for the three-year period are anticipated to be about
US$350 million.

xi.

In the Philippines there has been remarkable receptivity for the Bank Group’s
analytical and advisory activities (AAA). Given the impact of such activities, AAA support
will be essential irrespective of the size of the lending program. Trust funds will continue to
play a critical role in supporting AAA. Knowledge sharing will also continue to be an integral
business line of the Bank Group. We will leverage both our financial and non-lending
support through deeper coordination with development partners.

Suggested Topics for Board Discussion
Board members may wish to discuss, among others, the following aspects of this
xii.
CAS:
The suitability of the core design elements of the CAS, intended to maximize the
Bank Group’s impact.
0

The adequacy of the proposed lending scenarios.

0

The scope of collaboration between the Bank, IFC, and MIGA.
The realism of the results framework for a middle-income borrower like the
Philippines, where past development achievements have been limited and the Bank
Group’s financial contribution is a modest one.

1. Country Context and Development Challenges
Country Endowments
I.
The Philippines has a tremendous range of assets to draw upon for its development.
Perhaps the greatest asset of the Philippines is its people. Government, business, and
academia benefit from world-class talent. While there are concerns about the quality of
education and thus of the labor force going forward, the Philippines is still reaping the benefits
from its past investments in education. The huge proportion of overseas workers (7.8 million in
2003 or 25 percent of the active labor force) may reflect the lack of adequate employment
opportunities at home, but it also represents the global demand for the skills, English
proficiency, and adaptability of the Filipino work force.
In terms of natural resources, the Philippines is considered to be one of the world’s most
2.
bio-diverse countries. Mineral resources cover about 30 percent of total land area. Oil, gas,
and geothermal potential are substantial, as are the opportunities for expanding world-class
tourism. And, the Philippines is located in the dynamic East Asia region, which has grown
significantly faster than other regions and is now growing at its swiftest pace since before the
1997 financial crisis. Economic growth in the region (excluding Japan) is expected to exceed 7
percent in 2004. Intra-regional trade has expanded sharply, supported particularly by strong
demand from China. The Philippines has benefited substantially from this growth. Between
2001 and 2003, China’s imports from the Philippines grew by 224 percent, significantly
outpacing other East Asian comparators and the regional average (81 percent), albeit from a
low base.
3.
The Philippines economy has the basis for a vibrant private sector -- outward orientation
with a strong export sector, liberal domestic and foreign investment regimes, and good
entrepreneurial and managerial talents. And, the country is well-positioned in several dynamic
sectors. In particular, electronics account for over 60 percent of total exports. As a location for
offshore information technology (IT), the Philippines already compares relatively well in terms of
financial competitiveness and human resource skills. Tourism is growing fast worldwide and the
Philippines has the comparative advantage to tap this growing market.
The country also benefits from a very active civil society. The level of public debate is
4.
high. The dense network of non-governmental, civic, and religious organizations, free mass
media, and articulate urban class constitute a potential agent for change unlike any found in
other East Asian societies.

Development Outcomes and Challenges’
5.
Despite the Philippines’ considerable resources and advantages, overall development
outcomes over the last decades have fallen short of potential. Per capita growth has been
much lower than in neighboring countries, and the reduction in poverty has been only modest.
Because of weak fiscal performance and the accumulation of debt following the 1997 Asian
financial crisis, the country has experienced substantial macroeconomic vulnerability. The
contrast between the country’s human and physical assets and its modest development

’

Detailed analysis of the country’s economic situation is presented in the Developmenf Policy Review, to be
distributed to the Executive Directors of the World Bank in tandem with this CAS. For additional analysis
covering a broad range of themes and sectors, see the Discussion Briefs prepared in 2004 by Bank staff to
inform the policy dialogue among various levels and branches of government as well as other development
partners (available through the website: www.worldbank.org.ph).

2
outcomes is perplexing. This CAS is built on the emerging consensus of many within the
country that this conundrum is due to the inability of public institutions to resist capture by
special interests and thus promote the common good. As the result of a weak state and its
limited ability to provide public goods and services, the Philippines has been unable to achieve
its development potential.
6.
Many scholars assess that relics of traditional governance structures, established during
colonial rule, have endured in the form of informal networks of power outside of the state that
remained influential, while the state itself remained fractured.* Parts of public governance have
not kept pace with the modernization of other parts of society and the economy leading to a
curious coexistence of modern institutions and a sophisticated economy with elements of a
patronage-based political and public sector system. Within the country, there remains a
common perception that elements of the state serve fragmented groups and narrow vested
interests.
7.
The weakness of many public institutions and their difficulties in working for the common
good reflect a frail social contract between the state and its citizens. Because citizens perceive
that they do not receive the services that they deserve, they are reluctant to vest authority in the
government and provide it with sufficient resources. This leads to inadequate public sector
finances that further hamper the government’s ability to effectively deliver services, particularly
social services to the poor, like education and health. Because weak public finances reduce
investor confidence, the economy is also deprived of much needed investments that are critical
to growth. Together this creates a vicious cycle in which economic growth is less than its
potential, thus impeding poverty reduction and social inclusion, in the context of weak public
f inances.
8.
Given broad agreement on the basic diagnosis and the direction of needed reform, the
Philippines has the opportunity to turn the vicious into a virtuous cycle. Stronger growth since
2001, the election of a new administration, and early actions to improve revenues and
strengthen governance, provide a valuable opportunity to address development challenges.
The government’s plans for dealing with these challenges are laid out in the 2004-2010 Medium
Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP), released in November 2004. Developed with
close involvement of the President and wide participation of government agencies, the MTPDP
is based on a number of pillars that cover sector reforms and cross-cutting issues, including
inter alia: building a performance-oriented, service-based public sector; enhancing fiscal
discipline; enforcing anti-corruption measures; increasing investment in human resources; and
improving overall competitiveness and private sector development. Some of the key result
targets of the MTPDP are identified under Country Development Goals in Annex B9, as context
for the specific goals of this CAS.
9.
The economic and social aspects of the reform agenda supported by this CAS are
inseparable. The Philippines poverty reduction strategy, in fact, is integrally embodied in the
development strategy of this CAS with its two objectives (economic growth and social inclusion)
and two levers (fiscal stability and improved governance). Higher and sustained growth would
need to be the major driver of poverty reduction through jobs and income creation (despite the
lesser effect of growth on poverty reduction under high income inequality). With more social
inclusion the poor would be empowered and enabled to participate in the opportunities afforded
by economic growth, supported by public spending targeted to the poor as well as institutional
reforms for market access and participation in decision processes. Fiscal reforms, in turn, are

*

See references in Corruption’s Obstructions: Assessing the Impact of Rents, Corruption, and Clientelism on
Capitalist Development in the Philippines, by Paul D. Hutchcroft, University of Wisconsin-Madison, April 11,
1996.

3
essential for growth, for the prevention of crises that would inevitably hurt the poor severely, and
for building-up effective social spending that reaches the poor. Finally, governance
improvements would focus on institutional changes that let the state deliver its core services to
all citizens, especially the poor who are often excluded. The following sections consider these
country development challenges in more detail.
IO.
Growth Over the past several decades, the Philippines has not been able to enjoy the
overall high levels of growth of other East Asian countries. With a high average annual
population growth rate of 2.6 percent (compared to 1.7 percent in the region) over the 19612003 period, the Philippines has had a correspondingly modest 1.4 percent average annual per
capita GDP growth rate. This compares to an average increase of 5.4 percent in per capita
GDP for seven East Asian comparator countries over the same period.

11.
Economic growth in the Philippines has been on a rising path since 2001, however,
averaging 4.5 percent in 2002-03 and accelerating to its fastest pace in 15 years of 6.1 percent
in 2004 (reflected particularly by growth in the service sector of over 7 percent). The stronger
growth performance since 2001 represents the confluence of several factors. The economy has
benefited from reforms instituted in the late-I 980s. These measures have restructured the
economy to a considerable extent, helping it to integrate more closely to regional and global
trade and investment patterns. The Philippines has also benefited from a favorable external
environment including: robust growth in global ITlelectronics markets which comprise over twothirds of exports; stronger demand in its major markets (Japan and the US); rapid export growth
to China; ample liquidity in government debt markets in both foreign currency and peso
financing; and agricultural growth of about 5 percent in 2004, well above its historical norm.
Questions remain about the sustainability of higher growth, as growth in the Philippines
12.
has been driven largely by consumption rather than by investment. The contribution of
consumption to growth has been among the highest in the region, accounting for over 85
percent of average growth in the Philippines since 1990, fueled by a high level of remittances
from overseas Filipino workers. Remittances increased from US$1.2 billion in 1990 to US$8.3
billion in 2004. Savings and investment as a share of GDP remain lower than other East Asian
countries.
Table 1:
Accounting for Growth
Growth in Output
per Worker

,
Contribution to Growth of:

Physical
Capital
0.8

Philippines (1961-2003)

1.o

OECD (1961-2000*)
Developing Economies (1961-2000*)

2.4
1.4

1.o
0.8

East Asia (7 countries) (1961-2000*)

4.4

2.4

Human
Capital
0.4

Total Factor
Productivity
-0.2

0.3

1.o
0.3

0.5

1.4

0.4

4
13.
Real GDP per worker, a broad measure of labor productivity, increased by only 1
percent a year on average compared to 1.4 percent in all developing countries, and 4.4 percent
in other major East Asian economie~.~
(See Table 1) Similarly, growth in both physical capital
and total factor productivity has been much lower in the Philippines. Total factor productivity
growth was slightly negative on average over the whole period, compared to increases
averaging 1.4 percent a year in other East Asian economies, underscoring private sector
inefficiencies in the Philippines.
14.
Another key determinant of
growth is private investment. Both
volume and productivity of domestic
investments and foreign direct
investment inflows have been lower
than other East Asian countries and
investment horizons of private firms in
Philippines tend to be short term.
Between 2000 and 2004, the
Philippine competitiveness ranking
deteriorated, while that for Malaysia
and Thailand improved (China and
Singapore did not change). (See
Table 2)

Table 2:
Competitiveness Ranking of
East Asian Countries

I

China
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

I 2000 I 2001 I 2002 1 2003 I 2004 I

I

24
43
26
35
2

31

1

26
46
28
39
3

34

I

28
47
24
40
8

31

I

29
57
21
49
4

30

1

24
58
16
52
2
29

Note: These rankings are amongst all countries worldwide; the lower
the number, the more competitive the country.
Source: World Economic Forum (2004)

1

15.
The lackluster investment climate in the Philippines can be attributed to: a fragile fiscal
and debt position; perceived corruption; infrastructure weaknesses; uncertainty and
inconsistency in the application of regulations, especially in the infrastructure sector; concerns
about law and order; the high costs of doing business; and a sluggish financial system. This
assessment was reflected in a recent Investment Climate Survey of more than 700 firms
conducted jointly by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Bank Group in which firms
rated macroeconomic instability and corruption as the two main constraints. Other constraints
commonly cited included tax administration and regulatory policy uncertainty. (See Figure 3).
16.
The banking system is constrained by a high level of non-performing assets, insufficient
provisioning, and a low capital base. The Central Bank is progressively taking steps to improve
compliance with international supervisory and regulatory practices and adopt a consolidated
risk-based supervisory framework. Progress, however, is impeded by weak legal protection for
examiners which limits their ability to intervene and resolve distressed banks. Moreover, bank
secrecy laws limit supervisors’ access to deposit information. A positive development is the
recent confirmation by the international Financial Action Task Force that the Philippines is
effectively implementing anti-money laundering measures.

Credit to the private sector is increasing, but only very slowly. Credit growth is muted
17.
because of high public sector credit demand, which offers banks relatively attractive rates and
lower perceived risks. Thus for robust and sustainable growth, which will induce greater credit
flows, the government will need to curb its demand for funds from the domestic financial system.
This underscores the importance of tax and other fiscal reforms to rein in the fiscal deficit.
Encouragingly, lending to micro and small and medium enterprises is improving. A new and
more inclusive credit information system which is under development will help increase access
Calculations of growth and contributions to growth in this section draw on the database in Bosworth and Collins
(2003), which covers 22 developed and 62 developing economies over the period 1960-2000. Data for the
Philippines was updated through 2003 by the Bank. The seven other East Asian economies referred to in this
discussion are China, Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan (China), and Thailand.

5

to credit to small borrowers (especially to the poor in urban and rural areas), lower credit
transaction and borrowing costs, and improve management of credit risk in general.
Figure 3:
Firms’ Perceptions of Constraints
Percent of Philippine Firms Indicating “Major” or “Very Severe”

Telecomnications
Worker skills and education
Access to financing
Licensing and perrrits
Access to Land
Transportation

I
I
I
I

I
I

h s t o m and trade regulations
Cost of Financing
Anti-conpetitive practices
Labor regulations
Tax adrrinistration
Crime, theft and disorder
Regulatory policy uncertainty
Tax rates
Eectricity
Corruption
Macroeconomic instability

0

10

20

30

40

Source: Asian Development Bank and World Bank (2004); 716 Philippine firms surveyed.

Two other segments of the financial market that raise concerns are the pensions and
18.
pre-needs sectors, the latter providing pre-funded funeral, education, and pension/saving plans.
The slow pace of pension reforms is disquieting and the financial condition and long-term
sustainability of the contractual saving institutions remains tenuous.
19.
Inadequate
Table 4:
infrastructure is
Comparison of East Asian Countries’ Infrastructure
considered a serious
constraint to investment.
The percentage of roads
paved in the Philippines at
around 21 percent is lower
than in Indonesia (46
percent) or Thailand (97
percent). (See Table 4)
The cause for the
weakening state of
infrastructure in the
Philippines can be
Source: World Development Indicators Database; source for telephone and internet
attributed to many of the
data is ITU, Asia-Pacific Telecommunications Indicators (2004).
same factors affecting the
business environment. In particular, inadequate public resources and inefficient use of existing
ones, result in few available resources for infrastructure. Maintenance of infrastructure has
been neglected; funds allocated to road maintenance, for example, have been typically less

6
than 30 percent of estimated needs over the past five years, and half of the paved roads are in
poor condition. Also, there has been weak long-term infrastructure planning by the public
sector; major efforts have tended to be more reactive to crisis situations rather than proactive.
And, despite their expanded mandate, local governments have not increased their expenditures
on infrastructure.
20.
Experience in particular sectors, however, has demonstrated the Philippines’ ability to
achieve striking advances under the right circumstances. The rapid growth of the electronics
industry during the 1990s is the prime example of this. Looking forward, Philippine firms have
tremendous opportunities to benefit from high growth in China and other East Asian countries if
they are able to specialize in specific niche markets. In electronics hardware, for instance, the
Philippines could become a specialized supplier to the Chinese electronics industry. In fact, this
is already happening, with China’s imports of machinery and transport equipment from the
Philippines (principally electronic components) surging by over 250 percent between 2001 and
2003.
21.
Another promising area is the IT Enabled Services sector, which includes segments like
call centers, business process outsourcing, transcription and translation services, content
development (e.g., animation), and other services such as software development, and research
and development. Growth in this sector has been high. The number of “seats” (the key
performance indicator in the call center segment) increased from less than 4,000 in 2001, to
around 35,000 in 2004, and by end-2005 estimated to be 60,000. Prospects going forward are
good for this sector, thanks to the supply of an English-speaking educated workforce, relatively
low cost of commercial space, and access to a decent telecommunication infrastructure.
22.
The mining sector also offers considerable potential. Mining exports declined from
around 20 percent of exports in the mid-1970s to only a 1.6 percent average in 2000-02. A
recent Supreme Court decision has reduced regulatory uncertainty in this sector and initial
investor response has been very positive, with over US$3 billion of new investments identified.
Successful development will depend very much on improving environmental and social
practices which caused substantial problems in the past. There is also considerable potential
for development of agribusiness, in particular for tropical fruits. In the agro industry sector
banana production and exports increased by 83 and 53 percent, respectively, between 1997
and 2003; fresh pineapple exports went up by 40 percent. The tourism sector also holds great
promise given the increasing number of East Asian tourists looking for new destinations.
International tourist arrivals in 2004 increased by more than 30 percent over 2003 and tourism
receipts increased by more than 40 percent, but there is still tremendous growth potential given
the country’s attractive destinations and relatively small share of tourists visiting the region.
Good environmental management would be a key factor for exploiting the growth potential in
this sector.
The extent to which the Philippines will be able to exploit its considerable assets and
23.
achieve growth in high potential sectors will rest on its ability to improve the investment climate.
This, in turn, requires strong public administration and governance, essential to achieving
macroeconomic stability, enforcement of the rule of law and anticorruption measures, and
consistent application of regulations. As part of this growth agenda, the MTPDP recognizes that
over the medium term the private sector will play an increasing role in financing of infrastructure
projects. Hence, the plan’s emphasis on improving public-private partnerships in infrastructure
provision is appropriate (e.g., review the Build-Operations-Transferlaw and its implementing
rules and regulations). Improving the investment climate will also be linked to strengthening the
regulatory capacity and effective protection against non-competitive practices. Stronger public
sector management and regulatory capacity will also be critical for protecting the environment to

7
foster sustainable growth in tourism and mining, and for city planning to ease traffic and make
urban centers more attractive.
24.
Social lnclusion Lack of social inclusion is a serious obstacle to development, one
that is closely linked to the country’s economic and social challenges (as discussed in
paragraph 9 on the framework for poverty reduction in the Philippines). Inequality remains high
in the Philippines. Coupled with low growth over the longer term, this has translated into slow
progress on poverty reduction. The richest 5 percent of households account for nearly one third
of national income, while the poorest 20 percent accounts for only 6 percent. (See Figure 5)
Maybe as a result of unequal distribution of incomes and opportunities, many Filipinos,
especially the poor, are skeptical of economic reforms since they are unable to reap the benefits
of growth. Moreover, they are often not involved in the decision-making process. Thus the
ability of the state to take collective decisions
Figure 5:
and provide public goods and services is
Distribution of Income
impaired.
Household populaeon

Nationalincome

The incidence of poverty, based on
25.
household consumption, has declined
marginally from 27.6 percent in 2000 to 26.1
percent in 2003, after an increase of 2
percentage points between 1997 and 2000.4
Poverty severity remained about the same
between 2000 and 2003 (living standards of
those who remained poor have not improved).
Between 2000 and 2003, poverty incidence fell
Household
National income
in most (11 out of 16) regions, 4 t h the
Source: Philippines Statistical Yearbook 2003
exception of the Mindanao and CARAGA
regions. The highest poverty incidences in 2003 were found in the Autonomous Region in
Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) at 61 percent and Western Mindanao at 49 percent, followed closely
by Bicol and Eastern Visayas at around 45 percent.
26.
Poverty is highest in the agriculture sector and the sector also experienced the slowest
poverty reduction. Agriculture-dependent households account for over two-thirds of the poor
while they represent only 40 percent of the population. The self-employed and the wage
earners in the sector are equally likely to be poor. The incidence of poverty declined twice as
rapidly among households dependent on industry and services than on agriculture. Educational
attainment is a key determinant of poverty. Over three quarters of the poor lived in households
where the head had no more than an elementary education.
Notwithstanding small progress on the poverty front, persistent high income inequality
27.
implies that the poor do not share many of the income benefits generated by growth. In addition
to the lack of growth-related employment opportunities (unemployment rate was about 12
percent in 2004), the poor are often unable to access quality public services. For example, less
than 10 percent of the lowest 20 percent has access to adequate infrastructure services. This
implies that the poor are receiving little or no service, and therefore likely to be benefiting less
from national government programs and subsidies. Moreover, wide income disparities among
regions can be attributed, in part, to regional differences in the level of infrastructure

The poverty estimates are based on household consumption. The consumption-based poverty line of
US$0.72/person/day is constructed to reflect a consumption basket of basic-needs, consisting of a food basket
that provides 2,000 calories per person per day valued at consumer prices in each province, plus a basket of
non-food spending.

8
development. The country's poorest region, the ARMM, has the country's lowest level of access
to safe water, electricity and sanitation, as well as the lowest road density level in the c o ~ n t r y . ~
28.
Environmental degradation is a significant contributor to poverty, inequality, and loss of
livelihood. The Philippines is one of the most hazard prone countries in the world, and natural
disasters have been aggravated by environmental degradation. The impact of environmental
degradation is acutely felt by the rural population, the majority of whom live either in the uplands
or the coastal fringe and substantially relies on their habitat's natural resources for their
sustenance. Pressures on these resources, however, mean that only about 7.2 million hectares
remain forested, compared with 21 million in the early 1900s. Similarly, fish stock has declined
and nearly all of the coral reefs are under medium to high threat by environmental pressures.'
In urban areas, air and water pollution continue to escalate due to weak enforcement of
industrial regulatory policies, exacerbated by overcrowding and an increase in slum areas.
Related to these social costs, the deterioration of the environment also constrains productivity
and economic growth, particularly in such high potential growth sectors as agriculture and
tourism.
29.
Low incomes among the poor are aggravated by low outcomes for other social
indicators. Infant and under-five mortality rates are 2.3 and 2.7 times higher, respectively, for
households in the poorest 20 percent compared to those in the richest 20 percent. School
enrollment rates are 28 percent lower in the poorest group compared to the richest; similarly,
female literacy rates (age 15-49) are 9 percent lower for the poorest group compared to the
richest. Geographic disparities in health and education outcomes also remain high. The
average life expectancy of adults in the ARMM region in 2000, for example, is 10 years lower
that the national level and is at the comparable national level reached in 1970. Elementary
school enrollment rates in the ARMM are around 10 percentage points lower than rates in the
rest of the country; female literacy (age 15-49) is 15 percentage points lower.

I

30.
Education outcomes in the
Philippines are low compared to the rest of
the East Asia region. The Philippines
ranked nearly last in student performance
on mathematics and science tests (See
Table 6). In addition, about one third of
those who enter grade one and about one
quarter of those who enter first year high
school do not reach the last grade in the
cycle. High population growth rates and a
tight fiscal situation contribute to these
outcomes.
31.
The Philippines is likely to reach
several of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), including reducing the

Mathematics
score & rank
604 (1)
587 (2)
585 (3)

Country

I

Singapore
Korea
Taiwan
Hang Kong
Japan
Malaysia
Thailand
Indonesia
Philippines

Not available

I

579
519
467
403
348

(51
(16)
(27)
(34)
(36)

I

Science
score & rank
568 (2)
549 (5)
569 (1)
530 (15)
550 (41
492 (22)
482 (24)
435 (32)
345 (36)

See the World Bank report Meeting the Infrastructure Challenge in the Philippines (2005 forthcoming),
Philippines Environment Monitor 2004, World Bank.

I

9
maternal mortality, contraceptive prevalence, and other policies to address very high population
growth. (See Box 1) Progress on addressing child malnutrition has been particularly weak,
declining only from about 34 percent of children (0-5 years) underweight in 1990 to 28 percent
in 2003, far above the MDG target of around 17 percent for 2015. Placing the Philippines back
on track to realize these MDGs will require better growth and employment opportunities, as well
as concerted efforts to improve the delivery of basic public services to the poor.
Finally, social exclusion is manifest in, and reinforced by social conflicts in Mindanao and
32.
in other parts of the country, as well as a sense of a lack of personal security.’ (See Box 2)
While public decision-making is formally open to all members of society, the effective
participation of the poor and other marginalized groups is often limited. Their diminished social
inclusion and sense of disenfranchisement make policy making, especially the implementation
of hard reforms, all the more difficult because many groups of the population may not expect to
share in the benefits of public services and reforms.
33.
Allowing the poor and vulnerable groups to benefit more from the gains of economic
growth requires significant investments in human development. The MTPDP’s focus on key
anti-poverty areas will be important, namely: acceleration of asset reform; provision of human
development and social services (health and education); livelihood and employment; social
protection and security from violence; and participation of the poor in decision-making.
34.
Fiscal Stability A weak fiscal position is the main cause of concern regarding public
finances and macroeconomic stability. Non-Financial Public Sector (NFPS) debt has grown at
an unsustainable pace in recent years, exceeding 101 percent of GDP in 2003. Debt of the
national government was nearly five times its revenue, significantly higher than average ratios
for emerging markets. Interest payments of the national government reached 5.4 percent of
GDP in 2004, and total public sector interest payments are estimated at about 7 percent of
GDP. While the debt profile has been carefully managed and pushed out to longer maturities,
the public sector’s borrowing requirement remains high. Until debt levels and financing
requirements are brought down, the Philippines will remain vulnerable to shifts in investor
sentiment and market conditions.
The rapid increase in NFPS debt has been driven by large deficits due primarily to
35.
declining tax collection, and rising power sector losses through 2004. Tax revenue dropped
from 17 percent of GDP in 1997 to 12.3 percent in 2004. Several measures to strengthen tax
administration were taken during the past two years, which slowed but did not stop the decline
in tax effort. Poor tax collection reflects both policy and administrative weaknesses. VAT
exemptions, for example, remain significant, with dispensation for select groups (e.g.,
independent power producers, lawyers, doctors). Despite the perception of widespread tax
evasion, successful prosecution has, up to now, been rare.
36.
Public debt figures reflect not only past deficits, but also the calling of numerous
contingent claims on government and bailouts of government-owned corporations. But NFPS
debt does not include existing contingent liabilities of the government arising from such
commitments as: guarantees on risks from build-operate-transfer contracts; currency risks
associated with foreign loans intermediated by government financial institutions; liquidity support
to troubled banks; and future obligations of the government-run contractual savings system. Of
particular concern are the finances of the social security system, which given the present
package of benefits and contributions is expected to suffer increasing losses and eventually
deplete its assets in about ten years.
Crime, theft, and disorder were considered to be a major constraint to business by over 25 percent of firms
surveyed in the 2004 Investment Climate Survey.

10

37.
The country’s tenuous fiscal and debt situation is ultimately the result of deeper causes
related to weak public institutions and a frail social contract, discussed earlier. The difficulties
faced by the state in improving its revenues not only undermines macroeconomic stability, but it
also has profound implications for human development and growth prospects. Spending on
essential services has suffered from expenditure compression. Public sector investments
declined from 3.3 to 2.8 percent of GDP during 2000-03. Since 1997 real per capita spending
by the national government on education and health has fallen by 19 and 43 percent,
respectively, causing deterioration in these services. Public investment as a share of GDP

11

remains among the lowest in the region. High domestic and external public financing
requirements have driven spreads upwards and increased risk premia for the country.
Emerging Market Bond Index spreads for the Philippines stand at about 500 basis points (as of
early 2005). The high interest income from government bonds, coupled with their zero risk
weighting for bank capital requirements, have created a corresponding disincentive for banks to
lend to the private sector.
38.
Overall, a considerable upfront fiscal adjustment will be essential to send a strong and
credible signal to the domestic and international financial markets that the government -- both
the executive and legislative branches -- is committed to serious reform. This would improve
policy credibility and lower perceived risks by investors, yielding direct benefits of lower interest
rates, a stronger peso, and higher investment and growth. The subsequent savings in financing
costs alone would be large enough to support funding for several of the improvements in
services and infrastructure identified in the MTPDP.
39.
Recent progress is encouraging -- actions to increase excise taxes and adjust power
tariffs, as well as progress in Congress on revenue bills have sent a positive signal about the
ability to enact policy. In addition to reducing public spending in response to revenue
constraints, the government has also implemented a process to review budget proposals
against core agency mandates and performance indicators Of course not all necessary actions
can be initiated simultaneously and many will require further consensus building and
Congressional action.

The MTPDP outlines several legislative and administrative measures to improve the
40.
fiscal situation. Beyond the VAT reform, these measures include raising petroleum excise taxes
and rationalizing the present configuration of fiscal incentives. Equally important, tax
administration needs to be strengthened, specifically actions to reduce corruption, improve
discipline, and recognize and reward integrity in the revenue agencies. In addition to revenue
enhancement, the government aims at
Figure 7:
imposing greater discipline in
Governance
Indicators
Among East Asian Countries
Government-Owned and Controlled
Corporations (GOCC) financing;
addressing contingent liabilities,
El Average of
particularly related to the power sector
Corruption
9 other
E Asian
and pension obligations; and making
Countnes
Rule of Law
adjustments in inter-governmental
a Philippines
finances. The MTPDP also includes
Regulatory
measures to rationalize government
Quality
spending, improve budget allocation,
Government
and streamline the bureaucracy.
Effectiveness
Political
4 1.
Effectiveness of Public
Stability
Institutions The issue of governance
Voice &
in the Philippines presents another
Accountability
paradox. The country enjoys an active
-1 .o
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.o
and vocal civil society, open media, and
vibrant public debate. In addition, the
Note: The six indicators aggregate several hundred survey-based variables on
public administration benefits from
perceptions of governance for almost 200 countries and territories. The
many highly competent individuals,
indicators are normally distributed with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of
1. The nine other East Asian economies are China, Hong Kong (China),
especially at the top levels of the
Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan (China), Thailand, and Vietnam.
bureaucracy. Despite these attributes,
Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2004), WBI Governance Indicators.
there remains a strong perception of
“capture of the state” that biases public decision-making towards favoring narrow interests.

12

Indeed, governance indicators from a cross-country database indicate that, despite democratic
processes, rule of law, political stability, and control of corruption are lower in the Philippines
than in other East Asian comparator economies. (See Figure 7)
42.
Like other countries, the Philippines is
in a transition from traditional, clientilistic
governance towards a modern state in which
citizens provide resources to, and vest powers
in their government in return for accountability
for the delivery of public goods and services.
The country is seeking to build a stronger state,
not necessarily a bigger one, which can raise
adequate public finance and deliver public
goods and services efficiently. As the
experience of many of its East Asian neighbors
illustrate, a stronger state is a precondition for
robust private-sector-drivengrowth and greater
social inclusion.

“A consensus has also emerged in the past decade
among scholars that, first, the Philippines has had a
weak state; and, second, that the weakness of the
Philippine state has been the country’s overarching
problem that explains its inability to develop the
economy and alleviate poverty. There are two
essential attributes of a strong state. First, it is
autonomous of dominant classes and sectors, so
that it represents the people’s interest, both minority
and powerful groups. Second, it has the capacity,
represented mainly through a strong bureaucracy, to
implement its policies.
I’

Source: Quote from Rigoberto Tiglao, Adviser to President
Macapagal-Arroyo, Newsbreak magazine, January 6,2003

43.
Progress is slowly being made to improve the effectiveness of the state. Innovative
approaches are being taken to strengthen public institutions and constrain graft and corruption.
The “Lifestyle Checks” of public servants which has been adopted formally by the National
Office of the Ombudsman and the consequent dismissal of several senior level bureaucrats
have sent a clear message that ill-gotten wealth will be prosecuted. (See Box 3) The
implementation of landmark procurement legislation is helping improve transparency and
accountability in government contracting.
44.
Various home-grown efforts at reshaping public sector agencies have been initiated
including most prominently the recent promulgation of Executive Order 366 authorizing the
rationalization of the bureaucracy in order to reduce the fiscal burden and improve the delivery
of public services. At the local level, the passage of the Local Government Code in 1991 has
led to the emergence of a significant number of well-performing local governments. There have
in fact already been several instances in which well-governed LGUs have radiated their success
by influencing other LGUs. Similarly, community-driven development programs like KalahiClDDs which promote transparency and community involvement in decision-making, have
become powerful motivators for changing “business as usual” at the local level. The agenda
going forward will need to build on such initiatives to improve governance, reduce corruption,
and ultimately reenergize the social contract.
It will be important to encourage and support positive domestic experiences -- “islands of
45.
good governance”-- that demonstrate how progress can be made within the context of the
Philippines and can potentially create spillover effects. When citizens see concrete benefits,
they will be more willing to vest authority and provide resources for their public institutions.
Moreover, when public institutions (e.g., regulatory bodies) become more effective, the private
sector will make productive investments and devote increasingly less resources to unproductive
rent-seeking activities. The result: a virtuous cycle.

13

Country Directions
46.
The Philippines is at a critical juncture, facing a window of opportunity to address its
development challenges. The beginning of a six year term for the new government could
become a turning point toward creating a favorable policy environment. Implementing
reforms will, of course, be politically challenging. Indeed, since the beginning of the current
administration the reform agenda has already generated a much welcome and lively discussion
and an emerging sense of an impending crisis if actions are not taken. Widespread acceptance
of the reform program will depend upon how well the benefits of reform, as well as the downside
risks of no reform, are communicated to the public. Citizens will need to know that the initial
burdens of reform are shared across all sectors and classes of society. Most importantly, the
public will need to have confidence that the reforms will strengthen governance and that
government will be held to account. In this regard, the success of the administration’s anticorruption drive and efforts to prosecute tax evaders will be critical. (See Box 3)
An effective reform effort - specifically a more aggressive reduction in the public sector
47.
deficit -would help sustain the strong pace of growth attained in 2004. Reducing the public
sector deficit by about 3 percent of GDP during 2005-07 would lead to significantly improved

14
perceptions of stability, as measured, for example, by debt sustainability indicators and bond
spreads. Private investment would likely increase because concerns about macroeconomic
vulnerability would ease. With improved investor sentiment, higher private investment could fuel
economic growth to an average of at least 6 percent per year. Under this scenario in which a
virtuous cycle is achieved, the NFPS debt would fall significantly by about 25 percentage points
of GDP, from its current level (2003) of 101 percent of GDP. The ability to take a more
aggressive fiscal adjustment would likely reflect greater political consensus and thus be
accompanied by faster improvements in tax administration, expenditure management, and civil
service reform.
48.
With more public resources and greater effectiveness of social expenditures, the higher
growth, thanks to a favorable policy direction, would have a significant impact on poverty
reduction. If the Philippines can sustain growth of 6 percent per year with rapid employment
generation, the proportion of the population living on less than US$2 per day could be reduced
from 47 percent in 2000 to around 30 percent by 2010, and some 15 million more Filipinos
would rise above the poverty line of US$2 per day, with associated improvements in social
outcomes.
The country has taken important steps toward the virtuous cycle described above,
49.
underlying the high growth path. However, implementation of the needed reforms will face
many challenges. Gradual progress in the policy environment would imply reducing the
public sector deficit over the next three years and continued efforts to enhance public sector
management, including improved tax administration, civil service reform, broadening
implementation of the procurement law, and strengthening judicial functioning.
50.
But in this situation the gradual pace of reforms is not enough to create the necessary
momentum to make increased tax efforts and improvements in government spending sufficient
and sustainable and thus attain a virtuous cycle. These factors, together with the expectation
that the external environment will be less favorable and that agricultural growth will return to
historical patterns, could lead to a moderate growth path of about 3 to 4 percent per year during
the 2006-08 CAS period.
Negative policy circumstances, by contrast, would likely reflect gridlock in government
51.
and lack of political consensus, undermining progress on fiscal and public sector reforms.
Without a concerted effort to contain public deficits, the public debtlGDP ratio could continue
upward. This could also create pressure to rollback progress made in other areas such as
trade, financial sector, and regulatory policies, further undermining growth. Ultimately public
resources for infrastructure and human development would become even more constrained. A
reversal of progress on the policy agenda and fiscal adjustment could trigger a cycle of higher
deficits and debt, reduced access to external finance, and thus add to financial market volatility.
52.
Such a negative situation is unlikely to be sustainable as the country would continue to
remain vulnerable to shifting investor attitudes and the external environment. In particular, the
Philippines remains susceptible to deterioration in investor sentiment given high public sector
amortization requirements, a relatively open capital account, and the concerns expressed by a
number of international banks and credit rating agencies about the slow pace of fiscal
adjustment. A damaging shift in sentiment could possibly be triggered by external shocks such
as higher oil prices or a decline in the export market to China; social or political disruptions that
would distract from the policy agenda or merely perceptions of growing policy drift; and with
local banks’ growing exposure to the government, a fiscal crisis could envelope the banking
system as well. Protracted conflict in Mindanao or a deterioration of the general social and
security situation could interact with economic vulnerabilities and further undermine investor

15
confidence. Clearly, this is a direction that the Philippines will have to avoid if it is to achieve its
development potential.

16

II. The Bank Group and Philippines Partnership
Lessons Learned and Messages from Stakeholders
53.
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY2006-08 builds on the lessons of the past
and the messages heard during a series of consultations and client survey with a wide range of
stakeholders. The CAS Completion Report reviews the Bank Group’s8effectiveness over the
past five years and indicates that the Bank Group supported several key country development
objectives, including: expansion of basic infrastructure in rural areas; reconstruction efforts in
Mindanao; and improving procurement and financial processes in several key agencies. (See
Annex 1) Extensive CAS stakeholder consultations and a client survey revealed that the
institution’s knowledge resources, technical assistance, and information sharing are particularly
valued. The Bank Group’s outreach efforts to involve civil society and beneficiaries in project
preparation and implementation are considered especially successful. (See Annex 2)
54.
The CAS preparation also drew extensively from a series of formal and informal
meetings with a broad range of stakeholders. Small meetings were held with key opinion
leaders from various sectors and with government officials from oversight and implementing
agencies. Separate meetings were held with bilateral and multilateral development agencies.
Large workshops involved national and local governments; civil society; the business
community/private sector; academia; labor groups; and other development partners. The Bank
Group also held workshops around the country with youth representatives. Through these small
and large gatherings, the Bank Group heard the views of its various stakeholders. In many of
these fora, the imperative to make public institutions work for the common good was
emphasized, raising the question of whether our assistance can be more strategically focused
towards this objective.
55.
While the feedback suggests that the Bank Group’s contributions have been valuable
and much appreciated, it also indicates that international development partners, including the
Bank Group, may have fallen short of their potential impact. This perception mirrors, and is
likely related to, the perception of the country’s own development shortfall. The lessons learned
include the following:
0

0

*

Both the government and the Bank Group have, at times, been tempted to pursue an
overly-ambitious policy reform agenda. Complex plans have been developed by highly
capable counterparts only to fall short during implementation, often after responsibility
had passed on to other individuals. This applies to overall economic reform as well as to
sector reforms, for example in health and energy. A key lesson calls for less complex
designs and greater focus on implementation of future reform efforts, supported in
particular by development policy lending or reform-oriented investment lending.
The Bank’s proposed support for fiscal reform was not achieved, due to lack of progress
on reducing the public deficit, thus preventing adjustment lending. Further, Bank
investment lending (still often perceived as financing outside the government’s core
program) was severely constrained by the tight fiscal situation even though it could have
substantially benefited the country through low-cost financing as well as technical
contributions by the Bank. The key lesson is the need to align Bank lending more
closely to the priorities expressed in the government’s own investment program and
finance priority expenditures within the existing national budget in support of a well-

References in this document to the “Bank Group” encompass the World Bank, the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). References to the “Bank”, “IFC,
or “MIGA generally relate to the specific agency.

17

defined program of reforms. This requires a shift away from financing discrete projects
toward more programmatic engagement with selected key agencies.
0

Many sectoral projects and programs supported by the Bank and other international
development partners directly or indirectly work with or through LGUs. A number of
these programs have led to fragmentation of financing and procedures that do not
necessarily strengthen the ability of LGUs to determine and pursue their own
development priorities. Moreover, the national government is reviewing its approach
toward the financing of local government activities through on-lending and on-granting.
These factors have led to a slowdown in implementation and approval of support for
locally implemented projects while the demand for support from LGUs and their
relevance to the development agenda have in fact increased. The key lesson is the
need for an approach that encourages LGUs to pursue and finance their own
development priorities, but at the same time allows the national government to use
separate instruments to pursue national development objectives and priorities requiring
strong local implementation and partnership between national and local governments.
While there have been examples of good collaboration across the organizations of the
Bank Group, there is a perception of unexploited synergies in creating successful
models of public-private partnership, particularly in infrastructure. The key lesson is the
need for closer integration of operational approaches of the Bank Group members.
The previous CAS attempted to identify results based on broad and multiple strategic
objectives. With hindsight, such a wide-ranging approach proved to be a difficult
framework for assessing the effectiveness of Bank Group contributions. The key
lessons are to: further strengthen the results focus of the CAS and make it a more
effective management tool; focus on less ambitious yet more monitorable result
indicators; and distinguish between country-level results, CAS-level results, and program
level results.

56.
Throughout the development of this CAS, the Bank Group team has struggled to directly
address the identified obstacles and integrate these lessons in order to make a relevant
contribution toward the two primary objectives of the Bank’s mission -- economic growth and
social inclusion. The strategy described below seeks to respond, a challenge that will no doubt
continue beyond this CAS period.

Overview of Engagement Strategy
57.
The Philippines could attain substantially better development outcomes given the
available ingredients for more rapid development, as outlined in Chapter 1. These better
outcomes, however, will require strong and sustained policy implementation. Discouraged by
slow progress on policy reforms, the Bank, as well as other development partners, has scaled
back its program over the years. There is no question that the impact of the Bank and other
development partners’ support has been disappointing in some areas. We are, nonetheless,
confident that we can contribute toward country development outcomes substantially more than
our relatively small financial role would suggest. To this end, we intend to be proactive and help
address critical underlying institutional problems. The country is receptive to Bank Group
support and, encouragingly, many of those stakeholders consulted expressed confidence and
high expectations for the Bank Group’s role. Meeting these expectations will require a
continuing strong presence and program in the Philippines.
58.
To achieve the desired outcomes on growth and social inclusion, this assistance
program will need to be more strategically focused on addressing two key levers: fiscal reforms
as the essential short-term challenge; and more effective public institutions as the critical

governance and financing within the
existing budget will require an

19
61.
To achieve greater impact in the Philippines -- especially helping to improve the
governance of public institutions --the full range of our instruments need to be better integrated,
leveraged, and used more flexibly. This requires that we exploit our comparative advantage to
work at both the macro and sector levels; use our analytical work to inform our lending and
policy dialogue; combine international best practice with in-depth local knowledge (thanks to a
substantial in-country presence); offer a range of financial and guarantee products at more
attractive terms than commercial sources; and continue to play an honest broker role. Our
engagement must also be consistent with the severe fiscal constraints and realities faced by the
government.
62.
The assistance strategy implies a “back to basics” approach: on the margin, focusing
more on the ability of agencies to deliver services on the ground and make real implementation
progress, rather than on sophisticated reform design. We will be realistic about the relatively
modest role of the Bank Group in building good governance. Our success will depend upon
how we are able to help replicate and scale-up experiences in which the public sector effectively
delivers on its social contract. The strategy will require that we be more selective in approach
but opportunistic in specific engagements within the chosen approach. Moreover, selectivity
under this CAS is functional and not sectoral. We will focus on “islands of good governance” -national agencies, local governments, or economic sectors for which the basic governance
arrangements are sufficiently sound to provide a reasonable chance of success.

National Platform
The national platform reflects a transition from a project-based approach towards a
63.
program-based one which offers greater flexibility with lower transactions costs. Our program
will move us closer to supporting the government’s own priority needs and away from
disaggregated project-oriented financing which the government cannot afford given the fiscal
constraints. By offering within budget financing, the Bank Group will be better placed to support
improvements in the capacity of national government agencies to deliver their core mandates.

.

64.
The Bank Group's national
platform will provide financing to
agencies which show promise for
becoming examples of fiscal
responsibility and good
governance. This should lead to
improved service delivery. Our
program comprises a combination
of cross-sector and sector-specific
investment operations and nonlending activities, illustrated in
Figure 9.

20
Figure 9:
National Platform

65.
Cross-Sector
Engagement The government
has been undertaking a number of
efforts to strengthen finances and
service delivery, often with support
from the Bank Group. In this CAS,
Bank Group support for crosssector activities could address the
following government priorities:
0

0

0

0

0

0

fiscal reforms: implement measures to improve tax policy and administration and
address contingent liabilities (in the social security system and the GOCCs, including the
power sector);
budget and expenditure reforms: focus on core mandates and functions, service
delivery improvements, and performance-based budgeting, using sector efficiency
reviews and identifying measures of Major Final Outputs for key departments. An
important performance measure is citizen satisfaction with government services;
civil service reforms: establish merit-based performance processes, financing
incentives for departing employees, and modernization of the compensation regime;
streamlining of agency staffing: permit more targeting of staff and expenditures to core
functions and services delivery;
procurement reform: enhance capacity of new Procurement Policy Board to provide
oversight and monitoring, support the civil society monitoring of bid and award
committees, strengthen the internal procurement audit function of government agencies
and establish a framework to assess the progress and effectiveness of the public
procurement reforms, and continue to build capacity for the use of the recently
harmonized bidding documents;
anti-corruption measures: increase capacity of government agencies to more effectively
respond to corrupt practices (e.g., National Office of the Ombudsman, Supreme Court).

The basic thrust of our support will be in line with our ongoing policy dialogue in these
66.
areas, consistent with the key reform goals of the new administration for which many building
blocks are already in place (e.g., new procurement procedures, the development of Major Final
Outputs, and a new national government accounting system).' In this regard, the criterion for
Bank Group assistance would be tied to the quality and implementation of reforms, as well as
See Development Policy Review (2005) and the Discussion Briefs (2004).

21
for groups that show the most promise of becoming islands of good governance. Our support
will encompass a range of ongoing and new analytical and advisory activities. In particular,
Bank budget and trust fund grants will support continued technical assistance on such subjects
as: public sector expenditure and debt management; banking supervision; pension reform; civil
service reform; procurement reform; and strengthening the Office of the Ombudsman.
67.
An important element of our cross-sectoral approach is a possible investment operation
to support civil service reform in several agencies, with emphasis on performance-based
objectives and outcomes. The proposed National Program Support for Public Expenditure
Rationalization would provide financial support for Executive Order 366 which outlines a plan to
induce voluntary departures from national agencies through voluntary separation packages. Its
success depends on development of restructuring plans for each agency which identify
rationalization opportunities with clear benefits in improved service delivery.
If conditions are appropriate, the Bank could provide development policy lending, which
68.
offer quicker disbursing funds. (See Chapter 3) This could support cross-sectoral reform efforts
in the areas of tax policy and administration, public sector expenditure management including
civil service reform, banking and pension systems, the power sector, investment climate, and
capital markets, among other possibilities.
69.
We will also support another critical cross-sectoral objective of the government improving devolution of national government functions to LGUs. By freeing-up resources now
being spent by national agencies on devolved functions, the agencies would be better able to
focus their support on helping LGUs increase their own capacity to take on those functions
(discussed below in the section on the local platform).
70.
Sector-Specific Engagement In addition to addressing the cross-sectoral issues, our
national platform will provide national program support to specific sector agencies, based on the
following principles:
use programmatic support, within the existing budget, for the agency’s most effective
programs, focusing on core mandates and functions;
assist well-articulated plans for strengthening agency effectiveness and service delivery;
support efforts, where possible, to strengthen country systems for environment and
social safeguards, procurement, fiduciary control, fund allocation, and accountability
across the agency, rather than limited to project transactions;
up-scale successful earlier project experiences (e.g., in education); and
connect with cross-cutting programs (e.g., E0366 and the proposed National Program
Support for Public Expenditure Rationalization project).
Depending upon the readiness of sector agencies for reform and rationalization, these
71,
national program support operations would take a sector-wide approach (SWAP) to wellperforming or reforming entities over a period of years. (See Box 4) Applying the principles
noted above, such national program support operations would clearly specify development
objectives and would focus on resource prioritization and management -- improving service
delivery through better policy, planning, budgeting, and monitoring & evaluation systems. In
addition, national program support operations would address such agency-specific issues as
expenditure prioritization, staffing mix, incentives/ compensation, accountability, and
performance management. Possible candidates for national program support projects include:
the Department of Education (DepEd), the Department of Agriculture (DA), the Department of
Public Works and Highways (DPWH), the Department of Social Welfare and Development

22
(DSWD), and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), building on and
broadening in many cases ongoing operations in support of these agencies. Where
appropriate, a sector project could be linked to restructuring efforts under the proposed National
Program Support for Public Expenditure Rationalization project.
Progress is already being made for the preparation of a multi-financier SWAP with the
72.
Department of Health (DOH). The proposed National Program Support for Health project would
assist the DOH and selected provinces to implement the government’s health sector reform
agenda. This SWAP operation would be undertaken in coordination with several development
partners and would provide budgetary support for the department’s financial management and
procurement reforms, performance-based budgeting, and re-engineering of DOH regional
offices to promote effective decentralization of the health system.

Local Platform
The Local Government Code of 1991 devolved service responsibilities and revenue
73.
authority to LGUs, placing them at the forefront of development and poverty alleviation. A
remarkable outcome of the new code has been the emergence of good models of LGU
performance and service delivery under dynamic local leadership, as recognized by programs
such as the Galing Pook Award and the Asian Institute of Management‘s Competitiveness
Ranking. Successful and well-managed LGUs have become a visible example of islands of
good governance. These LGUs not only inspire neighboring LGUs, but in a few cases they
have achieved a track-record of performance across several administrations, thus showing
some signs of institutionalization of good governance. Some analysts consider these
successful LGUs as the most promising seed for the modernization of public institutions and the
adoption of good governance practices in the Philippines.
74.
This CAS intends to support a strand of LGUs committed to performance improvement
by helping them to achieve a cycle of improved service provision which in turn generates
citizens’ trust and increased resources to the public sector. These LGUs will serve as replicable
models for an emerging culture of service delivery and a stronger social contract. At the same
time, Bank Group support will help streamline and structure the government’s broader policy
approach towards all LGUs, including relatively weaker ones, in order to create conditions for
them to join the ranks of the stronger and well-managed LGUs. Overall, our assistance will
support decentralization by empowering
Figure I O :
LGU decision-making and supporting
LGU-led programs. This emphasis
reflects a shift to dealing with LGUs as
clients, rather than implementers of
national projects.
Our local strategy is outlined in
75.
Figure 10. It will be based on a clear
performance and capacity framework, to
be developed jointly with the national
agencies, LGUs, various other
stakeholders, and development partners.
The performance and capacity framework
will guide the technical assistance
program and the selection of financing
instruments offered to LGUs - national
government , government financial
institutions, and/or private financing

23

(discussed below). Each element of the framework embodies incentives to increase the LGUs’
own-sourced revenue; this is fundamental for achieving sustainability and ultimately the CAS
goals.
76.
Performance and Capacity Framework Benchmarking LGUs through a credible,
commonly-accepted performance framework will be key to strengthening LGU accountability,
thereby reinforcing the decentralization process. Correspondingly, LGUs need to increase their
capacity, particularly in the areas of governance, local service delivery, and investment planning
and preparation. LGU capacity building programs will be more effective if closely associated
with a performance framework.
The key elements of the performance and capacity building framework would include:
77.
revenue mobilization, planning and budgeting, fiduciary control systems, and local service
delivery. In all these areas, participatory approaches would be encouraged to promote greater
transparency and accountability in local government decision making. During CAS
consultations, stakeholders strongly endorsed such a framework, but also voiced quite strong
preference for it to be implemented independently outside the government system.
78.
Technical Assistance To help build LGU performance and capacity, the Bank Group
will provide technical assistance to support core governance capacity building, sector-specific
competencies, and LGU capacity in preparing and implementing investment projects. The core
governance capacity building program will be closely linked to the performance framework,
aiming to assist LGUs in attaining governance improvements measurable according to the
framework. Our technical assistance in this area will draw on our close partnerships with the
leagues of local governments that have been nurtured through the Bank and Cities Alliancesupported City Development Strategies program. The World Bank Institute (WBI), local training
institutions, and international development partners are expected to play an active role in the
program and should coordinate their respective programs. For LGU investment projects, the
Bank will help LGUs develop the ability to prepare feasibility studies, designs, and procurement
packages suitable for financing.
79.
It is envisaged that the national agencies will offer better and a greater range of technical
assistance to LGUs. This reflects the transition of national agencies from implementing services
that have been devolved to LGUs to instead, providing technical assistance to LGUs to execute
their own sector programs and investments. This represents the link between the CAS’ local
and national platforms -- by helping to develop sector-specific competencies of national
agencies, LGUs will benefit from improved support.
While technical assistance and other support to LGUs from the Bank Group, bilateral
80.
and multilateral development agencies, and the national government has been good, it has
been fragmented. Some of these programs are supply-driven, often overlapping, tied to specific
program needs, and inconsistent with each other. This fragmentation undermines planning and
capacity at the local level. To address this, a Development Partners Working Group on
Decentralization and Local Government, which has been created to work with the Department of
Interior and Local Governments and other government agencies, will help promote consistency
among technical assistance activities provided through a range of loan, grant, government, and
development partner programs. To reflect core concerns and ensure ownership, this work will
involve extensive consultations with LGUs, national government agencies, NGOs, academic
institutions, and development partners.
National Government Financing The Local Platform will support the government’s
81.
efforts in rationalizing inter-government transfer arrangements to LGUs. This is a complex

24
process and the Bank Group is helping the national government sketch the options for doing
this.
82.
The evolving financing framework for LGUs could eventually include a significant role for
conditional transfers. Conditional grant financing would support national priorities and public
goods (e.g., environment, public health). Sector based grants, channeled through sectoral
departments of the national government, can be used to provide incentives for LGUs to achieve
performance improvements in priority sectors. The grant programs in this area (such as the
National Program Support for Mindanao Rural Development 2 project and the National Program
Support for Health project) would be on a matching basis, requiring counterpart LGU funding,
either from borrowing or from own-source revenue. Grants could also be targeted to LGUs with
the poorest communities and would thus receive minimum support for poverty alleviation. The
government is also considering the possibility of a performance-based, cross-sectoral,
conditional grant program, for which LGUs would receive funding linked to pre-determined
performance criteria based on governance.
83.
For the poorest municipalities, the national government provides matching grants using
a community driven-development (CDD) approach, which promotes local-level collective action
for empowerment and poverty reduction. In the Bank-supported Kalahi-CIDSS program, for
example, the DSWD directly transfers grants to local communities in the poorest municipalities.
Communities then follow a planning and implementation process that is managed by DSWD in
cooperation with LGUs. As LGUs develop greater commitment and capacity to implement the
key principles of the Kalahi-CIDSS program - participation, accountability, transparency, and
shared responsibility for costs - LGUs (rather than the national DSWD) are meant to take
increasing responsibility for managing the interaction with communities and adopting the CDD
approach as a way to allocate resources and make decisions at the local level.
According to a Bank evaluation, the CDD approach is an important feature in almost half
84.
of the Bank's current portfolio. While the basic objectives of such projects are the same, the
mechanisms used to achieve the objectives differ significantly. While there may be legitimate
reasons why approaches are different, too many different approaches are likely to lead to
confusion, duplication, and inefficiency, especially when several Bank-financed projects overlap
in the same LGU. Conflicting advice and capacity building programs in different projects with
varying standards for preparing and implementing community activities can also place an undue
burden on local capacities. Where possible, many aspects of CDD projects would benefit from
tighter exchanges'of experience and harmonization, including: common procedures for selecting
and engaging communities; optimal cost-sharing techniques; the provision of quality technical
assistance; mechanisms for effective operation and maintenance; and the measurement and
evaluation of outcomes.
85.
Because so many CDD approaches are being carried out in the country -- through
LGUs, bypassing LGUs, through a social fund, through a municipal fund, through a line agency,
through the private sector -- the Philippines provides a unique environment for comparing
approaches. To this end, a cross sectoral CDD working group was established to exchange
experiences and a multi-sector supervision of several CDD projects was conducted. Among
other things, this has resulted in a CDD harmonization exercise in Mindanao with the goal of
identifying common standards and best practices for conflict affected areas. Going forward, we
will continue to support and consolidate CDD approaches in close partnership with client
agencies and other donors. The Spanish government has set a good example in donor
harmonization for CDD by expanding Kalahi-CIDSS in areas not already covered through a
Euro I.2 million grant to the DSWD, rather than introduce yet another approach to support the
poorest communities.

25

Government Financial institutions Financing Distinct from grants to LGUs which
86.
serve the broader policy goals of the national government, loan financing to LGUs through
government financial institutions (GFls) would increase based on sound banking principles.
Bank financing may be on-lent to LGUs through the Land Bank of the Philippines, Development
Bank of the Philippines, and the newly-created Municipal Finance Corporation, which together
provide the majority of credit financing to LGUs. Possible Bank operations implemented by the
GFls include the Local Government Support for City Development (through Land Bank), and the
Local Government Support for Municipal Finance (through the Municipal Finance Corporation).
(A list of possible projects is presented in Annex B3).
87.
Past experience with lines of credit through GFls indicate problems with low demand
and slow disbursements. This is attributed to low LGU revenue base; presence of alternative
financing sources (including political “pork barrel” funds); lack of capacity at LGUs to develop
“bankable” projects; complicated procedures of funding windows; and the bureaucracies of the
Bank Group and GFls. New credit lines, therefore, will offer a broad menu of eligible
subprojects, rather than limit financing to specific sectors. This will empower LGUs to finance
activities which they deem to be their development priorities. In addition, financing will be
expedited due to simplified procedures for subproject appraisal, approval, and supervision.
88.
Bank financing through GFls would proceed prudently, with particular attention to
improving GFI service quality.l0 GFls would conduct thorough creditworthiness assessments
and move toward taking-up real LGU credit risk (currently all GFI loans are fully secured by LGU
deposits or intercepts of inter-government transfers). For LGUs which meet governance
performance criteria, consideration may be given to GFI loans financing a share of the LGUs’
overall expenditure needs in selected sectors, instead of specific investment projects, thereby
reducing project-level transactions. The Bank’s local currency loan product will be explored in
supporting such on-lending arrangements.
Private Financing In addition to lending to LGUs through GFls, the Bank Group will
89.
also support the development of the private financial market for LGUs (consistent with the CAS’
private sector platform). Private financing to LGUs has been limited. Causes range from lack of
interest to lack of access to secured collateral (i.e., LGU deposit accounts). The Bank will
provide policy advice in this area. Through its financial products, IFC will explore ways to
enhance private financial institutions’ to access to long-term funds that would be retailed directly
to LGUs for purely commercial projects. In addition, IFC may support the development of
specialized private firms necessary for the smooth functioning of a municipal bond market. The
Bank may also use its guarantee instruments to enable GFls to mobilize resources for LGU
financing via debt issuance in the domestic capital markets.

Private Sector Platform
90.
The private sector platform aims to support successful experiences of private-public
collaboration that can be replicated and lead to dynamic private-sector led growth. These
visible successes would include private investment in infrastructure and dynamic private sector
activity in high growth potential sectors or geographic areas. To help improve the enabling
environment for such successes and to support the government’s MTPDP reform agenda, the
Bank Group assistance will focus on:
lowering the costs of doing business;
lo

Both Land Bank and the Development Bank of the Philippines have recently improved their profitability,
strengthened their capital base, and mobilized more domestic resources. Moreover, since late 2004, they have
made efforts to dispose of non-performing assets to private asset management companies.

26
0

improving financial intermediation;

0

strengthening regulatory agencies; and

0

financing public-private infrastructure investments and investments in sectors with high
growth potential.

91.
By creating jobs, generating incomes, and improving infrastructure, the visible
successes will stimulate political support for the reform agenda, as embodied in the first three
focus areas outlined above. This symbiotic relationship is illustrated in Figure 11.
92.
The private sector platform strategy is designed to complement the national and local
platforms. In particular, the national platform strategy seeks to help the government establish
fiscal stability and build the governance structures to address serious macroeconomic, policy,
and institutional constraints to private investment. For the local platform, private financing is an
important option for LGUs and the CAS seeks to help develop the performance and capacity of
LGUs to attract such financing.
The strategy envisages a close collaboration between the Bank, IFC, and MIGA. The
93.
Bank’s analytical and lending support will aim to maximize IFC investment opportunities in
sectors with high growth potential or where IFC investments can have strong demonstration
effects (e.g., housing finance, infrastructure, capital markets, small and medium sized
enterprises).
94.
Lowering the Cosfs of Doing
Business Despite an overall private-sector
friendly environment, the Philippines is a costly
place to do business. Our private sector
platform will focus on helping to bring down
those transaction costs by improving the
application of the rule of law. The Bank is
already providing assistance to reform the
judiciary”, which could be deepened in order
to improve the efficiency of judicial processes
relating to dispute resolution, corporate
restructuring, and loan recoveries. The Bank
will also continue to support improvements for
land management and titling so that security of
tenure encourages investments.I2 The IFC is
supporting Land Registration Systems, a
private entity engaged to provide services for
the Land Registration Authority on a publicprivate partnership basis.

Figure 11:
Private Sector Platform

95.
The Bank Group could respond positively to opportunities to help the government
identify and eliminate constraints to market competition as well as to increase deregulation,
particularly vital for sectors with high growth potential as well as for growth of small and medium
enterprises (SMEs). Through SWAps, investment projects, and advisory services -- especially
in the agriculture, mining, and transport sectors -- the Bank can assist national agencies in the
simplification and harmonization of procedural regulations and liberalization of rules governing
private investments. This can be supported by technical assistance programs directed at
11
l2

Judicial Reform Support Project, FY04
Land Administration and Management Project 2, FY05

27

improving the competitiveness of SMEs especially in rural areas. IFC is working on establishing
with other development partners a program for SMEs based in Mindanao. Through its analytical
and advisory work, the Bank can help the government establish a competition policy regime and
reduce the multiplicity of regulations and special investment incentives that give larger firms an
unfair advantage.
96.
lmproving Financial Intermediation The Bank Group could support financial
deepening by offering technical assistance to key regulatory agencies to improve the prudential
and supervisory framework for banks, insurance companies, pension funds, the pre-needs
sector, and capital markets. The Bank Group would also provide financial support to
intermediaries that serve the needs of micro enterprises, rural households, and SMEs.
97.
IFC’s focus in the financial sector is: developing housing finance, deepening the capital
market, and strengthening the banking sector. IFC is investing in a mortgage servicing
institution and helping in the restructuring of the National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation.
IFC’s work on deepening the capital markets also includes technical assistance to the
Philippines Stock Exchange and support to the Fixed Income Exchange. IFC is looking to
support the resolution of non-performing loans of the banking sector through asset managed
companies. IFC is also keen on providing acquisition financing to strong banks to assist in the
consolidation of the banking sector. For support to LGUs, IFC is considering entering into a
financial relationship with the LGU Guarantee Corporation to establish a municipal funds market
as well as providing direct financing to selected municipalities. And, as noted above, IFC is
considering a program to help develop investment opportunities for SMEs in Mindanao and
improve their access to financing. Concerning MIGAs role in the financial sector, it can offer
guarantees by supporting banks whose foreign partners require them to strengthen their capital
base. Based on demand, MlGA can also offer capital market guarantees in order to increase
tenors and decrease rates for local lending.
98.
Strengthening Regulatory Agencies To increase private investments in
infrastructure, the private sector platform will support improvements in the governance
framework of key regulatory agencies. In the water sector, the Bank Group will continue to help
strengthen the regulatory capacity and independence of the Metropolitan Waterworks and
Sewerage Systems (MWSS), including the implementation of tariff structures and adjustments
and cost recovery mechanisms, as well as strengthening enforcement of anti-pollution
measures. To support the goals of fiscal stability and attracting private investments in the
power sector, we will assist in enhancing the capacity of the Energy Regulation Committee, the
privatization of PSALM assets, and the functioning of the Wholesale Electric Spot Market. This
support will be provided by the Bank through technical assistance and by IFC through its
advisory services and direct financing for the privatization. To facilitate private investment
cross-sectorally, and linked to a SWAP for DENR (part of the national platform), the Bank could
support streamlined environmental permitting and clarification of environmental requirements,
programs for improved environmental information disclosure, and enhanced environmental
management systems.

Financing lnfrastructure and lnvestments in High Growth Potential Sectors IFC
99.
seeks to invest in infrastructure projects since they reflect urgent and medium-term structural
constraints to development. IFC is providing advice to the government on attracting private
sector investment for the Light Rail Project (LRT-1 extension), to the Department of Energy’s
Small Power Utilities Group for its privatization, and to the Build Operate Transfer Center related
to projects for bulk water supply for water districts. It also has investments in toll-roads, water,
and power utilities. In its future program IFC will focus on power, particularly renewable energy,
rural electrification, and transportation. It is anticipated that IFC operations for the three-year
CAS period will be about U S 3 5 0 million under a base case scenario.

28

100. One investment area in which Bank and IFC collaboration is already noteworthy is the
Manila Water Company Incorporated (MWCI), the privately-owned water distribution concession
operating Metro Manila’s eastern zone. Previously, IFC had invested US$60 million in loans
and US$15 million in equity in MWCI. In addition, the Bank had also invested US$20 million in
MWCI, through MWSS, for sewerage and sanitation investments. A new FY05 project will
provide additional financing for capital expenditures in sewerage and sanitation. Without the
Bank’s support and the more favorable terms of its loans, the sewerage and sanitation
improvement projects would not have taken place since such investments are generally not
commercially attractive. These investments are reinforced by the Bank’s ongoing dialogue to
strengthen MWSS’ regulatory capacity, as noted above.
101. More broadly, the Bank can assist in the development of the government‘s newly-formed
investment vehicle, the Philippine Infrastructure Corporation, by providing advice on its design
and financing. Through this new entity, the government intends to incubate, jump-start, and
later privatize a number of key infrastructure projects such as the South Luzon Expressway.
Complementing initial assistance by the Bank, the IFC could later provide direct financing to the
new projects on a commercial basis.
102. The Bank can also provide funding and partial risk guarantees where requested to
support public infrastructure investments and catalyze private co-financing. This includes a
possible partial risk guarantee for power sector reform, lending for MWSS financial
rehabilitation, rural power development, logistics development, toll roads, and other
infrastructure where the private sector’s interest can be magnified with public support. In
addition, through innovative approaches such as output-based financing, the Bank’s lending
would help leverage private sector investment to achieve greater impact.
103. MIGA’s offerings, coordinated with Bank and IFC efforts, would also support publicprivate partnerships for infrastructure development. MIGA’s political risk guarantees can
complement the Bank and IFC programs, including guarantees for privatizations (acquisitions of
existing assets, restructuring of existing assets, etc.) in the infrastructure sector. MIGAs
technical assistance to the Philippines has included a needs assessment of the Bureau of
Investment, accompanied by capacity building workshops. MlGA has also provided capacity
building support to sub-national investment promotion agencies in conjunction with a Canadianfunded initiative.

29

111.

Delivering the Bank Group Program

104. The Bank Group’s FY 2006-08 assistance strategy for the Philippines offers a
significant and timely opportunity to support the government’s reform efforts by focusing on
the strengthening of public institutions.
105. Under the platform approach, the Bank Group’s assistance will be opportunistic in
terms of sectors and areas of engagement, but selective in adjusting the range and level of
our Bank Group products to respond to the pace of the public reform effort. If fiscal reforms
should slow, for instance, there would still be considerable scope to provide non-lending
support and to finance selected projects with strong sectoral reform. We will leverage both
our financial and non-lending support through coordination with development partners. We
will also place greater emphasis on managing the portfolio and managing for results.

Managing the Portfolio
106. The Bank’s ongoing portfolio in the Philippines includes 21 active loans with net
commitments at US$1.14 billion, along with about 79 grant projects with total value of
US$46 million and other analytical and advisory activities financed from the Bank’s
administrative budget. The size of the loan portfolio has declined steadily in recent years,
from US$2.9 billion in 1999 to US$1. I 4 billion currently. This has been the result of a
conscious decision to limit commitments given little fiscal space in the national budget and
limited absorptive capacity of implementing agencies. More than half of the ongoing
projects support programs at the local level.
107. Portfolio performance has improved in recent years, but still faces considerable
challenges. Disbursements declined from 1996 to 2001, but have since improved and are
currently about 20 percent of undisbursed balances. Older projects with implementation
problems were restructured and non-performing components and activities were dropped to
respond to budget constraints. The riskiness of the portfolio has been fairly stable since
2001, with the number of problem projects remaining steady at three to four and
commitments at risk now at about 10 percent. The realism and proactivity indices remain
above Bank targets. Assessments of quality at entry and quality of supervision have
registered overall satisfactory-and-above ratings. Project outcome ratings have also been
improving and there has been considerable progress in harmonizing procurement and other
procedures with those of the government. These changes can be attributed to improved
portfolio management by both the government and the Bank, with regular joint portfolio
reviews and increased focus on results.
108. The existing portfolio is, in many ways, in line with the strategic focus of the new
CAS and the government’s development priorities, particularly in the areas of increasing
access to basic services for the poor and disadvantaged groups and in strengthening
systems and institutions to improve service delivery both at the national and local levels.
For newly-approved projects the shift towards a programmatic approach is already being
taken, for example in the FY04 SWAP-type Diversified Farm Income and Market
Development project. FY05 projects will also incorporate the new CAS emphasis on
simplified procedures, harmonized rules, and capacity building (e.g., second Women’s
Health & Safe Motherhood project). A few existing projects, however, may require
restructuring to improve their implementation and ensure consistency with the new country
assistance strategy (e.g., LGU Finance and Development project).

30

109. While portfolio improvements are noteworthy and provide a foundation to build upon,
there are a number of cross-cutting implementation challenges that limit the program’s
effectiveness and constrain the achievement of planned outcomes. These challenges
include: adequacy of budget resources and timely cash releases; improving project
implementation readiness, including the pace and quality of project preparation and startup;
strengthening government implementation systems particularly at the local level; and better
monitoring and evaluation.
110. Going forward, we will continue to undertake joint portfolio reviews with the
government, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the Japan Bank for International
Cooperation (JBIC). Efforts will also continue with the government to improve project
readiness and to mainstream project activities within implementing agencies. In addition,
we will strengthen our results-based approach to portfolio monitoring which was piloted
during the August 2004 project level review conducted jointly with the government. Outputs
and outcomes of all projects under implementation were summarized using a common
results framework that helped identify shortfalls in expected achievements and weaknesses
in project monitoring. A preliminary assessment was also made of results achieved under
technical assistance provided through grants. This process will be extended to include
analytical and advisory activities in future project-level reviews. And, of course, the results
framework developed for this CAS will be the basis for regularly assessing the outputs and
outcomes of the ongoing portfolio each year. We will use this ongoing monitoring and
evaluation process to draw lessons to continuously inform all of our program interventions.
111. Important steps to improve project implementation are the harmonization of Bank
procedures with those of the government, which help to strengthen the government‘s
fiduciary functions. Considerable progress has been made in improving government
procurement systems and harmonizing the procedures of the Bank, ADB, and JBIC with
those of the government for national competitive bidding. Focus is now on dissemination
and monitoring of the new procedures, including requirements for increased transparency
and the new role of civil society observers. Financial management improvements are also
becoming harmonized around the effective use of the New Government Accounting System,
which is being adopted consistently across all levels of government. The Bank is also
leading the Development Partners Working Group on Decentralization and Local
Government to promote consistency in the LGU engagement strategy.
112. The government has welcomed the Bank’s new approach to expenditure eligibility,
reflected in the new country financing parameters approved in February 2005. This
provides for increased flexibility in the treatment of cost sharing, taxes, recurrent costs, and
local costs. (See Annex 3) The Bank’s overall financing share is not expected to change
significantly at the aggregate level, with expected increase in sector-wide assistance (in
which the Bank’s financing share is typically low). One-hundred percent Bank financing
could be provided for some projects and activities with strong evidence of ownership and
commitment. Recurrent cost financing will be considered where consistent with project
objectives, subject to strong demonstration of arrangements to ensure sustainability after
Bank financing ceases. Integration of Bank financing in the budget process ensures that
increased recurrent cost financing would not jeopardize overall debt and fiscal sustainability.
113. The Bank is working with the government to strengthen capacity to implement and
monitor procedures to safeguard important social and environment policies. In particular,
procedures related to land acquisition, the rights of indigenous people, and resettlement

31
have been identified as problem areas. Joint discussions have led to preparation of a draft
law to address some of the land and resettlement issues. Similarly, while many government
policies and procedures on the environment are appropriate, their implementation faces a
number of challenges, including streamlining the DENR and prioritizing monitoring efforts
within limited budgets. There is also a need to strengthen environmental management
capacity at the local government level.
114. In line with the Bank’s effort to gradually move to greater reliance on country
systems, the Bank is also undertaking a diagnostic review to help the government identify
social and environmental policy and institutional needs based on gaps between the
Philippines’ and international good practices. The review will also identify concrete actions
that can be taken in the areas of environmental assessment, involuntary resettlement, and
institutional capacity. The longer-term goal -- supported by the platform approach -- is to
help build capacity for planning, implementing, and supervising social and environment
safeguards. In line with our local platform, discussions have begun among the various
development partners on harmonizing procedures related to these safeguards, with
consistent approaches designed to enhance local government capacity. Further efforts on
harmonization in the social and environmental areas will be carried out as part of portfolio
management during the CAS period, and will pave the way for greater reliance on country
systems in these areas.
115. The Bank Group is actively supporting government anti-corruption efforts with the
Office of the Ombudsman, Presidential Anti-Graft Commission, Supreme Court, Government
Procurement Policy Board, and civil society organizations. At the project level, the Bank
Group has supported improved fiduciary procedures in health, education, and social welfare,
including large reduction in textbook costs and civil society monitoring of book deliveries.
Innovative contracting approaches, for example in roads and solid waste disposal, allow
payment on performance rather than inputs. Fiduciary reviews check procurement and
financial management processes, and growing use of community-driven development
provides greater local involvement in planning and monitoring local expenditures.

Lending
116. The new assistance strategy proposes a graduated response to policy scenarios for
the Bank Group to achieve systemic impact. Our financing is moving towards more
mainstreamed support for the government’s own programs. Significantly, it will not create a
substantial additional fiscal burden on the government. Moreover, the government has
indicated its preference to rely more on official development assistance (ODA) over
commercial borrowing, because of its potential to promote key reforms and lower costs.
Finally, the new assistance strategy will offer flexibility to respond quickly to opportunities
and scale-up lending if warranted. (See Table 12)
117. The scale of IBRD commitments will be determined by progress on fiscal reforms
reflecting the overarching importance of fiscal adjustment in the short term and the need to
mitigate and manage risks. Assuming a scenario of gradual policy reform, the Bank’s base
case program would fall within a range U S 4 5 0 - 900 million of investment lending only, for
the three-year CAS period. This level is less than the base case scenarios of about US$1.I
- 1.3 billion for the two previous CAS periods, but more than the actual level of lending over

32
the previous period^.'^ Lower than anticipated lending levels were due to fiscal constraints
for regular investment operations and limited progress on fiscal reforms that held back
development policy lending.14
118. The base case represents a scenario in which there are no major policy reversals
and no widening of the fiscal deficit, but progress on implementing key reforms is uneven.
Under this scenario, Bank lending of up to US$900 million would not include development
policy lending (DPL). The actual amount would be driven by country demand and would
depend on the number of agencies and LGUs willing and able to take on reforms. At the
national level, this would imply the continuation of efforts to: reduce the public sector deficit,
strengthen public expenditure management, service delivery, and tax administration. For
Bank financial support at the sub-national level, greater clarity in the financing framework
would be expected. At both levels, lending would also be linked to the national government
and LGUs’ ability to prepare high quality operations in a timely manner. Good performance
of the existing portfolio would also need to be maintained to increase lending within the base
case, If progress on reforms and capacity is weak and if the portfolio deteriorates, Bank
lending would fall commensurately.
119. In a high case, the Bank would be prepared to provide total lending, including
development policy lending, of up to US$?.8 billion in response to an accelerated reform
scenario. Entry into the high case could occur once a track record of policies and
associated outcomes have been established, with a reduction of the consolidated public
sector deficit (CPSD) of 2 percent of GDP relative to 2004, as part of a sustained adjustment
effort compatible with a deficit reduction of 3 percent of GDP during 2005-07.’5 A significant
portion of the fiscal adjustment would be expected to derive from increases in the tax
revenue to GDP ratio, reflecting progress on both tax administration and tax policy
improvements. This fiscal adjustment would likely generate improvements in financial
market indicators and a significant reduction in the cost of borrowing. With improving
confidence in the macroeconomic policy framework, the share of private investment in the
economy would also grow. Lower public deficits and growth from stronger financial markets
and higher investments would combine to significantly reduce public debt/GDP. Substantial
progress toward the high case would be considered in an enhanced base case,
characterized by steady progress in strengthening public sector revenues and reducing the
public sector deficit (see footnote in Table 12).
120. In addition to fiscal adjustment, development policy lending, whether in a high case
or an enhanced base case, would support structural reforms in areas such as tax policy and
administration, public expenditure management including civil service reform, banking and
pension systems, the power sector, investment climate and capital markets, among other
possibilities. The pace and quality of the reforms implemented would influence the size and
timing of DPL. Each of a series of annual DPLs could cover fiscal reforms plus other key
reforms from the list above.
121. A low case scenario would be characterized by inadequate fiscal adjustment
contributing to heightened concerns regarding fiscal and debt sustainability, limited progress
l3
l4

l5

The actual lending was US$472 million for the FY2000-02 CAS period and US$379 million (projected) for
the FY2003-05 CAS period.
Development policy lending was included in the base case in the FY2003-05 CAS but was not actually
committed.
The CPSD in 2004 is reported at 5.0 percent of GDP. Adjustments to the CPSD would be measured net of
privatization receipts.

33
in other key policy areas, and deterioration in the quality of the Bank’s portfolio. Under such
circumstances, Bank lending would fall below US$450 million and lending instruments would
focus more narrowly on a selected number of investment projects to support direct poverty
reduction and delivery of critical public services (e.g., National Program Support for Health,
Basic Education, Social Protection, and Kalahi 2 (CDD) projects).

Table 12: CAS Trigger Matrix FYO6-08
Low case

Base Case

High Case a’

Lending envelope

Up to US$450 million

Up to US$900 million

Jp to US$1.8 billion

Development Policy

No

No

fes

Inadequate fiscal
adjustment
Widening fiscal deficit
Limited progress in
other key policy
outcome areas

Appropriate reform
agenda
No major policy
reversals, but progress
on implementing key
reforms is uneven
No widening of the fiscal
deficit

Entry into the high case
with track record of
policies and associated
outcomes established
with CPSD reduction of
2 percent of GDP
relative to 2004
Compatible with CPSD
reduction of 3 percent of
GDP during 2005-07
Significant portion of
adjustment due to
increases in ratio of tax
revenue to GDP

(for three-year CAS
Deriod)

a/

An enhanced base case would also be considered. In this case, DPL up to U S 4 5 0 million could be
included, with the proviso that total Bank lending would not rise above US$1.2 billion. Entry into the
enhanced base case could occur once a track record of policies and associated outcomes have been
established, with a reduction of the CPSD of about 1.O - 1.25 percent of GDP relative to 2004, as part of a
sustained adjustment effort compatible with a deficit reduction of 2 percent of GDP during 2005-07. A
significant portion of the fiscal adjustment would again be expected to derive from increases in the tax
revenue to GDP ratio.

122. To allow for flexibility to respond to emerging needs, a menu of potential projects and
estimated lending amounts, aligned to the platforms, has been prepared. (See Annex 83)
This indicative list of possible projects will be updated periodically. Some projects would
drop out depending upon evolving needs, and new projects may be added that are
consistent with the CAS framework.
123. Bank exposure to the Philippines is estimated at US$3.3 billion at the end of fiscal
year 2005, versus a peak of US$5.5 billion in FY95, reflecting negative net disbursements
from the Bank in each of the past ten years. Negative net transfers (including interest
payments) averaged nearly U S 4 0 0 million per annum in the past decade. Consequently,
exposure ratios fall well within Bank guidelines and debt to the Bank accounts for about 5
percent of the country’s external debt. Given projected principal repayments during
FY2006-08 averaging about US$400 million per annum, Bank exposure would continue to
decline during the next three years under the base case. Indeed, even with an enhanced

34
base case (up to US$1.2 billion), exposure would not increase. Exposure would only
increase with an aggressive expansion in development policy lending predicated by an
improved policy environment under the high lending case. The number of investment loans
that could be relatively faster disbursing (SWAp operations, for example, typically disburse
over a fewer number of years than do other investment operations) would be limited to
remain within these broad categories of exposure.
124. For IFC, the Philippines is among the Corporation’s top ten country exposures with a
committed portfolio of U S 4 3 0 million in 31 projects mainly in the infrastructure and financial
sectors. (See Annex 88) MIGA’s current exposure in the Philippines stands at US$103
million of gross exposure in the infrastructure and finance sectors. (See Annex 88) This is
well below the country limit (US420 million net), giving significant room for additional
guarantees.

Providing Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) and Sharing Knowledge
125. In the Philippines there has been remarkable receptivity for the Bank Group’s
analytical and advisory activities (AAA), drawn from its global knowledge and international
experience. These activities are particularly important for achieving impact, in view of
possibly limited lending volumes. The Bank Group will continue to invest in high-quality,
demand-driven AAA. This work will encompass: economic & sector work, which will
underpin our policy dialogue with the client as well as provide the foundation for effective
lending; and technical assistance which can be flexibly used to help the client implement
reforms.
126. Given the premium placed in this CAS on seizing opportunities when they arise and
being able to adjust to the evolving client priorities, a definitive list of new AAA tasks is not
provided as it will evolve over the CAS period. AAA will focus on several important broad
areas in which an ongoing dialogue will take place, in particular:
Fiscal reforms: AAA will build on recently completed work such as the Development
Policy Review. Our policy dialogue will focus on the direction of tax policy as the
main vehicle for managing macroeconomic stability and achieving sustainable
growth. This could also involve debt sustainability analysis and assessment of the
impact of fiscal stimulus on growth and poverty reduction. To complement such
fiscal analysis, AAA could also be conducted on contingent liabilities and pension
reform. The medium to long-term AAA agenda could include technical assistance to
improve the quality, effectiveness, and efficiency of public institutions, processes,
and systems (e.g., medium-term budget plans, budget systems, monitoring,
oversight, and possibly the formulation of a fiscal responsibility act).
0

Growth and the investment climate: AAA will support the development of policies to
enhance productivity and competitiveness. Work will aim to improve the
development of new policy approaches and to build capacity that will help the
Philippines derive greater domestic productivity growth benefits from reforms. This
could include analysis on improving supply chain logistics, the regulatory framework
for private investment, and related financial sector issues. In addition to national
issues on growth and competitiveness, AAA could help identify targeted measures to
support productivity improvements and employment among the rural poor and to
strengthen alliances between public and private stakeholders at regional and local

35
levels. This could include support for better agricultural trade policy and
infrastructure development.
Social development and inclusion, social protection, and poverty: The AAA program
will encompass advice on how to improve the coverage and quality of basic social
services and social assistance and how to reduce vulnerabilities (e.g., mitigate the
impact of shocks on the poor). The work will build on updated poverty analysis using
the recently completed national poverty map to improve budget allocations. This
could involve assistance to design a social protection framework, including a strategy
to scale-up effective programs, achieve synergies between social services, and
empower the poor. Other AAA activities could include developing different poverty
targeting mechanisms and interventions to support more objective, equitable, and
less political allocation of resources. These activities would be closely linked to work
on fiscal and decentralization issues. Additional AAA work may include policy notes
on human resource reform in the health sector, building knowledge on public-private
partnerships in the social sector, as well as developing a deeper understanding of
regional poverty by continuing work on poverty mapping.
0

Governance, political economy ofreform, and anti-corruption: AAA work in this area
will focus on developing rigorous stakeholder models to analyze the impact of policy
reform proposals on different stakeholder groups and improve the understanding of
the political economy of reform in the Philippines. Building on ongoing work with the
judiciary and other oversight agencies, support is likely to focus on increasing
transparency and accountability within government agencies and within private
corporations, strengthening institutions of government, and increasing involvement of
civil society and elected officials in the oversight of government activities. Specific
areas of attention could be on improvements in financial management practices,
public administration management, and judicial effectiveness.
LGUs, municipal finance, and fiscal decentralization: Potential AAA for this topic
would focus on three areas: rationalizing the existing inter-governmental transfer
system; introducing a performance orientation to it; and improving the ability of local
governments to enter into sustainable public-private partnerships which support
growth and employment.
Meeting infrastructure needs: Building on the Meeting lnfrastructure Needs report
(to be completed by end-FY2005), forthcoming AAA will address specific
infrastructure reform topics that are of particular interest to the government, such as
the power and water sectors and preparing policy notes on wastewater and solid
waste management issues. In addition, advice could be offered to the Philippines
lnfrastructure Corporation and the BOT Center on logistics development.

127. Another important aspect of our AAA program will be to discuss, disseminate, and
draw on several ongoing multi-year initiatives. In particular, the policy recommendations of
the Meeting lnfrastructure Needs report will be discussed extensively with the government,
and will provide the groundwork for future lending as part of both the national and local
platforms. Similarly, the Investment Climate Assessment, once published, will aim to inform
a broad range of stakeholders about critical private investment related issues, and thereby
promote agreement on the reform agenda.
128. Trust funds will continue to play a prominent role in our entire program. Besides
support to specific lending operations or recipients’ programs, trust funds allow us to
undertake a range of AAA that would be difficult to finance otherwise, in such areas as

36
poverty monitoring and analysis; governance and anti-corruption; corporate social
responsibility in the mining sector; strengthening LGU accountability; and managing water
resources. In addition, a multi-partner trust fund that supports reconstruction and
development efforts in Mindanao is being established, to be administered by the Bank. (See
Box 2)
129. Overall, we will also put greater emphasis on just-in-time AAA, to respond to
immediate client needs. Through the use of videoconferences, written materials, and
dialogue, the Bank Group can offer its clients quick advice on a range of topics, based on
our in-house experts, global knowledge network, and technology systems. A prime example
of this was a videoconference held in late-2004 which gave four government secretaries a
chance to discuss social protection policies and options, with a panel of Bank Group experts
who had wide-ranging global experience.
130. Knowledge sharing of our AAA is an integral business line of the Bank Group. We
intend to package our research and international experience with local knowledge and
innovatively disseminate it to achieve maximum impact on target stakeholders. To support
the government’s reform program, the Bank Group could promote Knowledge for
Development Networks at the national and local levels. These would be co-organized and
mobilized in partnership with government and civil society institutions, and associations that
support knowledge sharing and networking through communities of practice. The networks
could serve as channels for information dissemination, advocacy of policy agenda, and
promoting islands of good governance and replication of best practices.
131. Distancele-learning will be part of our knowledge sharing strategy. Through our
partnership with Asian Institute of Management and the Bank Group’s network of
Knowledge for Development Centers (KDCs), virtual courses will be offered on project and
procurement management and disaster risk management for national and local agencies.
(See Box 5) Such activities will be supported by the WBI and the Bank Group’s Global
Distance Learning Network. In addition, we will continue to co-organize with Asian Institute
of Management, the KDCs, and other national and international partners, real-time fora and
policy dialogue on relevant development themes.
132. As one of its focus countries, WBl’s program for the Philippines will be closely
aligned to the new CAS. A multi-year program of customized WBI activities will be linked to
AAA, as well as to operational work. The National Disaster Coordinating Council, in
partnership with WBI and three Philippine KDC universities, launched in 2005 an online
course on disaster risk management. The course was the first of its kind in the Philippines
as well as for the Bank Group at the country level and in collaboration with local country
partners. A broader program of capacity building targeted to strengthen the core
competencies of LGUs is also being developed. Topics will include strategy formulation and
development planning process; budgeting, financial management, and creditworthiness; and
revenue mobilization. In addition, Philippine government officials will participate in a WBIsponsored course to build capacity to combat money laundering and terrorism financing.

Partnering to Achieve Greater Impact
133. A network of strong partnerships is critical to knowledge sharing, and to delivering
our lending and AAA programs. Over the past decade the Bank Group has had a proactive
outreach program in the Philippines. We have established robust partnerships not only with
our main client, government, but with a range of stakeholders such as international

37
development partners, civil society, the business sector, academia, and the media. We will
sustain and build on our long-established relationships and actively explore new ones.
134. The Bank Group’s partnership with ADB and JBIC is especially critical. ADB, in
particular, is facing similar program challenges as the Bank Group and it is responding by
also adjusting its engagement strategy. With its strategic focus on fiscal consolidation,
improved investment climate, and support for faster achievement of the MDGs, there is
strong complementarity between ADB’s 2005-2006 Country Strategy and Program and the
Bank Group’s new CAS. Looking ahead there is scope for closer collaboration and
synchronized efforts in several areas including assessment of and support for the
government’s fiscal program, planning processes, governance and anti-corruption agenda,
and decentralization and LGU engagement strategy, and the results framework. Together,
ADB, JBIC, and the Bank Group programs comprise approximately 90 percent of the
country’s total ODA resources. With the government, the three institutions will continue
harmonization efforts. In addition, we will continue to coordinate closely with the IMF,
particularly in the areas of fiscal and banking, and the assessment of macroeconomic
policies. We will also continue our collaboration with the United Nations country team on
addressing the MDGs and other common activities.
135. At the project and sectoral level, partnerships will continue to be pursued. SWAptype operations, in particular, offer excellent opportunities for coordination with development
partners where there is a common agenda with the government and strong commitment
from the line agency. A good example is our ongoing coordination with the European
Commission and ADB during the preparation of the National Program Support for Health
project (FY06) given their active support of the government’s agenda in this area. Overall,
we will seek to develop a more harmonized, less fragmented framework for assistance
among partner programs, especially for local governments. We especially intend to create
better synergies with bilateral agencies, which have a range of programs targeted to the
local level. Extensive coordination with both bilateral and multilateral development agencies
on the creation of the Mindanao Trust Fund is a good example of how the Bank Group will
leverage its programs with development partners.
136. Global partnerships on the environment are an emerging and important business line
for the Philippines program. One of the region’s first agreements under the global Carbon
Fund Emission Reductions Purchase Program was recently signed for the Philippines. As
the first wind farm in the Philippines, the project will have a significant demonstration effect
in accelerating the commercialization of wind power in the country, consistent with the CAS
private sector platform. The Multilateral Fund for the Montreal Protocol is also supporting a
number of on-going projects in the Philippines to reduce ozone-depleting substances. In
addition, the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) is supporting global research for Coral
Reef Management which has significant focus on the Philippines. Going forward and in line
with the programmatic approach of this CAS, the GEF will also support a cross-sectoral and
integrated environment and natural resources management project.

38

rom academia
government sector use th
tatives are the main KDC

137. We will also enhance our strategic coordination with other external partnership
programs such as the Water and Sanitation Program, which supports capacity building and
knowledge sharing. The Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) will be
counted on to provide continued support to the Philippines to strengthen the investment
environment for infrastructure.
138. The Cities Alliance will also continue to support City Development Strategies and
other urban development assistance especially with the reported successes of the early
CDS program. This program has planted the seed for implementing and institutionalizing
participatory urban governance processes in urban development decision making (e.g.,

39
economic development planning, addressing poverty issues, project prioritization and capital
investment planning). Instead of the originally planned strategies for ten cities, the program
has generated city development strategies in 31 new cities due to a strong response from
city mayors. These will be further supported through the Local Government Support for
Cities Development (FY06). The approach will deepen the Bank Group’s assistance and
policy dialogue under the local platform of this CAS.
139. In playing an honest-broker role, our dialogue with civil society leaders and opinion
makers will be vital, especially in expanding relationships with congressional leaders. We
will support the government’s efforts to build coalitions for reform and help promote public
discussion and healthy debate, particularly related to the CAS themes of governance and
fiscal stability.
140. The Panibagong Paraan (“New Ways”) Development Marketplace program will also
serve as a venue for building partnerships with and between the branches of government,
development partners, civil society, and the private sector. This event, programmed every
18 to 24 months, promotes innovative ideas in poverty reduction and encourages the
replication and scaling-up of successful projects.
141. The Bank will continue its coordinating role among external development partners
through our organization and co-chairing, under the government’s leadership, of the
Consultative Group (CG) meetings. Under the CG umbrella, activities of other development
partners are already in line with the four CAS themes and are being coordinated through
various existing and new working groups. For instance, CG working groups on the MDGs,
health sector reforms, and education reforms are underway and support multi-agency
dialogue and coordination in the social sector, including social inclusion issues. New CG
working groups on decentralization and local governments, governance and anti-corruption,
economic and fiscal reforms, and growth and investment climate, are expected to continue
beyond the formal CG meetings, and will undoubtedly further the CAS’ goals in each of
these areas.
142. In March 2005, for the first time the CG meeting involved a broad range of
stakeholders from civil society, Congress, the business community, academia, as well as
government and development partner representatives, and to reflect its changed approach
was renamed the Philippines Development Forum. The interactive discussion provided an
opportunity for all groups to develop a better understanding and perspective on the reform
agenda, and hence fostered consensus. This Forum will continue and will focus on key
development issues and encompass broader participation and deeper development
dialogue.

Managing Risks
143. This entire CAS is focused on support for the Philippines to grasp opportunities and
manage substantial risks. A serious risk would be fading political support for key reforms.
The CAS is driven by the desire to minimize this risk by urging front-loaded reforms and
helping the country accelerate the benefits that are expected from fiscal and other reforms.
144. More specifically, the Bank Group’s program over the next three years will face risks
related to its effectiveness and ability to attain outcomes. The Bank Group’s effectiveness
will depend, to a large degree, on the extent of political will for reform and the pace of
change. In particular, failure to rein in fiscal deficits would create greater economic

40
vulnerability and require further expenditure contraction. This would negatively impact the
Bank portfolio and investment lending. Possible external shocks could also weaken the
economy with the same impact.
145. Social and political events can pose unpredictable, yet serious risks to our program
and to overall development outcomes. Significant constitutional reforms are contemplated
and could change the political landscape significantly and in ways that are difficult to predict
at this time.
146. The failure to achieve a sustained peace arrangement in Mindanao poses one
particular risk. Without a peace agreement between the government and the MILF, the
Mindanao Trust Fund for reconstruction and development (for which the Bank Group is
playing an active role in coordinating among development partners) would be limited to
modest capacity-building activities. Security concerns in Mindanao and elsewhere could
also hamper private investment and the preparation and supervision of Bank-financed
projects. To mitigate the possible impact of such risks on the Bank Group’s program, we will
maintain our broad and deep partnerships with development partners and country
stakeholders. While this can help reduce the impact on our program, such risks may
nonetheless have serious implications for the country itself.
147. Overall, the CAS is designed to not only capture opportunities for reform, but also to
mitigate and manage the risks to the Bank Group’s finances and reputation. This is
achieved through a strategy that scales Bank lending to the Philippines’ progress on policy
reforms and implementation, as outlined above. The platform approach itself is fundamental
to risk management since it strives to improve effectiveness of public institutions and the
ability to sustain reform measures.
148. Risks will also be reduced as we rely more actively on the results framework as a
management tool. As noted, monitoring and evaluation of CAS outcomes will be integral to
our annual programming and portfolio reviews. This will allow us to identify potential
problems early on. And, the SWAP lending approach provides enough flexibility to adjust
lending levels quickly depending upon the circumstances.
149. Our strong relationship with multiple stakeholders within the country as well as with
external development partners is another important way for the Bank Group to minimize its
risks and ensure its effectiveness under changing country circumstances.

Managing for ResuIts
150. The CAS results framework (Annex B9) will be used to manage the assistance
program on an ongoing basis. It identifies result targets at three levels:
Country development goals, extracted from the 2004-10 MTPDP, and some of the
more challenging MDGs for the Philippines. (See Box 1) These are shown in the far
left-hand column in Annex B9, and represent the country’s development objectives to
which the Bank Group can contribute but for which we do not control the outcome.
They provide the medium-term context for monitoring of the Bank Group’s
assistance.
0

CAS outcomes, expressed as “top-down” measures of visible successes that can
be replicated and thus achieve greater impact. These are based on the four CAS
themes (e.g., governance) and the three implementation platforms (e.g., national

41
platform) and are noted in the center column of the results framework. These CAS
outcomes (summarized by theme and platform in Table 13) link program-level
milestones to country development goals. The results outlined seek to identify
higher-level changes leveraged by Bank assistance. These are intentionally less
project-specific than in traditional CAS approaches (e.g., number of roads built,
drinking water systems established, etc.). This is to ensure relevance and impact of
Bank assistance in a middle-income country where the Bank’s financial resources
account for a very small share (recently about 0.2 percent of GDP).
Program-level milestones, or a “bottoms-up” approach, reflecting the outcomes of
the Bank Group assistance program of loans and AAA, including the existing
portfolio. These are summarized in the fourth column in Annex B9. The indicators
here are at a more aggregate level than the indicators provided from individual
projects, allowing for broader assessment of the overall impact of current and
proposed Bank Group activities. Annex Table B10 provides more detail by mapping
the ongoing and new lending and non-lending activities (including relevant programs
of partners) against the CAS themes and platforms.
151. Taking account of past experience, the targets for program-level milestones of the
Bank Group program are modest and selective, providing a broad framework for assistance
without over-promising on outcomes or over-prescribing the approach which may be
adopted to achieve these goals. In some cases, the identified targets are new and further
work will be required to identify baselines and measurement techniques. The approach to
finalizing these will be documented as part of the forthcoming portfolio review. We will
explore with the government the possibilities for sharing these reviews with external
stakeholders, so that CAS consultation can become a more continuous process.
152. The government is also working on results-based management of its expenditure
programs. With assistance from the Bank, the government has identified Major Final
Outputs for each of 13 national government agencies, highlighting key results associated
with their core functional mandates and key indicators for their achievement. These will be
used during 2005 to review and improve targeting of budget allocations for 2006. At this
stage the indicators being developed for this purpose are not necessarily good indicators of
achievement of Bank assistance targets. We plan to monitor and compare both approaches
and expect the CAS results monitoring process to gradually converge with government‘s
performance management indicators.
153. A potential list of projects has been developed and will help in formulating annual
work programs as needs evolve. (See Annex B3) While these goals provide clear targets,
the framework is intended to be sufficiently flexible to respond to evolving priorities over the
CAS period. Hence, projects and programs may change.
154. This a three-year CAS covering fiscal years 2006-08. The decision was made to
cover a three-year period, instead of the now more common four-year Bank Group
strategies, to align better with the government’s six-year electoral cycle and six-year period
for the MTPDP, both which commenced in mid-2004. This timeframe, therefore, will allow
the next three-year CAS to assess the Bank Group’s impact in tandem with the current
administration’s mid-term review of its MTPDP, and to respond accordingly. In addition, the
Bank Group will undertake a focused progress report about half-way into the CAS period to
ensure that the strategy continues to be relevant and the implementation is broadly on track.

42

Table 13:
CAS-Level Goals

Organizing Ourselves to Deliver
155. To deliver the CAS, the Bank activities will be organized in clusters based around
key client relationships. These are also more closely aligned with the result areas described
earlier, allowing more clear accountability for results and promoting greater room for
prioritization of efforts within the platform teams. This implies a significant shift away from
the management of individual (sometimes fragmented) tasks toward the management of
client relationships and related clusters of work.

43

156. At the national level, the work program will be organized into clusters aligned with
key client institutions, such as the line departments responsible for rural development,
environment, health, and education. The CAS' national platform will provide a coordinated
approach for cross-cutting support of government efforts to improve public sector
performance, efficiency, governance, and service delivery. Key analytic work on sectorspecific and cross-sectoral issues will also be included in these clusters.
157. Activities at the local level will be clustered to ensure consistent and effective
assistance to local institutions. Tt7e CAS' local platform will provide a common framework
for local performance assessment, capacity building, implementing procedures, financing,
and community-driven development. This cluster will include loans and technical assistance
provided directly to local governments and institutions in support of local development plans.
Since some national programs also include support for priority programs implemented at the
local level, the local platform will need a strong cross-sectoral approach to ensure
compatibility between national assistance and local financing, needs, and capacity. The
local platform will also work with government on identifying options for rationalizing national
grant programs to improve performance incentives and targeting of national priorities. WBI
assistance is also expected to be targeted on local performance and capacity building
efforts.

158. The private sector platform will include work clusters dealing with the key
infrastructure areas (power, water, transport), IFC investments, financial sector, and other
Bank Group efforts to improve the investment climate and support increased private
investments in the Philippines. We envisage increased coordination between Bank and IFC
teams, and increased attention to support government efforts for private participation in
infrastructure.
159. Each work cluster is expected to include a number of tasks grouped under a team
with clear accountability for client relationships. The CAS results framework also identifies
clear result areas for each platform. The country team will ensure smooth coordination of
work program clusters with the Bank's sector teams and other Bank Group units contributing
to the assistance strategy.

Annex 1
Page 1 of 13

Annex 1

Philippines Country Assistance Strategy FYO3-05
Completion Report
1. Introduction
1.
The objective of the Philippines Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) Completion Report
is to evaluate the effectiveness of the Bank’s assistance program to the Philippines and draw
lessons for preparation of a new assistance strategy for the FYO6-08 period. While the focus is
on the most recent CAS which covers FYO3-05, the review also looked at the 2000-2004 period
to take a medium-term view of the program. This CAS Completion Report:
reviewed the Bank’s previous CAS’ to determine the Bank’s strategic objectives and
their link to government goals in the Medium-Term Philippines Development Plan
(MTPDP);
reviewed portfolio performance and selected Bank documents and assessments carried
out to date;
0

interviewed Bank staff and managers (both in Washington and Manila), government
counterparts, and selected individuals outside the government who are knowledgeable
of Bank operations*;
assessed to what extent the Bank was successful in meeting CAS objectives; and

0

drew lessons for future Bank assistance.

The report draws heavily on the work done to date in Manila on assessing the results of
2.
the Bank’s portfolio and the technical assistance program. This work is being conducted as part
of the move towards results based management of the portfolio with the government.

II. Government’s Strategic Goals
The government’s strategic objectives for the CAS period are presented in the MTPDP
3.
(2001-04). The plan consisted of four key strategic areas:
macroeconomic stability with equitable growth based on free enterprise;
0

agriculture and fisheries modernization with social equity;
comprehensive human development and protecting the vulnerable; and
good governance and the rule of law.

4.
The plan laid out a comprehensive and ambitious agenda3. Among others, it aimed to:
promote macroeconomic stability; generate employment; enhance competitiveness of industry
and services; accelerate infrastructure development; modernize agriculture and fisheries; further

’
*

The World Bank Group’s Country Assistance Strategy for the Philippines 2003-2005: Improving the Lives of the
Poor through Growth and Empowerment., April 30, 2002; The Philippines Country Assistance Strategy, May 11,
1999.
A total of 43 people were interviewed: 23 Bank staff, 14 senior government officials (primarily at the
undersecretary, and assistant secretary level); 3 senior officials of government corporations (including the
Development Bank of the Philippines; and 3 people outside the government.
The main text of the MTPDP was 289 pages.

Annex 1
Page 2 of 13
agrarian reform; promote sustainable use of natural resources; strengthen education and
training; enhance health care; expand access to shelter; protect vulnerable groups; pursue
balanced regional development; secure peace in Mindanao; improve law enforcement and
administration of justice; and promote good governance.

111. Bank Strategic Objectives and CAS Outcomes
5.
The Bank’s FYO3-05 CAS was also broad and aligned with the government‘s strategy.
The Bank’s strategy was defined in terms of two broad objectives: to help achieve more rapid
sustained growth, and support national efforts to empower the poor to increase their
participation in development. To facilitate effective partnership with government, the Bank
aligned its strategy with the four-part framework of the MTPDP, and the CAS described in detail
how the Bank program supported the MTPDP4. The CAS was presented to and endorsed by
the President and the Cabinet. This formality confirmed government ownership and allowed the
Bank to stand by the lending scenarios laid out in the CAS.
6.
The CAS’S comprehensiveness reflects the breadth of the MTPDP and the scope of the
Bank’s engagement in the Philippines. The FYO3-05 CAS presented an overview of the Bank’s
program, but it did not include a concise statement of strategic objectives nor provide sufficient
basis to assess whether the Bank was successful in meeting its objectives. The main text of the
CAS (Table 3-1) listed 22 objectives subdivided by the two CAS objectives and the four MTPDP
themes, but it did not articulate what outcomes the Bank was attempting to achieve. The CAS
Program Matrix (Annex B9) outlined 38 strategic objectives (which were in line with, but not
necessarily identical to, the 22 in the main text), presented country and Bank performance
indicators, and specified Bank instruments for each objective by the four MTPDP themes. While
the Program Matrix was designed to be an experimental results framework at that time, it did not
fully develop a picture of what the Bank was hoping to achieve by the end of the CAS period.
This was because: (i) it did not help establish priorities; (ii) base lines were generally not given
for performance indicators; and (iii) targets were set mostly as directions (“increase”/”decrease”)
with no specific outcome against which to measure progress. Public finance was an exception
in which the Bank set clear targets for increase in tax revenues and decrease in national
government deficit, using it as a trigger for adjustment lending in the Base Case scenario5. The
Program Matrix was not kept up-to-date nor apparently used during program implementation’.

IV. Results Assessment
The following sections summarize country progress and Bank actions by Bank strategic
7.
objective. A simple assessment is made on the Bank’s success in meeting its objectives.
These objectives were derived by summarizing the stated strategic objectives in the main text
and the Program Matrix. They are clustered along the four strategic themes in the FYO3-05
The contribution of the Bank’s assistance program to the four strategic areas of MTPDP are described in detail in
pages 35-44 of the FYO3-05 CAS.
The Base Case triggers included improvements in fiscal performance: taxlGNP ratio to increase by 0.4 percent
per year in 2002-2005; national government deficitlGNP ratio to decline by 0.5 percent per year through 2005.
Having a limited number of strategic objectives, baselines, and targets does not ensure that they would be used.
The FYOO-02 CAS included seven strategic objectives and a similar program matrix (Annex B9), outlining
strategic objectives and performance indicators. The matrix did include some performance measures with base
lines and targets, but was comprehensive, covering 18 pages. The FYO3-05 CAS did not refer to these
indicators in its review of previous experience and it does not appear that this matrix was used for Bank program
management.

Annex 1
Page 3 of 13
CAS. A detailed discussion of the objectives and country and Bank performance is included in
Attachment 1.
A. Macroeconomic Stability and Equitable Growth Based on Free Enterprise

8.
Strengthen fiscal policy by improving tax effort and containing contingent
liabilities: The government's fiscal situation continued to worsen with the ratio of national
government fiscal deficit to GDP increasing from 4.0 percent in 2000 and to 4.6 percent in 2003
and non-financial public debt increasing from 88 percent of GDP in 2000 to about 101 percent in
2003. The government's inability to increase revenues is a key factor in this decline. While the
government was able to control budget expenditures, with expenditures remaining around 19
percent of GDP, tax revenue to GDP dropped from 13.7 percent in 2000 to 12.5 percent in 2003.
The government is taking measures to strengthen tax administration, but a key constraint has
been the unwillingness of the legislature to enact policy measures needed to increase revenues,
especially tax increases. Similarly, regulators had not approved revision to power and water
tariffs, a key factor for the deficits in Government Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs).
Following the election in May 2004, the government is beginning to turn the deficit situation
around with the CY2004 deficit below target, substantial progress being made on three tax bills,
and power tariffs increased. While the fiscal situation is improving, it is unlikely that this
objective will be met by the end of the FYO3-05 CAS period.
The Bank refrained from planned adjustment lending since the government did not meet
9.
the fiscal trigger^.^ The Bank prepared development policy reviews and policy briefs which
helped focus public attention on key development challenges, including the fiscal deficit. The
Bank helped the government to meet essential education, health, and social service
expenditures, such as textbooks, desks, and vaccines, through two Social Expenditure
Management Projects (SEMP I and 11). In addition, these projects promoted reform in
procurement and financial management in the implementing agencies. The Bank supported
improved public sector management through resources provided by various Asia Europe
Meeting (ASEM) Trust Funds and Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grants: improving tax
administration in the Bureau of Internal Revenue; promoting procurement reform and supporting
implementation of a Procurement Reform Act; and piloting of results based budgeting. A Public
Expenditure Procurement and Financial Management Review, conducted jointly with the
government and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), paved the way for the systemic
implementation of, and capacity building called for, by the Procurement Reform Act and thereby
contributed to substantial procurement reform, including the harmonization of procurement
between the government, ADB, the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), and the
Bank.
IO.
Address banking sector problems and deepen capital markets: Banking sector
reform, which gained momentum following the 1997 East Asia crisis, proceeded very slowly.
The Banking System Reform Loan, an adjustment operation, was cancelled in 2001 because
conditionality for the second and third tranches was not likely to be met within a reasonable

'

The base case lending program included a proposed Public Finance Strengthening Loan (FY03) and a Public
Sector Reform Loan (FY04). Base case triggers included improvements in fiscal performance: taxlGNP ratio to
increase by 0.4 percent per year in 2002-2005; national government deficit/GNP ratio to decline by 0.5 percent
per year through 2005. These were not met. The government itself had more ambitious targets for deficit
reduction. The MTPDP targeted the consolidated public sector deficit to decline from 4.3 percent of GNP in 2001
to 0.6 percent by 2004 and become a surplus of 0.4 percent by 2006.

Annex 1
Page 4 of 13
timeframe. While some progress is being made', many of the issues remain; high level of nonperforming assets, insufficient provisioning, and weak legal and regulatory environment. Debt
markets have grown, but government debt is crowding out private borrowings. The Bank and
the IMF conducted a Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) and two Report on the Observance
of Standards and Codes (ROSC) modules (accounting and corporate governance); both
institutions have maintained a dialogue with the government in the context of the FSAP follow
up. While progress is being made on banking reform, weaknesses in the financial sector are
still a major concern for private sector development in the Philippines. The Bank fell short of
meeting this strategic objective.

lmprove the investment climate and enhance competitiveness: Concerns over the
11.
fiscal deficit, handling of contractual dispute on private infrastructure contracts, and political
uncertainty have dampened private sector enthusiasm for the Philippines. An Investment
Climate Assessment carried out by the Bank in FY04 showed that at least 30 percent of the
firms surveyed saw macroeconomic instability, corruption, and electricity and tax rates as an
important investment constraint. The Bank is addressing these issues through its
macroeconomic dialogue, work with the government on governance (see Section D below), and
operations and dialogue in the power and transportation sectors. Consensus building and
capacity development on corporate social responsibility in the mining sector were supported
through workshops, international experience sharing, and capacity building. While the
Philippines enjoys many advantages in natural resources, labor force and location in a fast
growing region, it still lags behind other Southeast Asian countries, such as Thailand and
Malaysia, as a destination for investors. Therefore, the Bank fell short of meeting this strategic
objective.
12.
Alleviate infrastructure bottlenecks: Increased privatization in power and water
sectors and sustainability of key infrastructure investment and institutions through, among
others, better cost recovery and financial management, were key country outcomes in the CAS.
The Bank has helped the government address some of their major infrastructure needs: 254 km
of national roads were improved and 500 KV lines were installed between Sua1 and Masinloc.
While Bank-supported projects have been able to provide and/or improve some physical
facilities, implementationwas significantly slower than expected due to procedural delays and
budget constraints. Moreover, the sustainability of these investments is in doubt because of
continued institutional weaknesses in key agencies: lack of progress on strengthening
maintenance and road management in the Department of Public Works and Highways and the
financial weakness of the National Power Corporation. There was little progress in privatization
in the power sector, and substantial problems arose in private infrastructure projects in other
sectors. Infrastructure in the Philippines still lags behind that of other East Asian countries and
is considered to be a constraint to investment. The Philippine government undertook an
ambitious program of privatizing infrastructure to address the country's needs. This has proven
to be a complex undertaking. Privatization is proceeding, but slower than originally anticipated.
The supply of power and water and sanitation in Metro Manila has improved, but infrastructure
is still seen as a constraint by private investors. Therefore, the Bank has only partially achieved
this strategic objective.

*

For example, two large batches of non-performing loans were transferred from the banking system to private
asset management companies, the Philippines Deposit Insurance Corporation charter has been amended, and
staff afforded greater protection in the discharge of their regulatory duties.

Annex 1
Page 5 of 13
B. Development with Social Equity

13.
Enhance agriculture sector competitiveness and productivity: At the local level, the
Bank continued to provide support to rural communities with a package of infrastructure and
services. As of June 2004, various Bank projects have funded 1,280 km of rural roads, irrigated
28,410 ha of land, and constructed 19 post harvest and 50 multi-purpose centers. The
Implementation Completion Report for the first Agrarian Reform Community Development
Project (ARCDP I; completed in FY04) indicates that these investments have a positive impact
on agricultural productivity and household incomes: real household incomes have increased 63
percent, yields increased 34 percent in project areas. At the national level, the Bank is assisting
the Department of Agriculture (DA) strengthen its capacity to improve agricultural productivity
and competitiveness in key crops. The Diversified Farm Income and Market Development
Project (approved in FY04 after several years of dialogue on reform) supports DA’s efforts to
move from a traditional public sector, supply-driven approach to a more private sector, marketed
oriented approach with emphasis on market development, market information. It also seeks to
strengthen DAs regulatory functions. The Bank is meeting this objective within its project areas.
14.
Scale up land administration and rural finance: The Bank continued to support the
government‘s efforts to improve land administration and increase access to finance in the rural
areas. The Land Administration and Management Project did not deliver the expected 10,000
new titles, but assisted the government to develop capacity and streamline procedures to
provide land titles (347 titles issued, one-stop-shop established), which promises greater
benefits in the future. The Bank’s third Rural Finance Project supported the Land Bank to
increase finance in rural areas, creating close to 10,000 rural jobs. However, there is concern
that the funding mostly reached medium-sized enterprises and is not necessarily getting to
small poor farmers. The Bank is making progress in strengthening land administration and rural
finance, but the progress is falling short of initial expectations (in the number of titles provided,
reaching the poor). This objective has been partially achieved.
15.
Protect the environment and natural resource base: The Bank has been assisting
the government to address natural resource management through projects and Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AM). Bank projects have led to 88,890 ha of marine areas, 1,594 ha of
mangrove areas, and the placement of 6,690 ha of upland areas under environmental
management. The Bank has also assisted the government to improve water resource
management (water resource plans and watershed improvement plans) and helped to build
consensus for a national minerals policy for environmentally sustainable mining. Bank projects
(Community Based Resource Management and Laguna De Bay Institutional Development and
Community Participation projects) have engaged local governments in the preservation of their
local environments. The Bank has raised awareness of environmental issues through its AM
and instituted protection measures in project areas. This objective is being met in project areas.
Ensure participation, benefit, and ownership of local stakeholders: Community16.
based approaches (increasing community voice in developing investments in line with their
needs) is a growing feature of the Bank’s local infrastructure and service operations. All recent
community-oriented projects (ARCPD II, KALAHI-CISS, and ARMM Social Fund Projects) have
strong community participation. Participation is now an essential part of Bank community
oriented operations and KALAHI is seen as an important program by the government. The
Bank has achieved this objective.

Annex 1
Page 6 of 13
17.
Focus on the poor in development programs and target poorer regions, especially
Mindanao and the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM): A large proportion of
the Bank’s portfolio aimed to promote development and increase incomes in poor regions,
especially in Mindanao, which has become a focal point for Bank operations. The Bank has
conducted studies to assess the specific needs of Mindanao: Human Development Study for
ARMM and a Mindanao needs assessment for reconstruction in Mindanao, conducted jointly by
several bilateral and multilateral donor agencies, which provided a wider assessment. Specific
operations focused on Mindanao (the Mindanao Rural Development Project and the ARMM
Social Fund) provided basic infrastructure and identified priority services by the communities.
The Bank is working with other donors to coordinate aid in Mindanao, organizing and cochairing with the government the Mindanao Working Group in FY04, championing the creation
of the Mindanao Discussion Group (co-chaired by UNDP and Japan), and supporting the efforts
to establish a multi-donor Mindanao Trust Fund once a peace agreement is signed between the
government and the Mor0 Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). The Bank is meeting this objective.
C. Comprehensive Human Development Through Access to Basic Services

18.
Improve investments in human resources (education and health) and ensure
access by the poor: In education, the Bank assisted the Department of Education (DepED) to
provide basic supplies (text books, desks, etc.) and school repair through its projects (the Third
Elementary Education Project (TEEP), SEMP I & 11). To date, Bank projects have constructed
or improved 25,912 school buildings, provided around 800,000 desks, and supplied over
seventy million text books. The Bank is also assisting DepED to improve education through
piloting school-based management (through the restructured TEEP project) and to enhance
procurement and internal controls (SEMP ISll). Education policy notes addressed issues such
as education quality, teachers’ performance, school-based management, improving educational
outcomes among the poor and disadvantaged, and perfecting the efficiency of the education
system, As for health issues, Bank-supported projects ensured provision for vaccines and basic
supplies, facilities, and capacity development. To date, close to 130,000 people have received
tuberculosis drugs and thirty healthcare clinics have been constructed or improved through
Bank-supported projects. SEMP II strengthened procurement and financial management within
the Department of Health. The Bank delivered policy notes on lmproving the Poor’s Access to
Affordable Drugs and On Making Philhealth Policies More Pro-Poor. The Bank has assisted the
government improve the delivery of education and health supplies which would benefit the poor
who are not able to afford private alternatives and rely more on the government. The Bank is
meeting this objective.
19.
Provide basic services more efficiently (e.g., shelter, water supply, and sanitation)
and ensure their environmental sustainability: The Bank has made funding available to
communities, local governments, and water districts for water supply and sanitation investments
through rural development projects (for rural communities) and water supply projects (for cities
and urbanized municipalities). To date, 265 rural water systems have been constructed through
Bank projects. Take-up of Bank funding for water systems in the cities and municipalities has
been much lower than anticipated because of a combination of factors: changes in
administration and priorities following elections; local governments’ pursuit of financing at most
favorable terms (including lobbying the legislature for grants); the “cost of doing business”; and
the perceived high transaction cost of Bank loans. Within major urban areas, urbanization is
exacerbating problems of solid waste management and sanitation, with many poor people living
in unsafe environments. Industrialization and traffic congestion are worsening water and air
pollution in the cities. The Bank has supported the development of key legislation: the Clean Air
Act, the Ecological Solid Waste Act, and the Clean Water Act. The Bank’s annual

Annex 1
Page 7 of 13

Environmental Monitor publication is increasing awareness of these issues. The production and
screening of an audio-video version (i.e., a video on water quality) has been effective in
reaching a wider audience and generating public interest on the issue. While it has been
successful in raising awareness of urban environmental issues and assisted the government
improve water supply and sanitation in Metro Manila, the Bank has been less successful in
reaching out to secondary cities. Difficulties in tariff reforms raise questions of sustainability of
water and sanitation investments. The Bank has only partially achieved this objective.
D. Good and Effective Governance
20.
The Bank’s objectives were to: (i) keep a tight “firewall” against graft and corruption in
Bank financed operations; (ii) improve citizen’s access to information promoting participation;
(iii) strengthen public sector capacity (increase confidence in the rule of law, improve
governance to strengthen service delivery); and (iv) improve governance in both the public and
private sectors, thereby helping to rebuild investor confidence and improve investment efficiency.
The Bank is meeting these objectives.
21.
The government, with support from the Bank and others, is making some progress in
improving governance. The Bank saw the strengthening of government procurement and
financial management capacity as well as a greater transparency through civil society
participation in government as some key country outcomes. The Bank channeled over US$5
million in grants (ASEM, IDF) to support improvements in governance. These grants, together
with the Public Expenditure and Procurement and Financial Management Reviews (carried out
jointly with ADB and the government) paved the way for the systemic implementation of the
Procurement Reform Act (passed in 2003). Civil society observers are involved in public bid
committees, providing a greater transparency in the bidding process. As mentioned above, the
Bank is working with the DepED, the Department of Social Welfare and Development, and the
Department of Health to strengthen their procurement and financial management (SEMP 11).
The Judicial Reform Project is assisting the Supreme Court implement institutional reforms to
strengthen public confidence in the judiciary system. To guard against corruption in Bank
projects, the Bank has strengthened its procurement and financial management staff in the
Manila office and brought in its Department of Internal Integrity to investigate a GEF grant. The
Bank has been making progress in these areas, but more effort is needed as corruption
generally continues to be a significant problem in the Philippinesg.
22.
In sum, the Bank has been relatively successful in assisting the government maintain
education, health, and social services and in providing basic infrastructure and services to rural
communities and less developed areas, such as Mindanao, through its projects. The Bank has
reached out to poor communities and promoted community participation in the identification,
development and implementation of local investments. The Bank has been successful in
assisting the government strengthen its procurement and administrative procedures. However,
the Bank was not able to meet it macro-economic objectives. The public sector deficit and high
levels of public debt will continue to limit the government‘s ability to provide infrastructure,
facilities and services. The Philippines is seen as lagging behind Indonesia, Thailand, and other
Asian countries in key economic areas, such as provision of infrastructure and the ability to
attract private investment. Many key constraints were political and outside of the Bank’s
immediate sphere of influence. While progress is being made, strengthening the government’s
ability to deliver services (especially at the local government level) remains a key challenge.
About 35 percent of the firms surveyed in the Investment Climate Survey saw corruption as a major constraint ,
making it second only to “macroeconomic instability”.

Annex 1
Page 8 of 13

V. Bank Performance
Lending: Bank lending for FYOO-04 has been lower than planned. Actual lending was
23.
US$472 million for FYOO-02 compared to a base case of US$1.O-1.3 million in the FYOO-02
CAS and about U S 3 7 9 million projected for FYO3-05 compared to a base case of US$1.I
billion in the FYO3-05 CAS. Lack of adjustment lending was a key factor: the FYO3-05 CAS
included US$750 million in three adjustment loans in the base case scenario. The Bank did not
go ahead with adjustment lending because the government did not meet the fiscal triggers
(fiscal deficit reduction and revenue enhancement). The FYO3-05 CAS had anticipated political
opposition to fiscal reforms as a country risk. Investment projects often took longer than
anticipated to prepare so that projects were eventually delivered but in many cases not in the
fiscal year for which they were programmed. The proposed lending program and actuals for
FYOO-04 are presented in Attachment 2. Of the 23 projects proposed’’, 6 were implemented in
the programmed fiscal year, 6 were implemented later than programmed, 2 are now
programmed for subsequent fiscal years, and 9 were dropped. In addition, two additional
projects, not scheduled in the original program, were approved.”
24.
Although lending levels were lower than expected, the Bank was able to initiate some
innovative projects: engaging the judiciary and lending to the Supreme Court under the Judicial
Reform Project (FY04); reaching out to communities through KALAHI (FY03); and addressing
national policy/agency reform issues through support for improved efficiency of expenditures
within the government’s budget under SEMPll (FY02) and the Diversified Farm Income and
Market Development Project (FY04). Ownership and engagement by the leadership in the
relevant government agencies was a critical factor in project development and implementation.
Analytical and Advisory Activities: While lending has been limited, the Bank has
25.
maintained an active AAA program responding to the government‘s need for knowledge and
technical assistance. AAA activities are listed in Attachment 3. As discussed under Section Ill
above, many have had a significant impact on the government: the Development Reviews
(FY02 and FY04) helped focus discussion on key issues such as the fiscal deficit; the Country
Procurement Assessment Report / Country Financial Accountability Assessment (FY02) and
related technical assistance contributed to the development of the Procurement Reform Act;
and the Environmental Monitors for air and water quality raised awareness of the issues.
In order to improve the impact of its AAA program, the Bank has been reaching out to
26.
the public at large, in addition to the traditional government and immediate stakeholder
audiences. Through greater outreach, the Bank aimed to: (i) increase awareness of the
challenges facing the Philippines; [ii) develop an understanding and foster trust of the Bank and
its operations; and (iii) influence the public’s thinking, especially since many of the issues
require political action. In addition to the traditional launch events and press releases, the Bank
expanded dissemination of AAA products through roundtables in the provinces and the
production and distribution (where appropriate) of audio-video products (i.e., a water quality
video).

lo

Three projects scheduled in FY02 (River Basin Development, Rural Electrification, and Agrarian Reform) in the
FYOO-02 CAS were reprogrammed to FY03 and FY04 in the FYO3-05 CAS and are only counted in their original
fiscal year.
The Land Administration Management Project was added in FYOI and the Diversified Farm Income and
Agriculture Modernization Project was advanced from FY05 to FY04.

Annex 1
Page 9 of 13
27.
The Bank has established seven Knowledge for Development Centers (KDCs)
nationwide, making available not only Bank publications but also development literature and
other materials. KDC usage is averaging 400-600 visitors a month. A Global Distance
Learning Center was set up in the Asian Institute of Management in FY02, beginning with about
12 courses and sessions in that year. These increased to 75 sessions in FY03 and 101 in FY04,
enabling the center to post profits in FY03 and FY04 and to strengthen its financial sustainability.
The Bank actively engaged civil society in the preparation of the FYO3-05 CAS and similarly has
done so during preparation of the FYO6-08 CAS.
28.
An Innovation Market Place was held in January 2004 with the title of Panibagong
Paraan or “New Ways”. It forged partnerships between key leaders from civil society, academe,
the business community, development partners, and the government. The Bank was able to
leverage its US$300,000 allotment, with the total award fund growing to more than US$1 million.
More than 1,800 proposals were received under the theme “Making Basic Services Work for the
Poor” and grants were given to more than 50 winners.
Portfolio Management: The Bank made portfolio management a priority during the
29.
CAS period and actively managed its portfolio in partnership with government and other donors.
A summary of the portfolio indicators is provided in Attachment 4. This shows that overall
portfolio performance improved over the past two CAS periods. Disbursement improved with
the disbursement ratio’* improving from 12 percent in FYOI to over 20 percent in FY03 and
FY04, as problem projects were restructured and non-performing components and activities
were dropped.
30.
The Bank continued to work with the government and development partners to improve
portfolio performance. The move to joint ODA portfolio reviews (initiated by the Bank in FYOO)
spurred positive changes, including: focusing senior government officials on portfolio issues;
development of a “project readiness filter” adopted by government and development partners
(JBIC, ADB); streamlining of government review processes; strengthening government agencies
that oversee the ODA portfolio; and focusing attention on effective monitoring and evaluation.
The Bank intensified efforts to improve implementation capacity, with seminars and workshops
on procurement, financial management, disbursement, and social and environmental
assessment for various implementing agencies. An IDF grant financed the improvement of the
government’s oversight functions. Semi-annual, joint project-level reviews have resulted in
more continuous assessment and resolution of portfolio issues.
31.
The Bank is also working with the government to strengthen the focus on results in
portfolio reviews. Outputs and outcomes of all projects under implementation were summarized
using a common results framework, which helped to identify shortfalls in expected
achievements, and weaknesses in project monitoring. A preliminary assessment was also
made of results achieved under technical assistance provided through grants. This process will
be extended to include AAA in portfolio reviews beginning in early 2005. This work, combined
with the development of a results framework under the new CAS, will allow the Bank and
government to use results to manage the country assistance program in the Philippines.
The Bank is also strengthening coordination among projects involving local governments,
32.
The Local Government Code of 1991 devolved many functions carried out by national
government agencies and significantly increased the responsibility of local governments. Both

’*

The ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the portfolio at the beginning of the
year.

Annex 1
Page 10 of 13
national and local governments have been struggling to adjust to this new environment. The
Bank’s sector-focused approach, working primarily through national government agencies,
promoted a number of successful models for improved delivery of devolved functions, but did
not necessarily encourage a consistent approach across local governments. The Bank took
steps to address this issue by: (i) creating the Local Government Portal which allows local
governments to obtain information on Bank support available to them through the Bank’s
website; (ii) developing an Interactive Project Map that allows people to view Bank projects in
their localities through the website; and (iii) conducting a workshop on joint supervision of all
projects providing services at the local level. This workshop identified the potential for
streamlining and simplifying procedures for local government, with increased focus on the core
development priorities and capacity requirements of local governments. A development
partners working group on local governments is being reactivated to promote greater
harmonization of local development efforts. The government‘s decision in late 2004 to limit
national government grant financing of devolved activities to local governments required further
rethinking of the Bank’s approach towards local governments.

Aid Coordination: The Bank worked effectively with its development partners. The
33.
Bank continues to collaborate closely with the IMF, ADB, JBIC, and key development partners
through its leadership in the Consultative Group and the Quarterly Development Partners
Breakfast Group. The Bank is taking an active role in coordinating assistance to Mindanao
through a needs assessment completed jointly with other development partners and the
preparation of a proposed multi-donor Mindanao Trust Fund.
On harmonization, the Bank: (i) regularly conducts joint quarterly reviews of the portfolio
34.
with government, ADB, and JBIC; (ii) completed a joint Public Expenditure Procurement and
Financial Management Review with ADB (together with the government); and (iii) harmonized
procurement around the government‘s new procurement law. The Bank worked with the
government and other partners to complete standard national competitive bidding documents
for goods, works, and consulting services, which are now being widely disseminated. Some
progress was also made on harmonizing financial reporting formats and developing a common
approach to land acquisition and resettlement

VI. Client Feedback
35.
As part of the CAS Completion Report, senior Filipino officials who have been involved
with Bank operations were interviewed to obtain feedback on the effectiveness of the Bank in
the Philippines. These interviews focused on their perceptions of the Bank’s key
accomplishments and shortfalls during 2000-04 and the Bank’s contribution to meeting their
agency’s strategic objectives.
Overall, the Bank’s clients gave a favorable view of the institution. When asked to rate
36.
the Bank performance on a scale of 1-10 (with 1 being totally ineffective and 10 being extremely
effective), most responded with a 7 or 8. They clearly saw the value of working with Bank staff.
The increasing decentralization of Bank operations to the country office was seen as beneficial.
Many officials talked about how they had benefited from the knowledge they obtained through
interaction with staff, especially on experiences from other countries. Based on this feedback,
the Bank’s strengths are in its:

Annex 1
Page 11 of 13
Convener role: leadership among donors; “honest broker” among conflicting
stakeholders.
Knowledge: quality of analysis; knowledge transfers (both formal and informal); and
strength of a global institution.
0

Willingness and ability to develop approaches that address client needs: The Bank was
seen as “innovative”, “responsive”, and “flexible”.

37.
The Bank also created opportunities to “learn by doing”. For example, Bank projects
provided a model for the Departments of Agrarian Reform, Agriculture, and Environment and
Natural Resources to work with local governments in a decentralized environment; SEMP I & II
allowed the Departments of Health, Education, and Social Welfare to implement procurement
and financial management reform.
Clients often cited as keys to success experiences in which they felt they and the Bank
38.
had been able to work well together during project development and restructuring in a truly
collaborative manner. Similarly, some clients cited cases where they felt they had not been
engaged durin project preparation as a shortcoming - often a non-lead agency in a multiagency project?3 .
Through nterviews, complaints emerged over the “cost of doing business” - procurement
39.
review delays, safeguards “over-kill,” and special account amounts. However, there was no
overarching issue, with different agencies citing problems with diverse aspects. Several
agencies appreciated the Bank for having a greater number of local procurement and financial
management staff in Manila.
There is still area for improvement. When asked where the Bank could do more, one
40.
respondent mentioned the need to return the focus more on strengthening economic
competitiveness. Another suggested taking a systematic approach to local government
capacity building. For instance, significant resources go into capacity building through multiple
projects, but as these activities are not well coordinated, the country may not be getting full
return on the overall investment in capacity building.

VII. Conclusions and Lessons Going Fotward
The Bank has responded flexibly in assisting the Philippine government address its
41.
development challenges, at a time when the sense of urgency for change following the East
Asia financial crisis may be fading. The Bank continued to assist the Philippine government
address their infrastructure and service needs not only through traditional investment loans, but
also through budgetary support for key social expenditures (SEMP I & 11). The Bank also
reached out to communities to help address their immediate needs (KALAHI), initiated
innovative approaches (e.g., Judicial Reform), and worked with the government to strengthen
administrative practices (e.g., procurement and financial management). Many challenges
remain, however. Poverty continues to be a concern with over 35 million people (44 percent)
living on less than US$2 a day in 2003. The Philippines continues to face the degradation of
natural resources despite the progress being made in Bank project areas. Macroeconomic
l3

For example, the Water Districts Project was initially prepared with the Department of the Interior and Local
Government in the lead and the Development Bank of the Philippines was later brought in when the need for a
financial intermediary became apparent.

Annex 1
Page 12 of 13
instability, corruption, and poor infrastructure continue to be identified as key constraints to
private investment.
42.
While the country has not been able to meet a key macroeconomic objective of the CAS
-- increasing tax revenues and reducing the fiscal deficit -- the Bank adapted to the situation,
concentrating on AA4 to address constraints which were within the Bank’s (and the
government’s) area of influence. The Bank identified political reluctance to proceed with critical
aspects of the reform program as a country risk and pro-actively managed it by reaching out to
a variety of stakeholders, opinion leaders, and the public at large to raise awareness of the
challenges facing the Philippines. While lending volumes have been below targets, the Bank
was correct to set clear fiscal triggers for adjustment lending and to stand by them.
Overall, the Bank’s performance in the Philippines is satisfactory. The CAS did not
43.
provide a clear statement of what the Bank intended to achieve, making this evaluation difficult.
The Bank did not achieve some traditional markers, such as the volume of lending planned. At
the same time, the Bank adapted to the situation in the Philippines, exploring ways with the
government to address their priorities. Strong positive feedback from the government on the
Bank’s performance, especially its willingness to listen to and to work with the client, is an
endorsement of this flexible approach.
Key lessons going forward are as follows. The Bank should:

44.

Build on its strong relationship with the client and continue to strengthen country
ownership of the program. The Bank will need to: (i) collaborate closely with its clients in
operations and fully incorporate their needs and priorities; and (ii) ensure that clients
continue to see the Bank’s inputs as relevant, responsive, and innovative. Being
innovative does not necessarily mean taking state-of-the-art solutions to problems, but
working with the client to adapt experiences and knowledge from other countries to the
situation in the Philippines.
Continue its outreach to political leaders, opinion leaders (i.e., the media), and civil
society to build awareness of and promote consensus on the challenges facing the
Philippines and the Bank’s position on these issues. Increasing revenues, reducing the
fiscal deficit, and containing contingent liabilities will continue to be core challenges
facing the government. Many of the solutions are political, requiring action by the
legislature. The Bank will need to continue its “honest broker role,” but should be
realistic about what can be accomplished in the near term.
0

Continue to focus on improving portfolio performance. While the CAS tends to highlight
new operations for the coming years, a significant amount of resources remain to be
transferred to the Philippines. As of September 2004, there was an undisbursed
balance of about U S 6 8 6 million out of total commitments of US$1.2 billion over 23
projects (including GEF). These projects will have a more immediate impact than
operations currently in, or to be included in, the pipeline.
Further coherence among Bank projects involving local governments. In the past, local
governments were often seen as critical implementers of various sectoral strategies,
rather than as units of government in themselves. Going forward, local government
programs should: (i) strengthen local ownership by addressing their priorities; and (ii)
take a systematic approach to key cross-cutting areas such as capacity building and
revenue enhancement.

Annex I
Page 13 of 13
Continue to strengthen its focus on results. The move to results-based CASs provides
an opportunity to get a better handle on key strategic outcomes at the country level
around which the Bank should focus its program. It is critical to: (i) select a limited
number of core medium-term outcomes; (ii) develop indicators to measure progress
towards these outcomes; and (iii) establish clear links with the portfolio, proposed
lending, and proposed AAA. These should be developed with the government and used
to jointly monitor progress on the program. The Bank needs to be selective, but this
does not necessarily mean selecting which sectors the program will focus. The Bank
should be selective in what it realistically can achieve during the FYO6-08 CAS period.
Various operations should be assessed based on the contribution they can make
towards achieving these objectives.
Attachments:
1. CAS Completion Summary
2. Lending Summary - Planned Versus Actual

3. AAA Summary - Planned Versus Actual
4. Portfolio Performance Summary
5. List of Key People Met

a
I

I

a

a

a

a

0

a

a

a

a

a

I

I.

a

I

c

a

a

a

m

U

a,

c
.-fn

B

Qa,

p

ui

"
D
C

m
fn

P

n
C

.o
a

a

. b
1 0

a

a

a

I

I

I

b

.
m

Annex 1. Attachment 2
Page 1 of 1

Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY00-04)a’

Sub-total

IBRD
30.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
8.0
338.0

Current Status (as of June 2(3
Status
Actual
Actual
Actual
Dropped
Dropped
Sub-total

Metro Manila Urban Transport
SEMP II
LGU Urban Water & Sanitation (APL) I1
CALA Regional Development
Financial & Corporate Sector Reform
Solid Waste & Ecological Enhancement

89.0
100.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
40.0

Actual
Slipped to FY02
Slipped to FY02
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped

469.0

Additional Actual Projects
Land Administration Mgmt. Project
Sub-total

100.0
200.0
50.0
50.0
100.0

Slipped to FY04
Slipped to FY04
Slipped to FY03
Slipped to FY04
Dropped

Sub-tota

500.0

Actual Projects from Other FYs
SEMP II
LGU Urban Water & Sani. (APL)-II
Subtotal

Agrarian Reform Community Project4
KALAHI CDD Project
ARMM Social Fund
Judicial Reform
Public Finance Strengthening
Sub-tota

50.0
100.0
35.0
18.0
200.0
403.0

Actual (from FY02)
Actual
Actual
Slipped to FY04
Dropped

Rural Power 1 (APL)
Population Mgt.NVomen’s Health II
Health Sector Reform
River Basin Development
Program Loan (Public Sector Reform)

25.0
30.0
40.0
75.0
150.0

Actual (From FY02)
Slipped to FY05
Slipped to FY07
Dropped (From FY02)
Dropped

320.0

Actual Projects from Other FYs
Laguna Lake Inst. Strengthening
and Community Participation
Judicial Reform
Diversified Farm IncomelAg .
Modernization
Subtota,

CAS Plans
Project
Mindanao Rural Development (APL)
Nat. Roads Improvement Mgmt (APL)
SEMP I
Public Sector Reform Loan
Housing Finance Technical Assistance

~~

FY
2000

2001

Sub-total
2002

2003

Lake Laguna Environ. Mgmt. (APL)
Rural Electrification (APL)
Agrarian Reform Project
River Basin Development (APL)
Fourth Elementary Education

,i
/ All amounts in US$ millions

Sub-tota

I
IBRD
27.5
150.0
100.0
277.5

60.0

4.8
64.8

100.0
30.0
130.0
50.0
100.0
33.6

Subtotal

183.6
10.0

5.0

21.9
60.0
96.9

Annex 1, Attachment 3
Page 1 of 3

Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA)
Planned and Actual Deliveries (FYOO-04)
CAS Plans
Decentralization Study
Health Services Under Devolution Study
Rural Power Sector Action Plan
Recent Developments in Economy, Financial
Sector, and Poverty Indicators
Recent Trends in Social Development
Recent Trends in Agriculture, Food Supply and
Environmental Indicators

Current Status
leferred to FY03
nput into the Decentralization Study
3ural Power Sector Study
Srowth with Equity: The Remaining Agenda
'overty Assessment
3ural Development and NRM: Trends and
Strategy, Implementation, and Framework
'erformance System
3vironment Scorecard
4dditional Actual Products:
Judicial Assessment (informal paper)
Vational Urban Partnerships (informal paper)

Provincial Roads Study
Recent Developments in Economy, Financial
Sector, and Poverty Indicators
Recent Trends in Social Development
Recent Trends in Agriculture, Food Supply and
Environmental Indicators

Dropped
Filipino Report Card on Pro-poor Services
Rural Development & NRM Trends Update
Note
Environmental Monitor Update Note.
Additional Actual Products:
Mindanao watching briefs
Policy Notes - briefs for new administration
ROSC Reports - Corporate Governance
Update Notes on water and power sectors

Recent Developments in Economy, Financial
Sector and Poverty Indicators
Recent Trends in Social Development

Recent Trends in Agriculture, Food Supply and
Environmental Indicators

Development Policy Review
Out-of-School Youth Report;
Health Policy Notes: Improving the Poor's
Access to Affordable Drugs and On Making
Philhealth Policies More Pro-Poor
Environmental Monitor 2001 (Solid Waste
Mgt.)
Additional Actual Products:
Public Expenditure, Procurement (CPAR) and
Financial Management (CFAA) Review
Private Sector Development Strategy
Urban Strategy
Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP)
ROSC Reports - Insolvency and Creditor
Rights, Financial Accountability

Technical Assistance:

Rural Development and Natural Resources
Mgt. Monitoring (IDF Grant)

Annex 1 Attachment 3
Page 2 of 3
Economic Monitoring
Decentralization Study
Transportation Cost Review Strengthening
Human Development Study (ARMM)
Gender Coordination
Environmental Monitor
Natural Resource Management Study
East Asia Regional Studies
Technical Assistance:
Civil Service Reform
Civic Engagement in Expenditure Tracking
Capacity Building of BIR
Improving Public Sector Governance
Financial Sector (FSAP follow up)
Corporate Governance
Mindanao Post-Conflict Assistance

Continuous
Completed (Phase 1)
Incorporated into the FY04 Meeting
Infrastructure Needs Study
Human Development Study for ARMM
Gender Portfolio Review completed
Environment Monitor 2002 (Air Quality)
Started in FY03 and completed in FY04
Inputs to the Half-Yearly Economic Brief
TA provided under a PHRD grant to DBM
TA provided under an IDF grant to DBM
TA provided under an IDF grant to BIR
TA provided under ASEM, UDF and PHRD
grants
Provided under trust fund work
Provided to the Institute of Corporate
Directors under an ASEM grant
TA and advisory support through Dev’t Grant
Facility - Post-Conflict Fund
Additional Technical Assistance
TA to DENR on strengthening environment
regulations enforcement
Study tour on Budget and Appropriations
Process for DBM, DOF, NEDA and Congress

Economic Monitoring
Development Policy Review
Urban Infrastructure
Health Sector Issues
Support Regarding Violence Against Women
Country Environmental Analysis
Mindanao Post-Conflict Assistance
East Asia Regional Studies

Continuous
Development Policy Update
Incorporated into study on Meeting
Infrastructure Needs
Completed in FY02
Integrated in Womens Health Project
Environment Monitor 2003 (Water)
Mindanao Joint Needs Assessment
Inputs to the Half-Yearly Economic Brief
National Disaster Mgmt. Study (initiated
through regional initiative)
Additional Products:
Discussion Briefs for the New Administration
Education Policy Notes

Technical Assistance:
Poverty Assessment
Capacity Building of BIR
Improving Public Sector Governance
Selected Public Enterprise Reform

Poverty monitoring and analysis (ASEM grant:
Continuing - ongoing IDF grant to BIR
Continuing - ongoing ASEM, PHRD and IDF
grants
Trust-funded work on restructuring of water
authorities

Annex 1. Attachment 3
Page 3 of 3
Financial Sector (FSAP follow up)

Corporate Governance
Gender Coordination
Mindanao Post-Conflict Assistance

TA for financial risk monitoring under pension
reform
TA for strengthening capacity for bank
supervision
Completed in FY03
Coordination with other donors in Gender and
Development working group
Continuing TA and advisory support through
Post-Conflict Fund
Additional Technical Assistance:
Sustainable Development in Mining

Annex 1, Attachment 4
Page 1 of 1

Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio
Performance and Management

I
I Portfolio Assessment
I No. of Projects Under Implementation ‘
I Average Implementation Period (Years) b/
I Percent of Problem Projects By Number”
~

Percent of Problem Projects By Amount

I
I
I
I
I

FYOO
25
3.4
16.0

I
I
I
I
I

FYOI
24
3.7
12.5

I
I
I
I
1

FY02
21
3.9
19.0

I
I
I
I
I

FY03
21
4.2
0

1
I
I
I
I

FY04
23
4.0
13.0

33.5

9.1

20.1

Percent of Proiects At Risk BY Number dl

16.0

12.5

19.0

0

13.0

Percent of Projects At Risk By Amount d/

33.5

9.1

20.1

0

20.7

Disbursement Ratio (%) e/

17.3

11.9

14.9

23.4

21.2

Disbursements (US$ million)

203

125.9

136.3

205.2

167.2

12.5%

50%
100%

33.3%

0%

0%

100%

100%

NA

OED Disconnect
QAG Quality at Entry
QAG Quality of Supervision

I
I QAG Quality of Economic Sector Work

I
I

I Portfolio Management

I

CPPRS During the Year (Yes/No)

SuDervision Resources (Total US$ ‘000)
Average Supervision (US$ ‘0001project)

I
I

NS
NS
100%

Yes
2,024
67.0

I
I
I

I
I

100%
100%

Yes
1754
73.1

I
I
I

I

I

100%
100%

Yes
1431
68.1

I
I
I

I
I

0

20.7

-

-

Yes
1731
82.4

I
I
I

1

I

a/ As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance
bl Average age of project in the Bank‘s country portfolio
c l Percent of projects rated U or HU on Development Objectives andlor Implementation Progress
dl As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program
el Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank‘s portfolio as of the
beginning of the year (investment projects only)
NS No PHL project selected for review
NA Not available

NA
NA

Yes
1946
84.6

I
I
I
I
I

1
I
I

Annex 1, Attachment 5
Page 1 of 2

CAS Completion Report Mission
List of Key People Met
(Excluding Bank Group Staff)
Government:

Ms. Laura Pascua, Undersecretary
Department of Budget & Management
Mr. Roberto Tan, Assistant Secretary - IFG
Department of Finance
Mr. Roland0 Tungpalan, Assistant Director General
National Economic & Development Authority
Mr. Rene Villa, Secretary
Mr. Jose Mari B. Ponce, Undersecretary
Department of Agrarian Reform
Ms. Corazon Juliano Soliman, Secretary
Luwalhati F. Pablo, Undersecretary
Mateo G. Montano, Assistant Secretary
Department of Social Welfare & Development
Mr. Edmund Sana, Undersecretary - Regional Operations
Department of Agriculture
Mr. Alex Padilla, Undersecretary
Department of Health
Mr. Juan Miguel Luz, Undersecretary - Finance & Admin.
Department of Education
Mr. Austere Panadero, Assistant Secretary
Department of Interior & Local Government
Local Government Academy
Mr. Rafael E. Camat Jr., Assistant Secretary - FASPO
Department of Environment & Natural Resources
Mr. Teodoro Encarnacion
Presidential Adviser on Procurement Concerns
Office of the President

Annex 1, Attachment 5
Page 2 of 2

List of People Met (continued)
Government Corporations:

Mr. Orlando Hondrade, Administrator
Metropolitan Waterworks & Sewerage System
Eufemia C. Mendoza, First Vice President
Marissa V. Soriano, Senior Assistant Vice President, Fund Sourcing
Development Bank of the Philippines
Others:

Dr. Roberto de Ocampo, President
Asian Institute of Management
Ms. Luz Rimban, Broadcast Director
Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism
Mr. Vipul Bhagat, Country Manager
International Finance Corporation

Annex 2
Page 1 of 7

Annex 2

CAS ConsuItations
and Client Survey Summary
1.
The preparation of the FY2006-08 Country Assistance Strategy of the Bank Group drew
on various dialogue and feedback mechanisms, including a CAS Completion Report (Annex I ) ,
a client survey, in addition to a series of formal and informal meetings with key opinion leaders
from various sectors and with government officials from oversight and implementing agencies.
Feedback was also received from a government CAS counterpart group, set up to coordinate
with the Bank Group on the CAS process and its substance.
2.
In collaboration with NGOs, the private sector, and the government, the Bank Group also
held various conferences and workshops around the country with youth representatives. The
findings of these gatherings were incorporated by the government in its Youth Assessment
Study and National Youth Development Plan, and were also considered in the formulation of the
Bank Group’s CAS. Youth groups voiced some pessimism about their future, as reflected in
discussions on: substance abuse, reproductive health, education, and employment
opportunities. The underlying theme of all the discussions, however, was the need for the youth
to think more critically about their own situation, articulate their needs, and do everything they
can to pursue their dreams and visions for a better life.
3.
Separate meetings were also held with other development partners, both bilateral and
multilateral agencies. Through small and large meetings, the Bank Group heard the views of its
various stakeholders on the development needs of the country over the next three years and
views on how the Bank Group can assist the government and other development partners in
addressing these needs.
This Annex reports on the process and results of the more structured and formal multi4.
stakeholder meetings and the client survey, which complemented the other forms of
consultations.

MuIti-St akehoIder ConsuItat ions
Building on the consultations conducted for the previous two CAS’S prepared in 1999
5.
and 2003, as well as its regular outreach and dialogue activities, the Bank Group organized
multi-stakeholder consultation workshops across the country. These workshops involved
national (executive, legislative, and judicial) and local governments; civil society; the business
community/private sector; academe; labor groups; and other development partners. The
workshops were designed to gather the views of the stakeholders on: the critical problems
facing the country, policy options and programs that will lead to better development outcomes
over the medium-term; and, how the Bank Group can improve its programs of assistance and
operations in the country.
Close to 300 participants attended the workshops held between August and October
6.
2004. The national government representatives comprised the bulk of the participants (38
percent), followed by representatives from civil society and labor (28 percent), LGUs (16
percent), and academe (12 percent). All consultation workshops were done in partnership with
the government’s central planning agency, the National Economic Development Authority
(NEDA). As the government’s Medium Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP) was also

Annex 2
Page 2 of 7
being finalized during the same period of the CAS consultations, it was an opportune time for
the government to present the draft MTPDP to a wider group of stakeholders.
Two meetings were held in Manila, and one meeting each was held in Tuguegarao,
7.
Cebu, and Davao. The active participation of high-level local chief executives from Mindanao
(Davao) and the Visayas (Cebu) regions was quite impressive. Except for one meeting in
Manila, all the CAS consultations were organized in partnership with the Bank’s Knowledge for
Development Centers: St. Paul University, University of Southeastern Philippines, University of
San Carlos, Silliman University, and the Asian Institute of Management.
8.
Consistent with the thrust towards making the CAS more thematic (focusing on crosssectoral rather than purely sectoral issues) and results-oriented,the consultations also followed
a process that: validated the broad themes and the critical measures that would comprise a
strategic action agenda for the country, initially formulated by the Bank Group. In general, the
consultations confirmed the importance of the four emergent CAS themes -- growth, social
inclusion, fiscal stability, and governance. The Bank Group also used consultations to discuss
the proposed platform approach to implement its assistance strategy (national government,
local government, and private sector).
The key messages and implications for Bank Group assistance gathered from the
9.
consultation workshops are summarized in the table below. A detailed feedback report was
sent to all the participants and more details were posted on the Bank’s Philippines website to
inform the general public about its messages and recommendations. As the goal was to listen
to a wide spectrum of voices and not to build a consensus, these details would show some
divergent views and opinions of various sectors across the country.
An elaboration of the main messages related to the four CAS themes is discussed
IO.
below. The stakeholder’s views on the proposed platform approach to implement the Bank
Group assistance strategy is also considered.
Growth While the Philippines has been able to grow at a modest rate in the last three
11.
years, the growing population requires a more accelerated economic growth performance in
order to significantly reduce poverty. There was consensus that economic growth will be difficult
to achieve if the current fiscal and governance issues are not addressed. There was a very
strong clamor for the government to: show political will in pursuing revenue measures to avert a
possible economic crisis; and to rally the people towards supporting necessary measures which
may be painful to implement but which may be more bearable than a full-blown economic crisis.
Based on the consultations, the attainment of economic growth in the medium-term will
12.
hinge on:
addressing infrastructure bottlenecks;
raising investments particularly in identified priority sectors where the country has
comparative advantage;
developing further the financial market;
arresting the declining competitiveness of the country;
developing a globally competitive labor force; and
promoting the sustainable use of natural resources.

Annex 2
Page 3 of 7
Key Messages to the Bank Group from Multi-Stakeholder Consultations
Growth
Promoting pro-poor growth will not only
require more investments at the national
level but should also: (i) address
impediments to local development; (ii)
encourage community-based industries.
Addressing growth and social inclusion will
increasingly require looking at greater roles
for LGUs and better coordinative
mechanisms between national government
agencies and LGUs.
Explore more active involvement of the IFC
in local level investments.

Social Inclusion
Support provision of poverty targeted grants
and expand community-driven development
projects to promote improved governance
at local levels.
Support rural infrastructure, advocacy to
improve institutional and regulatory
environment for farmers, and human capital
development.
Support delivery of social services to poor
communities by converging poverty-related
services at the local level and improving
coordination between national and local
governments
Support marginalized groups to voice their
needs and to be involved in community
undertakings.
Assist the government in formulating safety
nets for vulnerable groups.

Fiscal Stability
It is urgent to undertake fiscal reform.
Support advocacy for fiscal reform among
different sectors; share experiences of tax
and other measures implemented by
countries during crises.
Coordinate with other development partners
in packaging a comprehensive program loan
linked to policy reforms.
Provide credit enhancements to the
government’s capital market operations
linked to policy reforms.
Assist the government in addressing GOCC
problems (e.g., NPC), and in strengthening
oversight agencies like DOF, NEDA, and
OA.

Governance
Growth and human development are
contingent on improving governance at all
levels.
Support a governance reform package with
LGU and national government level
components to make decentralization work
better; include capacity building in planning,
poverty targeting, management, monitoring
and evaluation, etc.
Private direct assistance to LGUs; adopt
innovative models for financing.
Support projects and programs that
improve efficiency and transparency of
government operations similar to the eprocurement project.

There was also a strong call to localize economic growth and to institute policies that
13.
would promote a more balanced rural-urban growth through increased investments outside
Metro Manila for the development of community-based industries.

Annex 2
Page 4 of 7
Social lnclusion Consistent with the pursuit of growth is the need to work towards
14.
greater social inclusion and more equitable distribution of income in the country. The
consultations highlighted the need to:
a
promote sectors that can generate employment and improving the productivity of
workers;
0
improve access of the people to productive assets (e.g., land) and to services like
education and health;
0
empower marginalized and vulnerable groups through social protection and safety net
programs to prevent them from being poor or from falling deeper into poverty, especially
with the vulnerability of the Philippines to crisis situations;
a
address population issues;
a
provide programs for youth; and
a
enjoin civil society groups, the community, and the private sector in general to participate
more actively in the planning, implementation, and monitoring of social sector projects.
The consultations also discussed the increasing role of LGUs in the delivery of basic
15.
social services at the community level. More efficient service delivery to poor communities,
which is partly dependent on the convergence of poverty-related services at the local level,
however, requires improving the coordination between the national government and the LGUs.
At the same time, the consultations also called for more participatory governance through the
implementation of more community-driven development projects, replicable in other poverty
areas in the country.
Fiscal Stability In general, workshop participants expressed impatience with the pace
16.
of the government’s response to the fiscal problem. This was partly due to the slow action of
the legislative branch, perhaps traced to the lack of appreciation of the gravity and urgency of
the fiscal situation, as well as to the perceived need for stronger leadership of the executive
branch. The consultations called on the government to recognize the seriousness of the
problem and to rally the people towards supporting solutions. It was also suggested that
individuals and academic groups work together as policy champions, giving briefings to the
public on the implications of a possible economic crisis and of the proposed revenue measures
to the lives of ordinary Filipinos.
Recognizing the difficulty of legislating the needed revenue measures proposed by the
17.
executive branch, the consultations suggested to:
formulate contingency measures consisting of a “second best” reform agenda in case
congress fails to pass the revenue measures which could include temporarily closing
sources of revenue leakages such as duty free shops and alternative tax measures used
in countries with similar problems;
pursue expenditure management reforms such as the reorganization of government; and
focus on cash-strapped government-owned and controlled corporations (e.g., NPC and
NFA) and oversight agencies (e.g., DOF, NEDA, COA); and implement procurement
reforms, especially at the local levels.
Governance Weak governance at the national and local levels was generally
18.
perceived as derailing the country’s development. The discussions went beyond the usual
concerns about corruption towards a discussion on the means of making public institutions work

Annex 2
Page 5 of 7
better for the common good with greater accountability and quality of service being required
from public servants.
There was also a strong clamor for promoting good governance at the local level, where
19.
there has been exemplary models of effective service delivery or “islands of good governance”
in recent years, which were proposed to be replicated. It was generally believed that the
effective implementation of the Local Government Code offers potential opportunities for
improving public service delivery at the sub-national levels.
Promoting just and sustainable peace especially in Mindanao was, likewise, identified as
20.
a critical factor for the country’s development. A combination of peace-keeping efforts and
social development interventions is important in the pursuit of lasting peace in the country.
Strengthening the National Government The attainment of the country’s
21.
development agenda is premised on the national government’s ability to exercise strong political
will and leadership to implement needed economic and political reforms. The consultations
highlighted the politics of policy making as an important consideration in the pursuit of growth
particularly:
consistent implementation of policies even with changes in administration;
0
participatory policy making which calls for constant consultation with stakeholders,
including local government officials; and
improved coordination among branches of government, and between the national and
local governments, in policy formulation, implementation and monitoring.
22.
The necessity of closer coordination is more crucial between the national government
and the LGUs in the effort to make decentralization work better through the LGUs’ increased
responsibility in the delivery of basic services. In relation to this, the consultations called for the
transformation of the national government’s role vis-a-vis the LGUs, in which the former focuses
on standard or performance benchmarking, incentive setting, and performance monitoring
rather than the traditional project implementation even for devolved functions. To assist the
national government in the implementation of the MTPDP at the local level, the LGUs are
proposing a “burden-sharing,” scheme based on a two-way arrangement in which LGUs will be
tasked with more responsibilities and accountability for the implementation of critical MTPDPrelated projects which are to be matched with resources from the national government for
project implementation.
In line with the objective of improving good governance is the importance of streamlining
23.
government operations involving the entire public sector from the executive to the judicial
branches, as a means to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery.
Specifically, the consultations pinpointed the importance to:
address graft and corruption in “high profile” agencies like tax collecting agencies;
0
make agencies accountable to the public; and
focus efforts on the agencies that are critical to the attainment of economic growth such
as peace-keeping agency levels (e.g., Philippine National Police) and the judicial
system.
24.
The consultations identified examples of “islands of good governance” both at the
national and local agencies which need to be more systematically scaled-up nationwide.

Annex 2
Page 6 of 7

Building LGU Capacity To make decentralization work better, LGUs should be
25.
assisted through capacity-building measures in planning, including poverty reduction, income
generation, project programming, and budgeting and monitoring. Recognizing that many LGUs
are dependent on central government transfers through the Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA),
the consultations recognized the importance of assisting LGUs to be financially independent of
the national government by improving their capability to raise revenues and other capital
resources. In line with this, the LGUs have appealed to both the national government and
multilateral and bilateral development agencies to review existing financing mechanisms
available to LGUs in order to increase their access to both grants and direct loans and/or to
facilitate the processing of their loan requirements through existing windows like the Municipal
Development Fund.
Part of LGU strengthening is the promotion of participatory governance, which partly
26.
entails enjoining communities to have a stronger role in planning and implementing local
projects most beneficial to them. This would be implemented partly by strengthening civil
society’s partnership with local governments in all aspects of governance.
27.
lncreasing Private Sector Role in Development While the private sector remains the
engine of growth in the country, the government has called on the business community to play a
greater role in attaining social development goals, especially given the present fiscal problems.
On service delivery, the private sector can partner with government in its poverty reduction
programs. To improve governance, the private sector is encouraged to set up systems for
monitoring public sector performance in public works, procurement, among others.
28.
In line with participatory governance, the consultations affirmed the importance of
greater involvement of civil society organizations not only in monitoring public sector
performance but also in the planning and implementation of projects and programs. lncreasing
involvement by civil society organizations, however, would entail not only their participation in
meetings and conferences but also increasing their capacity to understand, analyze, advocate,
and monitor policies as well as programs and projects.

Client Survey
29.
All workshop participants were invited to provide their opinions on the Bank Group’s
assistance to the country by participating in a client survey. A total of 148 stakeholders (54
percent) participated in the client survey through a self-administered questionnaire. The survey
requested respondents’ views on: overall attitudes toward the Bank Group; its greatest value
and weakness; the importance of specific areas of its work and its effectiveness in those areas;
its effectiveness in the way it does business; their level of agreement with a series of statements
about the Bank Group’s projects and programs; and questions about general issues facing the
Philippines, including whether the country is headed in the right direction and its highest priority
development challenges. In addition, respondents were asked about the Bank Group’s
communication and outreach efforts and how it should best be involved in the country’s
development.
30.
The client survey results indicate that the Bank Group is performing at a high level in
certain areas, with some indication of areas that may require more attention and focus. The
results also showed that the relationships between the Bank Group and its stakeholders (those
represented at the meeting in which the client survey was distributed) are strong and positive.

Annex 2
Page 7 of 7

Other interesting findings from the client survey include:

31.
e

Respondents identified poverty reduction and corruption as the top development
priorities in the Philippines. They reported that the Philippines is not moving in the right
direction in terms of reducing corruption.

e

This view of corruption may be the prism through which stakeholders view development
progress. Respondents may be less optimistic about the overall progress taking place in
the Philippines (in terms of development) because they do not believe much can really
change until this challenge is managed more effectively. As possible evidence of this,
more than 40 percent of respondents reported that the Philippines is moving in the
wrong direction (overall).
In contrast with their views on corruption, stakeholders believe that a fair amount of
progress is being made on a number of other areas including ensuring access to clean
water, managing the economy, and promoting growth.
Stakeholders see a broad role for the Bank Group in the Philippines -- particularly
related to sectors - as well as a fair amount of support for more Bank Group
involvement. At the same time, while a bit less than half of respondents reported that
the Bank Group should continue its strategy of working in “all areas with all players,’’
many others said the Bank Group should either work primarily with local governments or
local communities. The survey findings do not indicate a “mandate” for any of the
approaches described.

e

The Bank Group is considered fairly effective in a broad range of areas, including many
of the areas that are considered high priority such as poverty reduction. However, there
are a number of areas that are tangentially related to corruption, where expectations
exceed performance. These include transparency and governance, and improving
accountability in the use of public funds.

e

Those outside government have a much lower level of familiarity with the Bank Group
than those inside government (based on this specific sample of meeting attendants). In
most surveys related to the Bank Group’s work, it has been shown that the more familiar
stakeholders are with the Bank Group, the more effective they consider the institution.
According to data analysis, this is true in the Philippines as well.

e

There is nearly unanimous support for increased community-driven development in the
Philippines. Most stakeholders are familiar with CDD; a large percentage thinks it is
effective, and nearly all stakeholders believe that this approach should be more
widespread.

Annex 3
Page 1 of 2

Annex 3

Country Financing Parameters
for the Philippines
(January, 2005)

The country financing parameters for the Philippines below have been approved by the
Regional Vice President, East Asia and Pacific Region.

Item
Cost sharing Limit on the
proportion of individual project
costs that the Bank may finance.

Parameter
up to

100 percent

Remarks I Explanation
The Bank’s overall financing share
is not expected to change
significantly in aggregate level, with
expected increase in sector-wide
assistance (in which the Bank’s
financing share is typically low).
Projects implemented by local
governments will likely include some
counterpart funding. For projects
implemented by government-owned
corporations, evidence of ownership
and commitment would be
assessed, taking account of budget
and planning processes and project
cost sharing. One hundred percent
Bank financing could be provided for
some projects and activities with
strong evidence of ownership and
commitment.

Integration of Bank financing in the
No country
Recurrent cost financing Any
budget process ensures that
limits that would apply to the overall limit, but
increased recurrent cost financing
strong
amount of recurrent expenditures
would not jeopardize overall debt and
emphasis on
that the Bank may finance.
arrangements fiscal sustainability.The Bank will
continue to monitor the overall fiscal
to ensure
situation and its implications for
s usta inabiIity
recurrent cost financing. At the
project level, recurrent cost financing
could be considered if consistent with
project objectives, provided there is
strong demonstration of arrangements
to ensure sustainability after Bank
financing ceases.

Annex 3
Page 2 of 2

Item

Parameter

Remarks I Explanation

Yes
Local cost financing Are the
requirements for Bank financing of
local expenditures met, namely
that: (i) financing requirements for
the country’s development program
would exceed the public sector’s
own resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii) the
financing of foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing of individual
projects.

The two requirements for Bank local
cost financing are met. Therefore
the Bank may finance local costs in
the proportions needed in individual
projects.

Taxes and duties Are there any
taxes and duties that the Bank
would not finance?

Taxes and duties are considered
reasonable. At the project level, the
Bank would consider whether taxes
and duties taxes and duties
constitute an excessively high share
of projects costs. The Bank would
monitor local taxes for possible
distortions and that these maintain
consistent acceptable practices.

None

7c?
" 0

2

Annex A2-1
Page 1 of 2

Philippines at a dance
POVERTY and SOCIAL

2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Philippines

East
Asla 8
Paclflc

LowermlddleIncome

81.5
1,020
82.8

1,855
1,080
2,011

2,655
1,480
3,934

2.2
2.4

1.o
1.1

0.9
1.2

Average annual growth, 1997.03
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

1

Development diamond.

I

Life expectancy

I

T

I

Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 1997.03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% o f total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improvedwater source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy (“A ofpopulation age 75t)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

30
61
70
29
32
86
4
113
114
113

40
69
32
15
76
10
111
112
111

50
69
32
11
61
10
112
113
111

I

Access to improved water source

i

1993

2002

2003

1

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

54.4
24.0
31.4
15.5
18.6

78.0
19.3
48.9
18.8
26.1

80.6
18.7
48.3
16.2
24.5

i

Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicelexDorts

-5.5
3.3
66.5
25.6

5.6
3.6
77.1
20.6

4.2
3.2
77.8
18.4

1983-93

2002

2003

2003-07

2.1
-0.3
6.0

4.4
2.3
3.6

4.5
2.5
3.3

5.3
3.3
8.1

1993

2002

2003

21.6
32.7
23.7
45.7

14.7
32.5
22.8
52.8

14.5
32.3
22.9
53.2

74.4
10.1
39.8

69.1
12.1
49.4

72.3
11.4
50.7

1993-03

2002

2003

2.3
3.8
3.5
4.7

3.3
3.7
3.5
5.4

4.0
2.6
3.3
4.4

4.1
2.4
-3.5
4.7

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

primary
enrollment

capita

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

4/21/05

1

Lower-middle-income group

Economic ratios‘
Trade
T

I

Indebtedness

1

-Philippines
Lower-middle-income group

I
1

-z j

10.3

-Philippines

h

-301

-Exports

+Imports

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete. Poverty figures are government estimates based on Family Income and ExpenditureSurvey (FIES) 2003 data.

Annex A2-2
Page 2 of 2

Philippines
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government flnance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Overall surolusldeficit
TRADE

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Electronicsmeiecom
Garments
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Net inwme
Net current transfers

1993

2002

2003

7.6
6.8

3.2
4.9

3.1
3.7

17.7

-

14.1
-5.2

14.4
-4.6

1993

2002

2003

11,375
3,551
2,272
8,729
17,597
714
2,016
5,610

34,383
18,583
2,391
31,181
33,975
1,384
3,273
13,532

34,842
18,300
2,348
1,252
36,095
1,340
4,169
15,023

I9g3

2002

2003

16,048
20,700
-4,652

37,439
38,042
-603

37,812
40,292
-2,480

937
699

4,475
503

5,215
2,445

Current account balance

-3,016

4,375

3.347

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

2,850
166

-5,035
660

-2,898
-449

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

5,922
27.1

16,180
51.6

16,115
54.1

1993

2002

2003

36,143
4,598
167

60,090
3,325
208

62,663
3,445
215

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

4,920
669
3

9,374
480
7

9,207
478
8

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

270
972
584
1,238

178
-3 1
357
1.733
1,912

120
-12
1,123
161
-706

428
673
340
333
332
1

200
178
327
-149
159
-308

116
202
345
-143
142
-285

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

I

Inflation (%)
15T

98

99

-GDP

00

02

01

deflator

03

-CPI

I

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,ooO

0

97

98

QQ

00

Exports

02

01

03

Imports

I

Current account balance to GDP (%)
12 T
10
8

8
4

2
0
2
4

8
8

-

A IBRD
B .IDA
C IMF

D -Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F Private
G Short-term

-

4/21/05

Annex 82
Page 1 of 1

Annex B2
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
2002

2003

2004

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number b 8 d
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount bs
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number b , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount bs
Disbursement Ratio (%)

21
4.0
19.0
20.1
19.0
20.1
14.9

21
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.4

23
4.3
13.0
20.8
13.0
20.8
21.2

21
5.2
14.3
9.8
14.3
9.8
14.0

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$'OOO)
Average Supervision (US$OOO per project)

Yes
1,431
68

Yes
1,731
82

Yes
1,946
85

Yes
1,893
82

lndicafor

Memorandum lfem
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80
130
8,305.1
30.2
31.5

2005

as of 3/3 1/05

Last Five FYs
13
770.4
46.2
42.3

a/ All indicators are for projects active in the portfolio, with the exception of disbursement ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the tiscal year.
b/ As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
c/ Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
d/ Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
e/ As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
f/ Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: investment projects only.

Annex 63
Page 1 of 1

Annex B3
Indicative List of Possible Projects a’
FY2006 2008

-

Fiscal
Year
2006

2007

2008

Project Name

CAS
IBRD Amount platform
(US$ millions) c/

Focus

National Program Support for Basic Education
National Program Support for Health
National Program Support for Public Expenditure Rationalization
National Program Support for Participatory Irrigation
Local Government Support for Cities Development

100
40
80
30
35

NG
NG
NG
NG
LG

Development Policy Loan (if in enhanced base or high case)

tbd

NG

National Program Support for National Roads 2 (NRIMP2)
National Program Support for the Environment & Nat‘l Resources Mgmt
National Program Support for Mindanao Rural Development 2 (MRDP2)
Local Government Support for Municipal Finance
Private Sector Development Support for MWSS Financial Rehabilitation

200
30
75
50
100

NG
NG
NG
LG
PS

Development Policy Loan (if in enhanced base or high case)

tbd

NG

National Program Support for Social Protection
Local Government Support to LGUs Through Performance Grants
Local Government Support for Regional Water Supply
Private Sector Development Support for Rural Power 2
Private Sector Development Support for Logistics / Infrastructure

50
50
50
40
75

NG
LG
LG
PS
PS

Development Policy Loan (if in enhanced base or high case)

tbd

NG

d/

This table presents several possible projects under consideration for the three-year CAS period under the base case
(except for DPL if in the enhanced base or high case). Depending upon evolving country needs and priorities (e.g., within
the MTPDP), new projects may be introduced and others may be dropped in consultation with the government; actual
deliverables will fall within the CAS ceiling. Additional projects under consideration include: National Program Support for
Agrarian Reform, National Program Support for Agriculture (DFIMP2), National Program Support for Kalahi-CIDDS 2,
National Program Support for Disaster Preparedness, National Program Support for Judicial Reform 2, Private Sector
Development Support for Rural Finance, Private Sector Development Support/Guarantee for Power Reform, Private
Sector Development Support for Private Participation in Infrastructure.
a’

b’

Project titles are subject to modification as project details are further refined.

‘All amounts are tentative.
dl CAS

Platforms: NG: National Government; LG: Local Government; PS: Private Sector

Annex 84
Page 1 of 2

Annex B4
Social Indicators

I

Latest single year
1970-75

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

I
I

42.0
2.8
35.6
5.2

1980-85

I
I 1997-2003

54.2
2.4
43.1
4.5

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount indexa’
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

I I Same regionlincome group I

81.5
2.2
61 .O
3.2

Lower-

I

Pacific

income

I

1,854.5
1.o
39.7
2.1

2,655.2
0.9
49.7
2.1

1,080

1,480

1.9
3.2

2.6
4.0

30.4

380
10

530
43
46

1,080
159
142

INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

46.1
5.4
52.3

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

1.5
2.0

1.3

3.2

Annex B4
Page 2 of 2

Annex 8 4
Social Indicators
(Continued)
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

I
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female

Asia &

'
I

97
94
99

96
97
96

middleincome

1

93
92
94

92
92
92

91
92
91

86
91
79

76
93
67

81
94
70

50

49
59
33

73
70
32

70
78
15

78
84
11

59
58
61

63
61
66

70
68
72

69
68
71

69
67
71

60
90

55
81

28
37

32
42

32
40

376
314

323
259

249
142
200
58

184
129

214
135

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

I
I

Pacific

Life expectancy at birth

(Years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

68

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
World Development Indicators database (August 2004), World Bank
Source: National Statistical Coordination Board, based on 2003 Family Income and Expenditure Survey.
NSCB is currently reviewing urbanhural headcount index for 2003.

ai

Annex B5
Page 1 of 2

Annex B5
Key Economic Indicators
Indicator

Actual
2001 2002

2003

3timate
2005
2004

Projected
2006
2007
2008

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100
15
32
53

100
15
33
53

100
14
32
53

100
14
32
54

100
14
32
54

100
14
32
54

100
14
31
55

100
14
31
55

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment

82
20

81
19

84
18

82
20

84
19

84
20

84
21

83
22

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

49
52

49
49

48
51

49
51

46
50

45
49

45
50

45
51

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

18
25

19
26

16
24

18
25

16
23

16
24

16
24

17
25

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

72,043 77,954 80,573

87,069

99,485 109,805 120,090 130,712

1,180

1,250

1,350

1,480

1,590

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1985 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
3.0
4.4
4.5
Gross Domestic Income
1.3
7.4
5.7

6.1
5.4

5.0
5.4

5.0
5.2

5.2
5.5

5.2
5.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from
Gross domestic product at
market prices
0.7
2.3
Total consumption
1.8
5.2
Private consumption
5.7
2.8

2.5
6.8
7.9

4.1
1.9
2.1

3.0
3.9
4.3

3.1
2.9
3.2

3.3
2.8
3.1

3.3
2.9
2.4

Balance of Payments (US$ billions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account transfers
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, including
errors and ommissions)
Change in reservesd

1,030

1,030

1,020

1985 I ces)

34.4
31.2
37.2
32.0
-2.8
0.4
1.3

37.4
34.4
38.0
34.0
-0.6
0.5
4.4

37.8
34.8
40.3
36.1
-2.5
2.4
3.3

42.3
38.3
44.6
39.5
-2.3
-3.4
4.0

45.8
41.2
49.5
42.7
-3.7
-3.8
3.4

49.4
44.4
54.3
46.4
-4.8
-3.5
3.7

53.8
48.1
59.5
50.4
-5.7
-3.3
3.9

59.4
52.9
66.4
55.4
-7.1
-3.0
4.0

1.1
1.4
-0.2
1.6

1.7
1.5
0.0
1.5

0.2
1.8
0.0
1.8

0.5
-1.9
0.8
-2.7

0.6
0.4
0.6
-0.1

0.8
-2.7
-0.1
-2.5

1.1
-1.7
-0.5
-1.3

1.3
-2.4
-0.6
-1.8

-3.7
-0.2

-8.3
0.7

-4.8
-0.4

-2.9
0.2

-2.4
-2

0.4
-2.2

-0.8
-2.5
(Continued)

0.0
-3

Annex 85
Page 2 of 2

Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

lndicator

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)

Actual
2007 2002
-3.9

-0.8

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)*
Current revenues
15.3
14.1
Current expenditures
17.7
19.3
Current account surplus (+)
-2.3
-5.2
or deficit (-)
0.0
0.0
Capital expenditure
0.6
2.8
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M21GDP
Growth of M2 (YO)
GDP deflator (%change)

41.5
6.8
6.4

42.1
9.5
4.9

2003

3timate
2005
2004

2006

Projected
2007
2008

-3.1

-2.6

-3.7

-4.4

-4.8

-5.4

14.4
16.4

14.4
16.0

14.9
16.2

15.0
16.3

15.2
16.0

15.3
16.0

-2.0
2.5
3.3

-1.5
2.5
1.7

-1.3
2.3
1.o

-1.3
2.2
0.7

-0.8
2.2
2.8

-0.7
2.2
-0.7

40.0
3.3
3.7

38.0
7.5
5.5

36.7
8.5
6.8

35.8
8.0
5.5

35.1
8.5
5.0

34.8
9.0
4.5

a/ GDP at market prices
bl “GNFS denotes “goods and nonfactor services.”
c/ Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d/ Includes use of IMF resources.
el Consolidated central government.
f/ “LCU” denotes “local currency units.” An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 1

Annex B6
Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$millions)a

62.7

Estimate
2004

2005

62.5

62.7

Projected
2006
2007

2008

60.3

59.3

57.6
-1.7

58.5

60.1

Net disbursements (US$billions)a

1.6

-0.5

1.I

-2.7

0.2

-2.4

-1.I

Total debt service (TDS) (US$billions)a

9.1

9.4

9.2

9.4

9.4

10.1

8.6

10

140.5
81.2
21.9
19.2

132.0
77.1
20.6
20.8

135.0
77.7
19.8
22.6

111.7
71.8
16.8
25.0

104.3
63.1
15.6
26.7

92.8
54.9
15.6
28.6

84.3
49.3
12.2
29.3

74.8
44.0
13.1
29.9

8.8

7.8

7.5

8.3

8.1

7.1

8.0

6.3

17.7
1.2
3.2

22.1
1.I
3.3

23.9
1.o
3.4

25.5
0.9
3.4

21.7
0.9
3.2

16.7
0.8
3.0

18.0
0.7
2.8

11.8
0.7
2.7

IFC (US$millions)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equitye

243.7
77.8

389.3
71.9

374.1
70.5

347.3
87.2

MlGA
MlGA guarantees (US$millions)

139.5

124.9

117.0

112.0

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGs
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionallTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (YO)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)”
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$millions)d

a/ Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b/ “XGS”denotes exports of goods and services, including workers’ remittances.
c/ Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d/ Includes present value of guarantees.
e/ Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

6

m

Annex B8
Operations Portfolio (IFC & MIGA)
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
as of 02/28/05
(In US$ millions)

Annex 88
Page 1 of 2

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Statement of MlGA Guarantees
as of 2/28/05

(In US$ millions)
As of end of fiscal year

FY2002

52.5
87.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
139.5

37.9
87.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
124.9

30.0
87.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
117.0

30.0
82.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
112.0

21 .o
82.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
103.0

MiGA's Risk Profile
Transfer Restriction
Expropriation
War & Civil Disturbance
Breach of Contract

139.5
139.5
82.0
0.0

124.9
124.9
82.0
0.0

117.0
117.0
82.0
0.0

112.0
112.0
82.0
0.0

103.0
103.0
82.0
0.0

MIGA's Gross Exposure in
Country

139.5

124.9

117.0

112.0

103.0

YOShare of MIGAs Gross
Exposure

2.7%

2.4%

2.3%

2.2%

1.9%

129.1

115.9

108.8

103.8

94.8

4.1%

3.6%

3.4%

3.2%

2.9%

MlGA Net Exposure in Country
% Share of MIGAs Net
Exposure

FY2003 FY2004

FY2005 through

FY2001

Sectorai Distribution
Finance
Infrastructure
Mining
Oil & Gas
Agri businesslManufl

List of Active MlGA Projects
Project Name

ING Bank Manila
Manila North Toolways
Corporation

investor Name

ING Bank
Wesdeutsche
Landesbank

investor Company

Business Sector

Netherlands

Financial

Germany

Infrastructure

Effective
Date

Original
Amount
Issued

1211I95

30.00

6/29/01

(W

82.00

A

A

A

A

A

A

A
'c

0

A

A

A

A

A

U

c

([I

A

A

A

A

3
v)

al

E

8

a

U

3

A

A

A

A

A

D

fn
Q
S

0

-z
U

fn
Q

,-

A

z1
3

?!

3

fn

E
8

z

U

3
a

fn

0,

0
Q
fn

U

8'0
c

-

A

A

A

Q
fn
Q
S
fn
fn

.

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

.
I
-

C

A

A

A

A

a

v)

al
C

0

c,
v)

al

z

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

3
v)

E
8

a
CI

3
a

-Q
v)

0

a

U

v)

8U
C

a
v)

Q
3

v)

v)

A

A

A

a

A

A

3
v)

E
0

Y

a
v)

a

0

a

-a,
v)

0
Q

U

v)

8U
C
Q
v)

Q
3
VI

v)

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

a
v)

a,
E
0

U

.--a,
v)

E
A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

E

b

h
Q

C

0

z
0

2

S

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

I%A

( 2A

A

C

m

I 9

C

C

0

b A

i A

A

A

A

A

,Z'A

A

A

A

A

A

U

0

S A

A

S A

A

A A

A

SAA

A

~

A
A A A

A

A

A

C

A

A

A

A

A

EA

Z A

A

A

A

Annex B11
Page 1 of 2

Annex B l l
Environment Indicators
Country Data

Ag ricuIture
Land area 91,000 sq km)
Agricultural land (% of total)
Irrigated land (% of crop land)
Fertilizer consumption (100 grams/ha arable land)
Food production index (1989-91=loo)
Population density, rural (people/sq km arable land)

Group Data
East Asia &
Lower middle
Pacific
income

298
40
14.6
1,383
136
564

15,885
50
34.7
2,077
171
568

54,034
35
20.5
1,060
158
492

Forests
Forest Area (1,000 sq km)
Forest Area (YOof total land area)
Annual deforestation (%change, 1990-2000)

58
19.4
1.4

4,238
27.2
0.2

19,065
31.8
-0.1

Biodiversity
Mammal species, total known
Mammal species, threatened
Bird species, total breeding
Bird species, threatened
Nationally protected area (% of land area)

153
50
404
67
5.7

Energy
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$/kg oil equiv)
Energy use per capita (kg oil equiv)
Energy imports net (% energy use)
Electric power consumption per capita (kWh)
Share of electricity generated by coal (%)

6.8
538
53
489
40.6

854
-3
816
65.1

3.7
1,226
-2 1
1,304
42.5

Emissions and pollution
COzemissions per unit of GDP (kg/PPP$ GDP)
COzemissions per capita (mt)
Consumption of CFCs (ODP metric tons)
Particulate matter (pop-weighted average-ug/m3)
Passenger cars (per 1,000 people)

0.3
1.o
1,632
49
10

0.6
2.1
42,259
69
10

0.7
3.0
47,373
48
26

--

Annex B11
Page 2 of 2
Country Data
Water and sanitation
Freshwater resources per capita (m3)
Freshwater withdrawal
total (% total water resources)
agriculture (YOtotal freshwater withdrawal)
Access to an improved water source (%total pop)
rural (% rural pop)
urban (% urban pop)
Access to sanitation (% total pop)
rural (% rural pop)
urban (% urban pop)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

-

National accounting aggregates 2002
Gross national savings (%GNI)
Consumption of fixed capital (% GNI)
Education expenditure (%GNI)
Energy, depletion (% GNI)
Mineral depletion (% GNI)
Net forest depletion (YOGNI)
C02 damage (% GNI)
Particulate emission damage (% GNI)
Adjusted net savings (%GNI)

Source: The Little Green Data Book, World Bank, 2004

Group Data
East Asia &
Lower middle
Pacific
income

5,992

6,020

9,401

11.6
88
86
79
91
83
69
93
37

7.2
81
76
67
93
47
36
72
42

5.4
73
81
70
95
59
42
81
40

24.5
7.9
2.9
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.7
0.4
18.0

38.8
9.2
2.2
3.4
0.3
0.1
1.8
0.8
25.5

30.8
9.9
3.2
6.6
0.3
0.1
1.7
0.7
14.6

MAP SECTION

