Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 32078

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
SA0 TOME & PRINCIPE

Public Disclosure Authorized

M a y 2,2005

Country Management Unit (AFC15)
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date o f the last Country Assistance Strategy was November 2,2000
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Dobra
US$1 = Db 9,699.40 (as o f 27 April 2005)
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA:
AfDB:
CAS:
CFAA:

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum
CEM:
Country Procurement Assessment
CPAR:
Report
Consumer Price Index
CPI:
Country Policy & Institutional
CPIA:
Assessment
Development Policy Grant
DPG:
Debt Sustainability Analysis
DSA:
Extractive Industries Transparency
EITI:
Initiative
Economic Sector Work
ESW:
European Union
EU:
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
FIAS:
Federation o f NGOs
FONG:
Resource Mobilization Department
FRM:
Gross Domestic Product
GDP:
Global Environment Facility
GEF:
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
HIPC:
HIV/AIDS: Human Immunodeficiency
VirudAcquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Implementation Completion Report
ICR:
International Development Association
IDA:
Institutional Development Fund
IDF:
International Fund for Agricultural
IFAD :
Development

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:
CAS team:

ILO:
IMF:
JDZ:
JSAN:
MDG:
MIGA:

NEAP:
NGO:
NPA:
NPC:
OECD:
OED:
OPEC:
PHRD:
PRGF:
PRSP:
UNDP:
UNICEF:
UNEP :
UNFPA:
SSA:
TB :
WBI:

International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Joint Development Zone
Joint-Staff Assessment Note
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
National Environmental Action Plan
Non-Govemmental Organization
National Petroleum Authority
National Petroleum Committee
Organisation for Economic Cooperation & Development
Operations and Evaluation Department
Organization o f Petroleum Exporting
Countries
Policy and Human Resources
Development Fund
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Environment
Programme
United Nations Fund for Population
Activities
Sub-Saharan Africa
Tuberculosis
World Bank Institute

Gobind T. Nankani
A. David Craig
Eavan O’Halloran
Dorsati Madani, Allison Berg, K. Li Tow Ngow

FOR OF’FICIAL USE ONLY
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
SA0 TOME AND PRINCIPE

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.
I1.

I11.

I V.
V.

E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y ....................................................................................
C O U N T R Y C O N T E X T ..........................................................................................
A . Overview ...........................................................................................................
B. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) ................................................
C . Macroeconomic Framework .............................................................................
D. IMF Program .....................................................................................................
E. Poverty ..............................................................................................................
F. The Oil Sector ...................................................................................................
G. Debt Sustainability and the Enhanced HLPC Initiative ...................................
H. Social Sectors ..................................................................................................
I. Infrastructure ...................................................................................................
J. Govemance and Capacity ...............................................................................
K. Productive Sectors ...........................................................................................
BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ......................................................
A . Implementation o f the last C A S ......................................................................
B. Other W o r l d Bank Group Activities ...............................................................
C . Lessons Leamt ................................................................................................
D. Assistance Strategy .........................................................................................
E. Country Financing Parameters .,......................................................................
MANAGING RISKS ............................................................................................
C O N C L U S I O N.....................................................................................................

...

111

1

i

3
4
6
7
8
10
10
13
15
16
18
18
22
22
23
28
31
33

BOXES:
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:
Box 8:
Box 9:
Box 10:

The Petroleum Revenue Management L a w ......................................................... 9
Reaching the MDGs in the Health and Education Sectors ................................ 11
Environment .......................................................................................................
14
Gender Issues in Sao Tome and Principe ...........................................................
17
Non-Lending Activities Carried Out During the Previous C A S ........................
18
Bank Lending Program for the FYO1-05 C A S Period .......................................
19
Participatory C A S Process ................................................................................. 24
Specific Activities o f the Bank’s Program ......................................................... 25
FY06-09 IDA Financial Assistance Program (in the form o f IDA Grants) .......28
Donor Coordination and Intemational Assistance .............................................
29

T h i s document has a restricted d i s t r i b u t i o n and may b e used by recipients o n l y in
the performance o f t h e i r official duties I t s contents may not b e otherwise disclosed
w i t h o u t W o r l d B a n k authorization.

.

TABLES:
Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators. Sao Tome and Principe. 2001-2004 .........6

ANNEXES
Annex A l :
Annex A2-1:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B8 (IFC):
Annex B8:
Annex 9:
Annex 10:
Annex 11:

CAS Results Matrix for Sao Tome and Principe ................................
34
Sao Tome and Principe at a Glance ....................................................
38
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 40
IDA Program Summary ......................................................................
41
Summary o f Non-Lending Services .................................................... 42
Poverty and Social Development Indicators .......................................
43
K e y Economic Indicators .................................................................... 44
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio .............................. 46
Operations Portfolio (IDA & Grants) ................................................. 47
Development Partner Involvement in Sao Tome and Principe ...........48
Country Financing Parameters ............................................................
49
CAS Completion Report .....................................................................
50

APPENDIX:
Appendix 1:

Debt Sustainability ..............................................................................

..
.11 .

62

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

With an estimated GDP o f US$60 million in 2004, the Democratic Republic of
Sao Tome and Principe (STP) i s Africa’s smallest economy and one of the poorest
countries in the world. Approximately 54 percent o f its population o f 150,000 i s poor
and 15 percent live in extreme poverty. Social indicators are weak and improving only
slowly, with the likelihood that most M D G s will not be reached. After a prolonged period
o f economic mismanagement since independence, a series o f economic reforms were
implemented starting in 1999. As a result, economic performance improved and the
growth rate o f real GDP per capita rose from 3.3 percent to 4 percent between 1999 and
2003. The PRSP was finalized in early-2003 and has been partially implemented to date
although full implementation has been launched in 2005l. In July 2001, STP held its third
multi-party election which was deemed to be fair and was conducted peacefully.
Nevertheless, the political economy suffers from instability and, while a more active civil
society has gradually taken form, political and civil institutions remain fragile.

1.

2.
STP i s now at the threshold of a dramatic change with large oil resources
estimated in its territorial waters. The arrival o f o i l production, anticipated in 2012, i s
the most significant economic event facing STP with far-reaching social and political
implications. To date, STP has taken several positive and encouraging steps to prepare for
the arrival o f o i l revenues and to set up transparent o i l revenue management mechanisms
that set it apart from other resource-rich countries in Africa that have squandered their
wealth. While it is too early to judge whether STP will make effective use o f i t s o i l
revenues, there i s an important window o f opportunity to provide concerted international
support to ensure that o i l will make a positive impact on poverty reduction.

3.

This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for STP covers the four-year period
from FY06 to FYO9. The CAS supports the implementation o f the PRSP and sets out the
planned lending and non-lending activities o f the World Bank and their intended results.
This CAS benefits from a more robust analysis and knowledge base o f the country than
existed at the time o f the previous CAS (FY01-05)2 as a result o f the broader economic and
sector work that has been conducted since then and the more intensive dialogue between
the Bank and the Government. Above all, the strategy remains tightly focused, building
upon on-going activities and enhancing and deepening the strategy laid out in the previous
CAS, as well as building on the lessons leamt from i t s implementation. The two principal
objectives o f the Bank’s strategy are:
(i) to support the implementation o f the PRSP and strengthen the areas where the
PRSP needs to be improved, as highlighted in the JSAN; and
(ii) to provide assistance to STP to ensure that it i s sufficiently prepared to
maximize the benefits o f future o i l revenues.

I

*

The PRSP was promulgated by the President in January 2003, and an update of the strategy was issued in January 2005. The
PRSP was discussed by the Board of the World Bank on April 21, 2005 (Sao Tome and Principe, Joint IDA-IMF Staff
Advisory Note on the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, March 3,2005, Report No. 31726-STP) and i s due to be discussed at
the Board of the IMF in mid-May 2005. I t was not submitted earlier because the macro-framework was insufficiently
developed to put the poverty reduction strategy into full perspective.
Country Assistance Strategy for STP, October 2000, Report No. 21031-STP

... - 111

4.
As STP i s a tiny country, the Bank’s lending program i s naturally small with
an indicative allocation of US$5.5 million for FYO6-OS (Base Case). Under the IDA-14
framework, STP i s currently eligible to receive all o f its FY06 IDA allocation on grant
terms. The CAS focuses on just a couple o f selected areas o f intervention to maximize the
Bank’s impact and to ensure complementarity with other development partners. In
particular, an over-riding theme o f the strategy i s that the Bank will assist the Government
to “scale-up” for the future era when i t will have high levels o f its own resources from oil.
The challenge is to deliver a program o f Bank assistance which encompasses a limited
envelope o f financial resources but concentrates on a broader program o f overall support
including policy dialogue, AAA, ESW, IDF grants and Trust Funds, as well as the Bank’s
role in leveraging other donors’ resources.

5.
The World Bank’s program focuses on strengthening the macroeconomic and
public sector context and building the required institutions and capacity to ensure the
sustainable use of future oil revenues. The specific avenues o f support are:
(i)continue the implementation o f on-going activities, especially with respect to social
sector service delivery, capacity-building in public finance management,
institutional support to managing the o i l sector, and follow-up on recommendations
o f the Bank’s ESW and AAA. As part o f this, additional financing will be
provided to the on-going IDA projects; and
(ii)
move gradually to providing Development Policy Operations (budget support) in
FY07, with the objective o f strengthening implementation o f the PRSP, preparing
the ground for managing future o i l revenues into the budget and maximizing IDA’S
impact. In the period leading up to providing budget support, the Bank will work
closely with the Government to prepare the country’s fiduciary fi-amework and
institutional capacity for the management and implementation o f budget support.
These Development Policy Operations will be triggered by sound macroeconomic,
public finance and o i l management and will be closely linked to the PRSP Annual
Progress Reports and prepared in collaboration with donors.
The STP context i s subject to several risks. The main risk comes from the
6.
potential mis-management o f the influx o f the o i l contract signature bonuses and their
impact on political stability. The Bank will aim to mitigate this risk through ensuring that
the oil revenue management framework is respected, that the signature bonuses are
translated into transparent budgetary allocations and by continued and concerted efforts to
build institutional capacity and engage in dialogue/consultation with Government and civil
society. Although STP has made some efforts to diversify i t s exports, it remains extremely
vulnerable to exogenous shocks. To mitigate this risk i t is vital to continue the course o f
prudent public sector finance management, strengthening capacity and investing in human
and institutional capital, all core aspects o f the Bank’s program. A further risk is posed as
regards the Government’s willingness and capacity to pursue reforms in a sustainable and
consistent manner. The Bank plans to off-set this risk by working closely with the IMF
and other development partners to provide concerted financial and advisory support to
ensure that there i s follow-through o n the reform program and that there i s sufficient focus
on building capacity. The Bank will continue to pursue a frank and open dialogue with the
Government about the importance o f reforms in order to increase investment and foreign
aid.

- iv -

11.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Overview

1.
The Democratic Republic o f Sao Tome and Principe (STP) i s Africa’s
smallest economy with an estimated GDP of U S 6 0 million in 2004. It is greatly
dependent o n external financial assistance3 and heavily indebted. I t i s a small island
country with a population o f about 150,000 and a land area o f just over 1,000 square
kilometers. STP i s one o f the poorest countries in the world, with a per capita income o f
$320 in 2003, less than the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. I t ranked 123‘d out o f 177
countries in the UNDP Human Development Index for 20024. According to the most
recent household survey (2000/01), 54 percent o f the population i s poor and 15 percent
live in extreme poverty. Social indicators in STP are weak and progress towards
achieving the MDGs i s slow, with the likelihood that most M D G s will not be reached.
STP’s historical evolution has been very much affected b y i t s heritage as a
2.
Portuguese colony. Under Portugal’s early rule, STP became first one o f the world’s
largest producers o f su ar (in the mid-16th century) and then a major producer o f coffee
and cocoa (in the 19t century). Following the military coup in Portugal in 1974,
independence for STP was proclaimed. Transition to single-party Marxist r u l e was almost
immediate and socialist economic policies were implemented. In the face o f economic
deterioration during the 1980s and pressure from both the population and western donors,
political and economic reforms were introduced, a democratic constitution was
established and the first multi-party legislative election was held in January 19915.

a

3.
Since 1991, STP has been transformed from a Marxist one-party state into a
form of pluralist democracy. President Fradique de Menezes was elected President for
a 5 year t e r m in July 2001, in STP’s third multi-party election which was deemed to be
fair and was conducted peacefblly. Since then, the country has been ruled by a political
cohabitation with the presidency held by a semi-independent candidate and the
parliament divided almost evenly between the two main political parties. Nevertheless,
for such a small country, the political scene i s very complex. A unity Government exists
though i t i s shaky and there are frequent cabinet changes and clashes with the President.
The political economy suffers from inherent instability due to the vague separation o f
powers outlined in the constitution between the Presidency, National Assembly and the
Executive Branch o f Government.
The approaching oil era i s increasing social expectations and exacerbating
4.
political tensions. These tensions came to a head in July 2003 with an attempted coup.
%le
the President and Prime Minister were restored to power after a negotiated
settlement a week later, the attempted coup underscored the delicate political and social

’

STP has traditionally benefited Erom one of the largest amounts o f aid per capita in the world - equivalent to U S 1 6 6 per
capita in 2002
A more recent ranking i s not available due to data gathering problems in STP.
Source: The Economist Intelligence Unit Country Profile for Sao Tome and Principe, 2005.

situation in the country. A more active civil society has gradually taken form since the
democratic reforms o f the 1990s, but political and civil institutions remain fragile.

5.
The economic base i s extremely narrow, dominated b y services (65 percent o f
GDP, mainly public sector), with agriculture and industry (mainly construction)
contributing 19 and 18 percent o f GDP respectively. Manufacturing represents less than
5 percent o f GDP and there are no major foreign investments yet outside the tourist sector
(although this will change once o i l exploitation activities start). The economy is also
characterized by a l o w savings rate, a large public sector suffering from weak
institutional capacity, a high reliance on foreign aid and dependency on cocoa production
for exports. Tourism shows potential for growth but remains under-developed and
constrained by the high malaria incidence. Agricultural productivity is l o w and farmers
suffer from a lack o f agricultural services. On the structural reforms front, the public
enterprise reform and privatization program has made progress, though with some delays.
6.
STP faces many special development challenges because of i t s small size and
vulnerability to terms of trade and other external shocks. Its economic and social
indicators are negatively affected by some o f the basic challenges that afflict many small
island states which include remoteness and insularity, susceptibility to natural disasters,
weak institutional capacity, a narrow resource base, vulnerability to exogenous shocks,
limited access to capital, and entrenched poverty. STP reached the Decision Point o f the
enhanced HIPC Initiative in early 2001 and i s expected to reach Completion Point by
mid-20066. However, i t s vulnerability to exogenous shocks could impact negatively on
the overall debt sustainability o f the country. Notwithstanding the HIPC relief, the debt
burden i s still high: STP's debt ratios to exports and Government revenues remain among
the highest in the world.

7.
STP i s now at the threshold o f a dramatic change with large oil resources
estimated in i t s territorial waters. The arrival o f o i l production, anticipated in 2010, is
certainly the most significant economic event facing STP with far-reaching social and
political implications. There i s a strong possibility that the resources and revenues
accruing to STP will be very large indeed relative to i t s size7. Such rapid revenue inflows
into a country present the usual set o f challenges - Dutch disease, lack o f absorptive
capacity, pressure on the reform program, and risks o f greater inequality. W h i l e the
actual o i l revenues are not expected to accrue until 2012, STP i s already feeling the
impact o f o i l through the o i l contract signature bonuses that have recently been agreed.
In the second quarter o f 2005 STP i s expected to benefit from an o i l contract signature
bonus for the first block o f exploration in the order o f $49 million (equivalent to 90
percent o f GDP), which will be partially applied to the 2005 budget'. A new round o f
bidding was finalized in late 2004 o n 5 further blocks but the award o f these blocks has
not yet been made (it is s t i l l unclear when they will be made or for how many blocks).

'
*

The exact timing will be linked to one full year o f satisfactory implementationof the PRGF arrangement with the IMF.
Initial analysis suggests that STP will produce 142 barrels per capita per year, compared to 25 in Angola, 76 in Gabon and
26 in Congo-Brazzaville.
Of the $49 million, $9.3 million will be paid to the Joint Development Authority (between STP and Nigeria) on account o f
arrears accumulated during 2001-04 and $13 million i s programmed for spending toward the 2005 budget. The remaining
$27 million will be deposited in the government's national Oil Account held with the New York Federal Reserve Bank. In
accordance -with the Oil Revenue Management Law, these funds will be used gradually over the next several years.

-2-

B.

The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)

8.
The PRSP was finalized by Government in late-2002, promulgated by the
President in January 2003 and was partially implemented in the 2003-2004 budgets
(see footnote 1). In January 2005, the Government prepared a set o f annexes to the PRSP
main document which provided updates on the previous two years o f macroeconomic
performance, indicators and implementation infrastructure, as well as a summary o f the
new petroleum revenue management law, and a summary o f the PRSP implementation
experience in 2003-2004. The PRSP and its related Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN)
were discussed by the Boards o f the World Bank and IMF in April and M a y 2005
respectively.

9.
The PRSP sets an ambitious policy agenda - with an overall cost o f about
US$210 million for the first seven years o f implementation. I t lays out a strategic plan
for poverty reduction based on five pillars:
a) Reform o f public institutions, capacity building, and promotion o f a policy o f
good govemance;
b) Accelerated and redistributive growth;
c) Creation o f opportunities to increase and diversify income for the poor;
d) Human resource development and access to basic social services;
e) Adoption o f mechanisms to monitor, assess and update the strategy.
10.
An Action Plan i s attached to the PRSP to put these strategic pillars in place,
which has the following objectives: (i)
attain a GDP growth rate o f 5 percent starting in
2003; (ii)
reduce by h a l f the percentage o f the population living in poverty by 2010, and
reduce this figure to less than 1/3 by 2015; (iii)
provide the entire population with access
to basic services by 2015 and help improve their quality o f life; (iv) considerably reduce
the social and gender gap between districts in Siio Tom6 and between these and the
Autonomous Region o f Principe, as well as between urban and rural populations; and
(v) promote and build institutional capacity and a policy o f good govemance.

11.
The PRSP’s medium-term macroeconomic outlook assumes an average
growth rate of 4.3 percent during 2005-07, a declining inflation rate and broadly stable
nominal interest rate, supported by strong fiscal consolidation. The outlook also
encompasses control over public expenditures while safe-guarding pro-poor spending, a
prudent monetary policy, a flexible exchange rate and the implementation o f a
comprehensive structural reform agenda that includes a new investment code to promote
private investment.
12.
The full PRSP i s a result of an extensive consultative process by stakeholders.
The process was managed by a steering committee chaired by the Prime Minister and
consisting o f representatives o f government and civil society. Numerous workshops were
organized for civil society, political parties and other stakeholders in the six districts on
the island o f Sao Tome and on the island o f Principe. A PRSP unit was set up in the
Ministry o f Planning and Finance to ensure the implementation and monitoring o f the

PRSP: a key role o f this unit is to coordinate the various activities o f all the Ministries, as
well as private sector and civil society, under the overall framework o f the PRSP.

13.
The Monitoring and Evaluation Framework of the PRSP. The JSAN
indicates that the PRSP provides a fairly comprehensive set o f indicators and targets for
monitoring and evaluating the sectoral strategies, especially in education, health and
infrastructure. The set o f medium- and long-term targets broadly tallies with the MDGs.
Some o f the poverty targets, however, are more ambitious - particularly the 50 percent
drop in poverty targeted by 2010 - and will require major sustained efforts and financial
support. I t is recognized that efforts are needed to enhance the quality and availability o f
indicators and to strengthen statistical capacity. The Government i s targeting the
strengthening o f i t s PRSP unit to enhance implementation and monitoring.
14.
The JSAN underlines that the PRSP provides a reliable framework for
reducing poverty. I t s main strengths are that i t provides a poverty diagnosis and a
comprehensive private-sector-led development strategy, pays special attention to crosscutting issues, notably governance, and identifies detailed indicators to monitor progress
in poverty reduction. The JSAN highlights that there are several areas o f weakness in the
prioritize
PRSP and that these could be strengthened through the following actions: (i)
sectoral strategies and make them fully consistent with the annual fiscal budget and the
overall medium-term poverty alleviation strategy, (ii)
launch an in-depth analysis o f the
make an assessment o f the
impact o f potential o i l revenues o n the economy; and (iii)
redistributive effect o f the proposed reforms, including taxation, land redistribution, and
privatization.
15.
Furthermore, the JSAN underlines the importance o f further work in securing
good governance and fighting corruption, especially in the context o f rising o i l revenue.
Trade policy i s also singled out as needing attention, particularly given the emphasis o f
the PRSP on the need for non-oil investment and the diversification o f production and
exports. In conclusion, the JSAN highlights two major issues: (i)
the Government must
succeed in attracting a substantially higher level o f private investment and additional
donor support to achieve the desired high GDP growth rate targets until o i l production
starts; and (ii)capacity must be strengthened to ensure full implementation and
monitoring o f the PRSP.

C.

Macroeconomic Framework

16.

After a prolonged period o f economic mis-management since independence, a
series of economic reforms were implemented starting in 1999. These aimed at:
(i)
pursuing prudent fiscal and monetary policies; (ii)
improving the efficiency o f public
spending; (iii)
liberalizing the economy by reforming the tariff structure, preparing for a
liberalization o f the telecoms sector and privatizing a number o f public enterprises
(iv) accelerating sectoral reforms by developing new strategies in health and education;
and (v) strengthening human and institutional capacities, especially in the nascent
petroleum sector.

-4-

17.
As a result of these reforms, economic performance improved which resulted
in a more stabilized economy, sustained output growth and lower inflation. The
growth rate o f real GDP per capita rose from 3.3 percent to 4 percent between 1999 and
2003. The growth dynamic relied on a series o f reforms supported by the IMF and the
Bank, an improvement in world cocoa prices, and growth in the tourism and construction
sectors. Inflation was also brought under control and the CPI dropped from 12.6 percent
in 1999 to 9.2 percent in 2002. In 2003, the increase in energy prices, post-coup social
expenditures and civil service salary increases contributed to a rise o f the inflation rate to
9.6 percent.

18.
In 2004, real GDP growth i s estimated to be slightly lower (3.8 percent) than
2003 as the expected increase in petroleum related economic activities did not
materialize. The overall fiscal deficit i s estimated to have increased from 17 percent o f
GDP in 2003 to 26 percent in 2004. The external current account deficit (excluding
grants) is expected to rise to 61.5 percent o f GDP in 2004, from 54.4 percent in 2003, on
account o f new infrastructure projects and the sharp rise in the o i l import bill due to
increases in international o i l prices. This increase in o i l prices in 2004 has affected the
already fragile economy, particularly because o f the increasing financial difficulties o f
the sole electricity and water company (EMAE) that i s the main consumer o f imported
gasoline. Unable to pass through prices, EMAE has reduced i t s production load and
introduced rolling brown-outs, effectively rationing electricity since fall o f 2004. The
lack o f electricity has reduced the productivity o f both public and private sectors.
19.
I n the monetary sector, the Central Bank relied on heavy intervention in the
foreign exchange markets to avoid a sharp depreciation of the dobra and absorb the
excess liquidity from the large fiscal deficits and the rapid expansion o f bank credit to the
private sector. The Central Bank response led to a drawing down o f gross official
reserves from 4.5 to 3.2 months o f imports o f goods and services.
20.
Annual GDP growth i s envisaged to slow down in 2005 (to 3 percent) in
response to tight financial policies under the IMF’s planned PRGF program (see
paragraphs 22-23), but pick up during the following two years to reach 5.5 percent by
2007 o n account o f expanding economic activity in the services sector and petroleumrelated investments. End-year inflation i s projected to drop from 14.6 percent to 9
percent by end-2007, while current foreign exchange reserves levels are ensured (3.2 to
3.5 months o f imports o f goods and services). The overall external balance would
continue to show large deficits in 2006 and 2007. This would mirror sizable current
account deficits after grants (stemming from higher imports o f crude o i l and o i l sectorrelated investment goods), which would be partially financed by a mix o f foreign direct
investment, foreign aid and the gradual use o f revenue from the o i l bonus payment.
21.
The gross external financing requirements are projected to reach $73.5
million in 2005, falling to approximately $43 million in 2006-7. It is assumed that the
financing gap for 2005 would be closed if the Government succeeds in carrying out the
increase domestic tax revenues and control expenditures; (ii)
secure the
following: (i)
programmed levels o f bilateral and multilateral grants (including HIPC), loans and nonrenegotiating Paris Club commitments; and (iv) execute the
project lending; (iii)

-5-

graduated payment schedule programmed for Nigeria and the Joint Development
Authority (JDA) debts. The financial gaps re-appear in 2006 (approximately $8.6
million) and 2007 ($6.4 million) for which the country would benefit from concessional
lending or grants.
Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, Sao Tome and Principe, 2001-2004

2001

Real G D P (Annual % change)
Consumer Prices (annual average)
Current account balance ”
Net present value o f total debt ”
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure
Non-interest current expenditure
Overall fiscal balance 31
Change inbroad money (in percent)
Interest rate (inpercent) 4’

4.0
9.5
-63.1
1,200.9
63.1
79.4
28.8
-20.4
36.7
15.5

2002

2003

(Inpercent o f GDP, unless specified)

4.1
9.2
-53.9
1,142.5
53.9
67.6
33.0
-17.2
26.9
15.5

4.0
9.6
-54.4
1,024.5
54.4
75.0
33.1
-16.9
41.8
14.5

2004
Est.

3.8
12.8
-61.5
899.7
59.3
85.4
46.3
-26.1
7.4
14.5

Note:

IMF (httu://www.imf,or~/extemal/nu/sec/un/2004iun0432.litm). Notes: 1/ Excluding official transfers; 2/ In percent o f
exports o f goods and non-factor services, calculated as a three-year backward-looking average; 31 (commitment basis,
excluding grants and oil signature bonuses, including HIPC . 4/ Commercial bank reference rate, end o f period.
Please see Annex B6 for macro-economic projections

D.

IMF Program

Source:

22.
After successfully completing an IMF Staff Monitored Program in 2002 and
2003, the Government i s currently finalizing an agreement o n a PRGF program. The
program i s geared towards re-establishing the conditions for high and sustained economic
growth over the medium term. An early goal is to correct the fragile budgetary situation
and widening macroeconomic imbalances resulting from the relaxation o f the fiscal and
monetary policies to implement the 2004 budget. These imbalances came about as the
2004 budget had anticipated petroleum bonus signature which then did not materialize
but spending was not adjusted in line. The expectation i s that the PRGF will catalyze
needed financing from other international financial institutions (notably the African
Development Bank) and donors to further accelerate investment and economic growth.
23.
The program aims to place public finances back on modern and sound
grounds while protecting pro-poor expenditures. The tax revenues are to be increased
via introduction o f new tax policy and tax administration reforms. Measures are also
predicted to improve public expenditure management and control expenditure growth. In
the monetary sector, to achieve the dual goals o f controlling inflation and protecting
foreign exchange reserve levels, net domestic assets o f the Central Bank will be
supervised closely and private sector credit growth will be restrained. In the real sector,
the Government i s encouraged to adopt the new investment code to improve the business
climate, In the public sector, the Government i s to further liberalize the economy by
finalizing the telecoms market liberalization. I t will address the finances and status o f
-6-

some state enterprises within a strategic reform framework, especially as regards EMAE.
I t will also undertake a review o f the performance and status o f the public airport and
seaport, with a view to potential public-private partnerships. The PRSP acknowledges
that attainment o f i t s poverty reduction objectives will depend critically on maintaining
macroeconomic stability. The 2005 updated annex to the PRSP i s consistent with the
financial policies underpinning the PRGF program.

E.

Poverty

24.
The PRSP paints a stark picture o f poverty.
The 2000-2001
UNDP/ILO/World Bank survey o f living conditions and the UNDP poverty reviews
show that 54 percent o f the population lives in poverty; 39 percent are poor and 15
percent are extremely poor. Simulations suggest that between the late 1980s and
2000/01, the share of the population in poverty may have increased by 6 percentage
points, from 48 percent to 54 percent. The PRSP seeks to reduce the percentage o f STP’s
population living in poverty by half by 2010 and by more than two thirds by 20 15. These
goals are very ambitious and, if current trends persist, are unlikely to be reached.
Preliminary analysis indicates that the country would need to grow at an average rate
higher than 8 percent per annum (i.e. almost twice the average growth rate projected for
2005-07) during the next decade to meet the PRSP’s ambitious poverty reduction targets.
Even assuming an ambitious growth rate o f 6.5 percent per year from 2004 to 2010, the
share o f the population in poverty would only be reduced by about a fourth to 40 percent,
well short o f the target in the PRSP. While a higher growth rate i s attainable, it would be
contingent upon the authorities succeeding in attracting higher levels o f private
investment and additional donor support.
I t i s difficult to gauge social and poverty data over time as the analyses are
25.
sparse and very weak. Analysis suggests, however, that several years o f economic
growth since 2000 have led to a slight improvement in income with per capita GDP
increasing from US$290 in 2000 to US$320 in 2003. The distribution o f arable land to
small farmers has helped strengthen income prospects for those poor who have branched
successfully into production o f foodstuffs for the domestic market. Expenditure policies
aimed at ensuring that priority has been given to spending in critical social areas and
resources freed under the HIPC interim assistance are being allocated toward social
sectors and poverty-reduction related programs.
Poverty i s concentrated in rural areas and i s higher among female-headed
26.
households and among households whose head works in agriculture. The high
incidence o f poverty in rural areas has led many former rural workers to move to urban
centers where they live in slums. Other socioeconomic groups identified as most
vulnerable to poverty include low-level civil servants, fishermen and vendors and senior
citizens living alone (over 60 years old). Survey data suggest that a large household size,
a lack o f education or employment, and geographic location are all key determinants o f
poverty. The average size o f a household i s inversely proportional to its income; thus the
average household with 6.43 persons i s extremely poor, while families with 3.78

-7-

members are considered not poor. Exacerbating the income and economic dimensions o f
poverty is a weak sense o f community and social capital in the country.
The PRSP rightly considers that combating social exclusion i s fundamental
27.
for reducing poverty. I t identifies women, the elderly and the young as being in need o f
special support. Looking ahead, the JSAN o f the PRSP highlights that further analysis o f
poverty i s needed. In this respect, the Government is pushing ahead on conducting two
surveys aimed at improving household and expenditure data. The analysis should focus
on a review o f income and coping strategies at the household level across provinces,
including the allocation o f Government and donor resources, access to basic
infrastructure, and vulnerability to food insecurity and natural disasters. As part o f its
support, the Bank will provide assistance for further breaking down the poverty profile
into key components. The UNDP is providing assistance on strengthening the data
quality and availability. The surveys’ results are to be used to monitor progress toward
reaching the PRSP goals and MDGs.

F.

The Oil Sector

28.
By 2012, it i s expected that STP will become an oil producing nation with
significant revenues. In 2001, STP and Nigeria reached agreement on joint exploration
for o i l in waters claimed by the two countries. In April 2003, the Joint Development
Zone (JDZ), was opened for bids by international firms. The JDZ was divided into 9
blocks and negotiations on block one were finalized in the first quarter o f 2005 for $123
million, o f which STP is to receive 40 percent ($49 million - see footnote 7 ) and Nigeria
the other 60 percent. A new round o f bidding was finalized in late 2004 on 5 further
blocks but the award o f the blocks has not yet been made.
29.
The oil era i s a key development opportunity for STP. Revenues from oil, gas
and mining companies, in the form o f taxes, royalties, signature bonuses and other
payments should be an important engine for economic growth and social development.
But, as experience from other countries has shown, good governance and good economic
management are crucial to sustainable development. STP must follow through o n i t s
commitment o f putting o i l revenues to effective use, while balancing the use o f nonrenewable revenues for current and future generations. I t has made considerable efforts
towards good governance and transparency in the sector by adopting a best practice
petroleum revenue management law (see B o x 1) and indicating i t s willingness to
implement the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) process. A rapid and
full implementation o f the petroleum revenue management law should allay some o f the
anxiety owing to the strong correlation petroleum riches have tended to have with
negative patterns o f political and economic governance elsewhere in Africa and the
world. So far, i t has initiated the implementation o f i t s petroleum revenue management
law by contracting the Federal Reserve Bank o f N e w York as i t s custodian bank.
I n June 2004, Nigeria and STP signed a declaration regarding transparency
30.
and governance in the JDZ shared by the two countries. The parties agreed to full

-8-

public disclosure of all transactions in respect o f the o i l companies’ activities in the zone,
in particular the revenues accruing to the two countries. The Joint Development
Authority (JDA) is required to make public the basis for all awards o f interest in the JDZ.
In the first h a l f of 2004, the Government created a National Petroleum Committee (NPC)
which i s under the tutelage o f the President and addresses sectoral policies and political
issues. The N P C includes NGO and private sector representatives. The Government also
created a National Petroleum Agency (NPA) to provide the NPC and the government
with legal, technical and economic analysis and to act as the regulatory entity in the
sector, The establishment o f these institutions and the eventual implementation o f the
petroleum revenue management law represent important steps towards successful
management o f the o i l sector.

Box 1: The Petroleum Revenue Management Law
O n December 29,2004, President de Menezes o f STP signed into law a Petroleum Revenue Management
Law that sets a high international standard for control o f petroleum revenues and transparency. The law,
which was adopted unanimously by the National Assembly in late November 2004, details the rules for
the receipt and use o f the petroleum funds to best serve the country’s long t e r m economic development
goals that include poverty reduction and good governance. These goals are based on the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper o f the country.

The law focuses on creating mechanisms to promote transparency in the management o f o i l revenue. I t
creates an o i l fund to be held by an international custodial bank and outlines the yearly amounts o f the
revenues to be used for national expenditures and the portion that i s to be retained for a permanent reserve
for when the petroleum resources have been exhausted (Fund for the Future). The law mandates two
audits each year, one by the auditor-general and the other by a reputable international audit fm to be
selected by public tender. The receipt and use o f all petroleum funds are to be public information and
easily accessible to the population. The law proposes to limit the confidentiality o f o i l contracts and to
introduce an obligatory register o f all documentation related to the o i l sector, which w i l l be open to the
public.
The level o f transparency written into the law, the willingness o f STP to implement the principles o f the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), together with the June 2004 signing by President de
Menezes and President Obasanjo o f Nigeria o f the Abuja declaration provide a unique opportunity to set
an example o f success for the management and use o f the petroleum resources. Given the historical
experience o f countries dependent on non-renewable resources, STP’s law i s considered best-practice.
The World Bank and the IMF, along with UNDP, University o f Columbia and other donors, provided
expert assistance to STP throughout the development and adoption o f the Petroleum Revenue
Management Law. These actors are also providing support to the implementation o f the law.

31.
Apart from good governance, oil revenues will also require good economic
management. The volatility o f signature bonuses and o f actual o i l revenues may create
an unstable budgetary pattem and economic performance. This carries the risk o f an
over-expansion o f government and o f the mis-allocation o f resources, which in tum could
be compounded by STP’s lack o f absorptive capacity, leading to poor quality projects and
implementation. The risk o f Dutch disease i s expected to be mitigated through proper
use o f the Fund for the Future.

-9-

G.

Debt Sustainability and the Enhanced HIPC Initiative

32.
STP’s debt ratios to exports and Government revenues are among the
highest in the world, reaching close to 1,000 percent. STP reached the Enhanced
H P C Initiative Decision Point in December 2000 and expects to reach Completion Point
by September 2006. At the time o f HIPC Decision Point, the debt relief to be provided
under HIPC was estimated at US$97 million in end-NPV terms. Since then, STP has
received interim relief from IDA, the African Development Bank, the OPEC Fund and
the European Uniong. The latest Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) in Appendix 1 to
this CAS indicates that the debt situation has worsened compared to the estimates made
at Decision Point. Assuming that STP reaches i t s Completion Point in September 2006,
the D S A results indicate that the NPV o f debt to exports ratio after the full delivery o f
enhanced HIPC assistance would stand at 274 percent as o f end-2004, as compared with
142 percent projected in the decision point document.
Reaching HIPC Completion Point will require maintaining a track record of
33.
compliance with the IMF’s planned PRGF program and a successful
implementation of the PRSP, as well as implementing the social, financial management
and governance reforms laid out in the Decision Point document. The Government has
progressed steadily towards the implementation o f those reforms during 2003-04. The
first year progress report o f the PRSP implementation shall be prepared in time for the
HIPC Completion Point board date (expected September 2006)
The updated PRSP includes an action plan in which ensuring debt
34.
sustainability i s part of the strategy. In this regard, the Government created in late
2003 an extemal debt management unit at the Central Bank. The unit s t i l l needs to
develop i t s analytical capacity and establish systems for the regular dissemination o f debt
statistics to the public. Debt Relief International i s providing support to STP to manage
i t s debt and to build capacity in debt management.

H.

Social Sectors

35.
Since its independence from Portugal in 1975 and during the 1980s’ STP had
among the better social indicators in sub-Saharan Africa. Extemal terms o f trade
shocks, declining investment in the social sectors, deteriorating economic performance
and weak capacity led to a worsening o f the socio-economic conditions o f the population.
Basic social services deteriorated significantly, leading to deterioration in health and
education outcomes. There was a substantial decrease in public spending for the social
sectors in the mid-1990s but spending levels have recovered since then. Although public
expenditure on health and education i s relatively high - accounting for about 30 percent
o f expenditure - i t i s marked by large inefficiencies. Performance o f the sectors is poor,
capacity limited and access to services remains low.
Recently, Pans Club reschedulinghas met with some delays due to hesitation on the part o f some members on rescheduling
until the EMF program i s approved by its Board.

- 10-

36.
Today, social indicators are weak. I t i s estimated that 15 percent o f children
under five are underweight, 29 percent are stunted and 4 percent are wasted. Infant and
child mortality rates are high at 75 (out o f 1,000) and 95 (out o f 1,000) respectively. L i f e
expectancy i s 66 years and maternal mortality i s estimated to be 122 per 100,000 live
births. Malaria i s a major public health problem, affecting over 80 percent o f the
population and is the number one cause o f death. Education services are insufficient,
poorly functioning and of l o w quality. School drop-out rates and repetition rates are
high, availability of teachers and teaching materials i s scarce and education outcomes are
dismal. The delivery o f social services i s constrained by very limited Government
capacity to plan and implement social strategies and programs and a weak incentive
framework that has a negative impact on the performance o f public service providers. As
part o f the Household Survey o f 2000/01, households mentioned affordability as a barrier
to both education and health.

Box 2: Reaching the MDGs in the Health and Education Sectors
Analysis o f the potential o f STP reaching the health MillenniumDevelopment Goals (MDGs) suggests
that they are at least partially achievable:
The first MDG i s to reduce child mortality by two-thirds by 2015, signifying the achievement o f
a drop in infant mortality from 75 per 1,000 live births (ptlb) in 2002 to 30 ptlb in 2015; to
achievement o f a drop in mortality among children under five from 95 ptlb to 38 ptlb, and to
increase measles vaccination coverage from 69 percent to 100 percent in the same period. Based
on the progress achieved toward the first two indicators over the past decade (a decline in
mortality o f only 16.9 percent), the MDG goal i s likely out o f reach. The vaccination rate,
however, i s already high and full coverage i s achievable by 2015.
The second MDG goal i s to improve maternal health to reduce by three-quarters, between 1990
and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio (MMR), as measured by the MMR and the proportion o f
births attended by health personnel. Data o n the MMR are scarce and unreliable; however, the
proportion o f births attended by health personnel i s on the rise, and if the supply o f service
continues to improve, the MDG could be achievable.
The final health MDG goal i s to halt by 2015 and to begin reversing the spread o f HIV/AIDS.
The incidence in STP o f HIV/AIDS i s s t i l l relatively low, presenting the country with a window
o f opportunity to prevent i t s spread. Although the fight against H I V / A I D S i s a priority o f the
government, it s t i l l has to be translated into practice by providing resources and ensuring the
involvement o f all other sectors. Implementation o f the National AIDS Strategic Plan should be
pursued as a matter o f national urgency.

As regards t h e education MDGs, the status i s the following:
The goal for universal primary education by 2015, also reflected in the PRSP goals related to
literacy and net school enrolment rate, should be achievable, given more effective provision o f
sufficient institutional and financial support from donors.
There does not appear to be serious gender gaps in access to education. Enrollment rates for
boys and girls are equal at the primary and secondary levels but a larger proportion o f girls than
boys drops out. While the PRSP suggests that gender equality should be sought, no specific
indicator or milestone i s included to capture the MDG goal o f eliminating the slight gender
disparity in primary and secondary education-which should be achieved preferably by 2005
and, in all levels o f education, no later than 2015. The educational system w i l l need to establish
partnerships with civil society and communities to achieve t h i s goal.

- 11 -

37.

Education. The education sector i s characterized by a weak structure and
organization which negatively impacts on the quality and efficiency o f education.
Almost one third o f primary schools operate under a triple shift system which means that
average class time i s severely curtailed. The sector employs the largest group in the civil
service but the ability o f the Ministry o f Education to use these human resources costeffectively i s hampered by i t s weak capacity for personnel planning and management,
supervision o f teachers and monitoring resource use. Teachers are de-motivated and
untrained with their salaries corresponding to a mere 1.5 times the GDP per capita, and
no career development path in place.

38.
The Ten Year Education Strategy (2003-2013) covers the entire sector and
emphasizes four broad areas for action: (i)
laying the foundation for a better managed and
integrated six-years primary education system and for the promotion o f adult literacy
programs; (ii)
improving access to education irrespective o f gender or income level;
(iii)
improving learning and reducing repetition by strengthening the quality o f inputs and
management o f the system; and (iv) improving service delivery through policy and
institutional reforms and capacity building. To address these goals, the PRSP proposes to
increase the share of education in the budget and the relative budgetary allocation for
primary education. This in turn will help increase and equip classrooms in order to phase
out two and three-shift teaching, reduce regional and income disparities, retain more
teachers through better training and higher salaries and decentralize the education system.
Health. As previously mentioned, health indicators have worsened in the
39.
1990s with increases in child and adult mortality and child morbidity. Poor sanitary
conditions, malnutrition, weak sector management and inadequate attention to primary
healthcare are the major factors contributing to the worsening health outcomes. At
around 80 percent, general vaccination coverage i s good compared to other countries in
the region but the national average hides inequities among districts. Malaria i s the main
public health problem in the country, i s responsible for 65 percent o f all hospitalizations
of children under 5 and i s the major cause o f death, especially among children under 5
years o f age. STP’s population has one o f the highest rates o f bed net use in Sub-Saharan
Africa but only about 45 percent o f babies less than 6 months o f age sleep under a
mosquito net and only 53 percent o f the nets are impregnated.

40.
The health system i s characterized by inequities in availability and access to
health services, the lack o f qualified staff and weak supervision and monitoring o f the
system. The Ministry o f Health has limited management capacity in terms o f planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation. Staff capacity i s extremely l o w due to lack
of training and career structures, as well as an overall shortage o f staff. L o w salaries,
scarce data availability and poor utilization o f financial resources complete the dire
picture, To achieve the health goals, the PRSP envisages an increase in the budgetary
allocation for the health sector. The strategy focuses o n restructuring o f basic health
services, refocusing care on preventive approaches and o n the diseases with the highest
morbidity, guaranteeing access to specialized (tertiary) care and improving national
nutritional levels.

- 12-

41.
The Ministry of Health developed a National Health Development Plan for
2001-2010 which aims at (i)
improving access to, and develop the quality of, primary
care services; (ii)
raising access to drinking water and sanitation for the poor and improve
their nutritional status; (iii)
improving public information, education and communication;
(iv) strengthening reproductive health services; and (v) combating major endemic
diseases (malaria, TB and others). The Government also developed the National
Strategic Plan to Roll-Back Malaria 2001-2010 which has the following goals: (i)
reduce
mortality in children under 5 years attributed to malaria by 100 percent; and (ii)
reduce
by 90 percent the morbidity caused by malaria in the general population. The antimalaria campaign was launched in the first h a l f o f 2003 which emphasizes prevention via
education, use o f mosquito nets and spraying. The program requires substantial technical
assistance given the weak local capacity as well as significant financial resources to
complement the Government's contribution (Taiwan,. Portugal and the U S are already
supporting the program).
42.
The H I V / A I D S prevalence in STP i s s t i l l relatively low, but recent data
shows that this i s quickly changing; prevalence rates among pregnant women rose from
1 percent in 1993 to 5.4 percent in 1996". There i s a high rate o f sexually transmitted
diseases, awareness about HIV transmittal methods i s very low, condom use i s less than
one percent and cultural traditions mean that sexual activity begins early and involves
multiple partners. These conditions create an environment that allows HIV prevalence
rates to increase rapidly. A strategy o f HIV/AIDS was developed, costed and adopted in
2003 which aims to (i)reduce the risk for HIV infection; (ii)
reduce the vulnerability to
infection; and (iii)reduce the impact o f the epidemic. However, implementation
arrangements for many specific actions still have to be designed.

I.

Infrastructure

43,
Access to basic infrastructure services remains low, particularly among the
poor. Road and transport infrastructure i s in a state o f decline and rural infrastructure has
suffered from a prolonged absence o f investment (although the E C i s emphasizing this
sector in i t s aid program). Most rural roads have been badly neglected since the demise
o f the cocoa plantations. The l o w frequency and high prices o f air services and poor
airport infrastructure are significant barriers to the development o f tourism. The limited
port structure also hampers the integration o f STP into the regional and global markets:
improvements to the port structure and services are essential to promote private sector
development. Unsuccessful attempts have been made in the past to privatize the water
and electricity company - EMAE; given the difficult international energy environment,
privatization i s no longer being considered in the short-run. Cost recovery o f EMAE i s
an issue as the company has suffered from chronic deficits in the past. The Government
i s the biggest consumer o f electricity and does not pay i t s bills on time which creates
serious financial problems for EMAE.
loData scarcity

makes i t difficult to provide a more recent estimate o f prevalence rates.

-13-

44.
Notwithstanding these constraints, the picture on infrastructure i s not all
negative. Telecommunications are better than the Sub-Saharan Afiica (SSA) average
with 41 telephone lines per 1,000 people in 2003, compared to the SSA average o f 21.
Sixty percent o f households have access to electricity although transmission problems
and irregular power supply constrain the system. Regular rainfall and the mountainous
nature o f Sao Tome island suggest that fresh water i s abundantly available in the form o f
rivers and streams although actual data on access to potable water i s scarce.
The PRSP comprehensively covers infrastructure issues: (i) for
45.
telecommunications, the Government intends to liberalize the market by end-2005 to
foster investment; (ii)
in water and sanitation, i t foresees more connections, improved
quality and proper maintenance; (iii)for the transport sector, the strategy sets an
ambitious agenda for repair and maintenance o f roads, reform o f air traffic and
development o f airports and seaports; and (iv) in the energy sector, it envisages
increasing electricity supply and service through enhanced private sector participation
and reform o f the finances and management o f EMAE.
Box 3: Environment
STP has an equatorial climate with heavy rainfall, high temperatures and high humidity. Sao Tome
island i s mountainous with cocoa plantations carved out o f dense jungle, intersected by numerous
streams. Principe occupies just 15 percent o f the total area o f the archipelago and i s extremely jagged
and indented with numerous bays. There is abundant bio-diversity o n the islands, particularly flora
and birds. STP’s forest resources have been indiscriminately developed, with deforestation one o f
the m a i n environmental problems. Despite the support o f the European Commission, the
Government has yet to implement a plan t o protect areas.
STP has benefited f r o m B a n k support in the past to develop its National Environmental Action Plan
(NEAP) and the UNEP i s also active in the country in assisting them address environmental issues.
The Government i s aware o f the importance o f the country’s biodiversity, not just for the potential o f
developing eco-tourism but as a w o r l d heritage in i t s own right. The Ministry o f Natural Resources
and Environment has committed to implementing a series o f environmental and biodiversity
conservation programs.
N o o i l production or refining is anticipated o n the islands so f i t u r e environmental risks arising f r o m
the o i l era are judged t o be relatively low. The private sector o i l companies have expressed
willingness t o observe international standards o f environmental practices and intend t o carry out the
necessary environmental assessment associated with their activities.
In late-2004, STP received a GEF grant for $200,000 which assists the Government t o draft a p l a n
prioritizing the actions needed to prepare the country for projected climate change impacts in k e y
sectors, e.g. declining capacity for hydropower, increased coastal flooding, impacts o n agriculture,
etc. I t i s expected that this initial grant will pave the way for STP’s climate change program t o
benefit f r o m further GEF support for the implementation o f the priority actions. The Bank’s rural
and environmental team i s working closely with the Government o n the initial GEF grant t o ensure a
successful action p l a n i s prepared and that fiu-ther
grant resources are made available for i t s
implementation.

- 14-

J.

Governance and Capacity

46.
The key constraints facing STP in implementing its reform program stem
from weak institutional capacity, governance issues, and lack o f skilled human
resources. While successive Governments have expressed their commitment to reform
in general, effective and timely implementation o f measures has suffered from
insufficient technical and financial assistance and lack o f political will in specific reform
areas such as civil service and land reform. Governance issues are a source o f concern
with the arrival o f o i l signature bonuses and the future o i l era. A s a consequence,
improving governance must be at the forefront o f the poverty reduction agenda and
concerted efforts are needed to build strong institutions to prepare for the o i l era.

47.

The PRSP recognizes that good governance has a significant impact on
poverty reduction. I t stresses the need to consolidate the rule o f law, including
constitutional reforms to remove potential sources o f conflict among the branches o f the
government. Other measures considered include basing the National Assembly on
proportional representation, reforming and reinforcing the judiciary by training judges
and civil servants in modern law, updating the legal framework and empowering law
enforcement. The PRSP envisages a reorganized public sector to increase i t s efficiency
and transparency through: (i)
eliminating overlapping functions between agencies;
(ii)
decentralizing and strengthening local government structures; (iii)
with-drawing from
productive activities; and (iv) reforming the civil service to enhance the provision o f
public services.

48.
On budgetary procedures, capacity i s being strengthened in order to improve
public expenditure management, with more a priori and posteriori checks. With the
support o f the IMF, World Bank and others, the Government is moving ahead with
reforms to improve procurement, inventory and accounting practices o f government
assets, receipts and expenses. In this regard, the Government will shortly begin the
implementation of an integrated budgetary and treasury information system. Another key
action i s the strengthening o f the internal and external audit o f government agencies by
empowering the Auditor General’s Office. The accounting tribunal started i t s activities
in July 2003. In tax administration and collection, better cooperation and an information
sharing system among different directorates and authorities have led to improvements in
taxpayer registration and tax collections. Efforts continue to reorient public expenditure
toward the education and health sectors in the context o f the PRSP, and the authorities
continue to ensure that all government financial operations, including PRSP-related
spending, are within a single budget framework. The Government i s reforming the
programming and implementation process o f the PRSP by creating a PRSP unit within
the Ministry o f Planning and Finance. Notwithstanding this progress, the overall budget
framework needs to be further strengthened, and the capacity o f key ministries to
formulate programs and their associated budgets needs to be improved. Budget
execution i s not well coordinated, with numerous steps involved in expenditure approval,
while control remains weak.

- 15-

49.
I n April 2004, an update of the HIPC-AAP revealed that while some progress
has been made, much more work remains to be done. O n the positive side, the budget
formulation i s exhaustive; unified under one budgetary system, with l i t t l e reliance to
extra-budgetary processes; and captures approximately 90 percent o f external support.
Internal arrears are usually cleared within a few weeks. Regular internal reporting o f
budget execution and debt follow up i s adequate and the yearly books are closed within
two months o f the end o f the fiscal year. As regards work to be done, the HPC-AAP
suggests that the budget needs to be updated to the modern nomenclature system and
adapt a multi-year approach. Also budget execution is weak: in 2002, i t was 23.2 percent
of budget programmed. Execution i s not well coordinated among ministries, with
numerous steps involved in expenditure approval, weak accounting practices (no double
entry accounting), and weak a priori and posteriori controls. External reporting o f budget
execution to the National Assembly is s t i l l unavailable and poverty reduction
expenditures are not yet identifiable.
50.
Overall, despite some progress, the implementation of the reform program
has been slow paced in some areas while uneven in others due to political instability,
lack o f political will and l o w institutional capacity. Reforms in all areas were slowed by
the drawn-out political in-fighting, six reshuffles or changes in governments between
September 2001 and September 2004 and the consequent general uncertainty.

K.

Productive Sectors

51.
Agriculture represented 19 percent of GDP in 2003 with cocoa production as
the main economic activity. Production o f cocoa has been increasing since 2000 as
international cocoa prices have risen. The positive price trend has reversed somewhat the
decline in the cocoa sector which hampered the economy in the 1990s. The
Government’s program in rural development concentrates on diversifying agriculture
towards other crops and promoting export linkages. Reduction o f the food import bill i s
also a priority for the Government, since most food needs, except cereals, could be
supplied locally. A major land reform program has been underway since 1993, with
support in the early years from the World Bank. Its objective i s to distribute land from
former state plantations to small-scale farmers in an attempt to increase and diversify
agricultural production and increase equity. However, smallholder farmers have been
constrained by a lack o f credit, extension services and training and by poor access to
markets as a result o f inadequate road transport. Fishing licenses have become the
country’s largest source o f foreign exchange after cocoa. A three-year fishing agreement
was signed with the EU in January 2002 for about US$2.5 million.
52.
Increasing labor productivity and diversifying income-generating activities,
especially in rural areas, i s critical for reducing poverty. The Government’s strategy
emphasizes needed improvements in basic roads and marketing infrastructure for
agricultural products and extension services, the development o f downstream agroindustrial activities as well as tourism and fishing networks in the archipelago. These
actions are not well costed or prioritized in the PRSP so that their impact on growth and
poverty could be assessed.

- 16-

53.
Industry accounts for 18 percent of GDP but the manufacturing sector i s
limited to some small factories involved in the agro-industrial sector and other light
industrial activities. Privatization o f state companies has slowly proceeded with the
telecoms company, the state airline and the national fuel company having private capital
investment. There is s t i l l a lot to do to create the financial, administrative, institutional
and infrastructure conditions necessary to support growth in private sector production.
Services - predominantly public administration, tourism and commerce 54.
contribute the remaining 63 percent o f GDP. The tourism potential l i e s in the islands’
great natural beauty, unspoiled beaches, endemic bird species and old plantation houses.
However, tourists are deterred by the islands’ isolation, high malaria rates and poor air
access with high air fares. The Government i s trying to promote eco-tourism and some
investment has flowed in. Foreign exchange earnings from tourism have increased from
US$4.1 million in 1998 to an estimated US$15.8 million in 2004.
Box 4: Gender Issues in Sao Tome and Principe
In June 2004, the Government and the Bank finalized a Country Gender Assessment for STP (Report No. 29300STP). T h i s report highlighted that STP has a distinctive gender profile characterized by a dichotomy between the
officially-accepted gender equality laws and policies and the actual gender-associated socio-economic status. While
gender equality i s emphasized in the constitution and in the legal framework, actual practice i s often contradictory.

A high proportion of households are headed b y women who are mostly either single or living in “free union”. These
women are four times more likely as men to be illiterate. O n the whole, female-headed households tend to be larger,
poorer and with lower per capita consumption than male-headed households. Women’s participation in decision
making at the local levels i s marginal and cultural attitudes relegate women to more traditional roles. Women are
confined to a limited set o f economic activities - usually a form o f self-employment in the informal sector - and they
have limited access to productive resources. Women constitute the largest segment o f the economically inactive
population. Among those who are economically active, women are twice as likely as men to be unemployed;
specifically a quarter o f women in the labor force are unemployed compared to ten percent for men. Employed
women tend to be concentrated in the informal sector, mainly in commerce and services, while men are likely to be
employed as public or private sector salaried workers. There i s increasing evidence to indicate that domestic violence
rates against women and children are high.
O n the positive side, however, several women occupy high-level decision-making positions at the national level, there
does not appear to be any gender gaps in access to education and health and there is an official discourse that
espouses gender equality. Enrollment rates for boys and girls are equal at the primary and secondary levels but a
larger proportion of girls than boys drops out. While there are gaps in literacy rates between men and women in older
age groups, the gap is rapidly closing in younger generations. In terms o f power and decision making, women had, or
continue to have, a significant share at the highest levels o f Government. The previous Prime Minister was a woman,
the current Govemor o f the Central Bank i s a woman, women have headed the Ministries o f Planning and Finance,
Health, Foreign Affairs, Education, Culture and Justice, and women hold some senior presidential advisory positions.
Despite this good representation at the highest political level, the share o f women in the political process and
decision-making is very limited at the lower levels. Hence, while there i s a clear commitment towards gender
equality at the higher levels o f Government, more effort i s needed to expand opportunities for women’s participation
at other levels.
As part o f the preparation o f the Country Gender Assessment, a national workshop was held in January 2004 in STP
to discuss gender issues. The main recommendations were to: (i)
adopt an integrated national approach to gender
issues by developing a body o f gender-sensitive policies that would provide for access to information, awarenessraising and legislative reform; (ii)strengthen institutional capacity to integrate gender issues into development
programs and policies; (iii)establish advocacy, social mobilization, information, education and communication
programs on gender and development issues; and (iv) update existing legislation and adopt new legislation that i s
more gender-equitable. The Bank i s supporting some o f these recommendations through the IDF for Justice Capacity
Building as well as the Governance Capacity Building TA Project. T h e UNDP, ADB and the Portuguese and
Taiwanese bilateral aid programs also support gender issues.

- 17-

111. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Implementation of the last CAS

A.

55.
The previous CAS for STP was discussed by the Board in November 2000
and covered the FYO1-05 period. The CAS followed the finalization o f the Interim
PRSP (April 2000) and was closely aligned to the priorities outlined therein. The main
objectives o f the CAS were aimed at: (i)sustaining strong economic growth to raise
incomes and reduce poverty; and (ii)
broadening access to social services and improving
their quality. Given the small IDA envelope available to STP, the CAS placed emphasis
on a multi-sectoral approach within new lending. W h i l e no additional, formal economic
and sector work (ESW) was envisaged during the CAS, in actuality several studies were
undertaken to complement the Bank’s lending interventians, support the finalization o f
the PRSP, and assist the Government in qualifying for the Enhanced HIPC Initiative, as
shown in B o x 5 below.
Box 5: Non-Lending Activities Carried Out During the Previous CAS
Policv dialogue and AAA:
0
Assistance for qualifying for the Enhanced HIPC Decision Point and moving towards
achieving the Completion Point.
0
Support in finalizing the PRSP
0
On-going dialogue, in collaboration with the IMF, on macroeconomic management
0
Support to the development o f the petroleum revenue management law.
0
Dialogue and TA on policy reform in the telecommunications sector.

ESW:
0
0
0

0

Other:
0

0

0

0

Country Economic Memorandum (FY04)
Country Gender Assessment (FY04)
Poverty Diagnostic (FY05)
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) (on-going)
IDF for Capacity Building in the Justice Sector
PHRD financing for specific social sector studies (Study on the Situation o f Orphans and
Vulnerable Children, Institutional Assessment o f the Social Sectors, Analysis o f M&E in the
Social Sectors)
GEF grant for analyzing the vulnerability o f STP to the effects o f global wanning (the
$200,000 grant was recently approved in December 2004 and activities are being launched)
Belgian Trust Fund for poverty analytical work.

56.
As the CAS Completion Report in Annex 11 describes, the Bank rebuilt both
its knowledge base of STP and its relationship with the Government and other
development actors during the CAS period. The Bank actively pursued the policy
dialogue in the context o f PRSP preparation and HIPC relief, implemented and prepared
new operations, and focused E S W to support areas o f engagement. The Bank had limited

-18-

engagement with the country in the period immediately preceding the CAS and thus the CAS

suffered from a poor analytical and knowledge base and could be considered as a
relatively “light” strategy. Nevertheless, the actual implementation o f the CAS was
robust and the Bank’s program was increasingly broadened as the dialogue deepened
with Government.

57.
As regards lending operations, the CAS outlined that activities would remain
limited to the existing portfolio o f two projects and two new projects - the Public
Resource Management Credit (PRMC) and a supporting Public Resource Management
Technical Assistance Project (PRM-TA), which were both approved at the time o f the
CAS discussion. However, the CAS did make provision for possible further lending in
the context o f the future PRSP and indicated that such lending would be targeted to the
social sectors and capacity building for petroleum policy and management. Performance
by STP during the CAS period was considered sufficiently satisfactory to allow for
approval o f two hrther projects - the Social Sector Support Project and the Governance
Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project.

I

Box 6: Bank Lending Program For the FY01-05 CAS Period

Projects approved at same time
as CAS

Projects approved during CAS
period

Agricultural Privatization and
Smallholder Development Project
(US$9.8 million, FY92)

Public Resource Management
Credit
(US$7.5 million, FYO1)

Social Sector Support Project
(US$6.5 million, FY04)

(US$l 1.4 million, FY92)

Public Resource Management
Technical Assistance Project
(US$2.5 million, FYO1)

Governance Capacity Building
Technical Assistance Project
(US$5 million, FY05)

Projects already active at time
of CAS discussion

58.
The two projects which were active at the time of the CAS - the Agricultural
Privatization and Smallholder Development Project (US$9.8 million, FY92) and the
Health and Education Project (US$11.4 million, FY92) - were both closed in 2001. In
the case o f the Agricultural project, the ICR and OED rated the project’s outcome, Bank
performance and Borrower performance as Unsatisfactory. This investment project had
been approved in FY92 and was not appropriately tailored for the country context. As
acknowledged in the ICR, the project’s design was unrealistic, the reform program was
overly complex for local institutional capacity to handle, the planned implementation
timeframe was too ambitious, and the supporting activities were too dependent on
parallel financing o f other donors that had not yet been negotiated. The project also
failed to incorporate lessons learned from earlier projects, particularly regarding the need
to clarify and focus training activities appropriately. Project supervision did not take a
holistic approach, suffered from inadequate composition and timing, and was undermined
by high turnover o f task managers (five in eight years).

- 19-

I

’

59.
In the case of the Health and Education Project, the ICR rated the project’s
outcome, Bank performance and Borrower performance as Satisfactory but OED
rated each of these as Unsatisfactory. The analysis o f the project was that i t was poorly
designed, overly complex, and did not take capacity constraints sufficiently into account.
Similar to the Agriculture Project, the Health and Education Project was approved in
FY92. The project suffered from the frequent changes in government and reliance on
third party funding for implementation. In addition, supervision was deemed inadequate,
with missions lacking the specialists needed to cover the range o f activities included.
During the period covered by the CAS, the Bank implemented fully the PRMC
60.
(which closed in June 2004) and the PRM-TA (which closed in December 2004).

61.
The PRMC was designed as a quick-disbursing operation to fill the financing
gap for the period 2000-01, and also provided support to the implementation of
economic reforms. The project supported economic reforms with the following
objectives: (i)
improve domestic resource mobilization; (ii)
strengthen public expenditure
management; and (iii)
continue implementation o f the public enterprise reform program.
The PRMC was implemented in line with the IMF’s Staff Monitored Program and aimed
to help protect social sector expenditures. The I C R for the P R M C reflects a mixed record
o f success. The project’s outcome was rated unsatisfactory, its sustainability likely, its
institutional development modest, and Bank and borrower performance unsatisfactory
(OED agreed with these ratings). The I C R highlights that the P R M C was wide ranging
and overly ambitious. The fast-disbursing nature o f the operation over only two years
was too quick for the scope o f reforms proposed. While the Government progressed on
tranche release conditions, other reform measures fell by the wayside (e.g., rural land title
registration and some private sector development activities were never launched,
extension services and the micro-credit system were weak or inconsistent). Successes
under the PRMC included progress on domestic resource mobilization and management,
with the implementation o f tax and tariff reform measures and the protection o f health
and education expenditures; the Government also made efforts at privatizing public
enterprises and introducing more transparency and govemance into i t s activities. Some
o f the weaknesses in the project’s performance can be ascribed to elections and political
instability.
62.
The PRM-TA was designed in part to support measures implemented under
the Government’s reform program supported by the PRMC. However, i t also
supported the elaboration o f some o f the sectoral strategies and the preparation o f the
PRSP. It helped build institutional capacity in financial and budgetary management,
judiciary, o i l and statistics. I t focused part o f i t s support to some nascent o i l sector
successfully financing intemational experts to help the Government
activities through: (i)
negotiate four o i l contracts and launch and analyze the first round o f bids for the Joint
Development Zone; (ii)supporting the creation o f the National Petroleum Agency
(”PA); and (iii)providing technical assistance to the Government in finalizing the
petroleum revenue management law. The PRM-TA benefited from strong government
ownership and active Bank supervision. The I C R for the PRM-TA is not yet finalized,
however i t i s expected to reflect the generally positive experience in implementation.

- 20 -

63.
The Governance Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project ($5 million)
was approved in October 2004 and builds on the experience and lessons learnt o f the
P R M C and PRM-TA. I s main objectives are to: (i)
help facilitate the implementation of
the PRSP through capacity building and management support; (ii)strengthen public
provide critical
expenditure management and the implementation o f reforms; and (iii)
technical assistance and capacity building in the o i l sector. More specifically, the project
aims to improve the impact of better budget and economic management on economic
growth, development and poverty reduction through modernizing and building up
capacity in economic (financial and budgetary) management and supervision, and
through strengthening basic institutional and legal infrastructure in the Ministries o f
Planning and Finance and o f Natural Resources and Environment (which includes
petroleum). The project i s in line with objectives outlined in the country’s PRSP and
responds to the more complex economic and social environment arising from the onset o f
the o i l era. I t targets the following o i l sector interventions: (i)
strengthening o f the NPA;
(ii)strengthening o f the legal framework including sector-related environmental issues;
(iii)
helping the Government prepare a sound petroleum sector strategy and promote the
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) o f the country; (iv) establishing a functional
information system that is transparent; and (v) undertaking studies and seminars for
sector development and j o b creation. The project includes a detailed results framework,
with concrete indicatordtargets to track the Government’s progress in implementation.
W h i l e i t remains to be seen to what extent the project achieves i t s development
objectives, it i s o f f to a strong start under intense supervision and strong government
ownership.
64.
The Social Sector Support Project ($6.5 million, of which $1.5 million i s IDA
grant) was approved in May 2004. I t s development objective i s to contribute to
improving the delivery o f basic health and education services with a focus on greater and
more equitable access, better quality and improved local governance. The project focuses
on supportin the country in achieving the M D G s (it contributes directly to six out o f the
eight MDGs ), and supports the implementation o f the PRSP and the national social
sector strategies. The project was a key element o f the Bank’s 2000 FYO1-05 CAS as it
contributes to the CAS goal o f broadening access to social services and improving their
quality. The project deals to some extent with a re-definition o f the role o f Government
as it involves NGOs and civil society in project implementation. Three social sector
studies, financed by a PHRD grant, and the 2004 Gender Assessment, were used to
inform the design o f the Social Sector Support Project, which incorporated the studies’
recommendations. The project’s specific HIV/AIDS component will aim to improve the
statistical information base on HIV prevalence rates and ensure greater knowledge about
prevention techniques among the population.

7,

65.
I n FY05, the Bank approved an IDF for Capacity Building in the Justice
Sector (US$314,958) which is an important element o f the Bank’s program, although it
was not planned at the time o f the CAS. This IDF was developed in response to a request
from the Minister o f Justice and the Prosecutor General’s Office for the Bank’s support to
Namely: Goal #2 Achieve universal primary education; Goal #3 Promote gender equality and empower women; Goal #4
Reduce child mortality; Goal #5 Improve matemal health; Goal #7 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases; and
Goal #8 Develop global partnershipsfor development.

-21 -

pursue a strategic program o f reform and capacity building for the justice sector. The
PRSP identifies judicial and institutional reform as a key determinant for economic
development and poverty reduction. The justice sector faces many constraints: (i)
i t lacks
judges and prosecutors are
the resources and tools to ensure the full rule o f law; (ii)
poorly equipped to ensure a stable legal and judicial framework; and (iii)
with only 80
staff total, the judiciary is severely short o f capacity. As part o f IDF preparation, a
variety o f stakeholders in the sector prepared their own proposals for urgently needed
judicial and institutional reforms and capacity building activities. The IDF responds to
building
the critical issues in each o f these proposals, focusing in particular on: (i)
capacity for strategic planning; (ii)
better coordinating reforms; and (iii)
leveraging the
country’s resources to create a consensus for those reforms.

B.

Other World Bank Group Activities

66.
STP i s not a member of IFC or MIGA. The Government has been encouraged
to j o i n both institutions in order to benefit from their investment services, but i t has been
A MIGA
unable to come up with the required capital subscription amount.
representation visited the country in the spring o f 2004 to discuss possible membership
with the Government. FIAS has helped the country review the fiscal and investment
codes. It is expected that the future o i l era will usher in a new relationship between STP
and the IFC.
67.
Representatives from STP benefited from WBI trainings in PRSP preparation
and implementation, social sector capacity building and other areas o f WE31 trainings and
knowledge services. More recently, STP is becoming more active in attending
Lusophone training events (such as infrastructure regulation training in Cape Verde).

C.

Lessons Learnt

68.
OED evaluated all 8 of the Bank’s projects since 1980 and concluded that
half of them had Unsatisfactory ratings. The conclusions reached were that the Bank’s
projects were typically too complex to implement and did not address capacity issues
sufficiently. In particular, there was weak capacity in project management and in key
fiduciary control areas such as procurement.
69.

The lessons learned from the CAS implementation are the following12;

(i)

national ownership o f the reforms and related capacity building process i s
necessary for successful implementation and sustainable impact o f
proj ects/programs;

CAS Completion Report in Annex 11 provides more details o n the implementation o f the last C A S and the lessons
leamt.

l2 The

- 22 -

operations should take into account STP’s limited, weak institutional and
human resources capacity. Therefore, there is a need to keep the project
simple, clear and focused in design, implementation (components and
indicators) and follow-up (supervision);
with respect to capacity building support, activities should be delivered in
conjunction with project/programs, and should be part o f a detailed action
plan attached to the Government’s policy agenda;
implementation arrangements and monitoring and evaluation activities
should be simple but robust, including appropriate capacity building (e.g.,
training, technical assistance) as necessary;
a multi-sector approach to project lending i s more efficient in a small
country setting, but p r o g r d p r o j e c t objectives should be focused on a
limited number o f priorities in each sector, within the capacity o f properly
trained implementers;
flexibility should be built into project/program design, to allow for
adaptation to evolving needs on the ground during implementation
non-governmental stakeholder participation should be more systematically
incorporated in the planning and implementation o f activities;
the collaboration o f the Bank with the IMF had a positive impact o n the
outcome o f the PRMC and PRM-TA projects; and
enhanced donor collaboration and coordination i s critical to improving the
efficiency, efficacy, and impact o f external assistance.

70.
A key conclusion from the experience in STP under the CAS and previous
operations i s that project support may not be the most effective instrument to
deliver Bank financing to assist the country in meeting its development challenges.
Development policy operations (Le,, budget support) - coupled with appropriate capacity
building activities, technical assistance, analysis, and policy dialogue - should be
considered as a potentially more effective and efficient way o f delivering the Bank’s
assistance. The critical issue i s to ensure that there is appropriate design and timing o f
such operations and that they build on the lessons learnt from the quick-disbursing
experience o f the PRMC. Development policy operations also provide more leverage to
the small amount o f IDA resources available to STP.

D.

Assistance Strategy

71.
The CAS builds on the experience and lessons learned from the
implementation of the mol-05 CAS and sets out a strategy that consolidates and
deepens those activities already undertaken. The two principal objectives o f the Bank’s
strategy are:

(i)

to support the implementation o f the PRSP and strengthen the areas where
the PRSP needs to be improved, as highlighted in the JSAN.

- 23 -

(ii) to provide assistance to STP to ensure that it i s sufficiently prepared to
maximize the benefits o f fbture o i l revenues.
72.
The strategy draws from the wider base o f ESW and AAA that has been
conducted since the last CAS (the CEM, Poverty Diagnostic, Gender Assessment and
draft DTIS). I t focuses on just a few selected areas o f intervention to maximize the
Bank’s impact and to ensure complementarity with other development partner^'^. This
selectivity is dictated by the limited IDA financial envelope which i s available for STP
and by the Bank’s internal administrative constraints which allow for only a relatively
small number o f non-lending activities to be conducted in a country o f STP’s size14.
Box 7: Participatory CAS Process
As noted previously, the CAS i s specifically linked to the PRSP and i s “the Bank’s implementation arm” o f the
PRSP: in this regard, it benefits from the participatory process of the PRSP. The CAS team conducted
preliminary discussions with the Government in December 2004 about the possible strategic direction of the CAS
and the overall lending envelope that could be expected.

The CAS team visited Sao Tome in early April 2005 to carry out consultations with Government officials, their
advisors and staff, as well as with representatives of labor unions, members of the National Assembly, the
Federation of NGOs (FONG), representatives from the Chamber of Commerce and representatives o f donors and
international agencies (UNDP, WHO, UNICEF, European Commission, Embassies of Portugal and Brazil). The
team coordinated very closely with a mission from the African Development Bank (AfDB) which was in Sao
Tome at the same time to discuss their organization’s draft assistance strategy for 2005-2009. The team held
fruitful and frank exchanges with all these actors which allowed for a better understanding of the development
challenges facing Sao Tome and Principe as well as the role o f the World Bank in the country.
There was general agreement that the World Bank’s focus on building institutional and human resource capacity
i s critically important. Stakeholders also agreed that the Bank should continue to focus on the sectors where it i s
already active although there were demands for broadening the Bank’s financial assistance to cover non-oil
productive sectors. The CAS team emphasized that the proposed budget support operations could assist in
carrying out needed reforms and interventions in productive sectors but that traditional investment projects in this
regard would not be possible due to the limited financing envelope available. Moreover, the Bank would continue
to target its analytical support and policy dialogue on addressing the constraints facing the productive sector
through identifying necessary reforms for trade facilitation, private sector development and economic
diversification. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the Country Economic Memorandum, as
well as follow-up on the analysis of the on-going Diagnostic Trade Integration Study, will be especially critical in
this regard. In particular, there was a strong demand for the Bank and other donors to help with more training and
more capacity building specifically targeted at income-generating activities to permit a wider set o f employment
options for the population. The CAS team emphasized the goal o f the Bank to enhance its cooperation with other
donors which are active in these sectors.
As the Bank program does not bring significant IDA resources to the country, the CAS consultations resulted in a
greater degree of understandingand ownership of both the lending and non-lending support which the Bank can
provide to STP. Even after oil revenues come on stream, the Government has indicated that it i s interested in
having the Bank play an advisory role in regard to helping the country successfullymanage its oil revenue.

73.
Above all, the strategy remains tightly focused, building upon on-going
activities and enhancing and deepening the strategy laid out in the previous CAS. In this
regard, the Bank’s support will be two-fold:
l3 Annex
l4

10 provides details o f the sectoral focus o f donors’ programs in STF’.
The Results Framework in Annex 1 outlines a few key results to which the Bank’s program i s aiming to contribute.

- 24 -

(9

continue the implementation o f on-going activities, especially with respect
to social sector service delivery, capacity-building in public finance
management, institutional support to managing the o i l sector, and followup on recommendations o f the Bank’s ESW and AAA. In FY06, possible
additional financing could be considered for the two on-going operations
for specific capacity building activities not originally covered by the
projects but focused on related aspects o f PRSP implementation; and

(ii) move gradually to providing a series o f Development Policy Operations
(budget support) starting in FY07, with the objective o f strengthening
implementation o f the PRSP and maximizing IDA’S impact. Such
operations would be undertaken in close collaboration with other donors
interested in providing budget support. In the period leading up to this,
the Bank would work closely with the Government to prepare the
country’s fiduciary framework and institutional capacity for the
management and implementation o f budget support.

Box 8: SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES OF THE BANK’S PROGRAM
On-Going Activities

Proposed New Activities

On-going policy dialogue on macroeconomic issues,
in collaboration with the IMF

Development Policy Operations

Sustained support to the implementation o f the
Social Sector Support Project and the Governance
Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project

Additional financing to the Social Sector Support
Project and/or the Governance Capacity Building
Technical Assistance Project

Continued assistance to STP to achieve the HIPC
Completion Point

Enhanced AAA support for preparing
groundwork for the move to budgetary support

Support to the implementation o f the Petroleum
Revenue Management Law

Launch an Integrated Fiduciary Assessment in
FY06, to be completed in FY07, which w i l l cover
aspects o f a PER, C F A A and CPAR”

Finalization o f on-going ESW work (DTIS) and
follow-up on recommendations o f other ESW
reports (CEM, Poverty Diagnostic and Country
Gender Assessment)

Further analysis o f poverty and support to the
government to conduct two surveys aimed at
improving the present household and expenditure
data

Implementation o f the IDF grant for Capacity
Building in the Justice Sector

N e w IDF andor Trust Fund financing for support to
critical aspects o f PRSP implementation

GEF grant for developing Global Warming and
Climate Change program

Pursuit o f further GEF financing for implementation
o f priority actions o f the climate change program

The Bank and IMF w i l l continue to work together
with the Government on the HIPC-AAP16.

Consideration o f other ESW and AAA with othex
development partners, i.e. support to census

Is The
l6

the

Bank budget for the country i s insufficient to cover individual core diagnostic reports in each of these areas.
T h e analysis and recommendations of the HIPC-AAP for STP have fed into the design of the Governance Capacity
Building project as the project has a specific indicator linked to improvements in the HIPC-AAP scores.

- 25 -

74.
An over-riding theme of the strategy i s that the Bank will assist the
Government to “scale-up” for the future era when it will have high levels of its own
resources from oil (as previously mentioned in footnote 3, STP i s expected to remain an
IDA borrower for the CAS period). As part o f this transition, the strategy proposes to
provide financial support through Development Policy operations in support o f PRSP
implementation, with a view to preparing the ground for managing future o i l revenues
into the budget. This Development Policy Lending (DPL) would deliver a form o f
annually-negotiated budget support to the implementation o f the PRSP, starting in FY07.
This would not be a multi-year rolling commitment that i s usually associated with the
Bank’s PRSCs since the macro track record isn’t yet sufficient to justify a medium-term
commitment. Rather, it would be a form o f annually-reviewed financing that i s delivered
to support the PRSP program. This would represent a true new strategic direction for the
Bank program which would be triggered by sound macroeconomic management and
progress in public finance and o i l management.
DPLs are justified as an effective way to deliver necessary financial support
75.
to the PRSP. Given the small export base o f STP with a concentration on cocoa receipts
and the uncertainty related to o i l prospects, the economy i s highly vulnerable to
exogenous shocks. Even after STP reaches HIPC Completion Point, the country will
likely face a significant financing gap until o i l revenues become available, during which
time the Bank will continue to be an important partner. Although the share o f STP in the
signature bonus for the first block i s in the order o f US$49 million, the actual amount
available to the 2005 budget i s only $13 million (see footnote 8). Moreover, the amount
o f funds available from other o i l bonus signatures i s s t i l l uncertain, as well as the timing
o f the availability o f the funds. I t is, therefore, important that the Bank consider
providing some form o f quick disbursing fimding that will allow for timely support to the
implementation o f the PRSP and will strengthen the overall budgetary framework as
preparation for the arrival o f o i l revenues.

76.
The DPLs would likely be delivered in FY07 as the current framework in
STP i s not conducive for providing immediate budgetary support for the following
there i s a need to strengthen the overall strategy outlined in the PRSP,
main reasons: (i)
particularly to prepare annual priority action programs; (ii)
a medium-term program for
strengthening the fiduciary framework i s not yet elaborated to ensure transparency and
financial safeguards required for this form o f financing; and (iii)
there i s a need to
identify a clear set o f monitorable indicators around which future budgetary support
operations could be aligned. Therefore, a core element o f the Bank’s work for the
coming 12-18 months will be to help STP prepare the necessary framework for receiving
budget support from the Bank and other donors. In the immediate future, i t will be
necessary to work closely with the Government and other development actors in STP to
outline an annual priority action program for the PRSP and identify a set o f monitorable
indicators against which budgetary support could be aligned. This work would be carried
out as part o f the overall support to strengthening the PRSP and progress made on this
front could be assessed as part o f preparing the Annual PRSP Progress Report (expected
in April 2006).

- 26 -

77.
I n addition to support for PRSP strengthening, the Bank will provide
analytic support and technical assistance to the Government for outlining a
medium-term program for strengthening the fiduciary framework. An Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment will be launched in FY06 for delivery in early FY07. Areas o f
concem for this assessment will be the following: (i)the budget elaboration process,
specifically using h l l y implemented budget nomenclature and functional classification
the public accounting system based on a simple but
based on intemational standards; (ii)
efficient computerized network; (iii)budget execution reporting produced on a regular
basis; and (iv) intemal and external controls, particularly for ex-post control o f the
Supreme Audit Court. The Bank will work closely with Governrnent on implementing
the recommendations o f this assessment in parallel with on-going work on the HIPCAAP and other relevant analyses. The timing o f delivery o f financing in the form o f
DPLs will be linked to progress on this front.
78.
While it i s too early to confirm what exact reform measures the DPLs would
support, it i s likely that they will be linked to the sequential implementation o f the
underlying reforms for managing the h t u r e o i l inflows and to other critical issues such as
the investment climate and growth-related issues, drawing o n the recommendations o f the
C E M and the DTIS. The DPLs will draw from the lessons leamt o f the PRMC, be
designed to complement the Govemance Capacity Building project, will be closely linked
to the PRSP Annual Progress Reports and will be prepared in close collaboration with
other donors (notably the African Development Bank and the EC). It i s hoped that the
DPLs would contribute to meeting the expectations o f the population during the transition
period to an o i l economy.
79.
I n the nearer-term, i.e. in FY06, the Bank will consider delivering additional
financing to the on-going Social Sectors andor Govemance Capacity Building projects.
This financing would be relatively small - no more than US$1.5 million - and would
support a broader range o f capacity building and institutional support interventions,
linked to critical aspects o f PRSP implementation.
80.
The IDA-14 framework indicates an allocation o f US$5.5 million for STP for
FYO6-08 (Base Case). I t also indicates that STP i s eligible to receive all of its FY06
IDA allocation on grant terms”. This allocation i s indicative only and i s subject to
performance by the country’*. Should STP perform well on overall economic and
public sector management as assessed in an improved CPIA rating, as well as achieve
strong implementation o f IDA-financed projects, then i t s IDA allocation for FY06-08
could be increased up to US$7.5 million (High Case). Thereafter, for FY09 (which i s
also covered in this CAS), hrther IDA resources would be available as part o f the
following three-year IDA-15 envelope for FY09-11 and would be calculated based on the
assessment o f STP’s progress during FY06-08. W h i l e it i s not possible to determine
what the IDA-15 allocation would be at this time, good progress should allow STP to
benefit from an indicative IDA allocation o f $2 million per annum in a base case and $2.5

I*

Grant eligibility will b e reviewed annually.
As per the IDA-14 framework, actual amounts will depend o n the following: (i)
STF”s I D A performance rating; (ii)
STP’s
performance relative to the performance o f other IDA recipients; (iii)
the amount o f overall resources available to IDA; and
(iv) the terms o f financial assistance provided (i.e. grants versus loans).

- 27 -

million in the high case if performance improves significantly. Therefore, the CAS
outlines a notional lending program in the range o f $5.5 million to $10 million over 4
years. The financial amounts o f the DPLs would be increased in line with the overall
increase o f the IDA envelope (see B o x 9). A CAS Progress Report will be undertaken at
the mid-point of the CAS implementation period (late FY07/early FY08) which will
review the financing scenarios and assess overall progress on PRSP implementation,
CPIA assessments and project performance.
Box 9: FY06-09 IDA Financial Assistance Program (in the form of IDA Grants)

I

IDA-14
FY06

FY07

IDA-15
FYO8

FY09

Base Case

Additional Financing to
On-Going Projects
$1.5 million

Development
Policy Lending-1
$2 million

Development
Policy Lending-2
$2 million

Development
Policy Lending-3
$2 million

High Case

Additional Financing to
On-Going Projects
$1.5 million

Development
Policy Lending-1
$3 million

Development
Policy Lending-2
$3 million

Development
Policy Lending-3
$2.5 million

The low-case scenario. In the event that the macro-economic framework would
8 1,
not be sufficient to support the move to DPLs, the Bank’s strategy would move to a lowcase one whereby the Bank would only provide additional financing to the two on-going
IDA-financed projects. The actual amounts to be provided would be determined by the
IDA allocation which naturally would be lower reflecting the weaker performance.

82.
As part of the Bank’s non-lending work, on-going activities will be continued
and further ESW, IDF and/or Trust Fund financing for support to critical aspects
of PRSP implementation will be explored. The DTIS i s expected to b e completed by
the end o f FY05 so the Bank will focus on following-up on i t s recommendations, as well
as following-up on the recommendations o f the CEM. The Bank also plans to stay
engaged with Technical Assistance in the telecommunications sector. The Bank i s also
considering, together with the UNDP and UNFPA, support to a national census for
analyzing the impact o f uncontrolled immigration and the rapidly growing population.
Initial analysis o f immigration dynamics in STP shows that it is increasingly quickly,
particularly from neighboring Nigeria. Population statistics for STP are sketchy with
some extrapolations concluding that the population i s closer to 180,000 than 150,000. A
census would moreover be important and timely to determine who i s Sao Tomean and
thus who i s entitled to social services, particularly for the future once o i l revenues arrive
and are channeled into improving social service delivery.

E.

Country Financing Parameters

83.
The country financing parameters for STP have been prepared and agreed
upon with the Government (see Annex 10). As previously mentioned in this CAS,

- 28 -

domestic resources are currently limited and the Government’s budget i s highly
dependent o n foreign fbnds. Nevertheless, with respect to cost sharing agreements, as a
s i g n o f the Government’s commitment to i t s development program (as set out in i t s
PRSP), the Government and Bank agreed that a minimum Borrower cost sharing o f 10
percent-which has been the norm for past Bank projects in STP-would be maintained.
Decisions regarding the actual cost-sharing percentage under individual projects would
be made on a case-by-case basis. These cost sharing parameters will also apply to IDF
grants and recipient-executed trust funds.
Box 10: Donor Coordination and International Assistance

STP has traditionally benefited from one of the largest amounts of aid per capita in the world - equivalent to
US166 per capita in 2002. According to the OECD, net official development assistance to STP reached a peak o f
US$84 million in 1995 but fell to about US25 million in 2002 due to the poor quality o f macroeconomic
management in the 1990s. The 2000 Round Table meeting led to pledges of assistance of US$49 million, o f which
US$35 million was disbursed. Given the prospects for increases in revenues from oil, the currently high levels of
grants from donors (compared to other low income countries), amounting to about 37 percent of GDP in 2001 and
27 percent o f GDP i s 2002, may not be available in the future to the same extent. Nevertheless, it i s critical for
STP to maintain donor support until the start of oil production.
Donors’ programs in STP are poorly coordinated by Government. This situation i s exacerbated by weak absorptive
and management capacity in the country. T h e Government aims to improve donor coordination through ensuring
that activities are all aligned to the PRSP and are harmonized to the extent possible (the Governance Capacity
Building project provides specific financial support to this aim). The Govemment has requestedthe Bank to play a
role in leveraging the assistance of other donors and provide policy and programmatic leadership in some areas,
notably the social sectors and the oil sector.
In order to mobilize better the donor community, the UNDP and the Bank have agreed to work closely together
with Govemment on organizing a Round Table meeting around the PRSP (the meeting i s tentatively scheduled for
Fall 2005). The PRSP provides an excellent opportunity for more donors to become active in STP and for existing
donors to increase their support around the comprehensive PRSP framework. Greater donor dialogue and
coordination will be necessary between now and the HIPC Completion Point (expected in April 2006).

The recognition by STP of Taiwan in May 1997 has resulted in significant aid flows and the Taiwan aid program i s
very visible in the country, financing road rehabilitation, hospitals and other infrastructure and supporting the
social sectors, particularly malaria control.
The impending o i l era has greatly increased western strategic interest in STP - particularly from the U S . T h e U S
military i s considering setting up a military base in Sao Tom6 and the US govemment i s funding feasibility studies
on the construction of a deep water port and the extension of the international airport’s only runway. USAID i s
preparing a proposal to address issues of governance and efficient use of the petroleum revenues: this assistance
will likely comprise technical advisors, specifically for the implementation o f a more efficient, performance driven
budgetary process.
Nigerian and Angolan interest in STP has also increased. Nigeria i s strongly positioning itself to be the main actor
in the country.

The Columbia University Advisory Project, led by Professor Jeffrey Sachs and funded by the Open Society
Institute, has an active program in support of STP and played a key role in the preparation of the petroleumrevenue
management law. The objective of its work i s to support STP to develop a new Consensus Plan of Action for
sustainable economic development, covering the period 2005-2010. The work has focused on informing and
facilitating discussion by suggesting a number of specific public investments and policy changes on the part o f the
Govemment, aiming to lay the foundation o f public services that are needed for a wide range of private sector
activity. T h e University of Columbia intends to concentrate its support on the development of the required
secondary laws and regulations for the Oversight Committee and the Public Registry and Information Office
considered in the petroleum revenue management Law. To this end the University of Columbia will be working
with the recently appointed Petroleum Committee of the National Assembly.

84.
Recurrent cost financing associated with Bank projects has traditionally
been extremely limited, making up only a small percentage o f project expenditures. For
instance, recurrent costs accounted for zero percent o f project expenditures in FYO1, 5.4
percent in FY04, and about eight percent during the first half o f FY05. This l o w level is
expected to be maintained in the near to medium term as a limited number o f on-going
investment projects, DPLs, technical assistance, and analytic and advisory activities
remain the mainstay of the Bank’s program in STP. In such an environment, recurrent
cost financing will continue to be determined mainly by project specific considerations.
In all cases, recurrent cost financing will be applied after consideration o f the sector and
project sustainability issues, including institutional arrangements to allow for greater
emphasis on sustainability through result-based monitoring and evaluation systems and
strengthening o f capacity at national and local level; and implied future budget outlays.
Particularly when the Bank moves toward the provision o f financial assistance in the
form o f DPLs, the Bank would closely monitor STP’s fiscal and debt position and the
implications o f recurrent cost financing, taking into account sustainability issues at the
sector and macroeconomic levels, including careful consideration o f budgetary outlays.
85.
Local costs, on average, were 60 percent o f project expenditures over FY9904 and 78 percent over FYO2-04. The Government’s own revenues are not sufficient to
meet total local cost financing needs, and the financing o f foreign expenditures alone by
the Bank would not enable the Bank to assist in the financing o f individual projects.
Government tax revenue in 2003 constituted approximately 20.5 percent o f GDP (or 41
percent o f total revenues and grants), non-tax revenues constituted an estimated 4.5
percent o f GDP (9 percent o f total revenues and grants), and grants constitute 49 percent
o f revenues (highlighting STP’s dependence on foreign assistance). The percentages o f
local and foreign expenditures financed by the Bank as set out in the Governance
Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project-i.e.,
100 percent financing o f foreign
and 95 percent financing o f local costs for goods and works; 98 percent financing o f
consultant services and audits; and 100 percent financing o f training and workshops-are
expected to represent the status quo o f Bank funding under individual projects.
STP’s taxes and duties are not considered unreasonable or discriminatory.
86.
As i s typical o f small island economies, trade taxes figure prominently in the economy,
constituting 5.6 percent o f GDP in 2003; consumption and other taxes constituted 8.8
percent o f GDP; and direct taxes (profits and income taxes) were 6 percent o f GDP. The
corporate tax structure i s 30 percent on taxable profits, with an additional 15 percent on
taxable profits above 12 billion dobras; in the context o f the fiscal law under
consideration by the National Assembly, this i s to be brought down to 25 percent.
Personal income tax i s a flat rate of 13 percent. There are three tariff bands (ie., 3, 10,
and lo), with some products, such as alcohol, cars, and gasoline, subject to surcharges.
Bank projects have to date been granted waivers from import taxes under the
intemationaWnited Nations rule. The consumption tax on imported and domestic goods
covers only a few major products (including some products that do not appear in Bankfinanced projects) and i s product specific: the tax rate on petroleum products ranges from
42 to149 percent; and o n motor vehicles from 10 to 35 percent. The consumption tax on
services i s 5 percent. The Bank may finance taxes and duties associated with project

-30-

expenditures, determining on a case-by-case basis whether they constitute an excessively
high share o f project costs.

IV. MANAGING R I S K S
87.
The main risk in the short-run comes from the potential mis-managementof
the influx of large amounts of money from the signature bonuses of the oil contracts.
As with many other countries which have experienced a huge windfall o f revenues from
oil, the risk is that these revenues will either be poorly spent or will be misdirected to
expenditures outside the budgetary framework. In this context, governance i s key and the
requisite “checks and balances” need to be in place to ensure that the population can
benefit. The successful preparation, adoption and implementation o f the Petroleum
Revenue Management Law mitigates this risk and presents a real opportunity for STP to
show that it can use i t s windfall wisely. The Bank’s Governance Capacity Building
Project has the objective o f strengthening governance to off-set this risk. Moreover,
while the bonus is substantial compared to GDP, the Government i s aware that the
amount and timing o f future bonuses cannot be dictated or relied upon and that it will s t i l l
need to show commitment to the petroleum revenue management law in order to continue
to benefit from donor resources.
88.
The revenues from the oil signature bonuses potentially add to the political
instability and increase social expectations. In other countries, o i l revenues have
generated social and distributional risks - such as increased conflict, exclusion o f rural
areas, elite capture - which could also occur in STP and could be exacerbated by the
country’s weak institutions. The Bank plans to assist the Government in mitigating this
r i s k through ensuring that the revenue management framework is respected, that the
signature bonuses are translated into transparent budgetary allocations and by continued
and concerted efforts to build institutional capacity and engage in dialogue/consultation
with Government and civil society. The Bank will assist the Government in being
transparent and open about its management o f the o i l economy through ensuring that
consultation and information dissemination are broadened and deepened at both the
central and local government levels. The PRSP consultations were a positive experience
and have created momentum within the country; the Government will be encouraged to
build on this in the future. The Bank i s also working closely with the Government and
other donors on the efficient implementation o f the IDA-financed Social Sectors Support
project to enhance the focus on the actual service delivery on the ground, thereby
reducing the potential for social instability.

89.
With respect to the implementation of the CAS, the main risks posed are the
Government’s willingness to pursue reforms in a sustainable and consistent manner
and i t s ability to maintain a stable macroeconomic environment and focus expenditures
o n the priority sectors. The Bank will work closely with the IMF and other development
partners in off-setting this risk through concerted financial and advisory support to ensure
that there i s follow-through on the reform program. The HIPC framework will also

- 31 -

facilitate dialogue and adherence to the reforms laid out therein. In the event that there
are set-backs to the reform efforts, the Bank’s program would drop to a l o w case one.
The Bank will continue to pursue a frank and open dialogue with the Government about
the importance o f reforms in order to increase investment and foreign aid. The CAS
Progress Report (planned for FY07) would provide the opportunity to re-orient the
strategy in response to such a situation.

90.
Even when Government commitment i s present, weak capacity poses a
significant risk to the successful implementation of the CAS. The Bank’s Governance
Capacity Building Project focuses on a set o f key reforms and measures that can
influence the performance o f the public sector and that can strengthen the implementation
o f the PRSP and o f the Bank’s support program. In the same way, the Social Sectors
Support project focuses on strengthening capacity both within Government and among
non-Government actors which are playing a role in service delivery. Furthermore, the
Bank’s Integrated Fiduciary Assessment i s focused on identifying the necessary reforms
and capacity building activities for managing fiduciary risks. The Bank also i s
coordinating with other donors who are providing institutional development and capacity
building support in this area.
91.
There i s also a risk posed by the Government’s willingness to work with the
Bank given that the Bank i s only able to bring low levels o f financial assistance. It i s
possible that the Government may not consider that the financial support under the CAS
i s sufficient for them to invest in pursuing a long-term dialogue and relationship with the
Bank. The Bank plans to offset this risk through ensuring greater understanding and
engagement with the Government and stakeholders on the CAS to ensure that the Bank’s
role i s widely seen as bringing to bear a variety o f other instruments o f assistance which
are non-financial - such as policy advice, ESW, AAA, support to PRSP implementation,
IDF and GEF grants, etc. - and that the Bank has the ability to leverage other donors’
assistance. Finally, STP has not yet reached Completion Point in the Enhanced HIPC
Initiative so there i s still an important window o f opportunity in the short-run for the
Bank to play a key role.
92.
Although STP has made some efforts to diversify its exports, it remains
extremely vulnerable to exogenous shocks, especially to fluctuations in i t s terms o f
trade and dependence o n the availability o f foreign aid. In particular, the impact o f the
current high o i l prices and a possible hrther decrease in the price o f cocoa present
significant risks. As with any economy that i s heavily concentrated in the production and
export o f a few goods and services, there will always be an element o f vulnerability to
negative world commodity price changes. To mitigate this risk it is vital to continue the
course o f prudent public sector finance management, strengthening capacity and
investing in human and institutional capital. Good govemance and an attractive
investment climate can help in diversifying the economy over the long run. The Bank’s
program as laid out in this CAS concentrates on these areas.

- 32 -

V.

CONCLUSION

93.
The World Bank remains committed to supporting the economic and social
development of STP. The key areas o f focus are to assist the country in implementing
its PRSP and achieving the HIPC Completion Point, ensure strong implementation o f the
on-going IDA-financed projects and follow-up o n the recommendations o f the Bank’s
analytical work. As regards future Bank activities, the focus i s on; (i)laying the
groundwork over the next 12-18 months for, thereafter, delivering the Bank’s financial
assistance in the form o f budgetary support; and (v) supporting the country to prepare for
the arrival o f o i l revenues and to strengthen the overall macroeconomic and public sector
context to ensure that it i s conducive for the proper and sustainable use o f future o i l
revenues. While this strategy i s challenging, it i s ultimately feasible so long as the Bank
and other development actors can sustain their involvement in STP and bring to bear
concerted financial and advisory support.
94.
Beyond this CAS period, it i s expected that STP could have sufficient
resources in-coming from oil revenues and may not require financial assistance
from IDA. The Bank is preparing for this era by strengthening its client orientation and
the role o f the Knowledge Bank with the goal o f remaining active in the country as
partners on fighting poverty.

- 33 -

0
+

I

In

m
I

d

I

M
E
0

Y

$

3

CAS Annex A 2 4

Sao Tome and Principe at a Glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Aflas method, US$ billions)

SBo Tom6
and
Principe

SubSaharan
Africa

LOW.
income

0.16
330
0.05

703
490
347

2,310
450
1,036

2.0

2.3
2.4

1.9
2.3

36
46
103

126
130
122

56
35
67
94
60

30
56
62
44
75
39
92
99
65

4/27/05

1
hvelopment diamond'

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 199743
Population 1%)
Labor force (56)

Most recent estlmate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below nationalpoverty line)- 2000 e
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% ofchildren under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
IlliteracyI%ofpopulation age 75+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of schwl-age population)
Male
Female

54
56
66
75
13

5NI
ier
XPlta

Gross
wary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

-

Sao Tome and Principe
Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERMTRENDS
1983

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentlGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savingsIGDP

0.05
16.6
20.6

0.05
35.3
22.1
-16.7

0.05
32.5
43.7
-17.5
6.0

0.06
36.1
42.1
-16.7
15.9

Current account baiancelGDP
Interest paymentsIGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt service paid/exports before debt relief
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debtlexports

-27.5
1.o
63.9

-54.4
2.1
440.6

-53.9
5.0

-54.4

60.6
1,154.0
575.4

56.0
1,301.6

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

200347

17
-1.1
6.9

2.6
0.3
6.9

4.1
2.1
7.0

4.0
2.0
7.0

5.0
2.7
7.0

1983

1993

2002

2003

27.6
17.9

28.9
19.7

18.0
15.5

17.0
14.6

54.5

6.5
51.4

4.6
66.5

77.1
36.3

97.1
34.5

112.5
37.2

109.4
39.6

2o02

2003

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
~

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
ManufaCtUnng
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment

..

198343

5.1
0.9
0.6
0.2
23.3
-14.5
0.4

3.1
2.5
2.0
2.3
-10.6
6.2
3.7

Economlc ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Indebtedness
Sao Tome and Principe

1I , '
3.1
4.3
3.0
4.7

Investment

6:;

3.2
4.3
3.0
5.4

1

Growth of Investment and GDP ('A)

I

0

-501

-GDI

-GDP

Growth of exports and Imports ('A)
4o

20

O
-20

-7.4

- 38 -

..

22.6

-40

-Exports

+Imports

CAS Annex A2-2
Sa0 Tome and Principe
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1983

1993

2002

2003

25.5
39.0

9.2
10.8

9.6
9.5

18.0

29.7
-4.3
-17.8

33.4
-11.8
-17.2

1993

2002

2003

5
4

5
5

6

32
7
2
11

24
6
3
14

25
5
4
14

81
90
89

55
87
63

57
88
64

1983

1993

2002

2003

10
25
-15

11
42
-32

20
42
-22

22
42
-20

-15

-1
1

-5
4

-4
2

-4
4

-30

Current account balance

-14

-33

-24

-20

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

12
2

33
0

26
-2

19
1

42.3

429.9

20
9,088.3

25
9,347.6

1983

1993

2002

2003

44
0
0

210
0
38

333
0
66

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

3
0
0

3
0
0

5
0
0

Compositionof net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

8
7
0
0
0

20
14
0
-1
0

10
1
0
3
0

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
1
0
1
0
I

Domestic prices
I%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government tinance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Domestic primary balance
Overall surplus/deflcit
TRADE
(US5 millions)
Total exports (fob1
Cocoa
n.a.
Manufactures
Total imports (cifl
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital QOOdS

1983

(US5 millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves includinggoid (US5 millions)
Conversionrate (DEC, locaNUS5)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

88

-GDP

W

02

01

deflator

03

-CPI

I

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
30

T

20

Export price index (7995=700)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (7995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

6

08

5
0
5
0
4

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics central database.

- 39 -

10
0
07

00

88

E Exports

00

01

02

E Imports

O3

I

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0

45

-00

I

Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mlll.)

I

G 23

A - IBRD
6 . IDA
C. IMF

.

D Other multilateral

E Bilateral
F. Private
G -Short-term
~

4/27/05

-

CAS Annex B2 Sao Tome and Principe
Selected Indicators" of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 04/27/2005

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a , d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item

2002

2003

2004

2005

2
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
29.2

2
2.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
54.3

2
1.9
0.0
0.0
50.0
27.8
47.5

2
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.5

No
112
5612

No
73
3713

No
70
3512

No
293
7314

Since FY 80

Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

8
65.5
50.0
56.6

Last Five
FYs

2
21.1
100.0
100.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of
the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes
all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 40 -

-

CAS Annex 8 3 IBRDADA Program Summary
Sao Tome and Principe
As of Date 04/27/2005
Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year Proj ID

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b (H/M/L)

Implementation
b Risks (H/M/L)

2006

Additional Financing to OnGoing Operations

1.5

H

M

2007

Development Policy Lending 1

2.0

H

M

2008

Development Policy Lending 2

2.0

H

M

2009

Development Policy Lending 3

2.0

H

M

Overall Result

7.5

- 41 -

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Non-Lending Services
Sao Tome and Principe
As Of Date 04/27/2005

Product
Recent completions
CEM
Telecom Reform
Support to PRlS
Gender Assessment
Poverty Diagnostic
Underway
Climate Change GEF
Diagnostic Trade Integration
Study (DTIS)
IDF Justice Capacity Building
Telecom Reform
Planned
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

2003
2003
2003
2004
2005

148.5
71.5
61.5
29.1
Trust Funds

KG
KG
KG
KG, PB
KG, PB

2006
2005

240.0
106.7

KG, PB, PS
KG

2006
2006

14.0
40.0

PS
KG

2007

148

K, PS

a. Government, Donor, Bank, Public dissemination.
b. Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-Solving

- 42 -

Audiencea

Objective’

CAS Annex B5 - Poverty and Social Development Indicators

,Sa0 Tome and Principe Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (19 9 5 4 00)
INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(Years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same regionlincome
group

1975-80

1985-90

1997-2003

SubSaharan
Africa

0.09

0.1
2.8
39.1
5.1

0.2
2.1
55.6
4.3

704.5
2.3
36.5
5.2

2,311.9
1.9
30.4
3.7

330

500

440

10.3
6.2

2.6
3.3

1.5
3.2

30.8

Lowincome

54
65
430

77
82
72

97.1
100
94
79
89
73

58
82
46

75
89
70

71
92
17

87
94
13

61
59

65
67
44

62
60
64

66
63
69

46
45
46

58
57
59

75
118

75
118

101
171

80
123

269
226

519
461
916
39

319
268
689
38

79

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998
due to change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received
vaccinations before one year of age.
2005 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

- 43 -

-

-

CAS Annex B6 Key Economic Indicators Sao Tome and Principe
As of Date 0412712005

National accounts (as YOo f GDP)

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

20

20

18.0

17.0

Industry

17

17

15.5

14.6

Services

62

63

66.5

68.4

106
43
26
17

127
30
19
11

112.5
32.8
14.8
18.0

E X P O ~ ~(GNFS)~
S

33

36

44

Imports (GNFS)

83

93

95

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

-6
3.7

-23
10.6

-17.5
8.3

Gross domestic producta

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Govemment investment
Private investment

Memorandum items

100

100

100

100

109.4
36.1
20.1
16.0

122.1
34.4
19.4
15.0

122.0
37.8
16.5
21.3

121.5
41.2
16.2
25.1

120.0
46.8
15.7
31.2

38

38

46

47

44

77.5

78

116

117

115

-16.7
15.90

-22.1
7.10

-22
5.30

-21.5
7.70

-20
9.60

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
G N I per capita (US$,Atlas method)

46

47

50

60

62

290

290

300

330

370

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1987
prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

3.0
0.0

4.0

4.1
9.4

4.5
7.3

4.5
4.6

3.0
7.9

4.5

5.5

7.8
1.8
43.8

1.9
-4.6

2.3
-7.3

2.3
17.5

0.8
1.6

2.3
17.6

3.2
15.5

16

17

20

23

24

27

28.8

31.2

4
38

4
43

5
45

6
45

7
59

8
68

8
74

8
79

21
-22
6
-20

24.4
-26
4
-3 1

28.5
-25
2
-27

33
-23
4
-27

36
-35
4
-34

37
-4 1
4
-40

40
-44
4
-43

45
-49
4
-48

3

4

5

8

9

16

22

27

11

11

1

-3

-2

-8

8

0

0

0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from
1987 prices)
0.8
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
-16.3
Private consumption
-30.5

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
EXPOI~S

(GNFS)~

Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd

'' The CAS period extends to 2009 but projections are not available beyond 2007.
- 44 -

CAS Annex B6 - Sao Tome and Principe - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Memorandum items

-47.6

-58.8

-45.3

-39.8

3.2
3.2

22.5
22.5

16.9
16.9

4.5
4.5

4.2

-12.8

8.6

-2.2

25.6
24.2
1.4
41.9
80.0

25.2
28.8
-3.6
46.0
84.9

23.4
33.0
-9.6
28.8
91.2

M2/GDP
Growth o f M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

30.3
28.8
3.4

32.4
36.7
-2.0

Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

54.8
79.0
69.4

11.0
7.4

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market
prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

Monetary indicators

Price indices( YR87 =loo)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)
~

-56.4

-70.7

-69.5

-71.5

25.8
33.1
-7.3
35.8
80.8

29.4
46.3
-16.9
35.8
77.6

27.6
41.0
-13.4
30.0
87.0

27.0
36.4
-9.4
29.6
87.0

27.0
32.2
-5.2
29.0
88.0

33.1
26.9
11.6

41.8
20.4

7.4
31.8

41.2
99.1
41.6

48.2
95.4
50.6

59.1
105.2
56.2

9.5
9.8

9.2
10.8

9.6
9.5

14.5
15.5

12.4
13.9

10.0
9.0

~~

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Current expenditures

- 45 -

12.8
8.5

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Sao Tome and Principe
SZio Tomb and Principe
Statement o f IFC's
Held and DisbursedPortfolio
(In U S Dollars Millions)
Held
FY
Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

Disbursed

Quasi Partic

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan

Equity

Quasi

- 46 -

Partic

Loan

Equity Quasi

Partic

I

rz

d
I

r

I

00

d
I

ANNEX 10: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
The country financing parameters for Sao Tome and Principe set out below have been
approved by the Regional vice president, Africa, and are being posted on the Bank’s
internal website.
Remarks / Explanation

Item

Parameter

Cost sharing. Limit on the proportion
3 f individual project costs that the
Bank may finance

90%

Recurrent costfinancing. Any limits
:hat would apply t o the overall amount
2 f recurrent expenditures that the Bank
may finance

No
countrylevel limit

Local costfinancing. Are the
requirements for Bank financing o f
local expenditures met, namely that:
(i)
financing requirements for the
country’s development program would
exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation and other
revenues) and expected domestic
borrowing; and (ii)
the financing o f
foreign expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects.
Taxes and duties. Are there any taxes
and duties that the Bank would not
finance?

Yes

The two criteria are met. The Bank may
therefore finance local costs in the proportions
needed in individual projects.

None

The Bank may finance the costs o f taxes and
duties associated with project expenditures, since
these have been judged to be reasonable and nondiscriminatory. At the project-level, the Bank
would consider whether taxes and duties
constitute an excessively high share o f project

The Bank will continue to finance up t o 90
percent o f project costs. This will also be the
case for IDF grants and recipient-executed trust

funds.

Given STP’s fragile financial situation, the Bank
w i l l continue to monitor the aggregate fiscal and
debt situation and its implications for recurrent
cost financing. In all cases, recurrent cost
financing will be applied after consideration o f
the sector and project sustainability issues,
including institutional arrangements t o allow for
greater emphasis on sustainability through resultbased M&E systems and strengthening o f
capacity at national and local level; and implied
future budget outlays.

- 49 -

ANNEX 11: CAS COMPLETION REPORT
NB: Recognizing IDA’S limited role in Sa0 Tome and Principe and the need for flexibility in
applying the results-based CAS approach in small states, including the CAS Completion
Report (CASCR), this CASCR briefly reviews the Bank’s experience in the country, with a
focus on lessons learned and implications for the Bank’s engagement under the next CAS.

Country: Democratic Republic o f Sao Tome and Principe
Date of CAS: October 10,2000 (no Progress Reports)
Period Covered by the CASCR: October 10,2000 to June 30,2005
CASCR Completed by: Allison Berg, Operations Officer
Eavan O’Halloran, Senior Country Officer
Dorsati Madani, Country Economist
Date: April 15,2005

I.Background and Sao Tome and Principe’s Longer Term Strategic Goals
1.
The Democratic Republic o f Sao Tome and Principe (STP) i s a small archipelago o f
two islands located in the Gulf o f Guinea, with an estimated population o f about 150,000, and
a land area o f just over 1,000 square kilometers. I t s economic and social indicators are
negatively affected by basic challenges that afflict many small island states: remoteness,
insularity, weak institutional and human resource capacity, a narrow resource base, limited
economic diversification, vulnerability to exogenous shocks, constrained access to external
capital, and entrenched poverty.
2.
According to a 2000/01 household survey, 54 percent o f the population i s poor and
15 percent live in extreme poverty. There i s a strong likelihood that most MDGs will not be
reached. STP i s Africa’s smallest economy, with an estimated GDP o f US$60 m i l l i o n and a
per capita income o f US$320 in 2003, making i t also one o f the poorest. The economy i s
characterized by a large public sector suffering from weak institutional capacity, a high
reliance on foreign aid, a l o w savings rate, and a dependency o n cocoa production and
tourism. The majority o f the population i s involved in smallholder farming, though
agricultural productivity remains l o w and agricultural services are lacking. Public enterprise
reform and privatization has progressed, but with delays. STP’s debt burden i s among the
highest in the world (external debt accounted for more than 600 percent o f G D P in nominal
terms in 1999). STP reached the Decision Point o f the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in early
2001 and i s expected to reach i t s Completion Point by mid-2006.
3.
Since 1991, STP has transformed from a Marxist, one-party state into a pluralist
democracy. Civil society organizations have formed gradually, but political institutions
remain fragile with periods o f instability, and institutional capacity i s weak. President

-50-

Fradique de Menezes was elected for a five-year term in July 2001 in STP’s third multi-party
election, which was deemed fair and was conducted peacefully. However, the anticipated
arrival o f o i l production has increased social expectations and created political tension and
disturbances, which came to a head in July 2003 in an attempted coup. W h i l e the president
and prime minister were restored to power within a week following a negotiated settlement,
the event underscored the country’s delicate political situation.
4.
Following a profound economic and social crisis from 1987-1997, STP launched an
ambitious recovery and economic development program. The results were poor mainly due
to weak institutional capacity, lack o f adequately skilled human resources, and adverse
external shocks (especially the decline in world cocoa prices since the economy i s heavily
dependent o n the production o f aging cocoa plantations). Real GDP growth rates remained
low, macroeconomic imbalances worsened, unemployment increased, and living conditians
deteriorated. In 1998-99, within the framework o f an IMF staff monitored program, the
Government launched in earnest a series o f macroeconomic reforms that helped stabilize the
economy and, in parallel, implemented several structural policy reform measures supported
by a Bank-financed Public Resource Management Credit (PRMC). As a result o f these
reforms, improved cocoa prices, and growth in the tourism and construction sub-sectors, real
GDP per capita rose from 3.3 percent to 4 percent between 1999 and 2003. The CPI dropped
from 12.6 percent in 1999 to 9.2 percent in 2002, though in 2003 the increase in energy
prices, post-coup social expenditures, and c i v i l service salaries contributed to a rise in the
inflation rate to 9.6 percent. Real GDP growth in 2004 was 3.8 percent, slightly lower than in
2003 as the expected increase in petroleum-related economic activity did not materialize.
Economic growth was sustained through a relaxation o f fiscal and monetary policies, leading
to a rise in inflation (15.2 percent at end-2004) and deterioration o f the fiscal and monetary
balances.

5.

Though STP became a member o f IDA in 1977, IDA’Sassistance to STP only began
in 1985 and has been limited, both as an overall share o f the Government’s budget and
relative to several other donors (e.g., the African Development Bank, European Union,
Portugal, and Taiwan, China have larger commitment than the Bank). As o f April 2005,
World Bank assistance consisted o f 12 IDA creditdgrants (10 closed, 2 active) totaling
US$83.4 million; nine IDFs; a P H R D grant for several social sector studies22; a GEF grant o f
US$200,000 for analysis o f vulnerability to global climate change; a Belgian Trust Fund for
poverty analytic work; a commercial debt buy back operation totaling US$l.8 million; and a
PPIAF grant o f US$175,000. The IDA credits approved before the 2000 CAS included a
modernization line o f credit (FY85), two adjustment operations (SAL I,FY87 and SAC
II/TA, FY90), two agricultural projects (cocoa, FY87 and agriculture, FY92), two multisector projects (FY89 and FY91), and a health and education project (FY92). Due to
declines in economic management, no new lending operations were approved between 19922000. In conjunction with the 2000 CAS, the P R M C (an adjustment operation o f US$7.5
million, FYO1) and P R M - T A (US$2.5 million, FYO1) were approved, and during C A S
implementation a Social Sector Support Project (US$6.5 million, o f which US$1.5 m i l l i o n i s
an IDA grant, FY04) and a Governance Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project
(US$5 million, FY05) were approved. STP i s not a member o f IFC or MIGA.

22

Study on the Situation o f Orphans and Vulnerable Children, Institutional Assessment o f the Social Sectors, Analysis
o f Monitoring and Evaluation in the Social Sectors.

- 51 -

6.

STP finalized i t s Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) in April 2000.
It identified two broad objectives (a) sustaining strong economic growth to raise incomes and
reduce poverty; and (b) broadening access to social services and improving their quality. The
I-PRSP outlined further details o f the objectives and a “roadmap” for preparation o f the
country’s full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The country finalized its PRSP in
January 2003, though i t was not submitted to the Bank and Fund Boards until April 2005
because the country’s macroeconomic framework was insufficiently developed.23 The five
main PRSP pillars-(i)
reform o f public institutions, capacity reinforcement, and the
promotion o f a good governance policy; (ii)accelerated and redistributive growth;
(iii)
creation o f opportunities for growth and diversification o f income for the poor;
(iv) human resource development and access to basic social services; and (v) adoption o f
mechanisms for follow-up, evaluation, and strategies for updating-built upon the I-PRSP’s
objectives.

11. CAS Objectives and Outcomes, Bank Performance, and Quality of Services
Following the I-PRSP, the Board discussed the CAS o n November 2, 2000. The
7.
CAS states, “IDA’S strategy for the period 2000-05 i s to support the Government in the
pursuit o f i t s objectives as set forth in the I-PRSP: (a) sustaining strong economic growth to
raise incomes and reduce poverty; and (b) broadening access to social services and improving
their quality.” The CAS assumed that, given the likelihood that IDA resources and
administrative budget allocated to STP would remain limited, support to the country would
be delivered through the existing portfolio (at the time, the Agriculture Privatization and
Smallholder Development Project and the Health and Education Project) and a multisector
approach within selected new lending.

8.
The CAS envisaged one new project every two to three years during the C A S period.
The two ongoing projects at the time o f the Board discussion o f the CAS closed soon after,
but the P R M C and P R M - T A were approved with the CAS. The latter two operations were
the Bank’s main lending interventions during the first h a l f o f the CAS period, closing near
the end o f the C A S period (in late FY04 and the second h a l f o f FY05, respectively). During
the second h a l f o f the CAS period, the Social Sector Support Project (envisaged for FY03 in
the CAS) and the Governance Capacity Building TA Project (the Petroleum Support
envisaged for FY05 in the CAS) were approved in F Y 0 4 and FY05, respectively. Though
the Social Sector Support Project has experienced some delays in getting activities underway,
the two projects currently comprise the Bank’s active lending portfolio in the country. Table
1 summarizes the lending operations delivered over the CAS period and, although not
mutually exclusive, the main longer term goals supported.

23

The PRSP was submitted with a supplement updating the period 2003-2005.

- 52 -

Table 1. Bank Lending Operations during STP CAS, 2000-05

9.
There were several pieces o f analysis ongoing at the time o f the Board discussion o f
the CAS, mainly supported by Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grants. While no
additional, formal economic and sector work (ESW) was envisaged in the CAS, in actuality
several studies were undertaken to complement the Bank’s lending interventions, support the
Government in finalizing i t s PRSP, and assist the Government in qualifylng for the Enhanced
HIPC Initiative. A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), Gender Assessment, and
Poverty Diagnostic were undertaken, and a Diagnostic Trade Integrated Study (DTIS) i s soon
to be finalized. Policy dialogue with the Government deepened during implementation o f the
PRMC and PRM-TA and during preparation o f the Social Sector Support and Governance
Capacity Building Projects. Table 2 summarizes the ESW and analytic and advisory
activities (AAA) undertaken during the CAS period and, although not mutually exclusive, the
main longer terms goals supported.

- 53 -

Table 2. Bank M A and ESW during STP CAS, 2000-05

II

ESWIAAA

Completed

1
I

Ongoing
atTime
ofCAS

I
1

Activity
New
Over

CAS

10.
Overall, the C A S can be characterized as weak, and Bank (and borrower)
performance in implementing lending and non-lending activities as mixed. Because Bank
involvement with the country was limited for an extended period before CAS development,
the Bank started from a very l o w knowledge base in developing i t s strategy (a 1997 Public
Finance Review was the only ESW carried out by IDA within a decade and there was limited
analytic work available from other partners). Given this and the limited engagement with the
country in the period immediately preceding the CAS, the CAS was extremely “light.” The
main text o f the C A S was limited to 12 pages, and the C A S did not include a program matrix
with progress indicators. Clearly, monitoring and evaluation, including evaluability o f the
CAS, are major weaknesses.

11.
In spite o f these weaknesses, the C A S does a relatively good j o b o f elucidating the
major development challenges facing STP, but it fails to make a strong link between them
and the Bank’s proposed assistance strategy/program. Institutional capacity and economic
management i s among the first challenges described in the CAS-in retrospect, the Bank
strategy/program should have placed much greater emphasis o n capacity and institution
building, including delivery o f targeted, long-term training and technical assistance, to
address STP’s institutions’ l o w implementation capacity and shortage o f trained staff, to help
the country develop the skills and k n o w h o w to better manage i t s development process.
W h i l e Bank projects had acknowledged these weaknesses and attempted to incorporate
technical assistance measures to address them, few were successfd in implementing such
measures until the PRMC-TA and Governance Capacity Building TA Project.

- 54 -

12.
T o i t s credit, the Bank rebuilt i t s relationship with and knowledge o f STP during the
C A S period. The Bank team actively pursued the policy dialogue in the context o f PRSP
preparation and HIPC relief; vigorously implemented and prepared new operations; and
focused E S W to support areas o f engagement. Recognizing the lack o f monitoring indicators
in the CAS, both the Social Sector Support Project and the Governance Capacity Building
Project include detailed results frameworks. (The PRMC/PRM-TA also included an
ambitious matrix o f policy actions, performance benchmarks, and expected outcomes, o n
which more below.) Given the Bank’s necessarily selective program in STP, the most
important factors in determining CAS outcomes were the level o f Bank follow-up o n lending
and non-lending activities (achievements were most tangible when adequate and timely Bank
supervision was carried out); the borrower’s weak institutional and human resource capacity;
and the government’s instability during the CAS period (STP experienced five changes o f
government and multiple ministerial shuffles between 200 1-2004). Further details o n Bank
(and borrower) performance and quality o f services along the country’s two broad, longer
term strategic goals/CAS objectives are described below.
a. Sustaining Strong Economic Growth to Raise Incomes and Reduce Poverty

13.
Overall, some progress on this objective was made during the CAS periodeconomic growth over 1999-2003 led to a slight improvement in income, with per capita
GDP increasing from US$290 in 2000 to US$320 in 2003. Projects active during the CAS
period in line with this objective included the Agricultural Privatization and Smallholder
Development Project, the P R M C and PRM-TA, and the Governance Capacity Building
Technical Assistance Project. AAA/ESW included Agriculture Policy ESW, Civil Service
Reform ESW, Budget Planning ESW, Energy ESW, Telecom Reform supported by the
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), support for PRSP finalization,
support for development o f the petroleum revenue management law, dialogue on
macroeconomic management (with the IMF), a CEM, support for HIPC Decision Point
qualification, a Poverty Diagnostic, a Diagnostic Trade Integration Study, a Justice Sector
Capacity Building IDF, and a GEF for a diagnostic o f impacts o f global warming.
14.
The Implementation Completion Report (ICR) and O E D rated the Agricultural
Privatization and Smallholder Development Project’s outcome, Bank performance, and
borrower performance unsatisfactory. This investment project had been approved in F Y 9 2
and reflected the “old style” approach to projects. As acknowledged in the ICR, the project’s
design was unrealistic: the reform program was overly complex for (untested) local
institutional capacity to handle; the planned implementation timeframe was too ambitious;
and the supporting activities were too dependent on parallel financing o f other donors that
had not yet been negotiated. The project also failed to incorporate lessons learned from
earlier projects, particularly regarding the need to clarify and focus training activities
appropriately. Project supervision did not take a holistic approach, suffered from inadequate
composition and timing, and was undermined by high turnover o f task managers (five in
eight years).
In contrast, the P R M C was designed as a quick disbursing operation that covered the
15.
financing gap for 2000/01 and aimed to support the Government in implementing economic
reforms. Such reforms included: (a) improving domestic resource mobilization;
(b) strengthening public expenditure management; and (c) continuing implementation o f the

- 55 -

public enterprise reform program. The PRMC was implemented in line with the IMF staff
monitored program and aimed to help protect social sector @.e., education and health)
expenditures. The P R M C was accompanied by the PRM-TA, which was originally designed
to support measures implemented under the Government’s reform program supported by the
PRMC; a study fund to carry out analysis for PRSP preparation; and development o f the
agenda for macroeconomic reforms. However, in response to the Government’s request for
assistance in dealing with petroleum revenue management, the PRM-TA was refocused
during the CAS period to help build institutional capacity in financial and budgetary
management, in the judiciary and petroleum sectors, and in statistics. The PRM-TA
successfblly financed international experts to help the Government negotiate four o i l
contracts and launch and analyze the first round o f bids for the Joint Development Zone
(between STP and Nigeria); supported the creation o f the National Petroleum Agency (NPA);
and provided technical assistance to the Government in finalizing the petroleum revenue
management law. The PRM-TA benefited from strong government ownership and active
Bank supervision.

16.
The I C R for the P R M - T A i s not yet finalized, however it i s expected to reflect the
generally positive experience in implementation, benefiting from strong Government
ownership and Bank supervision. The ICR for the PRMC, however, reflects a mixed record
o f success. The PRMC’s outcome was rated unsatisfactory, i t s sustainability likely, i t s
institutional development modest, and Bank and borrower performance unsatisfactory. The
ICR highlights that the P R M C was wide ranging and overly ambitious. The fast-disbursing
nature o f the operation over only two years was too quick for the scope o f reforms proposed.
W h i l e the Government progressed o n tranche release conditions, other reform measures fell
by the wayside (e.g., rural land title registration and some private sector development
activities were never launched, extension services and the micro-credit system are weak or
inconsistent). Successes under the P R M C included progress o n domestic resource
mobilization and management, with the implementation o f tax and tariff reform measures and
the protection o f health and education expenditures; the Government also made efforts in
privatizing public enterprises and introducing more transparency and governance into i t s
activities.
17.
According to the ICR, Bank supervision o f the PRMC was satisfactory given fbnds
available. The team defined concrete steps and a timetable to put the project o n track when
needed. However, the operation’s matrix o f policy actions/outcomes consisted o f two tables
that in some instances were inconsistent and vague o n timing, which led them to become
outdated. Though the matrix o f policy actions fit within I-PRSP/CAS objectives and was
well intended, as mentioned above, actions not related to tranche release conditions were not
given priority by the Government thus, as an implementable logical framework, the matrix
was unrealistic. To provide a better basis for judging progress under the PRMC, the
supervision team retroactively introduced some outcome/output measures. Table 3
summarizes key outcome indicators. Lack o f data in some areas points to the need for
statistical capacity building in STP, an area not well addressed in the CAS.

- 56 -

Table 3. Key PerformanceIndicators and Achievements under the PRMC
Are
tive

Domestic
Resource
Mobilization

Public
Expenditure
Management

Civil Service
Reform

Public
Enterprise
Reform

Increase government revenue to
22% o f GDP in 2002.
Increase revenue collection in
the medium-termleading to a
more sustainable fiscal position.
Greater transparency and better
management o f government’s
financial resources.
Limit primary spending
(excluding foreign financed
investment) to 18% o f GDP by
2002.
Increase the share o f total
primary spending allocated to
education and health as
recommended by the PERs.
Reduce the number o f civil
servants from4708 to 4176.

Increase private investment
through a reduced role o f the
state and the implementation o f
institutionall administrative
reforms.

Tax revenue increased from 16.2% in 1999 to
18.3% in 2001 and an estimated 23.4% in 2004.
Free floating exchange rate established. GDP per
capita increased from 3.3 to 4% over 1999-2003.

Pro-poor expenditures constituted around 23% o f
the budget on average from 2001-2004. Share o f
health and education expenditures has vaned:
2001 2002 2003 2004(est.)
Educ. share o f G D P 11.4
9.0 10.3 7.8
Healthshare o f G D P 8.6
2.7 6.2
6.1
308 dismissed after long delays and higher cost
than envisaged.
General evidence suggests public sector s t i l l
dominates economy, though construction, nontraditional agriculture, and tourism are engines o f
growth. 5 o f 7 public enterprises liquidated, sold,
or being privatized at project end. Government
introduced competition in air travel leading to
sharp price decreases. EMAE (public electricity
and water company) being restructured, but
financially weak-privatization strategy yet to be
developed. Telecoms to be liberalized by end2005.

18.
Building o n lessons learned under previous projects, particularly the P R M C and
PRM-TA, the Governance Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project aims to: (a) help
facilitate the implementation o f the PRSP through capacity building and management
support; (b) strengthen public expenditure management; and (c) provide critical technical
assistance and capacity building in the o i l sector. More specifically, the project aims to
improve the impact o f better budget and economic management on economic growth,
development, and poverty reduction by modemizing and building capacity in economic
(financial and budgetary) management and supervision, and by strengthening STP’s basic
institutional and legal infrastructure in the finance and natural resources/environment
ministries. The project i s in line with objectives outlined in the country’s PRSP (finalized
during the second h a l f o f the CAS implementation period) and responds to the more complex
economic and social environment arising from the onset o f the o i l era. Following o n actions
under the PRM-TA, the project targets the following o i l sector interventions (a) strengthening
the NPA; (b) strengthening the legal framework, including sector-related environmental
issues; (c) helping the Government prepare and promote the country’s Exclusive Economic
Zone; (d) establishing a functional information system that i s transparent; and (e) undertaking
studies and seminars for sector development and j o b creation. The project includes a detailed
results framework, with concrete indicatodtargets to track the Government’s progress in

- 57 -

implementation. While it remains to be seen to what extent the project achieves i t s
development objectives, i t i s o f f to a strong start under intense supervision and strong
government ownership.

19.
Sectoral ESW and studies conducted to support this longer term strategic goal/CAS
objective targeted appropriate topics (ie., agriculture policy, budget planning, c i v i l service
reform, energy, telecom reform) but, in several areas, the combined lack o f follow-up on the
part o f the Bank and/or lack o f ownership and capacity on the part o f the borrower resulted in
negligible impacts. In the case o f telecom reform, however, the team actively followed
through on the recommendations in the analysis, helping the Government to put in place a
supervisory and regulatory framework to prepare the way for privatization (the telecoms
sector i s to be liberalized by end-2005, with the Government aiming to end the telecom
monopoly). The recently completed C E M i s also providing the Bank and current government
policy makers and other stakeholders with useful information on the state o f STP’s economy.
The team i s planning to follow-up more closely with government officials o n the
recommendations in the CEM, in conjunction with the recently completed Poverty
Diagnostic, and soon to be completed DTIS.

b. Broadening Access to Social Services and Improving their Quality

20.
Overall, some progress o n this goal/objective was made during the C A S period,
however Bank (and borrower) performance was again mixed. Projects active during the C A S
period in line with this objective included the Health and Education Project and the Social
Sector Support Project. AAA/ESW included public expenditure reviews (PERs) in health
and education, several social sector studies, and a Gender Assessment. Similar to the
agriculture project under the first goal/objective, the Health and Education Project was
approved in FY92. The I C R rated the project’s outcome and Bank and borrower
performance as satisfactory, but OED rated each o f these as unsatisfactory, again due to
overly complex design and lack o f attention to capacity constraints. The project suffered
from the frequent changes in government and reliance on third party funding for
implementation. In addition, supervision was deemed inadequate, with missions lacking the
specialists needed to cover the range o f activities included.
21.
The more recent Social Sector Support Project i s key to this goal/objective going
forward. I t s development objective i s to contribute to improving the delivery o f basic health
and education services with a focus o n greater and more equitable access, better quality, and
improved local governance. The project focuses o n supporting the country’s efforts to
achieve the MDGs, contributing directly to six o f the eight MDGs, and supports the
Government in implementing i t s PRSP and associated social sector strategies. The project
deals with a re-definition o f the role o f Government as it involves NGOs and c i v i l society in
project implementation. The team i s cognizant that this project will require intense
supervision if it i s to meet i t s development objectives.
22.
E S W undertaken to support this goal/objective was also well targeted but, again, in
some cases lacked follow-up and ownership. In particular, the PERs in education and health
were o f poor quality and never finalized. However, the more recent studies have underpinned
the Bank’s lending activities. The three social sector studies financed by a P H R D grant were
used to inform the design o f the Social Sector Support Project, which incorporated the
studies’ recommendations. The recent Gender Assessment i s o f high quality, and the team

- 58 -

plans to follow-up with government authorities on i t s recommendations, also in conjunction
with the recent Poverty Diagnostic.
111. Portfolio Performance, Country Dialogue, and Aid Coordination
23.
While operations and analytic work undertaken during the second h a l f o f the CAS
period had greater impact and success-due to more intense engagement by the Bank team
and increased stability and ownership by the Government-the Bank s t i l l struggled to make
the most o f limited human and financial resources allocated to the STP program. In
particular, early in the CAS period, the Bank’s performance was affected by overly ambitious
operations that were not designed in tune with STP’s institutional and human resource
capacity; inadequate supervision o f operations; and lack o f follow-up odownership o f ESW
policy recommendations. Government instability during this period was also a factor in
undermining the Bank’s impact, negatively affecting portfolio performance. In addition,
onerous procedures for project restructuring at the time made it difficult to modify
inappropriate or poorly designed operations even once deficiencies had been identified.
These factors are evident in portfolio indicators for STP, which are shown in Table 4. (Note
that indicators are expected to improve once the ICR for the PRM-TA i s completed, and as
newer projects, which better incorporate past lessons, are completed.)

Projects Evaluated by OED by Amount
(US$m)
Percent o f OED Projects Rated U or HUby
Number
Percent o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Amount

65.5

21.1

50.0

100.0

56.6

100.0

24.
Country dialogue for the CAS was fed by PRMC/PRM-TA preparation, which began
almost one year before presentation o f the C A S and these projects to the Board. A team o f
eight staff visited STP in November 1999 and worked over the year to prepare the projects;
members o f the team simultaneously developed the CAS. Just before the C A S was discussed
by the Board, the Bank worked closely with UNDP in organizing a donor Round Table
meeting (October 5-6, 2000) for STP in Geneva. The C A S describes the Bank’s interaction

- 59 -

with other donors in the design and implementation o f assistance programs, including the
European Union, African Development Bank, IFAD, France, Norway, Portugal, Taiwan, and
the IMF. However, the level o f collaboration and coordination among donors o n the ground
was limited over the CAS period, and the Government’s role in aid coordination was
nonexistent. This i s clearly an area o f weakness.

25.
Donor coordination, collaboration, and harmonization in STP i s starting from a very
shallow base. However, due to the necessarily limited nature o f the Bank’s program in the
country, i t will be key to leveraging the impact o f Bank interventions. W h i l e the Bank liaises
with the other development partners active in the country, aid coordination remains nascent.
Helping the Government to realize that enhanced donor coordination i s in its interest, and
taking advantage o f the window o f opportunity that exists under the period o f the next C A S
(until petroleum revenue comes on stream) to enhance donor coordination so that the
Government and people o f STP can realize their long-term development vision o f a
productive society that benefits from-rather
than relies on-petroleum revenue, will be
critical, Donor partners, civil society, members o f the private sector, and other stakeholders
have a large agenda to tackle on this front, but one that i s crucial to ensuring that STP
achieves i t s objective o f diversifying i t s economy to avoid mistakes made by other petroleum
producing countries.
IV. Lessons Learned and Implications for the Future

26.
O f the 10 closed Bank operations in STP, OED has evaluated eight, with half rated
unsatisfactory. OED’s evaluations and the operations’ ICRs deliver a consistent set o f
messaged lessons learned from this high failure rate, which the CAS acknowledges.
However, i t was not until recently that such lessons have been successfully incorporated into
the design o f operations, such as the P R M - T A and the Governance Capacity Building TA
Project, Principal lessons learned include:
Operations should take into account STP’s limited, weak institutional and human
resources capacity;
All aspects o f projectlprogram design should be simple, clear, and focused;
Government ownership o f reforms i s necessary for successful implementation and
sustainable impact o f projectdprograms;
Capacity building activities should be delivered in conjunction with projectlprograms,
and should be part o f a detailed action plan attached to the Government’s policy agenda;
A multi-sector approach to lending i s more efficient in such a small country, but
projectlprogram objectives should be focused o n a limited number o f priorities in each
sector, within the capacity o f properly trained implementers;
Flexibility should be built into projectlprogram design, to allow for adaptation to
evolving needs o n the ground during implementation;
Implementation arrangements and monitoring and evaluation activities should be simple
but robust, including appropriate capacity building (e.g., training, technical assistance) as
necessary;
Non-governmental stakeholder participation should be more systematically incorporated
in the planning and implementation o f development activities;
Enhanced donor collaboration and coordination i s critical to improving the efficiency,
efficacy, and impact o f external assistance.

- 60 -

27.
A key conclusion from the experience in STP under the C A S and previous operations
i s that project support may not be the most effective instrument to deliver Bank financing to
assist the country in meeting i t s development challenges. Development policy operations
(i,e,, budget support)--coupled with appropriate capacity building activities, technical
assistance, analysis, and policy dialogue-is seen as a more effective and efficient way o f
delivering the Bank’s assistance. Development policy operations provide more leverage to
the small amount o f IDA resources available to STP and allow for a more efficient use o f the
limited Bank administrative budget allocated to the country. Overall, budget support i s seen
as a more appropriate and effective way to help the country implement i t s PRSP. Ensuring
that the country has an adequate fiduciary framework and elaborates relevant sector
strategiedpriority action plans based on PRSP objectives so that IDA can move toward
budget support will be a focus over the period o f the next CAS.
28.
Conclusions can also be extrapolated from the Bank’s experience in STP to apply to
the way in which the Bank engages with small state borrowing member counties in general.
While small states receive, on average, a higher share o f IDA and Bank administrative
resources per capita, staff time allocated to small states i s often not commensurate to meeting
the high transaction costs o f delivering this aid, and incentives for staff to work on small
states are weak. The Bank gains some economies o f scale by taking a regional approach
when feasible (e.g., in the Caribbean and Pacific), but traditional Bank instruments applied to
all borrowers alike, such as STP, m a y not be appropriate. Since the 2000 Joint Task Force
report on small states24, the Bank has recognized that small states’ development challenges
are as complex as those o f large states. However, other than the introduction o f horizontal
adaptable program loans in the Caribbean and regional ESW, the Bank has not adapted i t s
approach to more effectively and efficiently help small states like STP meet their
development challenges. The Bank needs to think creatively about h o w it can improve the
delivery o f lending and non-lending services to such counties, while respecting the
institution’s operational policies and due diligence responsibilities. OED’s review o f the
Bank’s programs in small states, the five-year review o f the Small States Task Force report
agenda, and the simplification proposal under development by Bank staff working in small
states will hopefully help to galvanize efforts to make the Bank more responsive-and
effective-in responding to small state clients’ needs.

24

See Small States: Meeting Challenges in the Global Economy, report o f the Commonwealth Secretariatiworld Bank
Joint Task Force on small states, April 2000, available at www.worldbank.ordsmallstates.

- 61 -

Appendix I:Debt Sustainability

1.
This appendix presents an update o f the debt sustainability analysis (DSA)
presented in Sa0 Tome and Principe's Decision Point document. The purpose o f this
exercise i s to compare the evolution o f the external debt burden projected at the time o f
the decision point with current projections, and to asses the impact o f the HIPC debt
relief that will be provided at completion point on the country's debt burden. In addition,
debt burden indicators are analyzed under the l o w income countries framework (LIC
framework), which provides a forward-looking analysis o f Sao Tome and Principe's
external debt profile and i t s future financing needs. 25 As it will be shown in this
appendix, both debt sustainability and future financing needs are highly dependent on the
prospects o f large revenues from the o i l sector.
Background

2.
Sao Tome and Principe (STP) i s one o f the most heavily indebted countries
participating in the Enhanced HIPC Initiative. STP's outstanding debt amounted to
US$294 million as o f end-1999, equivalent to 624 percent o f GDP. At that time, the net
present value (NPV) o f the stock o f debt amounted to US$190 million, equivalent to
1,395 percent o f exports o f goods and services, well above the HIPC threshold o f 150
percent.
3.
STP reached the decision point under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in December
2000. A total assistance o f US$97 million in W V terms 26 was committed for STP to
reach the targeted NPV o f debt-to-export ratio o f 150 percent. Since that date some
creditors including IDA, the African Development Barik and the OPEC Fund have been
providing interim relief and a number o f additional creditors have committed to providing
their share o f HIPC assistance at the completion point.27 The Paris Club has provided
traditional r e l i e f in the form o f a reschedule o f all arrears on eligible outstanding debt at
end-March 2000 and current maturities from April 2000-April 2001.28

25

The L I C framework differs from the HIPC D S A framework, both conceptually (the indicative debt
burden indicators are based on the quality o f countries' policies and institutions) and methodologically
(using different definitions for debt ratio denominators and discount and interest rates). Thus, results
obtained under each framework should be interpreted carefully, considering the underlying
methodological differences. For further information o n the L I C D S A framework see: "Debt
Sustainability in Low-Income Countries: Proposal for an Operational Framework and Policy
Implications", SMl04127 and IDAEecM2004-0035 and "Debt Sustainability in Low-Income
Countries--Further Consideration o n an Operational Framework and Policy Implications," SM/04/3 18
and IDA/SecM2004-0629/1.
26 Equivalent to a reduction o f 83 percent o n the debt due and outstanding as o f December 31, 1999.
27 IDA'S share o f debt relief i s US$45 million in nominal terms, and i s being provided through the
reduction on debt service over a period o f 23 years.
28 The Paris Club had agreed to reschedule all arrears on eligible outstanding debt at end-march 2000 and
current maturities from April 2000-April 2003 in three phases. While phase one took place (2000-Ol),
phases 2 and 3 were inoperative.

- 62 -

4.
At the time o f the decision point, STP was expected to reach the completion point
under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in 2003, but difficulties in implementing a stable
macroeconomic program have set back the implementation o f the poverty reduction
strategy and, thus, delayed the completion point. It is currently expected that STP could
reach the completion point in September 2006.29
Updated DSA under the HIPC Framework

5.
This section updates the DSA conducted at the decision point with revised
projections for exports and debt data, and using exchange and interest rate parameters
prevailing at end-2004. The update took into account the observed performance o f
exports for the period 2000-04 and revised exports projections for 2005 -25. The debt
data was updated with information provided by the authorities on actual disbursements
from STP’s creditors for the period 2000-04.30 In addition, new borrowing assumptions
from 2005 onwards were updated.
6.
Compared to the decision point projections, export performance has not been as
strong as expected, in particular during the period 2006-10. This i s mainly explained by
the fact that commercialization o f o i l i s not expected to begin in 2006, as assumed in the
decision point document. At the time o f the decision point, the o i l prospects were highly
uncertain as progress in reaching an agreement in the delimitation o f maritime borders
with Nigeria was
Updated projections take into consideration the o i l signature
bonuses recently agreed for the first block o f e ~ p l o r a t i o n in
, ~ the
~ order o f US$49 million
(equivalent to 90 percent o f GDP). In addition, the updated projections envisage a
production phase starting in 2012.33

7.
The main results from this exercise indicate that the NPV o f debt to exports ratio
after the full delivery o f enhanced HIPC assistance would stand at 274 percent as o f end2004, as compared with 142 percent projected in the decision point document,34 and i s
projected to stay above the decision point projections until 2013 (Figure 1). The main
factors underlying the difference in the ratios are:

29 Subject to receiving financial assurances from the Paris Club and provided that an IMF PRGF i s put in
place, followed by at least a 6-month period o f good performance under the program.
30 A full loan-by-loan reconciliation will be conducted prior to the preparation o f the completion point
DSA.
3 1 The border dispute was solved in 2001, and the f i r s t round o f biddings for the o i l blocks was conducted
until 2003.
32 The Joint Development Zone i s divided into 9 blocks.
33 The projections assume the following timeline: exploration phase (2005-06), the development phase
(2008-1 1) and the production phase (2012-31). See Article I V Consultation Staff Report. April, 2004.
IMF 04/108.
34 Ift h i s ratio i s assessed conditional upon reaching the completion point (i,e., without considering the
fbture relief that would be received after the completion point), it would stand at 741 percent.

a) An unanticipated fall in the discount rates and the depreciation o f the dollar,
which increase the dollar value o f the NPV o f debt. (About 45 percent o f STP’s
debt is denominated in USD).
b) Lower than estimated exports.
c) New borrowing has been somewhat higher than anticipated at the time o f the
decision point.
8.
The updated DSA also indicates that the provision o f HIPC assistance will have
an important effect in reducing STP’s heavy debt burden. Assuming that no further debt
relief i s provided beyond the interim relief already granted, the NPV o f debt-to-exports
ratio i s projected to remain above 400 percent for the period 2004-11. The provision o f
HIPC assistance at completion point will significantly reduce this ratio to levels slightly
above 200 percent. In order to bring STP debt burden to levels below the HIPC
thresholds, proceeds from o i l commercialization would need to be realized. (Figure 1)
Figure 1: NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio.
800

700
600

500
400
300
200
100

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

Impact o f IDA Lending on Debt Sustainability

9.
As presented in figure 1, STP’s debt ratios are expected to fall to levels below the
HIPC threshold once STP benefits from the large o i l revenues expected in 2012. IDA
lending, which i s provided in highly concessional terms, would have a greater impact on
STP’s debt sustainability during the period o f 2005-1 1, before the arrival o f o i l revenues.
10.
Under the base case scenario, the IDA-14 envelope for FY06-08 provides for an
allocation o f US$5.5 million for STP. Provided that STP observes positive performance

- 64 -

throughout this period, IDA allocation could be increased up to US$7.5 million under the
high case scenario.
According to the current IDA-14 guidelines, STP i s eligible to receive 100
11.
percent o f its FY06 IDA allocation in the form o f grants (its eligibility for grants in FY07
and FY08 will be determined at a later point). Even under such scenario, and assuming
that the IDA allocation for the following CAS period i s provided at least as 50 percent
grants, the external debt burden i s projected to remain high. (Figure 2)
12.
Given the small financial envelope available for STP, the impact on the debt
burden o f providing the full IDA allocation as loans would be small, but not insignificant.
As presented in Figure 2 below, under the base case scenario for the CAS, the NPV to
exports ratio i s estimated at 269 percent at end-2005, and i s projected to remain above
200 percent until 2012 when i t i s expected to reduce significantly to 45 percent. Moving
to the high case scenario, would result in a slight increase in the NPV ratio from 273
percent in 2007 to 274 percent.
13.
Despite the prospect o f large o i l revenues in the future, debt sustainability remains
a concern in the near term. Furthermore, in the event that o i l commercialization i s
delayed, IDA financing in concessional terms, would be essential to reduce STP’s high
debt burden. Nevertheless, the arrival o f o i l revenues in 2012 will represent an important
structural change in STP’s economy, thus i t s financial needs will need to be reassessed to
better reflect STP’s position as an o i l producing country.
Figure 2: NPV o f debt to exports ratio
Grants vs Loans

275
270
265
260
255
250
245
240
2005
+-B
-ase

2006
Case 100% loans

2007

----

2008

2009

High Case 100% loans

- 65 -

2010

-

201 1

100 %grant allocation

Debt Sustainability Analysis for Low-Income Countries Framework

14.
This section presents an analysis o f the projected debt profile o f STP using the
L I C framework methodology, which provides for a forward-looking analysis o f the
country’s extemal debt sustainability.
15.
As previously mentioned, one o f the differences with the HIPC methodology i s
that the debt burden indicators in the L I C framework are based on the quality o f each
countries’ policies and institutions, as measured by their CPIA rating. In this context, STP
i s classified as a weak policy country, on the base o f its 2003 CPIA rate (2.7). Table 1
below shows the applicable indicative debt-burden thresholds and compares them with
the STP’s projected average ratios for the periods 2004-1 1 and 2012-24:
Table 1. Indicative Debt-Burden Thresholds for a Weak Policy Country

I

NPV of debt
service in
ercent of

Threshold

Average
(2004-1 1)

Revenue

200

342

Debt service
in percent of
Exports
Revenue

I

I
15
25

I
11
13

~~

Average
(2012-24)

I
1
10

16.
As previously suggested by the results observed using the HIPC methodology, the
L I C framework indicates that STP faces a high risk o f distress, even after the full delivery
o f HIPC assistance. Even though debt service ratios do not signal that a distress situation
i s an immediate concem (debt service to exports ratio i s estimated at 14 percent as o f
end-2005 and i s projected to remain below the debt-burden threshold throughout the
period o f analysis), the high debt ratios signal an important risk o f debt distress (Table
2.a). Under the baseline scenario, the NPV o f debt to exports as o f end-2005 i s estimated
at 241 percent, increasing to 274 percent in 2008 and sharply decreasing to 19 percent by
2012. Similarly, the GDP to exports ratio, estimated at 107 percent as o f end-2005, i s
projected sharply decrease to 16 percent by 2012.
17.
The dramatic reduction in the debt and debt service ratio in 2012 i s an indicative
result that STP’s debt sustainability i s highly dependent on the success o f the production
and commercialization o f oil. Any delays in the schedule foreseen will have a significant
impact on the debt burden and would require STP to rely heavily on extemal financing in
highly concessional terms.

- 66 -

18.
Comparing the baseline assumptions with STP’s historical performance reinforces
these results. Assuming that the key macroeconomic variables that determine the debt
dynamics grow at their historical levels resulted in a significant deterioration o f the debt
and debt service ratios compared to the baseline a ~ s u m p t i o n sAs
. ~ ~presented in Table 2.b
and Figure 3, the NPV o f debt to exports i s projected to be more than 100 percentage
points higher than the baseline by 2010, remaining well above the indicative thresholds
throughout the period o f analysis. Similarly, the NPV o f debt to GDP ratio i s projected to
reach 118 by 201 1 and i s expected to remain at levels above the debt-burden thresholds
throughout the period o f analysis. Such scenario underscores the importance o f realizing
the targets set out in the baseline, in particular in terms o f oil-related exports.
Furthermore, stress tests performed under the LIC framework indicate the
19.
vulnerability o f debt distress to shocks in exports.36Under such scenario, STP’s NPV o f
debt to exports ratio i s significantly affected, reaching a peak o f 404 percent by 2008,
more than 100 percent higher than the baseline projection. (Table 2.b and Figure 3)
Conclusion

20.
STP’s NPV of debt-to-exports i s estimated to have increased significantly since
the decision point. The increase was mainly due to changes in exchange and discount
rates, new borrowing and lower than anticipated exports. The updated D S A underscores
the importance o f reaching the H P C completion point in order to reduce STP’s high debt
indicators, in particular prior to the “oil era”. I t also highlights the needs to consider the
structural change that the economy will face at the beginning o f the o i l commercialization
phase to better assess STP’s future financing needs.
In addition, the preceding scenarios suggest a high risk o f debt distress and a high
2 1.
sensitivity to the arrival o f o i l revenues. Even under the baseline assumptions, debt ratios
will not reach a sustainable level until the beginning o f the o i l commercialization phase;
any delays in the schedule would seriously compromise STP’s extemal long-term debt
sustainability. In this context, the government faces the challenge o f maintaining
responsible fiscal policies and a credible strategy to sustain growth with a view to
strengthen STP’s repayment capacity and reduce vulnerability to shocks, in particular
exports shocks. Equally important will be the authorities’ efforts in diversifying i t s
exports base (highly concentrated in services and cocoa exports) to further reduce i t s
exposure to export shocks and minimize its impact in the future.

35 The standard assumptions under this scenario are that real GDP growth, inflation, non-interest current
account (in percent o f GDP), and non-debt-creating inflows (inpercent o f GDP) remain at their 10year historical average. Given STP’s high dependence on the exports growth in 2012, it i s further
assumed that the trade balance as percent o f GDP will also remain at i t s historical average.
36 The stress test assumes that exports growth i s one standard deviation below i t s historical level during
the period 2006-07. This scenario represents a 25 percent probability o f occurrence.

- 67 -

~ ~ m w - m m
dmid-imv,

I

00
\o
I

Table 2b. SPo Tome and Principe Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Extemai Debt, 2004-2024
(In percent)
Est.
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Projections
2009
2010

2011

2012

2022

2023

2024

N P V oldebt-tc-GDP ratio 11
Baseline

105

107

107

106

I02

97

91

84

16

2

2

4

105
105

106
107

117
106

120
102

127
98

131
92

133
85

128
79

127
14

96
2

93
2

89
3

IO5

109
107
118
107
112
145

112
107
131
107
133

110
109
127
109
142
149

106
108
125
108
131
144

101
I03
118
97
125
137

94
91
111

88
85
103
84

119

1
1
1
1
2
2

6
6
9
6
0
2

2
2
2
2
3
3

3
2
3
2
3
4

4
4
5
4
5
6

9

2

3

5

304
7

2

2

282
3

9
5
9
9
3
9

2
3
2
2
3
2

3
4
3
3
3
3

5
6
5
5
6
5

A. Alternatlve Scenarlos

A I . Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-24 21
A2 Ncw public sector loam on las favorable temu in 2004-24 31
8. Bound T e a

BI. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviationin 2005-06 41
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06
84 Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06 51
85. Combination of 81-84 wing one-halfstandard deviation shocks
86. One-timc 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2005 61

IO5
IO5
105
105

105

151

91

117
128

109

N P V of debt-tc-exports ratio
Bmrline

271

274

279

276

284

280

268

262

1

271
271

336
274

370
274

380
267

401
272

415
265

422
252

405
243

402
1

271
271
271
271
271
271

271
318
301
274
285
370

279
376
279
279
336
279

276
383
273
286
354
276

284
405
284
300
348
284

280
400
280
281
343
280

268
362
268
269
328
268

262
353
262
262
320
262

1
2
1
1
2
1

A. Alternwive Scenarios
A I . Kcy variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 U
A2. Nw public sector loam on Iso favorable term! 2004-23 31

295

B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP gmwth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06
82. Export value gmwth at historical average mbus one standard deviationin 2005-06 41
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06
84. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06 51
85. Combinationof 81-84 usingone-balfstandarddeviationshocks
86. me-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baselinein 2005 61

Debt service ratlo
Basellne

9

11

9

I1

II

11

II

I1

5

0

0

0

9
9

I1

14

10
8

14
10

14
IO

16

19
I1

19
11

75
4

25

27
0

31

9
9
9
9
9
9

I3
12
11
I2
15

II

8

10
14
10

10
IS

II

12

0
0
0

13

10

I1
13
I1

4
5
4
4
5
4

0

12
12
IS
12

0
0

I1
13

12
17
12
12
15
12

33

31

30

28

27

25

23

23

22

13

12

IO

A. Alternative Scenarios

A1 Kcy variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 2/
A2. Nnv public Sector loam on IKS
favorable temu in 2004-23 31

10

0

0

B. Bound Tests
E1 Real GDP gmwth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005-06 41
83 US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minvs one standard deviation in 2005-06
84. Net nondebt creating flows at historicalaverage minus one standard deviation in 2005-06 51
85. CombinationofB1-84 usingone-half standard deviationshocks
8 6 One-time 30 percentnominal depreciation relative to the baselinein 2005 61

Memorandum ilem
Grant element a s

d on raidual financing (:.e, hanchg required above baseline) 7/

II

8
8
10
8

II

10

10

15
11

Source. Staffprojections and sirmlations.
11 By the year 2023 red GDP growth slows down sipifiuntly due to the projected decline in peUOleumpmduction.
U Variables includereal GDP growth, gmwth ofGDP deflator (in U.S.dollar terms), noa-interst current - u t
inpercent of GDP, and noa-debt creating flows.
31 Assumes that the interst rate on ncwbomuing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline.,while grace and maturity periods arc the same as in thebaseline.
41 Expom value are assmed to m i n QenMneatlyat the lower I N e l , but the cuncnt smut as a share of GDP is assumed to reblm to its baselinelevel aRer the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjusmtent in import levels).
51 Inclvdes official and private namfen and FDI
61 Depreciationis defined as percentage decline in dollarllocal ~ m c rat+
y such that i t never exceeds 100percent
71 &plies to all suess scenarios except for A2 (las favorable financing) in which the terms on all new hancing arc as specified in foomotc 2

- 69 -

16

0
0
0
0

0
0
0

1

0

0
1
0

Figure 3: SsLo Tome and Principe: Indicators o f Extemal Debt Under Altemative Scenarios, 2004-2024

(In percent)

200

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio

-

175

Baseline

- - - Historical scenario

150

-Most

125

extreme DSA stress test

- - - - - _ _ _ _-_- _
---____

--

100

75
50
25
0

2004

500
450

2006

2008

2010

2012

1

2014

2016

2018

2024

-

Baseline

2004

80
90

2022

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

-

100

2020

2006

2008

2010

2012

I

2014

2016

-Most

extreme DSA stress test

--- --- --.

---dj$@cal

scenario

2018

2020

2022

2024

Debt service-to-exports ratio

-

Baseline

-Most

extreme DSA stress test

- - - Historical scenario

30
20

-

I
I

'- - - - - - _ _ _---_

_*----/

,

....I..I.I.I.s.I.......I....f.I.f...I.I.......I.. 15
I

2004 2005 2006 2007 ZOO8 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
Under the LIC bamework, Sa0 Tome and Principe i s classified as a weak policy country. As such, its indicativedebt-burden
thresholds areas follows: 100 % for NPV of debt to exports, 30% for NPV of debt to GDP and 15 % od debt service to exports.

- 70 -

I
3

l?
I

" O N ; ; "

" " W O

544555

6
66666
"""

Figure 2: S l o Tomb and Principe: Indicators o f External Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2004-2024
(In percent)
120

-

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio

-

80
60

-

40

-

20

-

\

\

\

\

\.

-Baseline

- - - Historical scenario
extreme DSA stress test

-Most

2004

350

---_..

- - - _ - - - - - - H - -

2006

2008

2010

-

I

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio

-

Baseline

-Most

200

- - - Historical scenario

-

100

-

50

-

150

extreme DSA stress test

.------___------I

2004

6o
50

2006

2008

2010

i

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

Debt service-to-exports ratio

A

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

- 73 -

