Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 31702 - PL

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
WITH
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 9,2005

Central Europe and the Baltic States Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Poland was discussed by the Board on December 10,2002.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as o f February 28,2005)
U S $ 1 = 2.95 Polish Zloty (PLN)
GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
APL
CAS
CEDB

Analytical and advisory activities
Adaptable Program Loan
Country Assistance Strategy
Council o f Europe Development
Bank
Country Financial Accountability
CFAA
Assessment
Computable general equilibrium
CGE
Country Partnership Strategy
CPS
Central Statistics Office
cso
European Bank for Reconstruction
EBRD
and Development
European Commission
EC
Emergency Flood Recovery Project
EFRP
European Investment Bank
EIB
Exchange Rate Mechanism
ERM2
European System o f Accounts
ESA95
ESMAP Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program
Economic and sector work
ESW
European Union
EU
Euro
EUR
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
EU8
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovak
Republic, and Slovenia
Foreign direct investment
FDI
Foreign Investment Advisory
FIAS
Services
FSAP
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal year
FY
GDDKiA General Directorate o f National
Roads and Highways

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

Gross Domestic Product
Harmonized Index o f Consumer Prices
Investment Climate Assessment
Institutional Development Fund
Initial Public Offerings
Farmers Social Insurance System
Middle-income country
Ministry o f Finance
National Bank o f Poland
National Development Plan
National Health Fund
Policy and Human Resources
Development
PKP S.A. Polish National Railway ComDanv
PLN
Polish Zloty
PPP
Public-private partnership
PSL
Polish Peasants Party
R&D
Research and development
ROSC
Reports o n Observance o f Standards and
Codes
SGP
Stability and Growth Pact
SLD
Alliance o f the Democratic Left
SME
Small and medium enterprises
SIDEM Social and Institutional Development and
Economic Management Technical
Assistance Program
SWAP
Sector-wide approach
TA
Technical assistance
TIBS
Training Initiative for Banking
Supervision
Labor Union Party
UP

GDP
HICP
ICA
IDF
IPOS
KRUS
MIC
MOF
NBP
NDP
NHF
PHRD

. -

Shigeo Katsu
Roger W. Grawe

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..............................................................................................................

i

I.

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................................................

I1.

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMAND CHALLENGES ........................
5
A . Development Priorities....................................................................................................
5
B. Development Challenges - Sectoral Aspects and Macroeconomic Linkages ................. 5

I11.

POLAND AND THE WORLD BANK: PAST RELATIONSHIP AND LESSONS.......... 10
A . Past World Bank Assistance .......................................................................................... 10
B. Implementationo f the Previous CAS ............................................................................
11
C. Rationale for Future Partnership....................................................................................
13

I V.

WORLD BANK’S PROPOSED STRATEGY ....................................................................
A . CPS - Principles for Engagement..................................................................................
B. Operational Approaches ................................................................................................
C. Guidelines for Engagement and Risk Management ......................................................
D. Key Priorities for the CPS .............................................................................................
E. Fiscal Consolidation......................................................................................................
F. Convergence/Competitiveness......................................................................................
G. Poverty and Employment ..............................................................................................
H. Assistance from Other Development Partners ...............................................................

13
13
13
14
15
15
15
16
17

V.

CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISK MANAGEMENT....................................................

18

V I.

CPS CONSULTATIONS.....................................................................................................

18

VI1. CONCLUDINGREMARKS...............................................................................................

1

19

T h i s document has a restricted distribution and may b e used by recipients only in
the performance o f their official duties I t s contents may n o t b e otherwise disclosed
w i t h o u t W o r l d Bank authorization.

.

TABLES:
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:

Key Economic Indicators, 1998-2004 .............................................................................
2
Pension Fund Reform - Effect on General Government Deficit ..................................... 4
Government Macroeconomic Strategy, M a i n Indicators.................................................
5
Proposed Nonlending Program......................................................................................
17
Indicative Lending Program ..........................................................................................
17

CAS ANNEXES:
Annex 1
Annex 2
Annex A 2
Annex B 2
Annex B 3
Annex B 4
Annex B 5
Annex B 6
Annex B 7
Annex B 8
Annex B 9

Brief Description o f Activities Proposed for 2005
Summary o f Public Consultations on the World Bank’s CPS for Poland
Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
Summary o f Nonlending Services
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
K e y Economic Indicators
K e y Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD & Grants)
CPS Results Matrix

Map

IBRD 33467

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) has been developed in collaboration with the
Government o f Poland. I t aims to align the World Bank’s program b o t h with the development
challenges that Poland faces as a new member o f the European U n i o n (EU) and with the
Government’s decision malung process. The CPS foresees the evolution o f the relationship towards a
partnership for development in which the Bank continues to support the Government with a full set of
instruments to tackle elements o f the remaining agenda and in which Poland increasingly contributes
with the lessons o f its experience for broader dissemination by the Bank t o other member countries.

ii.
The strategy set out in this document takes as i t s starting point the country’s objective to
reach two-thirds o f EU average per capita income by 2013. Achieving this objective will require the
prudent management o f the economy and sustained structural reform efforts in order to increase
employment and reduce poverty and meet the requirements for the adoption o f the Euro. The CPS
sets out a program that will assist the Government in meeting these challenges in an environment
where the need for external borrowing i s modest.

iii.

Partnership: The evolution from Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) to CPS entails: (a) a
single lending case based on a macroeconomic framework consistent with Poland’s convergence
program under the EU Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) described in para. 15; and (b) shifts fi-om a
largely pre-determined program o f lending and non-lending activities t o a more flexible approach in
which broad priorities are defined for the entire period and specific activities are agreed o n a yearly
basis in a manner consistent with the Polish planning and budgeting cycle.

iv.
World Bank Analytic Work: Based o n previous work and the ongoing policy dialogue with
Government counterparts, consultations were carried out with the relevant Government agencies for
the 2005 analytic work program. W o r k will include studies and policy dialogue around issues related
t o public finance reform, including financing o f health and higher education, railway privatization,
public administration improvement, accounting and auditing, corporate governance, influence o f the
legal system on the financial market, financial services, public environmental financing, energy
policy dialogue, including energy efficiency and renewable energy, public-private partnerships
(PPPs) for roads, labor markets, and computable general equilibrium (CGE) model building.
v.
World Bank Operations: The Government recognizes that Bank involvement in project
preparation and supervision can transfer h o w l e d g e and skills in ways that pure analytic work cannot
accomplish. Accordingly, the 2005 annual business plan includes three projects: road rehabilitation
and maintenance, flood prevention, and support to improve social cohesion in rural municipalities
(gminas) and strengthen the analytic and administrative capacity o f the Farmers Social Insurance
System (KRUS). These projects are under preparation and expected to be approved in the coming 12
months. Areas o f future project development include a follow-up road rehabilitation and maintenance
project, which has been reconfinned by Government. The current Government views the financial as
w e l l as transaction costs o f Bank financing as a disincentive for further borrowing; therefore other
potential areas for future development will be discussed with the new Government in the context o f
the 2006 annual business plan.
Most projects will be in the form o f investment lending with embedded technical assistance
(TA), using the sector-wide approach (SWAP) modality to pool funds with Government and other
development partners. T o respond rapidly t o evolving demand, projects would be designed and
delivered quickly, with preparation held t o under 12 months, whenever possible. Bank procedures

vi,

will continue to be simplified and aligned with PolisWEU practices in line with the Bank’s initiative
o n “Use o f Country Systems.” Although no projects have been identified yet, lending for TA could
also be provided under the Social and Institutional Development and Economic Management
Technical Assistance Program (SIDEM) for Eligible Members o f the European Union, which was
discussed by the Board on January 25,2005.
vii.
Guidelines for Engagement and Risk Management: The flexible nature o f the CPS creates
the need for clear guidelines as to when and where the Bank should be engaged in Poland. The first
basis for any engagement must be demand by Poland in consideration o f its development agenda and
access to EU Cohesion and Structural Funds, funds from other development partners, and from the
debt and capital markets at lower financial costs than those o f the Bank. On i t s side, the Bank needs
to continue t o ensure that i t s work in Poland meets the institution’s standards and serves its broader
goals. T o do this, Management will regularly monitor progress with reforms as well as the
environment into which its resources are placed. The CPS includes a set o f indicators to monitor
progress in i t s implementation.

viii.
The framework outlined in this Partnership Strategy i s designed t o remain in force until such
time as i t i s no longer relevant. Relevance will be assessed against two criteria: the demand for the
Bank’s services; and, the existence o f a conducive macroeconomic environment consistent with
Poland’s convergence program under the SGP, as discussed in para. 15. To demonstrate the
continued relevance o f the framework and priorities o f this Strategy, Management will provide a b r i e f
progress report t o the Board by mid-2007 when the EU financing framework for 2007-2013 i s
confirmed.

Board Members may wish to discuss the following aspects:

ix.
0

e

Does the CPS adequately respond to the needs o f Poland, balancing flexibility with a
framework to focus and guide the program?
Are the suggested guidelines for engagement adequate?

..

11

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) aims to align the World Bank’s program both with
Poland’s development agenda as a new EU member and with the Government’s decision-making
processes. The CPS has been developed in partnership with Poland, and on the basis o f a
collaborative approach i s geared to provide the flexibility and capacity for rapid response that are
required for the Bank to remain relevant in helping to meet the challenges that face Poland as an upper
middle income country and a new member o f the EU.
2.
The last CAS for Poland was presented to the Board on December 10, 2002. I t was prepared
in the period prior to Poland’s accession to the EU, and at a time o f economic slow-down and
uncertainties in Poland’s policy framework. Since that time, Poland has become a member o f the EU,
its overall economic performance has improved and there has been greater consistency in policy
alignment with EU obligations. While most o f the priority activities identified in the last strategy are
being implemented, their timing and modality have changed in response to actual country demand, the
large amounts o f EU funds now available, and the obligations o f Poland as a new member o f the EU.
At the same time, the perception o f country risk and, consequently, borrowing costs in international
capital markets have significantly declined for Poland.

I. The Country Context
3.
Poland joined the EU on May 1,2004. EU membership concluded a period o f four years o f
negotiations, implementation o f a wide range o f reforms, and adoption o f the acquis communautaire,
which saw the alignment o f Polish legislation, regulations and procedures with those o f the EU. As a
result, Poland has access to approximately Euro (EUR) 13 billion o f EU Cohesion and Structural
Funds to be committed by the end o f December 2006. For this period, Poland’s development priorities
are largely defined in the National Development Plan (NDP) 2004-2006. The major challenges
identified in this context are: implementingthe acquis communautaire, continuing the reform agenda,
including areas not covered by the acquis, and ensuring efficient and effective utilization o f EU funds.
Beyond 2006, the Govemment has prepared a draft N D P 2007-2013, which i s currently being
discussed with local stakeholders and which will be approved in i t s final form by the next Government
following elections later this year. While the time horizon o f this plan coincides with the next EU
financing cycle, i t lays out a comprehensive development strategy which goes beyond the utilization
o f future EU funds.
4.
Political dynamics are s t i l l dominated by the lack o f stable party structures, and polarized
loyalties linked to the political heritage o f transition. Populist tendencies and unstable coalitions are
likely to play a continuing role in Polish politics. Despite a decisive victory in parliamentary elections
in September 2001, the governing coalition o f the Alliance o f the Democratic L e f t (SLD), the Labor
Union (UP) and the Polish Peasants Party (PSL) headed by Prime Minister Leszek M i l l e r fell apart
after 15 months leading, from February 2003, to a minority Govemment. After another year as a
minority Govemment with limited political capital plagued by corruption scandals and little ability to
push through needed reforms, M i l l e r and his Cabinet resigned on M a y 2, 2004, the day after EU
membership took effect. A new Government headed by a respected economist and two-time Finance
Minister, Marek Belka, and including several ministers from the previous Government took over; but
only managed to secure the necessary parliamentary vote o f confidence in late June 2004 with the
condition that i t would seek a second vote o f confidence in autumn 2004. That second vote o f
confidence was also secured in October 2004, and the Government i s now set to remain in office until
the upcoming elections later this year.

5.
As a result o f this unsettled political environment, a good deal o f time was lost in formulating
and implementing a reform agenda; but the current Government, although clearly interim in nature,
has reinvigorated the process particularly with respect to privatization and fiscal reforms. This has led
to renewed progress in some o f the areas in which the World Bank i s involved, including the reform
and privatization o f the hard coal mining and railways sectors, the modernization o f the roads agency
and the initial attempts to tackle health financing issues.

6.
The overall economic situation and outlook have generally improved since the time o f the
last CAS. Output growth has accelerated rapidly, inflation has remained low, and the external current
account has remained sustainable. At the same time, however, the fiscal balance has weakened further
and unemployment has remained stubbornly high. Table 1 below contains key economic indicators
for the period.

I

Table 1: Key Economic Indi
Annual data

Real Economy
GDP Growth (constant prices)
Domestic Demand Growth (constant prices)
Gross Domestic Fixed Investment Growth (constant prices)
Social Indicators
Inequality (Gini coeff. for equivalent consumption)
Employment (end of period, millions)'

-

998-2004

-!004e

- ---

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

4.8

4.1

4.0

6.3
14.2

4.8
6.8

2.8
2.7

1.o
-1.6
-8.8

0.9
-5.8

1.4

2003
3.8
2.4
-0.9

5.4
4.9
5.1

Unemployment, registered (end of period, %)

0.260 1.265 0.271 0.271 1.278 0.281
15.34 14.57 14.54 14.04 13.72 13.72 13.75
10.7 13.8 16.3 19.4 20.0 20.0
19.1

Public Finances
National methodologf
General Government Revenues (% of GDP)
General Government Expenditures (% of GDP)
General Government Deficit (% of GDP)

39.5
41.9
-2.4

39.6
42.7
-3.1

41.2

Total Public Debt (% of GDP)
ESA95'
General Government Deficit (% of GDP)
General Government Debt (% of GDP)
Prices, Waaes. and Interest Rates
Inflation HlCP (period average, y/y, % change)
Commercial lending rate (period average, %)
Real Effective Exchange Rate4 (end of period, y/y% change)
Nominal Exchange Rate (PLN/Euro, end of period)

37.5
40.9

37.9
43.2

37.9
44.1

43.9

-3.4
40.0

-5.3
40.9

-6.3
46.7

-1.o
34.8

-0.3
35.9

-0.7
36.8

-3.8
36.7

11.8
24.5

7.2
17.0

10.1
20.2

5.3

4.5
4.09

-1.0
4.17

13.0
3.85

18.7
11.1
3.52

39.6
45.3
-5.8
51.5

-7.0
51.8

-3.6
41.4

-3.9
45.4

-5.4
45.9

1.9
13.4
-8.7
4.02

0.8
7.5

3.5
7.7
12.1

-12.0
4.72

External Developments
-9.2
-2.9
-4.1
-7.4
-3.8
-7.6
Trade Balance (goods) (% of GDP)
-7.6
-2.0
-4.1
-2.9
-6.0
-2.6
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)
4.4
3.1
5.7
2.2
2.1
3.8
FDI (inflow, % of GDP)
35.2 41.6 39.8 37.7 41.5 47.6
External Debt (% of GDP)
Figures for 2004: World Bank Staff estimate
I/ Based on Labor Force Data
2/ Constant methodology, cash basis, includes below-the-line expenditures (e.g. transfers to pension funds)
3/ source: Eurostat, MoF, excluding the effect of pension reform
4/ IMFReeR, increase indicates appreciation
Sources: CSO, NBP, OECD, IMF, Eurostat and Bank Staff estimates

-

-2-

38.2
45.2

4.08

-2.4
-1.6
2.3
47.0

- ---

7.
Output growth has accelerated rapidly. As a result o f accommodative macroeconomic
policies and cyclical factors, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rebounded to 5.4 percent in 2004
(up from 1 percent in 2001, 1.4 percent in 2002, and 3.8 percent in 2003). This acceleration signals
the end o f the first marked economic cycle in Poland since the beginning o f transition. Growth
originated in a rapid expansion o f exports (linked partly to EU accession, but also to efficiency gains),
and growing private consumption, while fixed investment only began recovering in 2004.

8.
Inflation has remained low and relatively stable. Inflation declined to less than 1 percent in
2003, but increased in 2004 on the back o f EU-accession effects (adjustments o f indirect taxes etc.)
and the surge in o i l and other commodity prices. However, second round effects appeared to be
contained as monetary conditions were tightened both through a hike in interest rates and through
appreciation o f the zloty. Further, wage pressures were held in check by the persisting slack in the
labor market.
9.
The current account deficit has stayed at a very l o w and safe level, helped by a healthy
increase in exports and muted investment demand. The impressive export performance reflected a
combination o f EU accession, including full access to European markets for agricultural products, the
mild recovery in Western Europe, and strong competitiveness arising from modest wage and rapid
productivity growth. External debt at 47 percent o f GDP poses limited risks.
10.
The fiscal position has continued to deteriorate, but strong output growth and renewed fiscal
reform efforts in 2004 arrested the negative dynamics. W h i l e the general government deficit i s
estimated to have reached 7 percent o f GDP in 2004, this was lower than budgeted on the back o f
strong revenue growth despite a lowering o f the corporate tax rate. Further, the expected rise in the
public debt-to-GDP ratio was contained through appreciation o f the zloty, and the ratio at end-2004 o f
less than 52 percent o f GDP was well below the 55 percent o f GDP limit specified in the Public
Finance Act.’ In early 2004 the Government adopted a comprehensive fiscal reform plan (the Hausner
Plan) aimed at both rationalizing social transfers and certain other spending programs, and broadening
the revenue base. The measures included in the Plan, if fully implemented, would reduce the fiscal
deficit by about 2 percentage points o f GDP (on an annual basis) by 2007. W h i l e about one-half o f the
targeted savings have been assured, key measures relating to both farmer and disability pensions
remain o n the agenda.
11.
Unemployment has increased rapidly as the economy continued to slow through 2002, and
peaked in 2002 at 20 percent. Despite accelerated economic growth since mid-2003, unemployment
has only started to decrease in the second half o f 2004 to i t s current level o f 19.1 percent. While the
reasons for this slow decrease in unemployment are complex, there i s evidence to suggest that the
structural nature o f Polish unemployment - related to regional, demographic and education
characteristics o f the labor force, and estimated around 15 percent - i s an important factor.
12.
Poverty increased during the period o f economic slowdown from 14 percent to 17 percent o f
households*, and i t remains high despite resumed economic growth owing to stubbomly high
unemployment. Poverty in Poland is, in fact, found to be directly related to an individual’s ability to
hold a job.
13.
The economic outlook for 2005 i s favorable, but looking further ahead, there i s naturally more
uncertainty. Output growth should remain buoyant in 2005 at around 4% percent, inflation should

’

Once this threshold i s exceeded (in year t), which i s officially known in year t+l; the budget for the following
year (t+2) must be consistent with containing the debt-to-GDP ratio to below the level prevailing in year t.
The numbers refer to “moderate poverty” defined as US$6.33 a day (power purchase parity), “Growth,
Employment and Living Standards in Poland”, March 22, 2004.

*

-3

-

decline to within the National Bank o f Poland’s (NBP) target range (2% +/- 1 percent) over the course
o f the year as the impact o f the temporary price shocks fade, and the external current account deficit
should remain low and fully financed by foreign direct investment (FDI). The budget for 2005 targets
a reduction in the general government deficit o f almost 2 percentage points o f GDP through containing
real expenditure growth in the state budget to 1 percent, although in part this results from shifting
certain expenditures (notably pension indexation) to the following year. Further, revenue projections
appear to be on the optimistic side. Nevertheless, public debt should remain well within the
precautionary limit o f 55 percent o f GDP. Beyond 2005, sustaining these favorable trends will depend
on renewed reform efforts, both o n the fiscal side and broader structural reforms aimed at improving
the investment climate and efficiency in the economy.

14.
The general government deficit as reported by Poland treats public sector transfers to pension
funds as public savings. This i s consistent with pension system reform in Poland and other countries,
including Hungary and the Slovak Republic. However, Eurostat has ruled that such transfers should
be excluded from public finance, thereby leading to a higher deficit (see Table 2 below).
Table 2: Pension Fund Reform - Effect on General Government Deficit
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

General govemment deficit (% o f GDP)

-3.9

-5.4

-3.9

-3.2

-2.2

Effect o f pension reform (% o f GDP)

-1.6

-1.6

-1.8

-1.7

-1.7

General govemment deficit according to Eurostat pension
ruling (% o f GDP)

-5.5

-7.0

-5.7

-4.9

-3.9

ESA95 methodology
Source: staff calculations

15.
Macroeconomic Framework under the Stability and G r o w t h Pact (SGP).
The
Government’s medium-term macroeconomic plans are centered o n meeting the conditions for Euro
adoption in 2009 as laid out in the convergence program required by the EU in the context o f the SGP.
The main objective of the SGP i s t o enforce discipline in the Eurozone as a means to support price
stability and sustainable growth. Budgetary discipline i s gauged with respect to t w o criteria: a general
government deficit-to-GDP ratio below 3 percent; and a debt-to-GDP ratio below 60 percent.
Functioning o f the SGP rests on t w o pillars: multilateral surveillance and corrective mechanisms. As
regards surveillance, EU member states are required to prepare a convergence program and update it
annually. The European Commission (EC) prepares an assessment o f the convergence program of
individual member states on the basis o f which the Council o f the EU issues an opinion. As regards
corrective mechanisms, the Excessive Deficit Procedure identifies and forces corrections o f excessive
deficits, defined under non-exceptional circumstances as a deficit over 3 percent o f GDP. Whenever
such deficit occurs, the EC prepares a report and recommendations for the EU Council, which then
reaches a decision o n the existence o f excessive deficit and issues recommendations for corrective
actions, which should be effected within a four month period. Poland submitted i t s convergence
program to the EC in M a y 2004 (Poland, The Convergence Program, 2004) and last updated i t in
December 2004 (2004-2005 Update). The program envisages a reduction o f the general government
deficit to below 3 percent of GDP by 2007 as a result o f the implementation o f the Program for the
Rationalization and Reduction of Public Expenditures (Hausner Plan, see para. 10). The main
assumptions are presented in the table below:

-4-

Table 3: Government Macroeconomic Strategy, M a i n Indicators
~~

2003

2004e

2005

2006

2007

GDP mowth. %V/Y
Budget balance, YOo f GDP (1)

3.8
-3.9

5.7
-5.4

5.0
-3.9

4.8
-3.2

5.6
-2.2

Public Debt, % o f GDP
Inflation - Harmonized Index o f Consumer
Prices (HICP)
Current Account Balance, % of GDP

45.4

45.9

47.6

48

47.3

0.7

3.5

3.0

2.7

2.5

-2.2

-1.9

-2.3

-3.0

-3.6

(1) According to ESA95 but excluding the effect o f pensionrefom
Source: EC

11. Government’s Development Program and Challenges
A. Development Priorities
16.
The Government’s development strategy i s contained in the NDP 2004-2006, and in the draft
NDP 2007-2013. The overriding objective o f the strategy i s t o put the economy o n a path o f high and
sustainable growth, through improved competitiveness o f f i r m s and regions, to contribute to the
recovery o f employment, and promote strong social cohesion. The aim i s t o reach two-thirds o f EU
average income per capita by 20 13.
17.
The Government’s strategy provides a good basis for support from Poland’s partners, most
notably the EU through Cohesion and Structural Funds, the European Investment Bank (EIB), the
Council o f Europe Development Bank (CEDB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD), and the W o r l d Bank. The strategy recognizes the need to manage the economy
prudently in order t o increase employment and reduce poverty, converge in the medium to long-term
to average European income levels, and meet the requirements for the adoption o f the Euro. The
following paragraphs highlight each o f these three challenges as Poland implements i t s NDP and, in
key areas o f World Bank involvement, they review progress and identify remaining challenges.

B. Development Challenges- Sectoral Aspects and MacroeconomicLinkages
18.
Poland aims to reduce i t s fiscal deficit to below 3 percent o f GDP in 2007, while maintaining
public debt below 60 percent o f GDP in line with i t s convergence program as discussed in para. 15
above. The Government acknowledges that further public expenditure reforms, beyond those
measures o f the fiscal austerity plan which have already been approved, will be needed to make r o o m
for needed infrastructure investments and to achieve i t s medium-term fiscal targets. These measures
should be implemented as soon as possible, including to ensure that the budget target for 2005 i s met.
Reforms o f those sectors which have been a burden t o the budget such as coal mining, railways and
health should be pursued ambitiously, as well as further reforms o f social transfers (notably the
farmers’ pension system and disability pensions), with the particular objective o f reducing disincentive
effects in the labor market. Additionally, public expenditure management systems and tax
administration require further improvement. Continued use over the medium-term o f the implicit rule
in the 2005 budget for limiting spending growth t o 1 percent per annum in real terms would provide
for the necessary restraint on the overall expenditure envelope.
19.
Health sector reforms have been introduced (including approval o f the Health Financing A c t
in August 2004), but they address primarily health financing, and they still need t o be implemented.
Beyond this process, the remaining reform agenda in the sector includes: (a) introduction o f
appropriate incentives for cost-saving and efficiency improvements in the financing and delivery o f
health services; (b) better performance o f the National Health Fund (NHF) and i t s regional branches;
-5-

(c) reduction and eventual elimination o f the high levels o f indebtedness which pervade the health
system; (d) improvements in clinical quality o f health services; (e) rationalization o f hospital capacity
across regions; (f) strengthening o f governance and management in hospitals; (g) introduction o f
comprehensive and effective regulatory and oversight mechanisms; and (h) improvement in collection
and redistribution o f health insurance premiums.

20.
Reform o f the coal sector has been under implementation for several years. While much has
been achieved in terms o f reduced staff levels, increased productivity, reduced fiscal drain, and
restructuring o f the industry, long-term sustainability o f the sector will require further progress o n all
these fronts as w e l l as actions to address the industry’s environmental legacy. The key will be t o
accelerate privatization, on which progress has been slow and inconsistent. The 2004-2006 Reform
Program approved in April 2004 has renewed the emphasis o n further voluntary staffing reductions. I t
also targets lower production capacity, elimination o f state subsidies, adherence to a hard budget
constraint, and ultimately privatization o f the sector. The impetus o f the reform has slowed somewhat
in recent months, largely because the coal companies see less need for employment and capacity
downsizing due to buoyant coal prices, especially in the second h a l f o f 2004. Additionally, there i s
labor union opposition to privatization. The four key challenges are: (a) overstaffing - the target for
staff reductions i s unlikely to be met under the voluntary program, necessitating mandatory
retrenchments t o ensure long term viability o f the sector; (b) capacity reduction - proceeding but with
strong opposition from both workers and the (still state-owned) mining companies; (c) environmental
legacy - mitigation o f past mining damages has not received sufficient attention; and (d) privatization delayed and proceeding slowly in spite o f the unique opportunity provided by a buoyant coal market.
The reforms will not be completed without concerted Govemment action. If these issues are not
addressed in a proactive manner, the risk i s that a downswing in coal prices could cause large parts o f
the industry t o revert t o financial losses which would become a major obstacle to successful
privatization.
21.
Convergence to European Income Levels. The Govemment recognizes that medium to
long-term convergence t o European income levels will require sustained high growth averaging 4.5
percent per year until 20 13 to achieve the stated a i m o f two-thirds o f EU average income per capita by
2013, and strong competitiveness in European and world markets. This will entail continuing
structural reforms to: (a) improve the business environment, including broadening and deepening
financial intermediation, initiating judicial system reform and deepening public administration reform,
including being able t o use the available resources from the EU effectively and efficiently; (b) improve
the energy and transport infrastructure: (c) develop the knowledge economy, including initiating
tertiary education reform.
22.
Business Environment. Poland has benefited from large investment flows over the last 15
years, reflecting the many efforts that have helped improve the business environment. But this i s an
area in which continuous improvement i s essential to stay competitive and attract new investors.
Recent business environment surveys, as well as the Bank’s Investment Climate Assessment (ICA),
Doing Business 2004 and 2005 reports, and the Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS) w o r k
on administrative barriers to investment indicate that the Polish authorities need to improve the
mechanisms for contract enforcement and dispute resolution, including out o f court settlements. The
quality of infrastructure services needs improvement, including developing mechanisms t o enhance
participation o f the private sector in the provision o f these services. There i s also a need to enhance
the predictability o f the tax regime to allow businesses t o plan for taxes, including ensuring
consistency in interpretation o f tax decisions across regions. To ensure that investment i s
employment-intensive, there i s a need to reduce the high tax wedge for social security premiums. The
costs o f regulatory compliance are too high and administrative procedures could be streamlined.
Overall, there should be a mechanism to monitor the business environment o n a regular basis, compare
i t t o competitors and provide direct feedback t o policy formulation.
-6-

23.
A competitive market economy depends on effective support from the judicial system. In
Poland, the judicial system needs to improve its efficiency by enhancing case-load management and
overall judicial administration. Policy makers need better court statistics and better access to such
information. Better case-load management would help shorten the excessive time n o w required for the
resolution o f contract and other disputes in Poland. There i s also a need t o undertake systematic
impact assessments o f new laws and regulations on the overall business environment and o n the cost
o f doing business.
24.
Poland has seen wide-ranging financial reforms with a private banking system n o w operating
in a competitive environment. Financial sector growth, like competitiveness, requires, however, a
continuous reform environment. Improvements in creditor rights, in the quality o f financial
statements, and in credit information top the list for the banking sector. Non-bank sources o f
financing need to be deepened, including leasing, factoring, venture capital, commercial paper and
bond markets. Financial sector oversight needs to be strengthened and modemized, including
preparations for Base1 2, development o f risk-based regulation and supervision o f pension funds, and
creation o f an accounting standards board and a public oversight body for the audit profession.
Mortgage finance, which remains an underdeveloped aspect o f the financial system, may also require
the attention o f policy makers.

25.

The Energy Sector. This sector has undergone a major transformation in preparation for EU
accession and integration into global markets. Poland’s recently adopted Energy Policy Framework
until the Year 2025 emphasizes three key objectives: ensuring energy safety, increasing economic
competitiveness, and protecting the environment. T h i s Framework recognizes the need to increase
emphasis on energy efficiency, expand the use o f indigenous renewable energy sources, establish a 90day fuel reserve capacity, accelerate coal sector reform (discussed in para. 20 above), and increase the
use o f natural gas, thereby reducing excessive levels o f coal-fired emissions. Balancing the cost and
security advantages o f using indigenous coal against the environmental benefits o f using cleaner but
increasingly imported natural gas will involve difficult policy tradeoffs. There i s progress o n most
fronts; but major challenges remain in restructuring and privatizing the power, coal, and gas sectors.
Power and gas markets, dominated by monopolies and contract-based market structures, will prove
challenging to shift to a competitive pricing model. Poland’s aging power and gas infrastructure needs
expansion and investment, and attracting large-scale private investment into the sector i s difficult
given continuing uncertainties about market structure and slow progress in privatization. Integration
into Europe and achieving economic competitiveness will require progress o n this agenda in the near
term. Despite major gains in energy intensity, Poland s t i l l uses around 2.5 to 3 times more energy per
unit o f GDP than the EU a ~ e r a g e . Over
~
time, this will undermine the competitiveness o f the Polish
economy. The potential for energy savings i s very large in all sectors o f the economy, and many
investments in energy efficiency will be feasible without direct subsidies. Activities to tap the
efficiency potential, and the level and type o f Government intervention required to achieve these
targets will need to be analyzed, and appropriate measures to scale up energy efficiency investments
should be taken.

26.
Modernization and Reform of Transport Infrastructure. Three subsectors are included:
railways, roads, and ports. The reform o f the railway sector has been under implementation since
1999 with ambitious objectives, but mixed results. There has been progress in productivity growth
due principally to a f i r s t round o f layoffs to reduce chronic overstaffing. There has also been progress
in the financial and operational restructuring o f the industry, resulting in the reconfiguration o f the
traditional monolithic monopoly structure into several independent operating companies. Despite
these achievements, the sector i s far from sustainable; in addition t o the current levels o f compensation
EuropeanEnergy and Transport Trends to 2030, European Commission, Brussels, 2003.

-7-

for public service obligations, the railways continue to require periodic debt relief, write-off o f other
financial obligations to the State, and support for new capital expenditures. T h i s i s due mainly to
underfunded, financially non-viable regional services. These constitute social obligations and result in
large accounting losses and short-term liquidity constraints. Finally, progress on privatization has
been slow and further complicated by repeated changes in strategy.
27.
The railway reform strategy was revised in December 2003. It called for a renewed push
towards privatization and the devolution o f responsibilities for regional passenger services to local
governments with appropriate budget funding. Unfortunately, little progress has been made in i t s
implementation. Another strategy revision has been adopted by the Government in February 2005. I t
reflects a policy change aimed at boosting the future role o f railways in the Polish transport sector
while continuing with privatization. Access fees will be reduced by one-third in order to lower tariffs
and encourage rail utilization. At the same time, to avoid burdening the state budget or taxpayers,
one-third o f the least used network (7,000 km) will be closed. The Govemment will assume
responsibility for most o f the maintenance and renewal o f the remaining network. This will be funded
from a new National Railway Fund (beginning in 2006), a major source o f which will be 20 percent o f
the receipts from fuel charges collected in the National Road Fund. Operating companies will be
further strengthened by the transfer o f all operating assets currently owned by the holding company,
Polish National Railway Company (PKP S.A.), and changes in their organizational and capital
structure. A new major stations company will be created as a subsidiary o f the infrastructure company
to exploit the real estate potential o f railway property. In terms o f privatization, while preparations
continue for cargo services, the priority i s the trade sale o f intercity passenger services. The
Government needs to play a more decisive role in pushing network rationalization, rapid privatization
of cargo and intercity passenger services, and devolution o f regional passenger services to local
governments.
28.
Changes in the roads sector have focused on institutional restructuring to improve planning
and implementation capacity, measures to finance the large maintenance backlog and o n the
substantial investments required to extend Poland’s minimal highway system. Some progress has
been made with the creation o f a single roads agency, the General Directorate o f National Roads and
Highways (GDDKiA), through the merger o f the General Directorate o f Public Roads and the Agency
for Construction and Operation o f Motonvays, and with the creation o f the National Road Fund,
financed by a fuel surcharge. A more ambitious plan for the introduction o f a user tax based on a
vignette system was rejected by Parliament, partly because o f lack o f proper communication and
information to the public. I t i s unlikely that the current Road Fund will generate sufficient resources
to meet the full needs o f the sector, even with increased private sector involvement. Attempts to
involve the private sector in the financing o f roads through concessions or public-private partnerships
(PPPs) have as yet been quite limited, partly because o f the lack o f an adequate legal and regulatory
framework. T h e four key challenges are to: (a) improve GDDKiA’s investment planning capacity to
enhance the quality and pace o f project implementation; (b) build GDDKiA’s capacity for
prioritization and selection o f investments on the basis o f economic criteria using modem
programming tools; (c) eradicate the large road maintenance backlog; and (d) enhance the capacity to
mobilize and coordinate private sector involvement in road infrastructure development.
29.
Reform and modernization o f the ports have been under implementation since the early 1990s,
with approval in 1996 o f a new legal and regulatory framework which aimed to modernize the sector,
increase its competitiveness and improve the quality o f services provided by the ports. State-owned
enterprises were restructured to act as ‘landlords’ o f the facilities with commercial activities to be
carried out by separate private operators independent o f the port authorities and regulated by the
Ministry o f Infrastructure in line with best practice. Joint-stock companies were created for each o f
the three main Polish ports with responsibility to manage the land and port infrastructure, including
maintenance services, modernization, and investment planning. As a consequence o f these changes,
-8-

municipal authorities gained more responsibility to make efficient use o f port infrastructure.
However, in the absence o f direct incentives, with the exception o f the port o f Gdynia which has been
able to attract a private investor to develop and to operate i t s container terminal, this responsibility has
not yet translated into better management o f port assets which therefore remains an urgent task.
30.
Knowledge Economy and Innovation. The Bank’s Knowledge Economy Assessment
concluded that a key element in a successful competition strategy for Poland must be increases in the
overall expenditure on research and development (R&D) and, most important, in the share o f R&D
financed by the private sector. Currently, Poland spends only 0.7 percent o f GDP o n R&D and only
one-third o f this i s spent by the private sector. Poland’s private sector will need t o increase i t s R&D
spending substantially, and this will require a range o f R&D financing instruments f r o m grants for
innovation at the very early stages to venture capital. There i s also a need t o improve the regime for
intellectual property rights. The quality and relevance o f formal education needs t o be assessed
critically, life-long learning systems need t o be improved, and the linkages between academia and the
scientific and business communities need t o be strengthened. Lastly, there i s a need to complete the
liberalization o f the telecommunication sector in order to reduce costs, increase access to services such
as internet, and facilitate the introduction o f e-Government for businesses and citizens.
While the Education Development Strategy has been approved within the framework o f the
3 1,
NDP 2007-2013, i t s implementation i s only just starting, and many improvements are needed t o
contribute t o competitiveness and social inclusion. The report o n tertiary education produced jointly
with EIB identifies the need t o strengthen the capacity o f the Ministry o f National Education and
Sports for analytical work and for decision-making as an important requirement for dealing with some
of the key remaining challenges in the sector, which include: (a) better orienting education t o labor
market needs with emphasis o n greater flexibility; (b) improving access to high quality educational
services; (c) developing a life-long learning system that takes into account the changing demographic
profile o f learners in Poland; and (d) embedding the tertiary education system within a national
innovation strategy.
32.
Increasing Employment and Reducing Poverty. Increasing employment and reducing
poverty are two sides o f the same coin in Poland, given the strong correlation between family income
levels and employment status o f heads o f household. Currently, however, employment creation
remains sluggish, and it i s indeed lower than i t had been in the past when i t had offset the considerable
j o b destruction associated with transition. A s a result, unemployment i s high, and long-term
unemployment i s increasing, leading t o growing pockets o f long-term poverty and social exclusion.
To stimulate new j o b creation, labor market reforms are needed, and small and medium enterprises
(SME) development needs t o be revitalized. It may also be necessary to support the creation o f
sustainable employment where markets are currently failing, both in rural areas and in depressed urban
areas. Large inequalities in education and skills are a key barrier to citizens’ capacity to find and hold
a j o b and, thus, to staying out o f poverty. There i s also a need to examine the system o f social
transfers for better targeting, as evidence suggests that in some circumstances social transfers have
created a disincentive to more active participation in the labor market. However, growing pockets o f
long-term unemployment and poverty must also be dealt with, requiring actions t o increase the level o f
social inclusion.
33.
The Bank’s Living Standards Assessment has shown unemployment to be closely linked t o
large regional disparities and high inequality in educational outcomes across individuals and between
regions. High non-wage labor costs also played important roles. Indeed, employment opportunities in
Poland are highly correlated to individuals’ level o f education, and for low-skilled individuals, they
appear to be impaired by a combination o f a binding minimum wage, high labor taxes, and a structure
o f the social transfers that, while helping t o alleviate poverty in the earlier years o f transition, has also
proved a disincentive to active participation in the j o b market in l o w wage, high unemployment areas.
-9-

There i s also evidence that uniform national minimum wages may be a barrier t o employing some
people with l o w skills given the regional variations in price levels which translates into significantly
higher real minimum wages in poorer regions.

34.
Polish legislation provides for equal treatment o f women and men in the labor market and
ensures gender equality in access to professional training and promotion. Yet gender inequalities
continue to prevail as shown in the report on Gender and Economic Opportunities in Poland prepared
by the Bank in collaboration with the Govemment Plenipotentiary for Equal Status for M e n and
Women and numerous Polish experts. The gross gender pay gap i s l o w by intemational standards (17
percent in the 2002 Labor Force Survey) but, contrary t o other EU countries, it i s not linked to gender
differences in productivity-related characteristics. Moreover, Poland i s unique among the Central
European countries in experiencing an increasing female disadvantage in employment opportunities,
with the rate o f unemployment growing much faster for women than for men. These findings suggest
the need to go beyond legislation by focusing o n improved implementation and increased employers’
accountability in the selection and promotion process and to eradicate the social and cultural
stereotypes that lead t o the unequal treatment o f men and women in the labor market and social
protection system and promote the disadvantage o f women in public and political life.

35.

In rural and depressed areas, efforts should be continued to support the creation o f
employment but with a focus o n the creation o f sustainable employment where market responses have
thus far been weak. This includes incentives for the creation o f off-farm sources o f employment, as
well as enhancing the incentives and possibilities to seek urban employment. Reducing barriers to
labor mobility (i.e., finance, transportation including commuting, housing, and income transfer
mechanisms including KRUS) are key in this regard. These actions need to be supplemented in rural
areas with efforts t o increase the productivity and value-added o f the agricultural sector in general. In
the agriculture sector, while large farms are operating effectively and use modern production and
marketing techniques, several challenges remain, in particular in supporting the development o f small
and medium sized farms t o increase their productivity and value-added. Particular areas o f focus
include sustainable mechanisms for supporting marketing efforts, as well as introducing production
techniques that improve profitability, salability and environmental friendliness o f production for this
group o f farms.

111. Poland and the World Bank: Past Relationship and Lessons
A. Past World Bank Assistance
36.

Poland rejoined the W o r l d Bank in 1986, but the first lending operation occurred only in 1990
(after the end o f the communist period). Lending was substantial in the 1990s but decreased in the
early years o f this decade before recovering in 2004, coincident with a pickup in reform
implementation. Demand i s expected to remain at a level o f about US$350-400 m i l l i o n per year for
the next two to three years. A sizeable amount o f technical assistance and capacity building was, and
continues to be, embedded in lending in addition to the Bank’s analytical and advisory activities
(AAA) and activities supported by Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grants. Policy advice and
analytic work have been w e l l received by the authorities throughout the Bank’s involvement in
Poland.

37.
Bank lending has responded with lower volumes and greater selectivity to the completion o f
Poland’s transition to a market economy, i t s increased access to EU funds, and i t s achievement o f
investment grade (BBB+) rating as a sovereign borrower. At the same time, TA financed from the
Bank’s budget has become increasingly sophisticated. A total o f 66 loans have been approved since
1990 for total lending (commitments less cancellations) o f US$4.7 billion. As o f the end o f calendar
year 2004, US$2.8 billion have been repaid, and US$297 m i l l i o n remain undisbursed. Financing

-

10-

under the last CAS has supported government-led reform and modernization efforts, for which the
Bank lent modest amounts, but in which i t could add value in terms o f technical expertise,
implementation and management skills for complex activities, and helping to leverage larger financial
resources f r o m other partners such as EIB. The portfolio includes 11 loans, which support reform
efforts, including privatization (coal and railways) and strengthening and modernization o f institutions
(ports and the roads agency, GDDKiA), and programs for road maintenance, rural development,
energy efficiency, geothermal energy, regional water supply, and flood reconstruction and prevention.
All projects are rated satisfactory for implementation progress and development objectives.
38.
TA financed from the Bank budget has also changed in nature, responding to Poland’s
growing capacity and increasingly specialized needs by moving into more sophisticated areas where
the Bank’s global expertise has been particularly relevant and appreciated. Indeed, as Poland has
progressed, there has been an opportunity to pilot initiatives with relevance for other countries
confronting similar challenges and for Bank staff to learn from Poland’s experiences. Some examples
include the work on banking supervision which led to the establishment, within the structures o f the
NBP, o f TIBS (Training Initiative for Banking Supervision) through which Poland now supports the
training o f bank supervisors not only from neighboring countries in transition in Eastern, Central and
Southern Europe but also from Central Asia and from as far as Vietnam. Poland’s experience with
decentralization and establishment o f local governments has been analyzed by the Bank and
documented for use in other developing countries. Some ongoing work in the areas o f accounting and
auditing as w e l l as corporate governance as part o f updating the Reports on Observance o f Standards
and Codes (ROSCs) also have the potential for wider Bank use.

B. Implementation o f the Previous CAS
39.
An evaluation o f the implementation o f the FY03 CAS must take into account that the
changes in Poland’s circumstances which led to the preparation o f this CPS also affected the
implementation o f the previous CAS.
Two factors were particularly important in CAS
implementation. The first was the delays and uncertainties associated with political instability through
mid-2004, and the second was the momentous changes associated with EU accession. The latter, in
particular, has led to a period o f redefining o f the relationship between the World Bank and the Polish
authorities in which the role o f the World Bank inevitably accommodates the primacy o f Poland’s
partnership with the EU and other European institutions, not least in improving access to resources at
increasingly attractive terms. However, the basic priorities set in the FY03 CAS demonstrated their
robustness and remained at the core o f dialogue with the Polish authorities during the intervening
period. In particular, as reform efforts were re-initiated in late 2003 (roughly a year into CAS
implementation), the Bank’s operational focus on the coal sector, road administration and
maintenance, health financing and administration, higher education, and rural development was
confirmed.
40.
Recognizing the changing nature o f the Bank’s operational relationship with Poland, the FY03
CAS had anticipated that Poland would not be interested in traditional investment lending in these
priority areas. I t anticipated instead a potential series o f sector adjustment operations related to
specific sectoral benchmarks and a common single macroeconomic trigger. The authorities clearly
gave first priority to Bank support to coal and roads, and progress on the related sector benchmarks
was satisfactory by the end o f 2003. However, the sector adjustment instrument turned out to be illsuited to Poland’s evolving situation. In both prospective operations in coal and roads, the authorities
wanted stronger linkages with the actual administration o f the reform and related expenditure
programs than sector adjustment operations would normally entail. Furthermore, the conditionality
itself was not so much a set o f policy changes as it was the implementation o f institutional changes
linked to specific expenditures. Clearly, a more flexible and innovative approach than had been
foreseen at the time of the CAS was necessary. As a result, the roads operation was successfully

- 11 -

designed as a SWAP which pooled World Bank resources with those o f the Government and other
financial partners such as EIB, linked to the implementation o f specific budget lines. In the case o f
coal, two operations evolved. One directly supported retrenchment packages in the budget, thereby
linking disbursement to the actual implementation o f the reform program, and the second followed a
modified SWAP for mine closure expenditures over a multi-year period. These innovative approaches
were also implemented within a very short timeframe--less than six months once the appropriate
instrument had been identified.

41.
The CAS contained a specific quantitative macroeconomic trigger defined as an increase in
central government savings without a deterioration in general government recurrent balances.
Although this trigger had been met in 2003, it became apparent in early 2004 that it would not be met
in that year in spite o f the generally improved performance o f the economy and the implementation o f
the Hausner Plan (see para. IO), which made real progress toward fiscal sustainability. Considering
the direct links between the proposed operations and an improved composition o f public expenditure,
this trigger was judged to be n o longer a critical indicator o f improved policy performance when the
Government requested in early 2004 that the Bank proceed with support to the coal and roads sectors.
42.
The envisaged dialogue in other sectors and AAA were also broadly confirmed during the
FY03 CAS implementation, but delays and some shifts in priorities linked to the process o f redefining
the Bank-Poland partnership led to a consolidation o f some activities and, in some cases, a shift in
focus to TA from economic and sector work (ESW) or lending. The rural development dialogue
evolved based on initial experience with structural funds and has strengthened the focus on social
inclusion at the community level. Health and education have primarily focused on TA, although the
jointly-produced sector report on tertiary education with EIB was a notable output. Labor market
issues were melded into the Living Standards Assessment which also builds more strongly than
anticipated on regional differentials. Competition, SME and regulatory policy were considered in a
comparative context with the ICA, FIAS work on administrative barriers to investment, and the
Knowledge Economy Assessment rather than a free-standing competition policy review. A program
o f financial issues has been agreed with the NBP including elements o f judicial reform that affect
contract enforcement for banks. Finally, based on the request o f the Government, the Bank i s
endeavoring to assist with the formulation o f the next N D P rather than undertake i t s own review o f
development policy. In general, these changes reflect a greater attention to the specific requests o f the
authorities and less emphasis on ESW outputs.
43.
The benchmarks for evaluating progress o f the Bank program were largely met, in spite o f the
delays and shifts in priorities that affected Bank operations and AAA. Exceptions were policy
dialogue and possible TA for raising productivity in the agriculture sector and TA and dialogue on
strengthening regulatory capacity. On the other hand, policy dialogue on competition and labor
market reforms and on the environment for SME development did occur in the context o f the ICA, the
Living Standards Assessment and the Knowledge Economy Assessment.
44.
Overall, the lessons from the implementation o f the FY03 CAS are the following: (a) the
underlying analysis and priorities in the CAS were sound and remained robust in light o f Poland’s
improved performance and accession to the EU; (b) the instruments foreseen in the CAS were too
rigid for Poland’s changing circumstances, but flexibility in implementation and support from the
Region and Bankwide Middle-Income Country (MIC) and Simplification agendas helped keep the
Bank program relevant; (c) in spite o f the Bank’s higher financial costs relative to Poland’s other
sources o f funds, the Bank can provide sufficient value-added in selected areas in which i t brings
technical expertise combined with rapid and flexible implementation to justify modest levels of
lending.

-

12 -

C. Rationale for Future Partnership
45.
Although Poland’s recent developments could soon lead the authorities t o initiate graduation
from World B a n k borrower status, there i s s t i l l an agenda o f important reforms in areas in which the
Bank has been, and continues to be, the key technical partner and where B a n k operational activity
including, in some cases, modest financing can add value from the perspective o f the client. This
includes activities supporting privatization in the coal and railway sectors, modernization o f roads and
ports administration, public finance management, social inclusion, health, education, the development
of the financial sector and o f systems for knowledge transfers to industry. Additionally, the capacity
to design and implement reforms i s s t i l l constrained by the speed at which public administration and
institutions can be reformed. W o r l d Bank support in the form o f analytic w o r k and TA embedded in
modest lending has helped, and can continue to help, address this constraint. Furthermore, the Bank’s
engagement in the form o f an operational program has been, and continues t o be, a significant factor to
leverage and promote as well as endorse needed reforms. Consequently, there remains an opportunity
for continued, selective Bank involvement, particularly in the form o f technical support, either free
standing or embedded in lending and financial partnerships in Government programs.

IV. World Bank’s Proposed Strategy
A. CPS - Principles for Engagement

46.
W o r l d Bank’s activities in Poland under the partnership arrangement will need to be both
strategic and demand driven, focusing o n areas that are consistent with the development priorities o f
Poland as laid out in the NDP and where:
(a)

(b)
(c)

Significant policy or structural issues are involved;
The Bank can add value, as perceived by the Polish authorities in terms o f technical
excellence and comparative advantage, taking into account the cost o f financing; and
Effective partnerships are continued both with Polish partners, including private sector,
youth and c i v i l society organizations, and with external partners, including the EU, EIB,
EBRD, CEDB, the International Monetary Fund, and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development.

B. Operational Approaches

47.
Operational approaches consistent with the above criteria require the evolution o f the
relationship towards a partnership for development in which the Bank continues to support the
Government with a full set o f instruments to tackle elements o f the remaining agenda and in which
Poland increasingly contributes with the lessons o f its experience for broader dissemination by the
Bank to other member countries. T o fulfill its role in this partnership, the Bank will need to increase
its flexibility and responsiveness in a manner consistent with the priorities and recommendations from
the Bank’s Middle-Income Country Bankwide Working Group4 and those contained in the Framework
for W o r l d Bank Support to the EU N e w Members Countries o f Central and Eastern Europe’.
48.
The evolution f r o m CAS to CPS entails: (a) a single lending case based o n a macroeconomic
framework consistent with Poland’s convergence program under the SGP described in para. 15; and
(b) shifts from a largely pre-determined program o f lending and nonlending activities to a more
Enhancing World Bank Support to Middle-Income Countries (SecM2004-007Ul), April 20,2004; and
February 26,2004.
Management Action Plan (SecM2004-007I),
Framework for World Bank Support to the European Union (EU) New Member Countries o f Central and
Eastern Europe (SecM2004-0283), May 28,2004.
-13-

flexible approach in which broad priorities are defined for the entire period and specific activities are
agreed o n a yearly basis in a manner consistent with the Polish planning and budgeting cycle.

49.

Increased responsiveness and flexibility entail: (a) quick design and delivery o f projects, with
preparation held to less than 12 months and implementation timetables to three years whenever
possible; and (b) continuation o f the work started under the Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance,
and the Coal M i n e Closure projects and the further simplification and alignment o f Bank procedures
with PolisWEU practices in line with the Bank’s initiative o n “Use o f Country Systems” and the
concept o f “entityhector accreditation” contained in the Framework for W o r l d Bank Support to the
EU N e w Member Countries o f Central and Eastem Europe where possible.
50.
Lending and nonlending activities will be identified and agreed in annual business plans
consistent with the above principles and linked to the Polish budget cycle; but this possibility would
not preclude the flexibility to alter the agreed business plan in response to urgent demands. Tables 4
and 5 at the end of this section include specific activities agreed for FY05 and FY06. Activities
beyond the end of Polish fiscal year 2005 (December 2005) included in the table are indicative in
nature and will be confirmed with the Govemment in the context o f the 2006 and subsequent budget
cycles. Beyond FY06, the Bank would consider lending along the same lines as during F Y 0 5 and
FY06 with final composition and levels based o n the evolution o f country demand. M o s t lending will
be in the form o f investment lending with embedded TA, using the SWAP modality to pool funds with
Govemment and other development partners. Only the two loans for Road Maintenance and
Rehabilitation are expected to disburse more rapidly than average investment loans (i.e., within two
years from approval). Lending for technical assistance could also avail the multi-country APL,
SIDEM. S I D E M was discussed by the Board o n January 25, 2005; i t s f i r s t loan t o the Slovak
Republic for a Human Capital Technical Assistance Project was approved o n the same date. AAA
would be delivered using the Bank’s own resources with an increasing emphasis o n
intemational/regional comparative analysis, but with clear country-specific elements and
recommendations. M o r e specialized work or demands which exceed the available budget could be
provided under reimbursable arrangements.

C. Guidelines for Engagement and Risk Management
5 1.
The flexible nature o f the CPS creates the need for clear guidelines as to when and where the
Bank should be engaged in Poland. The first basis for any engagement must be demand by Poland in
consideration o f i t s development agenda and access to EU cohesion and structural funds, funds from
other development partners, and from the debt and capital markets at lower financial costs than those
o f the Bank. On i t s side, the Bank needs to ensure that its work in Poland meets the institution’s
standards and serves its broader goals. T o do this, Management will regularly monitor progress with
reforms as well as the environment into which i t s resources are placed. The CPS includes a set of
indicators to monitor progress in i t s implementation.
52.
The framework outlined in this Partnership Strategy i s designed to remain in force until such a
time as i t i s n o longer relevant. Relevance will be assessed against two criteria: the demand for the
Bank’s services; and the existence o f a conducive macroeconomic environment consistent with
Poland’s convergence program under the SGP, as discussed in para. 15. T o demonstrate the continued
relevance o f the framework and priorities o f this strategy, Management will provide a b r i e f progress
report to the Board by mid-2007 when the EU financing framework for 2007-20 13 i s confirmed.

53.
In the event that the debt-to-GDP ratio exceeds 60 percent, severe fiscal adjustment would be
legally required. This would prohibit any further borrowing, including f r o m the Bank, suspend
investment expenditures, and cut social transfers. Under such circumstances, this Strategy would n o
longer be relevant and the Bank, in partnership with the Polish authorities, would prepare a new

- 14-

strategy and modify the annual business plans accordingly. Such a scenario would in effect constitute
a “low case” in which new and more relevant AAA would be identified, and Bank operations reevaluated.

D. K e y Priorities for the CPS
54.
The Government has signaled i t s interest that the World Bank remain engaged in the three
broad priority areas listed below, which are consistent with the criteria for engagement discussed in
the preceding paragraph and support the key priorities o f the NDP:
(i)

Promote fiscal adjustment and reverse negative debt dynamics through restructuring o f
expenditures (Fiscal Consolidation);
(ii) Promote convergence through an improved investment climate and enhanced
competitiveness (Convergence/Competitiveness);
(iii) Reduce poverty, encourage social inclusion and bring employment closer to the Lisbon
targets (Employment and Poverty).

E. Fiscal Consolidation
55.
Analytic work i s supporting the dialogue around various fiscal reform issues, including public
finance management, expenditure reform, regional development, and corporate income taxes. This
work builds on the Public Expenditure and Institutional Review conducted in 2003, as well as ongoing
AAA in the form o f quarterly economic reports for the EU8 countries, a multi-year E U 8 cross-country
fiscal study, and a public administration improvement program. The ongoing support to privatization
and related reforms in coal mining, railways and health aims t o achieve economic and financial
sustainability o f these sectors and eliminate the need for future state support. T w o loans currently
under implementation support measures in the coal sector reform program t o reduce overstaffing and
excess and uneconomic production capacity, promote adherence by all companies in the sector to a
hard budget constraint, and accelerate progress in privatization to consolidate the objectives o f the
reform. Another loan under implementation supports similar reforms in the railway sector. In the
health sector, progress toward sustainable financing o f health insurance i s supported through analytic
work and technical assistance. These are a l l areas o n which progress i s necessary for Poland t o meet
i t s convergence objectives as laid out in the convergence program and NDP (see paras. 16, 18-20, 26
and 27).
56.
For the future, Government has signaled that i t expects the Bank t o continue to provide AAA
support on public finance issues, implementation o f health reform, improvement o f public
administration, as well as reform and privatization o f railways. Details o f the proposed lending and
nonlending programs are in Tables 4 and 5. A brief description o f the proposed nonlending and
lending activities until the end o f 2005 i s included in Annex 1.

F. Convergence/Competitiveness
57.
Ongoing activities support efforts to increase the competitiveness o f the economy, particularly
the transport and energy sectors. In the transport sector, the objective i s t o increase efficiency and
decrease costs through unbundling and privatization o f the railway sector and modernization o f the
roads agency and ports administration. This i s supplemented by limited financing o f infrastructure
maintenance, improvement and expansion, which has helped leverage more copious financing from
the EU and EIB. In the energy sector, lending supports the ongoing restructuring o f the coal sector in
order to make i t more efficient, financially viable, and attractive for privatization. An energy
efficiency project for Krakow’s district heating aims to increase competitiveness by improving the
efficient use o f energy and spur the development o f financing mechanisms for energy savings projects

- 15 -

in other cities. Bank AAA supports efforts to improve the overall business climate and identify the
key requirements for the development o f a knowledge economy through assessments o f the investment
climate and the knowledge economy, as well as tertiary education. In addition, a dialogue has begun
on Poland’s Energy Policy Until 2025 that may contribute to setting priorities in the overall energy
sector reform program in order to achieve greater energy market competitiveness within EU
convergence. Finally, the Bank has been closely associated with the development o f Poland’s flood
control and early warning system which i s designed to stem the losses incurred from the periodic
floods which have ravaged Central Europe in the past decade. Poland’s system represents regional best
practice.

58.
In 2005, the Government has signaled its interest in continued Bank support to increase the
competitiveness o f the Polish economy through promoting, among others, improvements in the
business climate, continued efficiency improvement in infrastructure and energy, and support for the
development o f the knowledge economy. Potential activities include support to the continued
modernization of the roads agency and road maintenance program, and financing, in partnership with
European institutions, a key set o f flood control investments in the Odra river basin.
59.
The Government also endorses continued AAA to support the following: improvements in the
overall business climate including regulatory, judicial and administrative aspects, developing
infrastructure, developing the knowledge economy, complying with EU standards through support for
the finalization o f the 2007-13 NDP, financing o f higher education, energy efficiency and renewable
energy, improving financial intermediation including non-banking services, the role o f public
environmental financing, and compliance with EU standards for the environment, particularly
wastewater treatment. Details o f the proposed lending and nonlending programs are in Tables 4 and 5.
These activities constitute the core o f the Bank’s partnership with the Polish authorities in helping to
tackle the convergence challenges identified in Poland’s development agenda (see paras, 16 and 2131). A brief description o f the proposed nonlending and lending activities until the end o f 2005 i s
included in Annex 1.

G. Poverty and Employment
60.
Bank financial support to the ongoing Rural Development Program i s supporting off-farm
rural employment efforts through focused training, labor redeployment, micro credit programs, rural
infrastructure investments, including roads and schools, and capacity building for local governments.
A World Bank Living Standards Assessment produced in close collaboration with Polish researchers
and Government officials identified a very clear linkage between holding a j o b and staying out of
poverty. The assessment also contributed to the debate on poverty levels by proposing a new
methodology for measuring poverty based on regionally adjusted indices.
61.
For the future, the Government has signaled i t s interest in continued Bank engagement in the
form of lending to support efforts to enhance social inclusion, in particular in smaller municipalities
(gminas), through building capacity o f local partners in preparing strategic plans and managing social
activities. The project would also support the reform o f farmers’ social insurance. Continued support
i s also expected for analysis o f labor trends and issues and building o f a CGE model. Details o f the
proposed 2005’06 lending and nonlending programs are in Tables 4 and 5. These activities are
directly linked to key employment and poverty reduction goals o f Poland’s N b P (see paras. 16 and
32-35). A brief description o f the proposed nonlending and lending activities until the end o f 2005 i s
included in Annex 1.
62.
The following potential activities are under discussion for FY07: (a) final phase o f coal mine
sector restructuring and privatization (Fiscal Consolidation); and (b) private sector R&D
(Convergence/Competitiveness). These activities together with any additional future initiatives will be

-

16-

discussed with the new Govemment in the context o f the 2006 annual business plan. The Govemment
has indicated that important considerations in its future demand for lending from the W o r l d Bank
include financial as well as transaction costs.
Performance measures for the activities already defined for FY05 and FY06 are linked to the
63.
progress benchmarks set out in the CPS Results Matrix (Annex B9).
Tal e 4: Proposed NonlendingProgram

ACTIVITY FY05/FY06
EU8 Cross-country Public Finance Reform (FY05-06)
EU8 Quarterly Economic Reports
Health Reform Implementation (FY05-06)
Railway Reform Implementationpolicy dialogue (FY05-06)
Public Administration Improvement Program (FY05-06)
CONVERGENCE/COMPETITIVENESS IDF Grant for Accounting and Auditing Reform (FY05-06)
ROSC Updates (Corporate Govemance and Accounting & Auditing Modules)
(FY05)
Influence o f the Legal System on the Financial Market in Poland (FY05)
NDP 2007-13 policy dialogue (FY05-06)
Financial Services Policy Notes (FY05)
Public Environmental Financing (FY05-06)
Energy Efficiency (FY05)
Renewable Energy (FY06)
Energy Policy Dialogue (FY05-06)
PPPs for Roads (FY05-06)
EU8 Cross-countryPublic Finance Reform, chapter on Financing o f Higher
Education (FY05)
EU8 Cross-country Labor Market (FY05-06)
EMPLOYMENT AND POVERTY
CGE Model Building (FY05-06)
PRIORITY
FISCAL CONSOLIDATION

PRIORITY/ACTIVITY
Fiscal Consolidation
Hard Coal Mine Closure (*)
Competitiveness
Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance I1
Road Rehabilitationand Maintenance HI(**)
Odra River Basin Flood Prevention (**)
Employment and Poverty
Post Accession Rural Support
TOTAL

FY05

FY06

100

131

195
130- 190
65
390-450

23 1

H. Assistance from Other Development Partners
64.
The EU i s the major development partner for Poland. Approximately EUR 13 billion in
cohesion and structural funds will be available to Poland for commitment by the end o f 2006 in
accordance with the country’s priorities as defined in i t s programming document. Substantial
additional resources will be provided as part o f EU’s 2007-2013 financing cycle. EIB offers Poland
substantial financial resources (EUR 1.2 billion in 2004), some o f which are in road infrastructure
where the Bank i s playing a major role in the modemization o f the roads agency (GDDKiA) and
supporting i t s ability to leverage large financial resources, including those from EIB. The C E D B i s
also involved in Poland, including in areas in which i t has worked together with the Bank such as
flood reconstruction and a development program for Silesia, which i s a companion program o f the
Bank-supported social mitigation work linked to employment downsizing in the hard coal sector.
EBRD i s also active, in particular in municipal infrastructure financing and railway sector reform.

- 17-

V. Creditworthiness and Risk Management
65.
Overall, Poland i s a strong creditworthy borrower and has good access t o sovereign credit with
a rating o f BBB+. Constitutional debt restrictions in line with Maastricht criteria put an effective limit
o n any economic policy irresponsibility. The Government continues efforts t o consolidate public
finances and i s fully committed to meeting the requirements for the adoption o f the Euro. F r o m the
external debt perspective the annual CPS envelope i s less than 0.1 percent o f GDP and less than ‘/4 o f
one percent o f exports; thus, it does not pose any significant burden o n the country’s repayment
capacity. Poland’s outstanding debt to the W o r l d Bank i s currently less than 1 percent o f GDP, less
than 2 percent o f total external debt and less than 2 percent o f total public debt.

66.

The m a i n risk to the successful implementation o f this strategy would be a prolonged
slowdown in growth which could result from stalling o f the reform agenda, combined with lack o f
further fiscal reforms. This, in turn, could follow from adverse economic shocks or political
instability. Under such circumstances, it would be difficult to comply with the Public Finance A c t and
avoid triggering severe fiscal adjustment, not least if the Constitutional debt limit o f 60 percent o f
GDP were to be breached: this would prohibit any further borrowing and force tax increases,
suspension o f investment expenditures, and cuts in social transfers, which would affect the successful
implementation of this partnership strategy and would require preparation o f a new strategy for
discussion with the Board as discussed in para. 52. This risk can be managed through the regular
surveillance and corrective mechanism o f the SGP discussed in para. 15, as w e l l as Poland’s own
safeguards, including the intermediate debt-to-GDP threshold contained in the Public Finance Act as
discussed in para. 10 and the 60 percent o f GDP Constitutional debt limit, which effectively imposes
an upper bound limit on public debt. In this respect, Poland has better safeguards than most o f the
current European Monetary U n i o n members. However, as discussed in para. 52, should such risks
materialize, the Bank would reassess i t s strategy with a view to formulating and implementing
appropriate mitigation measures in collaboration with the authorities.

VI. CPS Consultations
67.
Consultations with the Government started in early November 2004 with a meeting with the
Minister o f Finance and his team. This was followed by meetings with individual ministries and other
Government stakeholders during November and early December.
Outside o f Government,
consultations also took place in late November and early December with some 150 representatives of
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, research institutes, think tanks and local
Governments in Gdansk, Warsaw and Katowice, as well as representatives o f the main political
parties, and youth. Consultations were based o n a slide presentation o f the CPS. The same document
was also posted in the Bank’s Poland website for on-line consultations with interested population at
large. The draft final CPS was also sent to the Government and posted on the W o r l d Bank‘s Poland
website for comments prior to final internal review by the Bank’s management. A summary o f the
consultations with civil society i s included in Annex 2; this summary has been discussed with the
individuals and entities that participated in the consultations for accuracy and completeness.

- 18-

VII. Concluding Remarks
68.
This Strategy i s intended to provide a framework for working with Poland in the immediate
period after EU accession in anticipation o f important decisions prior to the 2007-2013 EU financing
cycle. A brief progress report will be presented to the Board by mid-2007 when the EU financing
framework for 2007-20 13 i s confirmed.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.
March 9,2005

- 19-

Annex 1
Page 1 o f 5

Brief Description o f Activities Proposed for 2005
Nonlending

Health Reform Implementation. W o r k started in the spring o f 2004 at the time o f discussion and
preparation o f the A c t o f 27 August 2004 on Health Care Services Financed from Public Funds.
Following approval o f the act and i t s entry into force on October 1, 2004, work was focused on
providing technical assistance to support the implementation o f the Health Financing Act, including
necessary regulations, with specific focus in the following areas: (i)
development o f the algorithm for
division o f resources o f the NHF between the headquarters and the 16 regional branches; (ii)
development o f provider payment mechanisms and rules for contracting; (iii)
development o f the
execution instruments for the draft Act o n Public Assistance and Restructuring o f Public Health Care
Establishments; (iv) development and implementation o f the information technology system in health
care, including the necessary oversight mechanisms at the Ministry o f Health; and (v) information and
discussion o f issues related to monitoring doctors’ consultations.

EU8 Public Finance Reform Cross-Country Study. W o r k started in November 2004 following
consultations with the Ministers o f Finance o f the E U 8 countries, including Poland. The study will be
multi-year and will focus o n selected priority areas with yearly deliverables. W o r k in each o f the
selected areas would focus on drawing lessons from reforms both within the region and outside.
Studies will be o f a comparative analytical nature, with detailed country information and identification
o f reforms and initiatives which could serve as lessons for countries in the region. Findings will be
discussed in a series o f workshops/seminars with country counterparts. The overview chapter o f each
study reviewing fiscal developments, the current structure o f revenues and expenditures, medium to
long-term fiscal prospects, and reform initiatives will be compiled into one final volume for each year
as Issues in Public Finance Reform in Central Europe and the Baltic Countries. The key areas, as well
as the first deliverables per area are: (i)
Health Care - deliverable: health care financing; (ii)
Education
- deliverable: tertiary education financing; (iii)
Social Insurance - deliverable: pension reforms; (iv)
Fiscal Risks - deliverables: public-private partnership arrangements; (v) Public Administration
Reform - deliverable: decentralization; and (vi) Tax Reform - deliverable: None.
Implementation o f Recommendations o f the Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA). This work i s a follow-up o f the C F A A w o r k started in September 2003 and sent to the
Government in draft f o r m in June 2004. I t will consist o f a workshop t o discuss the action plan
presented in the draft C F A A report and agreement o n i t s implementation and timing.
The CFAA aims at providing updated information o n the arrangements for public sector financial
accountability, and helping to develop a program for reforms and capacity building to improve
transparency and accountability with respect to the use o f public funds. The draft report was discussed
with the Ministries o f Finance and Economy. It was prepared following internal W o r l d Bank C F A A
guidelines and it also used the intemational standards, codes and laws as a benchmark for Public
Financial Management since EU financial regulations are relevant to Poland.
It provided
recommendations on: (i)public sector budgeting, including budget preparation, coverage and
presentation; (ii)
cash management; (iii)
accounting and financial reporting; (iv) intemal control and
intemal external audit and parliamentary; (v) state-owned-enterprises and the major extra-budgetary
funds; (vi) sub-national governments; and (vii) capacity development in public financial management.

Annex 1
Page 2 o f 5

Public Administration Improvement Program. Preliminary discussions on the project concept
started in November 2004. The project would be implemented on a pilot basis at the Ministry o f
Finance (MOF) with the aim o f supporting i t s change from a process oriented institution into a
knowledge-based organization that would focus on: (i)
becoming a center o f excellence for Poland; (ii)
cost efficiency from the perspective o f development; (iii)
managing performance; and (iv) client
orientation. W o r k started in early 2005 and initial results are expected in the second quarter o f 2005.
Work in this initial phase would consist primarily o f providing support to MOF for the development o f
a reform strategy and agenda that can be implemented in a way likely to ensure that its underlying
objectives will be achieved and that those impacts will be sustained beyond the period o f the reforms
themselves.
Policy Dialogue on the NDP 2007-13. Work started in November 2004 with the Bank participating
as an observer in coordination meetings at the Ministry o f Economy and Labor. The Bank has also
been requested to review: (i)
the draft NDP; (ii)
sector and regional strategies that feed into the N D P
on-demand o f line ministries and local Governments; (iii)
national regional policy; and (iv) national
and regional operational programs.
Energy Efficiency. The project will be implemented within the framework o f an ongoing Energy
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) project. The project will investigate mechanisms
to scale up investments in energy efficiency through financial intermediation tools. The Bank will
discuss the preliminary results o f this project with the Ministry o f Economy and Labor in mid-2005,
and, if the results are positive, investigate the opportunities to prepare a follow-up activity to
implement the study’s recommendations.
Policy Notes on Development of Financial Services. This work started in November 2004 with
preliminary discussions with the N B P and other potential stakeholders. This work i s a follow-up to
earlier work done in Poland on the business climate in general and financing o f the corporate sector in
particular, and i t i s also complementary to ongoing work in updating the Accounting & Auditing and
Corporate Governance modules o f the ROSC (see below), and in contract enforcement and obstacles
to secured lending.
Five policy notes are proposed, respectively to: (i)
analyze use of, and demand for finance at the
corporate level; (ii)
formulate concrete proposals for overcoming the obstacles to the development of
factoring as a key source o f short t e r m working capital for SMEs identified in previous Bank work on
factoring in Poland; (iii)analyze successful corporate traded debt market development examples
around the world and seek to identify the specific reasons (beyond Government crowding out) why
such markets have not developed in Poland, with an emphasis on the insolvency framework, corporate
governance and accounting & disclosure issues; (iv) infrastructure financing by the private financial
sector with a focus on what successful models exist around the world for private infrastructure
financing by the financial markets, including investment bank-led models such as the Macquarie bank
model in Australia, and how they could be applicable to Poland; and (v) further development of
mortgage finance markets in Poland identifying the critical remaining constraints (if any) to the
functioning o f the primary mortgage market and proposing mechanisms to develop the secondary
mortgage market through securitization o f mortgage loans and, as necessary, mortgage credit
insurance or guarantee schemes.

Annex 1
Page 3 o f 5

Update o f ROSC Modules on Corporate Governance and Accounting and Auditing. W o r k
started in November 2004 with a review in the areas o f Accounting & Auditing and Corporate
Governance within the ROSC initiative, a joint initiative o f the W o r l d Bank and Intemational
Monetary Fund (IMF). The original ROSC reports in these t w o areas were prepared in 2002.
Updating the t w o reports i s considered necessary, given the numerous changes in the Polish legal and
regulatory framework for the financial markets which took place in preparation for EU accession, and
also talung into account the need to encourage further development o f these markets through adoption
o f intemational regulatory and supervisory best practices which would allow Poland to bridge the gap
with other EU member states in this area.
The ROSC Accounting and Auditing module: (i)evaluates a country’s accounting and auditing
standards/practices, based on internationally recognized benchmarks, and (ii)makes policy
recommendations to help i t bridge the gaps between current practices and those considered adequate.
In the context of Poland’s accession to the EU, the update o f the ROSC Accounting and Auditing
module will specifically assess Poland’s implementation and enforcement o f the related acquis
communautaire, and propose recommendations for the Polish Government and market institutions
within their respective regulatory domains. An IDF Grant for Accounting and Auditing Reform in
Poland (see below) will draw o n the detailed recommendations o f the ROSC Accounting and Auditing
review. Draft reports are expected to be available in January/February 2005. After consultations with
the counterparts the W o r l d Bank will post the reports on its website.

-

IDF Grant for Accounting and Auditing Reform in Poland
A US$500,000 IDF Grant was
approved for implementation o f recommendations included in the 2002 Accounting and Auditing
ROSC as well as in the most recent update (see above) in order t o meet fully the requirements o f the
EU. W o r k should start in early 2005 and will be implemented within three years; it will focus on: (i)
adoption and implementation o f International Standards o n Audit though practical/technical training,
(ii)strengthening the audit profession through provision o f technical assistance to design a legal
framework and assisting in the implementation o f a public oversight mechanism, technical assistance
to review the quality assurance system o f the National Chamber o f Statutory Auditors, training and
workshops, and (iii)education and training for accountants, auditors and regulators in the
implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards
Influence of the Legal System on the Financial Market in Poland. This work originated at the
request o f the NBP following the findings o f the W o r l d Bank’s reports o n D o i n g Business in 2004 and
in 2005, which identified registration o f property and contract enforcement as some o f the key
constraints to a more favorable business environment in Poland. The a i m o f the report i s to identify
the interrelations between the legal environment and the financial market in Poland by reviewing some
typical contracts concluded between financial institutions and enterprises in Poland, e.g. investment
loans, which were triggered by entering into some other contracts, e.g. sale o f goods. The work i s
being conducted in collaboration with the EBRD, which i s responsible for a study o n different types o f
collaterals used in contracts, e.g. registered pledge, mortgage, etc. A qualitative assessment o f the
situation will be conducted by experts supported by empirical evidence and data. Interviews will be
conducted with institutions and professions that play various roles in the general enforcement o f
contracts. I t will be supplemented by focus group interviews with each o f six target groups: SME
managers, practicing lawyers, lawyers working for financial firms, bailiffs, judges, and notaries. In
order to ensure that the study has some empirical support, data necessary f o r the analyses o f legal and
institutional infrastructure for the enforcement o f contract and property rights will be collected in
cooperation with the Statistics Department at the Ministry o f Justice, the NBP and the various relevant

Annex 1
Page 4 o f 5

professional associations. Work started in December 2004 and a draft report with preliminary findings
will be available in April 2005 for discussion with counterpart officials. A final report should be
available in late June 2005.

EU8 Cross-country Study on Labor Markets. Work started in November 2004 following
consultations with the Ministers o f Finance o f the EU8 countries, including Poland. The study will be
multi-year on the role o f labor market institutions and outcomes in promoting economic growth and
reducing poverty and social exclusion in the EU8 countries. I t s main objective i s to support the new
EU member states in formulating well-targeted, evidence-based strategies for employment creation
and social inclusion, in accordance with the guidelines and requirements o f the EU Treaty o f Lisbon.
It proposes to do so by: (i)
identifying the bottlenecks and labor market imperfections in the labor
markets o f the new member states; (ii)
quantifying the relative importance o f these factors in the
different countries; (iii)
highlighting typologies o f countries that share similar characteristics and
pointing to cross-country differences; (iv) identifying outliers and best practices; and (v) making both
country-specific and regional recommendations on priority policy levers that may enhance the labor
market performance and growth prospects o f the EU8 countries.
Lending

Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance 11. This project i s the continuation o f the Road Rehabilitation
and Maintenance project implemented during calendar year 2004. L i k e i t s predecessor, this project
will continue improving the effectiveness o f Poland’s national road rehabilitation and maintenance
systems by further increasing the percentage o f national roads in good condition, establishing reliable
and stable funding for the national road maintenance and rehabilitation network, and supporting the
modernization o f GDDKiA, by improving its capacity to operate efficiently and effectively. The
project w i l l provide financing under pooling arrangements for road maintenance for which there are no
EU funds available, and only limited other sources o f financing: The EUR 100 million loan would: (i)
finance part o f the 2005 road maintenance budget from GDDKiA by pooling Bank resources (62
percent) with the Government (32 percent) and EIB (6 percent); and (ii)continue supporting the
modernization of GDDKiA, including possibly financing the development o f a management
information system to enable the better performance o f GDDKiA in road management and financing,
including through enhanced accounting, planning, and contract management. I t i s scheduled to be
presented to the Board together with the CPS.
Odra River Basin Flood Prevention. Preparation o f this work started in early 2004 during
implementation o f the on-going Emergency Flood Recovery Project (EFRP). The project aims to
eliminate the r i s k o f flooding for a population o f more than 2.5 million people living in several towns
and rural settlements in three provinces in the Lower Silesia region through the construction of
infrastructure as well as institutional capacity strengthening. Construction o f civil works includes: (i)
a dry polder in Racib6rz; and (ii)
improvement o f the Wroclaw Water Way. The institutional capacity
strengthening component will continue with the work undertaken under the current project and will
support better preparedness for emergencies through improvements in flood forecasting and
management. This i s a EUR 500 million traditional investment project, and although the financing
package has not yet been finalized, several partners will participate, including the Government, the EU
Cohesion Funds, and the CEDB.
Post Accession Rural Support. T h i s project focuses on improving social cohesion in small rural
low-income gminas and supporting the reform o f KRUS. The specific aims o f the project are to

Annex 1
Page 5 o f 5

enhance the capacity o f local governments to identify, plan, and execute social inclusion strategies,
including developing better education management systems, to strengthen the administrative and
analytic capacity of the KRUS during i t s reform process, to assist the ongoing decentralization o f local
self-government and regional development.
The enabling policy framework for the social inclusion focus i s the new Social Assistance Act which
went into effect in January 2004 and the National Action Plan for Social Inclusion (2004). The latter
outlines the principal challenges in relation to tackling poverty and social exclusion in Poland, and the
preparation studies focus on a number o f these challenges in rural areas. Project preparation started in
mid-2004, with the support o f a Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund (PHRD)
Grant, and all o f the main preparation assignments have been initiated or are currently being tendered.

Annex 2
Page 1 o f 4

Summary o f Public Consultations on the World Bank’s
Country Partnership Strategy for Poland
Consultations took place over a period o f six weeks in November and December 2004. T w o channels
were used: internet and public meetings. In the first case, the World Bank’s Country Office placed
Polish and English versions o f the draft CPS o n i t s web site and encouraged public feedback.
Comments were received in November and December from individuals and institutions, ranging from
website comments and emails to official letters. Public meetings were convened in Gdansk, Warsaw
and Katowice from December 6-8, 2004.
Ninety-four persons participated in these events,
representing local authorities, c i v i l society organizations, academia, local businesses and the media.
T w o additional consultations were conducted in Warsaw with representatives o f the Polish business
community and youth on December 9 and 13, respectively, and attracted more than 25 participants of
each o f the two constituencies.
Public consultation meetings followed a two-part structure. The first part focused o n the W o r l d
Bank’s assessment o f the current socio-economic situation in Poland and the m a i n challenges the
country will face over the next three years. The second part analyzed the Bank’s assessment o f i t s role
in supporting Poland’s future development and the proposed set o f projects and non-lending services.
The meetings were conducted by external facilitators and participants received, before the meetings,
Polish copies o f the presentations. The process yielded many useful ideas and suggestions regarding
the World Bank’s future role and operations in Poland. The scope o f this note does not allow
reporting o f each and every comment made by feedback providers. The note attempts to cluster the
comments in groups around sectoral issues and, when possible, formulate recommendations for
inclusion or modification in the CPS.
In general, the Bank’s assessment o f the main social and economic challenges currently faced by
Poland was considered correct. However, participants highlighted a number o f issues that were
missing or insufficiently recognized in the CPS. These included:
0
housing and housing construction (including support for communal dwellings)
0
the role o f c i v i l society in the country’s development
0
the problem o f curbing corruption and the ”gray zone” (unregistered employment)
0
protection o f the natural environment
0
strengthening o f the judicial system and improvement o f the effectiveness o f courts.

A number o f participants felt that the CPS was overly general in regard to many issues and argued
that, unless they were elaborated, i t was difficult to take a clear stance o n some o f the
recommendations. Moreover, it was felt that a three-year strategy o f an international organization
operating in Poland should be well-embedded in the country’s long-term development strategy and the
National Development Plan for 2007-201 3 that i s currently being formulated by the Government.
Questions were also raised as to whether the CPS gives due consideration to the Millennium
Development Goals and what exactly that would mean in the Polish context. Bank support for c i v i l
society development was mentioned in many contexts. I t was felt that a viable non-profit sector i s an
underutilized yet important means and goal o f the country’s development. By exercising control over
public sector officials, a vibrant c i v i l society strengthens the efficiency o f the public sector and
heightens the quality o f the resource allocation process. Civil society can also play a more active role
in delivering social services and curbing unemployment.

Annex 2
Page 2 o f 4

In regard to Bank operations in Poland, it was argued that the country now enjoys relatively easy
access to commercial lending and, hence, the role o f the World Bank should be carefully defined
based on the institution’s select comparative advantages over commercial banks and other
intergovernmental development agencies. In this context, the requirement o f a government guarantee
for World Bank loans was considered a hurdle. Moreover, the quality o f foreign consultants hired
under Bank-supported operations was questioned. There i s also scope for using local consultants and
utilizing Polish expertise in other countries o f the region. There are s t i l l too many cookie-cutter
solutions originating from the “Washington consensus” although the approach o f the Bank has
improved in this regard. Bank procedures are bureaucratic and the processing time o f loans needs to be
shortened. The issue o f loan currency denomination was raised as well and a recommendation was
that Bank loans for Poland be made in zloty. The country’s successful entry in the EU should improve
its creditworthiness and loan conditions.
Inregard to particular sectors, the following suggestions were made:
Reform of the health care sector. Disagreement was expressed concerning the operations to improve
the National Health Fund. There were voices o f sharp criticism regarding the NHF, describing i t as:
“waste o f funds”, “repairing something which i s irreparable”, “a return to the Soviet model” and so
forth. A number o f remedies were postulated such as elimination o f a single insurer and the
introduction o f competition among private insurers, World Bank support for rebuilding the system o f
financing health care, linking the financing o f health care reform w i t h tax system reform, introducing
public-private partnerships in the operation o f the health care system, placing emphasis on disease
prevention, and more analytical studies o f the sector (investment needs, treatment profiles, financial
mechanisms).
Educational reform. Efforts should be made to decentralize management o f education. The current
educational system stifles innovation and vocational education does not exist. I t i s necessary to
educate teachers to raise the quality o f educational staff. Unequal access to education for social and
financial reasons must be counteracted.
Hard coal mining reform. Problems concerning mining gave rise to heated discussions and some
extreme positions were presented, such as: enough o f mining support, now (with the existing world
demand for coal) i s the best time for privatizing mining, the coal era i s changing into the gas era and
there i s no point in reactivating mining, funds should be shifted from mining restructuring to e.g.
telecommunications. However, there were also views in favor o f further development o f the hard coal
mining sector, proposing to stop the process of mine closures and placing more emphasis on
modemizing them, retaining hard coal resources in times o f lower demand as the primary energy
carrier in the future, adjusting the country’s coal extraction capacity to predicted demand, ceasing
further employment downsizing in mining as it poses a threat to energy security o f the country.
Questions were raised as to why the World Bank i s not investing in the development o f the sector but
in i t s liquidation and why mining liquidation programs are not adequately discussed with the trade
unions. It was argued that in view o f the EU environmental directives, coal-fired thermal energy
generating entities will need to undertake significant technical modernization in pollution emission
control. The modernization will require World Bank assistance.
Road sector reform. The diagnosis o f the situation o f public roads in Poland i s correct. The main
problem i s the lack of state assistance for public roads other than national roads. An important goal i s
modernization o f the national roads management and the revamping o f the national road agency. The

Annex 2
Page 3 o f 4

elimination o f delays in maintaining roads should be considered a national priority. Other priorities
raised by the participants included connecting Polish roads t o the Transeuropean Road Network as
well as addressing urgently the need for rehabilitating local roads. There i s a shortage o f funds for the
construction o f access roads t o ports in GdaIisk and Szczecin.
Railway reform. It i s necessary to privatize railway passenger services. A negative factor i s
discrimination of other railway carriers in access t o PKP (Polish State Railways) infrastructure.
Efforts should be made t o combine railway reform with EU programs.
Unemployment. In the CPS’s diagnostic part, the poverty level of working people i s rated too
optimistically. Support should be provided for investments to create new jobs, particularly for youth.
An important goal i s the protection o f existing jobs. Unemployment calls for greater regulation o n the
part o f the State and stronger emphasis o n the development of the non-profit sector and social
economy. The process of economic restructuring should not raise unemployment. I t i s important to
implement comprehensive programs o f occupational activation. An important factor i s lowering offpayroll labor costs.
Legal reform. The main problem i s protraction o f court procedures (3-4 years) in economic cases and
inequality between private and state entities in courts. Action should be taken t o improve enforcement
o f economic contracts by legal measures. It i s necessary to analyze the scope o f responsibilities o f
courts and the management o f courts. Legislative proceedings must be made more efficient.
Development o f knowledge-based economy. There i s a need for significant investments in this area
and for expanding on-line services. This should also help equalize opportunities for people living in
the urban and rural areas. Training the elderly in using the Internet i s needed. While young people are
quickly acquiring computer s k i l l s and can access information and knowledge thought the Internet, the
elderly lag behind.
Agricultural reform. Material and non-material resources should be used to raise the attractiveness
and competitiveness o f rural areas. Rural gminas (communes) without adequate own funds have
difficulties accessing available EU funds. I t was postulated that the WB extends i t s assistance directly
to the gminas. The issue o f young people leaving farming i s o f key significance and should also be
addressed.
Administrative reform. Public administration should be characterized by the following: transparency,
efficiency, accountability, and client-orientation. Local governments at the gmina and solectwo
(village administrative unit) levels should be supported in order to strengthen public administration
and to define i t s new responsibilities. Long-term planning should be introduced. Measuring the
effectiveness o f public expenditures i s o f great significance. I t i s important to promote ethics and
transparency in management and administration. L i k e the central government, the recruitment and
performance assessment of c i v i l servants at a local level should be conducted in a transparent and
professional manner. The government should enhance mechanisms o f social control o n local
governments at the gmina and solectwo levels. I t was suggested that the WB provide more support for
c i v i l society development. The Bank should also support polycentric regional development and the
development o f metropolitan regions. Departure from support for the weakest regions, where social
assistance i s needed, was postulated, with support being steered t o regions auguring w e l l for
development.

Annex 2
Page 4 o f 4

Improving the business environment. I t i s necessary to strengthen structures engaged in R&D o n the
basis o f existing material resources. For example, patents are currently underused. Greater
transparency of action between business and public administration i s needed. The principles of
corporate governance for small and medium sized firms should be developed. I t i s important t o create
guarantee funds for private business. An important factor is stability o f the legal regulations
governing the relationship between private business and the banlung sector.

Annex A2
Page 1 o f 2

Poland at a dance
Europe 8.
Central
Asia
Poland

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Uppermiddleincome

38.2
5,170
199.7

476
2,160
1,030

331
5,040
1,668

-0.1
0.4

0.1
0.4

1.2
1.8

3/4/05

I

1 Development diamond’
Life expectancy
~

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (“A of population)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

~

18
63
74
8

63
69
25

75
73
19

97
0
100
100
99

91
3
102
103
101

90
7
105
106
105

Gross
primary
nrollment

per
capita

I

I

1
Access to improved water source
-Poland
Upper-middle-incomegroup

~

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savirigs/GDP

85.9
15.6
22.9
16.5
15.6

191.3
18.9
29.7
15.5
16.3

209.6
18.9
33.9
16.3
16.9

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports

-5.8
1.o
52.6

-2.6
1.2
36.3

-2.0
1.2
32.6

2002

2003

2003-07

4.4
4.4
10.9

1.4
1.5
4.8

3.8
3.9
13.0

4.1
4.2
7.7

1983

4993

2002

2003

534

300
174
669

304
176
6

63 0
20 4
22 0

190
330

185
364

1983

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1983-93 1993-03

..
..

Economic ratios.
Trade

-

__

Domestic
savings

-

Investment

Indebtedness

Poland

~

Upper-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(“A of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

66
40 0

Growth of Investment and GDP (x)

-

GDI

‘O-GDP

(average annual growth)

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Paee 2 o f 2

Poland

7
IPRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
~

~

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficit

]TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Food and Live Animals
Machinery and Transport Equipment
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
'Import price index (1995=100)
ITerms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1 (US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
1 Resource balance

1983

1993

2002

2003

..
..

35.3
30.6

1.9
1.2

0.8
0.7

..
..
,.

53.3
0.6
-5.0

37.5
-3.9
-6.3

39.2
-3.4
-5.8

1983

1993

2002

2003

14,143

41,019
2,968

53,728
4,084

20

..

18,834
1.838
2,346

34,865
55,109
2,752
5,038
8,187

39,043
68,177
3,155
6,206
10,056

..
..

..

157
148
106

86
a5
101

a7
91
95

1983

1993

2002

2003

..

15,455
17,561
-2,106

56,777
63,177
-6,400

72,173
77,379
-5,206

..
..

..

..

Net income
,Net current transfers

..

-3,394
483

-1,887
3,280

-3,112
4,233

Current account balance

..
..

-5,017

-5,007

-4,085

3,879
1.138

5,642
-635

5,280
-1,195

..

..

4,281
1.8

29,794
4.1

34,168
3.9

1983

1993

2002

2003

ITotal debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

..

45,176
1,073
0

69,521
2,385
0

68,275
2,453

'Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

..

1,695
64
0

13,489
312
0

912
176
44
1,715
400

-1,068
1,774
0
0

1,046
317
0
317
64
253

15
172
206
-33
106
-140

1

'Financing items (net)
iChanges in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

'EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

i

US$ m///ions)

1

1

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

/World Bank program
j Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments

..

..

..

..

..
.,

..

..
..
..
..

-

I

Inflation (%)

-

99

98

-GDP

01

00

defiator

02

03

+CPI

I

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

-

I80 000
'70 000 -

50 000 -

,BO 000

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

I

I

Current account balance to GDP ( O h )

-8 -

' Composition of

2003 debt (US$ mill.)

0

374
0

0

112
275
-163
99
-262

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C .IMF

D Other multilateral
~

E - Bilateral
F - Pnvate
G -Short-term

I

1 Development Economics

3/4/05

Annex B2
Page 1 o f 1

Selected Indicators* o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of March 1,2005

Indicator

2002

2003

2004

2005

Portfolio Assessment
Number o f Projects Under Implementation a
Average ImplementationPeriod (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

12
4.2
8.3
14.6
8.3
14.6
29.8

11
5.3
9. I
15.6
9.1
15.6
30.5

10
4.4
20.0
6.6
20.0
6.6
40.4

11
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
67.0

no
1,200
100

no
852
77

no
740
74

910
78

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
30
10
3,275.0
742.8
20.0
10.0
12.7
0.5

a.
b.
c.
d.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio ImprovementProgram.
e. Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

no

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 2

IBRD Program Summary
As of M a r c h 1,2005
Proposed IBRD Lending Program
Fiscal
year

Strategic
P r o j ID

2005

Hard Coal Mine Closure 1/
Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation I1
Subtotal

2006

Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation I1121
Post-Accession Rural Support
Odra River Basin Flood Protection 2/
Subtotal

uS$(M)

Rewards
(H/M/L)

Implementation ‘I
Risks (HIM//)

100.0
130.5
230.5

H
H

H
H

195.0
65.0
130-190
390-450

H
H
H

H
M
L

a. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be
High (H), Moderate (M) or Low (L).
l / Approved on July 1,2004. Operation was included in the previous CAS.
2/ These projects are indicative and will be finalized during discussions for the 2006 annual business plan.

Annex B3
Page 2 o f 2

IFC & MIGA Program, FY2002-2005

IFC approvals (US$m)

2002

2003

2004

0.00

45.82

47.56

2005

Sector (YO)
Pulp & Paper
Wholesale and Retai
Total

100

100

100
100

100

100

0

100

100

0.00

0.00

0.00

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

Summary of Nonlending Services
As o f March 1,2005

Product
Recent completions
Knowledge Economy Assessment
Living Standards Assessment
Cities o f Change
Pensions in Multipillar System
Factoring Conference
Investment Climate Assessment
Anticorruption Policy Dialogue (ESW)
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Audit Review T A
Regional Policy Review
Underway and Planned
EU8 Cross-countryPublic Finance Reform
EU8 Quarterly Economic Reports
Health Reform Implementation
Railway Reform Implementation policy dial
Public Administration ImprovementProgram
IDF Accounting and Auditing Reform
ROSC Updates (Corporate Governance and Accounting & Auditing Modules)
Influence o f the Legal System on the Financial Market in Poland
NDP 2007-13 policy dialogue
Financial Savices Policy Notes
Public Environmental Financing
Energy Efficiency
Renewable Energy
Energy Policy Dialogue
PPPs for Roads
EU8 Cross-countryLabor Market
CGE Model Building
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Completion FY

Audience

Objective

K
WPD

04

GIP
GIP
GiP
G
GIPD
GIP
GIP
GIDIB
G
GIP

05-06
05-06
05-06
05-06
05-06
05-06
05
05
05-06
05
05-06
05
06
05-06
05-06
05-06
05-06

G,B
GIDIB
G,B
G
G,B
GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIB
G,B
G,B
GP
DIPD
DIPD
DPD
GIDIB
GIDIB
G,B

04
04
04
04
04

04
04
04

04

KITS
PS

W PS
W PSI PD
WPD

WPS

PS
WPD

K, PS

WPS
K, PS
K, PS
K, PS
WPS
WPS
WPS
K, PS
K, PS
K, PS
PS
PS
PS
WPS
WPS
K, PS

Annex B5
Page 1 o f 1

Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Europe &
Central
Asia

Poland
POPULATION
Total population, mid year (millions)
Population growth (annual %)

Urban population (% of total)
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)

Uppermiddleincome

zoo0

1975

1985

1995

2000

2002

34.0
0.98
55.4
2.3

37.2
0.78
59.3
2.3

38.6
0.11
61.3
1.6

38.6
-0.03
61.7
1.3

38.2
-0.04
61.8
1.3

474.9
0.06
63.2
1.6

322.0
1.22
74.8
2.5

0.1

0.3
0.4

2,890
100.0
100.0

4,440
182.1
162.2

4,670
195.7
168.9

2,030

5,190

POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME

GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
Consumer price index (1995 = 100)
Food price index (1995 = 100)

..

INCOME/CONSUMPTIONDISTRIBUTION
GIN1 index
Income share held b y lowest quintile
Income share held b y highest quintile
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% o f GDP)
Education (% o f GDP)
Social security and welfare (% o f GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(3‘3’ ofpopirlation with access)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunizationrate
(96 of children nges 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(Years)

Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
under-5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 male adults)
Female (per 1,000 female adults)

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live binhs)
Births attendedby skilled health staff ( X of total)

*) 1999 data

Source: SIMA on-line W D I Database

31.6* ..
7.3* ..
42.5* ._

4.70

96.5
96.5
96.4

71
67
74

217
101

4.85
19.91

4.20 ..
5.05 ..
17.40 ..

4.25
4.29*

97.7 ..
97.6 ..
97.8 ..

99.4 ..
99.7 ..
99.0 ..

3.53
4.38

93.2
93.0
93.5
91 ._
96 ..
82

77

92
94

96
96

97
98

98
99

94
93

89
91

71
67
75

72
68
76

73
69
78

74
70
78

68
64
73

73
70
16

14
15

9
9

8
9

32
38

20
23

250
94

226
88
13

317
137
58

197
103
67

254
105

..
..
..

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 2

Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as YOof GDP)
Gross domestic product”
Agriculture
Industry
Services

2000

2001

2002

2003

Estimate

2004

Projected

2005

2006

2007

100
4
33
63

100
4
31
65

100
3
30
67

100
3
30
67

100
3
30
67

100
3
30
68

100
3
29
68

100
2
29
68

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment

82
24
3
21

83
21
3
18

84
19
3
16

84
18
3
15

82
18
3
15

81
19
3
15

81
19
3
15

81
19
3
16

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

28
34

28
31

30
33

34
36

39
41

40
41

40
40

40
41

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings‘

18
19

17
18

16
16

16
17

18
18

19
19

19
19

19
20

166548

185787

191310

209563

242247

294972

321711

349840

Real annual growth rates (“A)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

4.0
2.5

1.o
1.o

1.4
1.3

3.7
3.4

5.4
5.4

5.0
5.0

4.8
4.8

5.6
5.6

Real annual per capita growth rates (“A)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

3.9
2.8
3.1

1.0
1.7
1.8

2.5
2.7
3.3

3.8
2.4
3.1

5.5
2.8
3.2

5.1
3.3
3.8

4.9
3.7
4.2

5.7
4.3
4.9

46289
35902
57204
482 10
-10915
2380
-9998

51419
4 1664
58275
49324
-6856
2889
-5357

56777
46742
63 177
53991
-6400
3280
-5007

72173
6 1007
77379
66732
-5206
4233
-4085

92475
80337
96708
84352
-4233
2300
-362 1

101169
88486
107757
93761
-6589
2800
-6784

109550
95935
118234
103467
-8684
3300
-965 1

121301
107032
133038
117013
-1 1738
3300
-12594

9358
1379
-456
1835
-121
-618

5624
2263
-4130
6393
-2967
437

4361
1218
-1068
2285
63
-635

461 1
307 1
-1810
4881
-2402
-1 195

5633
2014
64
1950
3200
-1208

6000
-5336
-1210
-4126
2700
-540

7000
-5964
-2202
-3762
2200
-34

7500
-4372
-3128
-1245
2200
2120

-6.6

-3.7

-3.3

-2.5

-1.6

-2.3

-3.0

-3.6

Government investment
Private investment

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNF’ per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance o f Payments (US%millions)
E X ~ O ~(GNFS)~
~ S

Merchandise F O B
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise F O B
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & o d s s i o n s )
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

Annex B6
Page 2 o f 2

Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator
Public finance (as YOof GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth o f M2 ("7)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth ("7)
Price indices( yR02 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms oftrade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCVf
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Estimate
2004

Projected
2005
2006

2007

42.1
40.3
1.8
2.9
-1.2

42.2
43.3
-1.1
3.1
-2.9

42.3
43.1
-0.7
3.2
0.4

43.3
44.2
-0.9
3.4
0.7

42.8
44.5
-1.7
4.1
0.4

44.1
44.2
-0.1
4.2
-0.3

44.4
43.7
0.7
4.3
0.0

43.6
42.2
1.4
4.0
-0.5

41.5
11.8
73.2

43.2
9.2
78.2

41.0
-2.4
275.3

41.4
5.5

42.1
9.8

42.9
9.5

43.6
9.3

44.4
9.0

121.3

138.0

133.6

120.5

130.0

131.0

132.0

133.0

10.1
6.7

5.5
4.0

1.9
1.2

0.8
0.7

3.5
2.6

3.0
2.7

2.7
2.5

2.5
2.4

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated General Govemment, ESA95 methodology
f. "LCU' denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

Annex B7
Page 1 o f 1

Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

1999

Actual
2000
2001

60671 63259

Estimate(
2003
2004

2002

63275

69521

68275

Projected
2005
2006

72260 73715

2007

68392

63158

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a

1741

3522

999

2624

2094

2152

1344

949

825

Total debt service (TDS)

8374

10233

15382

13489

9633

9512

9659

10787

11924

150.7
36.9
20.8
12.0

130.3
38.0

118.4
36.3
23.0
9.5

91.6

77.7

72.9

21.1
10.7

117.1
34.1
28.5
9.8

32.5
13.0
8.7

31.0
10.1
7.2

29.2
9.4
6.6

68.1
27.3
10.6
5.7

63.5
25.6
12.0
4.1

14.9
14.9

9.4
9.4

5.2
5.2

8.4
8.4

11.1
11.1

9.3
9.7

8.8
9.9

7.3
8.9

7.4
9.8

(US$mIa
Debt and debt service indicators

(%I

TDO~XGS~
TDOiGDP
TDSiXGS
ConcessionaliTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic

DS (%)'
IBRD DSiXGS
IBRD TDO (US$mld

0.8
2185

0.7
2229

0.6
2211

0.5
2385

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

2453

1912

1992

2134

2300

O f which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

IDA TDO (USSmld

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity i c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 o f 2

Operations Portfolio (IBRD & Grants)
As of March 1,2005

Closed Projects
IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
o f which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed(Active + Closed)
o f which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed(Active)
Total Undisbursed(Closed)
Total Undisbursed(Active + Closed)

32

1,014.39
108.70
3,397.63
2,670.13
4,4 12.02
2,778.84
247.70
28.99
276.69

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision
Rating

Project Kame

Prqiect ID

Bielsko-Biala Water
Flood Emergency
Roads I1
Rural Development
Krakow Energy Efficiency
Rail Restructuring
Seaway Port Modemization
Hard Coal Social Mitigation I
Road Maintenance & Rehabilitation
Coal Mine Closure
Energy Efficiency (GEF)
Overall Result

PO08595
PO53796
PO08593
PO58202
PO65059
PO40795
PO086 15
PO665 12
PO78 170
PO83093
PO70246

--

Original Amount in
US%Millions

DO

IP

FY

IBRD

HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

HS

1996
1998
1998
2000
2001
2001
200 1
2004
2004
200s
200s

21.5
200.0
300.0
120.0
15.0
101.0
38.5
200.0
126.0
100.0

S

S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S

1,222.0

Disbursements

GRANT

Undisb.

11.0
11.0

2.5
16.1
17.2
10.3
12.8
0.2
17.0
51.0
9.0
111.5
11.0
258.7

Orig. Frm Rev'd

4.54
16.14
9.61
-1.05
7.30
-0.81
8.88
-133.43
4.98
0.29
0.10
-83.46

1.58
16.14
9.61
-8.45

18.89

Annex B8
Page 2 o f 2

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of January 31,2005
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held
FY Approval

Company
1996 Baltic Malt
1997 CPF
1999 ESCO Polska
1998 Global Hotels
1995/97/98/00/03/04Intercell
1993 PEF-Poland
1994/1996 Peters
1993 Pilkington
2004 Schwarz Group
Total Portfolio:

Loan
Equity
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.60
0.00
0.21
4.35
0.00
54.43
3.69
0.00
1.50
0.40
0.00
2.55
0.00
54.43
0.00
116.16
7.01

Disbursed

Quasi
1.96
0.00
0.00
5.84
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.80

Partic
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

ADDrovals Pending commitment

Loan
2003 Intercell-Expan.
Total Pending Commitment:

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Loan
Equity
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.69
1.50
0.00
0.40
0.00
2.55
0.00
54.43
0.00
57.38
6.91

Quasi
1.87
0.00
0.00
3.64
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.51

Partic
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

E

P

e

E

_.

w

6z

M
E

a
B

c;l

e

8
e,

s

.-E

e

0
.*

5>

k

-0
0
0

c:

.E

O

L

T> m
m
B?

E 2

3

