Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 47983-GY

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
GUYANA
FOR THE PERIOD FY 2009-2012

April 15,2009

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and Caribbean Region

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their official
duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Countly Assistance Strategyfor Guyana was discussed by the Executive Directors on
May 17,2002

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Guyanese Dollar (G$),US$l.OO = G$203.25, January 21,2009
FISCAL YEAR
January 1- December 3 1
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AIDS
AOG
CARICOM
CAS
CAS-CR
CDB
CIDA
CPCE
CPD
CSME
DFID
DPR
DSA
EFA-FTI
EC
E-HIPC
EITI
ESW
EU
FCPF
FDI
FIAS
FMAA
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GLSC
GNBS
GNI
GNP
GWI
HIES
HIPC
HIV
ICA
ICR
ICs
ICT
IDA
IDB
IDF
IEG
IFA
IFC
IFMAS
IMF
ISR
IT

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Audit Office of Guyana
Caribbean Community
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS CompletionReport
Caribbean Development Bank
Canadian InternationalDevelopment Agency
Cyril Potter Teacher’s College
ContinuousProfessionalDevelopment for
Trained Teachers Program
Caribbean Single Market and Economy
UK Department for International
Development
DevelopmentPolicy Review
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Education for All-Fast Track Initiative
European Commission
Enhanced HIPC
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign InvestmentAdvisory Service
Financial Management and Accountability
Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
GlobalEnvironmentalFacility
Guyana Lands and Survey Commission
Guyana National Bureau o f Standards
Gross National Income
Gross National Product
Guyana Water Incorporation
HouseholdIncome Expenditures Survey
Heavily IndebtedPoor Countries
Human ImmunodeficiencyVirus
Investment Climate Assessment
ImplementationCompletion Report
InvestmentClimate Survey
InformationCommunicationTechnology
InternationalDevelopmentAssociation
Inter-American Development Bank
InstitutionalDevelopmentBank
IndependentEvaluation Group (World Bank)
IntegratedFiduciary Assessment
International Financial Corporation
Integrated Financial Management and
Accounting System
International Monetary Fund
ImplementationStatus and Results Report
Information~echnology

JSAN
JSDF
LAC
M&E
MDG
MDRI
MIC
MIGA
MOLHSSS
MSME
MTEF
NCD
NCERD
NCS
NLTA
NPTA
NPV
OECD-DAC
OECS
PAHO
PEFA
PEPFAR
PER
PFM
PFMPR
PPC
PPF
PPP
PPP-Civic
PRGF
PRS
PRSC
PRSP
PRPMO
PSIP
PSTAC
QAG
SME
TA
TB
TF
TFSCB
UNDP
UNESCO
USAID
VAT
WHO
WBG

Vice President
Country Director
Country Representative
Task Manager

Joint Staff Advisory Note
Japanese Social Development Fund
Latin America and the Caribbean
Monitoringand Evaluation
Millennium DevelopmentGoals
MultilateralDebt Relief Initiative
Middle Income Countries
MultilateralInvestmentGuarantee Agency
Ministry o f Labour, Human Services
and Social Security
Micro and Small and MediumEnterprise
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Non-CommunicableChronic Diseases
National Center for Research and Development
NationalCompetitivenessStrategy
Non-lendingTechnical Assistance
NationalProcurement and Tender Administration
Net Present Value
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development- Development Cooperation
Directorate
Organization o f Eastern Caribbean States
Pan American Health Organization
Public Expenditure and FinancialAccountability
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
Public ExpenditureReview
Public Financial Management
Public Financial Management & Procurement
Public Procurement Commission
Project PreparationFacility
Public-Private Partnership
People’s Progressive Party-Civic
Poverty Reductionand Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty Reductionand Public
Management Operation
Public Sector Investment Program
Public Sector Technical Assistance Credit
Quality Assurance Group
Small and MediumEnterprise
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Trust Fund
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
United States Agency for International evelopment
Value Added Tax
World Health Organization
World Bank Group

Pamela Cox
Yvonne Tsikata
Giorgio Valentini
Afef Haddad

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR GUYANA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDi EMENTS ........................................................................................................... i
..
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...........................................................................................................
11
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT ...............................................................................................................
1
I1. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS. CHALLENGES AND GOVERNMENT PRIORITIES...........4
A . Recent Macroeconomic Developments ................................................................................... 4
B. Outlook for 2009-20 12 ........................................................................................................... - 6
C . Challenges and Country Priorities ........................................................................................... 7
I11. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ....................................................................... 12
A . Lessons from the last CAS .................................................................................................... 12
B. Current Bank Group Program................................................................................................ 13
C . Country Assistance Strategy FY09-FY 12 .............................................................................
14
D. Partnerships ...........................................................................................................................
18
E. IFC Program .......................................................................................................................... 19
F. Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation ............................................................................ 20
G. Managing Risks ..................................................................................................................... 20
BOXES
Box 1: International Migration: A Challenge and an Opportunity ............................................... -10
Box 2: Lessons and Recommendations ......................................................................................... 13
TABLES
Table 1: Guyana: Key Macroeconomic Indicators (2006 - 2013) .................................................. 5
Table 2: Proposed Lending and Analytical and Advisory Activities (FY09-FY 12) ..................... 15
FIGURES
Figure 1: Growth Performance in Guyana ......................................................................................

4

ANNEXES
Annex A: Guyana at a Glance ....................................................................................................
23
Annex B1: Guyana CAS Results Framework ............................................................................ -26
Annex B2: Selected Indicators o f Bank o f Portfolio Performance and Management .................28
Annex B3 : Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending............................................................................ 29
Annex B4: Summary o f N o n Lending Services - Guyana ..........................................................
30
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators .......................................................................................... 31
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators ........................................................................................... 32
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) .......................................................... 33
Annex C: Donor Support to PRSP.............................................................................................
34
Annex D: Guyana CAS Completion Report (FY2003-2006) .................................................... 35
Annex E: GUYANA Joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis ............................. 64
Map: ............................................................................................................... 84

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration with the Government o f
Guyana in the preparation o f this Country Assistance Strategy.
The World Bank Guyana team’s contributions were critical to the production of this
document.
The team would also like to thank Tevfik Yaprak, Economic Advisor, OPCCE for his helpful
and continued advice to the team.
Throughout the preparation process, the team also benefited from input, comments, and
suggestions, from colleagues from LCSOS, LCRRM, DECPR, OPCS, SECPO, SDN, FRM,
COCPO, IFC, and LEG.
The team i s grateful for the close collaboration with the Ih4F’s Guyana team, and with all
other partners and donor agencies involved in Guyana.

i

EXECUTIVE S U M M A R Y
1.
Guyana has made significant headway in laying the foundations for
macroeconomic stability and higher pro-poor growth, but challenges remain. After
years o f volatility, GDP growth rebounded in 2006-2007, reaching 5.1 percent and 5.4
percent respectively, underpinned by booming investment and favorable terms o f trade
changes. Moderate and extreme poverty rates declined from 43.2 percent and 28.7 percent in
1992 to 36.1 percent and 18.6 percent in 2006, respectively, and at present, poverty-related
spending continues to exceed 20 percent o f GDP. Significant progress has been made on
MDG targets that address the empowerment o f women as well as hunger and primary
education, particularly to l o w income households.
2.
Guyana’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper focuses on accelerating and
sustaining economic growth through enhanced competitiveness and social development.
I t i s committed to addressing the various challenges that constrain growth: (i)
protecting the
environment and managing natural resources with simultaneous sustainable social and
economic development; (ii)managing the sea level rise and changes in rainfall patterns
through disaster mitigation; (iii)improving infrastructure to promote growth and private
sector development; (iv) improving the quality o f education; (v) improving the quality o f
health services which i s hampered by the emigration o f skilled health personnel; (vi)
deepening governance and modernizing the state, while building on progress already made;
and (vii) preventing crime and enhancing citizen’s security.
3.
An additional challenge that Guyana now faces i s i t s vulnerability to the global
crisis. Weakened commodity exports (sugar, rice, timber, bauxite, and gold), lower workers’
remittances and reduced foreign direct investment are likely to contribute to slower economic
growth in 2009 and 2010.

4.
While the last Country Assistance Strategy correctly identified the country’s
challenges, it was overambitious in scope and had mixed results, with the clear exception
o f education where good outcomes (e.g. reaching universal primary school completion with
assistance from Education For All-Fast Track Initiative) were achieved.
5.
This new CAS i s both demand-driven and highly selective. In addition to
expressed demand by the authorities, i t s design i s framed by four factors: (i)
the small IDA
allocation ( U S 8 . 2 million) and its implications for the choice o f instruments; (ii)
the need to
stay engaged and remain relevant in areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage; (iii)
a focus on areas where the Bank’s support could significantly leverage additional financing;
and (iv) the need to remain realistic with regards to the selection o f outcomes to be achieved.
6.
The Bank will assist Guyana in addressing its development challenges through a new
Country Assistance Strategy with two main pillars: (i) strengthening environmental
resilience and sustainability ;and (ii)improving education quality and social safety nets.
7.
The CAS seeks to achieve its outcomes through a mix of instruments that rely
heavily on technical assistance and analytical work, which complement a limited lending
envelope, and that leverage other donors’ support. In both lending and AAA, the CAS will
allow the Bank to be in a position to take advantage o f opportunities as they arise, and thus
incorporates reserves for “seed money” to enable the Bank to explore areas where i t can

11

provide analytical or project preparation activities that could leverage additional donor
financing.

8.
Based on lessons o f experience in implementing the last CAS and from other donor
experiences, and because o f the fact that CAS implementation and achievement o f expected
outcomes would depend significantly on the success o f partnering with and leveraging other
donors’ funds, the risks associated with this modest program are characterized as high.
However, the Bank recognizes the potential and high rewards from supporting the country in
addressing some o f the constraints to faster growth and poverty reduction.
9.
The risks to the CAS will be monitored, and mitigation measures w i l l be re-evaluated
regularly, throughout the CAS period, including: policy ownership and commitment;
implementation capacity; fiduciary, accountability and governance risks; insufficient donor
coordination; and exogenous risks (such as price volatility and climate change); and political
instability.

10.

In its discussion, the Board may wish to consider the following:

(i) Given the Bank’s limited financing in Guyana, does the proposed strategy
represent the most appropriate role the Bank can perform to support the
Government’s strategy?

(ii) Does the Country Assistance Strategy adequately identify the risks to the
successful implementation o f the Bank program?

...

111

I.COUNTRY CONTEXT
1.
Guyana i s situated in the Northern part o f South America, bordering the North
Atlantic Ocean, and with Suriname, Venezuela and Brazil as neighbors. I t i s the third
smallest country in South America after Suriname and Uruguay, and has a population o f less
than a million’. I t i s also the third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, after Haiti
and Nicaragua’. It i s well endowed with natural resources including bauxite and gold, fertile
agricultural lands, and large tropical forests. W i t h 80 percent o f the country covered by
forests, Guyana has one o f the world’s highest forest cover per capita ratios. Ninety percent
o f the inhabitants live on the narrow coastal plain, where population density i s more than 115
persons per square kilometer. According to the 2002 census, the composition population i s
composed of: Indo-Guyanese (43.5 percent); Afro-Guyanese (30.2 percent); Mixed Heritage
(17.6 percent); Amerindian (9.2 percent); and Portuguese and Chinese (e 1 percent).
2.
After over 25 years o f authoritarian rule, democratic elections were held in 1992.
Since then, there have been three largely free and fair general elections, but Guyana remains
a fragile democracy where political parties remain largely divided along ethnic lines.
T h i s has periodically resulted in civil unrest and violence, particularly around the 1997 and
2001 elections, and in slowing the pace o f economic reforms. However, the most recent
general elections, held in August 2006, were peaceful, fostering hope that Guyana’s
democracy has entered a more stable period.
In 2007, Guyana’s GDP reached US$1.043 billion with a GNI per capita o f
3.
US$1,300. With 72 percent o f Guyana’s population classified as rural, i t s economy i s
resource-based; specialized in agriculture and mining, which account for 30 percent and 9.7
percent of GDP, respectively. Inrecent years, manufacturing has remained constant at around
10 percent o f total value added while the share o f services has increased to 47 percent. The
IMF Article IV Staff Report (2007) and the Bureau o f Statistics posit that Guyana’s official
statistics underestimate the size o f i t s GDP by as much as 40 percent. This i s due to two
factors: a large informal sector that i s not accurately accounted for, and the use o f biased base
year (1988) weights in the estimation o f constant-prices GDP.

4.
With one of the highest rates of skilled migration in the world, Guyana i s the
greatest recipient o f remittances as a share of GDP in the Latin America and Caribbean
Region, and has the largest percentage o f households who receive remittances. Although the
country enjoys the benefits o f remittances, migration in Guyana constitutes a significant
challenge for human capital and socio-economic development - between 35 and 55 percent
o f Guyana’s nationals live abroad, and between 80 and 90 percent o f the Guyanese with
tertiary education are abroad (World Bank, 2007).

5.
The incidence of poverty, at 35 percent o f the population (with much higher
rates in rural and Amerindian areas), i s among the highest in the Western hemisphere.
Guyana ranks 107th out o f 177 countries in the UNDP Human Development Index - second
lowest in the Caribbean Region (after Haiti). Despite progress in recent years, significant
challenges remain.
6.
While some MDG indicators are likely to be achieved (education, hunger,
gender, and environment), the country i s still facing some challenges. According to the

’ The populationwas estimatedat 763,200 people in 2007 (Govemment o f GuyanalBureauof Statistics).
Accordingto the 2008 WDI, and in terms o f GDP per Capita, PPP (current international).

1

Poverty Assessment Report (World Bank, 2008), the most significant progress (compared to
2003) has been made on targets that address hunger and primary education, particularly to
low income households, and empowerment o f women. Guyana fares very well in terms of
educational attainment compared to other L A C countries with similar per capita GDP.
However, achievements related to maternal and child health, and controlling the prevalence
o f malaria and other diseases, were assessed as being unlikely to be met. The fact that goals
in chronic malnutrition, poverty, child mortality and maternal health will not be met i s
particularly worrisome because o f their long-term implications for the well-being o f large
segments o f the population and for building human capital.
Progress Towards Reducing Poverty

7.
According to a Household Income and Expenditure Survey3 completed in 2006, and a
Poverty Assessment Report (World Bank, 2008), poverty declined at a fast rate during
1992-1999, but seems to have stagnated afterwards. The national poverty rate fell from
43.2 percent in 1992 to 36.3 percent in 1999, and extreme poverty declined even more
rapidly from 28.7 percent in 1992 to 19.1 percent in 1999. However, since 1999, both the
overall and the extreme poverty headcount rates have remained stable in parallel with l o w per
capita GDP (GDP grew at an annualized rate o f less than one percent). In 2006, the national
poverty rate was estimated at 36.1 percent, with the population in extreme poverty
comprising 18.6 percent o f the population. To achieve the 2015 poverty MDGs, Guyana w i l l
need a 10 percentage point reduction in poverty, which i s a higher reduction than that
observed during 1992-1999.
8.
National poverty averages hide strong disparities between rural and urban areas
with 19 percent in urban areas and 74 percent in rural interior areas. Poverty rates are very
similar for the Afro-Guyanese (3 1.6 percent), Indo-Guyanese (30 percent) and the mixed
(33.7 percent) population. The Amerindians, the minority group largely residing in isolated
rural interior areas, experience the highest poverty incidence in the country (around 78
percent). This ethnic group represents only 9.2 percent o f the population in Guyana, but
contains one third o f the extreme poor population. Low education level i s the individual
characteristic with the strongest negative association with poverty status. N o t
surprisingly, the poverty rate decreases monotonically with increasing levels o f education. A
big decline in poverty rates i s associated with completed secondary education. In 2006, those
with the least education (none at all or incomplete primary), exhibited poverty rates o f 41
percent. Individuals with completed primary or incomplete high school show considerably
lower poverty rates. Completing secondary education i s associated with earnings that are 20
percent higher than those with incomplete secondary.
Gender

9.
According to the Poverty Assessment Report, there are sharp differences in
participation in the labor force. Guyana has the lowest female participation rate in the
region, and the widest gender participation gap. While 84 percent o f men aged 15-64 years
old look for a j o b or have a job, the proportion for women i s only 37 percent. Even
considering other factors that affect the decision to j o i n the labor force (marital status,
ethnicity, or area o f residence), the participation gender gap remains strong. This suggests the
existence o f distinct gender roles in Guyanese society that create a disincentive for women to
participate in the labor market.

Conducted by the Bureau o f Statistics with support from the World Bank, UNDP, and IDB.

2

10.
In both the PRSP and in i t s recent budget presentation (2009), the Government
highlighted i t s increased focus on equity and empowerment o f women. Government actions
include:
(i)
increased focus to the legislative framework to protect women and to empower them to
earn a living; (ii)
greater emphasis on incorporating entrepreneurial skills training into the life
skills programme for women and, (iii)
in 2009, a residential programme will be implemented
along with expanded training for women in hinterland communities. In addition, a
programme to assist single parents, who are mostly women, will be launched this year.
Foresty

11.
Guyana i s a major provider of environmental services. I t i s located at the heart o f
the Guiana Shield-a vast expanse o f tropical forest shared with Brazil, French Guyana,
Suriname and Venezuela. I t i s a center o f biodiversity and a provider o f environmental
services o f global scale. Much o f Guyana’s indigenous population lives in forests on which
they d,epend for their economic, social and cultural subsistence. These Amerindian
communities hold formal land titles over 2.4 million hectares. The annual deforestation rate
i s estimated at 0.1 - 0.3 percent, which i s relatively slow compared to most tropical countries.
About 90 percent o f Guyana’s forest i s s t i l l intact. At present, the main pressures on forests
are considered as: forest clearing for mining, the conversion o f forest to agriculture, and the
opening o f infrastructure, especially roads. The main factors that protected Guyana’s forests
so far are considered as: the very l o w population density away from the coastal plains, and
the lack o f physical accessibility to the forest hinterland. However, the low rates o f
deforestation (and o f forest carbon emissions) experienced in Guyana in the past may not
accurately predict future trends, as the country continues to improve its infrastructure and to
meet its development challenges.
Vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters

12.
Guyana i s highly vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters. According
to the 2005 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC),
Guyana’s total losses resulting from the heavy rains o f January 2005 amounted to US$465
million, or 59 percent o f the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In the most densely
populated area in the country, 71 percent o f residents were affected, while 20 percent o f those
in neighboring regions were impacted. In lowland areas, flood waters persisted for over a
month and the death toll reached 34, mostly attributed to waterborne disease.
13.
Sea level rise poses an important challenge to Guyana’s geography, ecology and
economy. According to recent estimates4, sea level can be expected to consistently rise and
possibly reach one meter by the end o f the century. A rise o f this magnitude would flood
about 200,000 hectares, where 70 .percent o f the population resides, 40 percent o f the
agricultural land i s located and 48 percent o f the GDP i s produced. While a change o f this
magnitude i s decades away, the Government recognizes the need to plan ahead for the
eventuality. Guyana has prepared a National Sector Policy for sea and river defense, and a
pilot project for mangrove cultivation and management i s ongoing. About the equivalent o f
US$12 million were spent over the last year to reinforce sea and river defense structures to
prevent flooding and overtopping, with over 5 kilometers o f sea defense structures being
completed and over 2 kilometers o f erosion prevention works being done, along with routine
maintenance. In addition, the Government i s working with other donors on addressing this
Source: Guyana Agriculture Adaptation StrateD, 2009,prepared under Mainstreaming Climate Change Issues in National
Development Processes (nltACC).

3

challenge through the following activities: Sea Defenses and Disaster Management (EU);
Flood Mitigation Support (DFID); Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery (UNDP); Support
for Natural Disaster Management (IDB Technical Assistance planned under the new
Assistance Strategy).

As indicated in its 2009 budget, the Government w i l l continue executing major
14.
infrastructure works to address the country’s vulnerability to climate change, with a view to
sustaining the economic livelihood o f i t s citizens. A budget allocation o f an equivalent o f
US$lO million has been provided to this effect. In addition, mangrove cultivation pilots will
continue as part o f the shore zone management program.
11. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS, C H A L L E N G E S AND GOVERNMENT
PRIORITIES
A.

Recent Macroeconomic Developments

15.
Economic growth in Guyana has been characterized by high volatility. Between
1997 and 2007, years o f GDP growth were interspersed with years o f contraction. From
reflecting increased o i l prices,
2002 to 2005, GDP growth averaged 0.08 percent (Figure l),
natural disasters (severe floods in 2005), the winding down o f production in Guyana’s largest
gold mine and the deteriorating security situation. GDP growth rebounded in 2006 and 2007,
reaching 5.1 percent and 5.4 percent respectively, underpinned by booming investment
activities and favorable terms o f trade changes. Significant remittance flows (about 25
percent o f GDP in 2007) and FDI (12.2 percent o f GDP in 2007) helped finance the
additional investment. The estimated growth rate for 2008 i s 3.2 percent. The slower growth
i s mainly due to strongly contracting sugar production and lower manufacturing output,
which fell by 15 percent due to heavy rains. Non-sugar growth was strong at 6 percent,
driven by growth in construction and commodity exports (rice, gold).
Figure 1: Growth Performance in Guyana

5.5
4.5
3.5
2.5
1.5
0.5
-0.5
-1.5
-2.5
2002

2003

2004

2005

I O gdp I
gdp per capita

2006

2007

= population I

Source: IMF, W o r l d Bank, Guyana Ministry o f Finance.
16.
The fiscal situation deteriorated considerably between 2002 and 2005, but the
Government has made efforts to reverse the trend since then. Increased expenditures
after 2002 were the result o f rising import prices (especially oil), flood-related reconstruction
expenses, the Cricket World Cup-related spending as well as the much needed investment to

4

modernize the sugar industry5. Sugar sector investments were necessary to ensure the
sector’s competitiveness in the context o f the gradual elimination o f the European Union
(EU) sugar preference6. The overall Government deficit after grants increased from 5.9
percent o f GDP in 2002 to 13.6 in 2005 (or 9.3 excluding the Skeldon sugar investment).
17.
With fiscal consolidation, the deficit declined to 11.5 percent o f GDP in 2006, and to
7.6 percent o f GDP in 2007. The recently improved fiscal balance reflects a strong revenue
effort, notably through improved administration, and the introduction o f a value added tax in
January 2007, as well as restrained expenditures with improved prioritization o f the Public
Sector Investment Program (PSIP) and containment o f the wage bill. A reduction o f interest
payments due to the various debt forgiveness initiatives has also helped to improve the fiscal
position.
18.
The fiscal deficit widened in 2008 to 8.7 percent o f GDP primarily due to measures
adopted to mitigate the impact o f higher fuel prices. The measures included subsidies to the
electricity company to contain tariff increases and a reduction in fuel excise taxes, and cost
about 4 percent o f GDP. These measures have been reversed. The other measures -expanding the list o f zero-rated VAT goods and a subsidy to flour -- have had a very small
effect on the budget; however, if maintained, they could over the long run erode the tax base.
Table 1: Guyana: Key Macroeconomic Indicators (2006 - 2013)
2006

2007

Est.
2008

2009

2010

Proi
2011

National Accounts and Prices
2.4
3.2
Real GDP growth (percent change)
5.4
5.1
3.6
5.1
3.6
8.2
CPI Inflation (percent change, average)
12.2
6.7
5.0
5.0
...
205.0
Exchange rate (per US%,end of period)
204.0
201 .o
...
...
-7.2
3.1
-8.2
Terms of Trade
-1.4
6.5
3.2
Investment (percent of GDP)
29.4
30.6
33.2
27.0
Gross Domestic Investment
27.9
33.6
12.4
10.8
10.3
Private Sector
11.3
9.2
9.3
16.7
Public Sector
18.3
20.3
22.4
16.6
24.3
Nonfinancial Public Sector Indicators (percent of GDP)
42.9
43.6
44.5
42.6
Central government revenues and grants
42.2
46.7
33.8
33.3
35.6
33.8
33.4
31.6
Tax revenues
52.1
47.4
Central government expenditures
51.6
51.9
48.0
58.2
31.2
30.1
Current I /
33.3
29.7
34.0
30.8
-11.5
-8.7
-6.8
-7.6
-5.9
-4.8
Overall balance afier grants
11.5
Financing
8.7
6.8
7.6
5.9
4.8
12.7
12.4
10.0
8.4
11.2
9.1
Net external financing 11
0.9
-1.7
1.5
0.8
-0.6
0.7
Net domestic financing
-1.6
-4.7
-4.9
-3.9
-5.1
...
PetroCaribe savings
External Sector Indicators (percent of GDP)
-41.9
MerchandizeTrade Balance
-33.5
-35.5
-31.6
-32.9
-28.3
52.7
64.1
68.3
63.4
59.7
52.6
Exports of goods, f.0.b.
86.2
110.2
98.9
97.0
88.0
84.2
Imports of goods, c.1.f.
-19.0
-20.8
-18.0
Current account, incl. off. transfen
-20.9
-13.3
-18.6
Gross International ReSeNeS (in months of imports)
3.1
3.0
2.6
3.0
3.3
3.4
Sources: Bank of Guyana; Statistical Bureau of Guyana; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
I / Reflects interest and amortirations after debt stock omations.

2012

2013

4.9
5.0

4.4
5.0

0.7

0.4

26.4
11.2
15.2

25.2
10.8
14.4

41.8
33.5
45.4
30.2
-3.5
3.5
7.8
0.3
-4.5

41.4
33.3
44.4
30.1
-3.0
3.0
2.1
-0.1
1.l

...

-26.5
60.8
87.3
-11.9
3.3

At an average level o f 15 percent for the period 1998-2005, Guyana would appear to have a comparatively high public investment to
GDP ratio. Comparator small countries have a rate well below 10 percent; however, due to Guyana’s particular geographic
configuration (10 percento f the land in Guyana i s below sea level), and the difficulties o f connecting communities dispersed over its
vast land area, public infrastructure requires higher than average amunts o f public investment.
A sugar modernization plan was initiated in 2000, anticipating lower preferential prices for exports to the EU. The plan calls for
increasingoutput by nearly 70% over the medium term, from 226,000 tons in 2008 to 389,000 tons in 2012, and reducing costs from
20 U S cents to 11 US cents per pound. The program included the construction o f a new US$180 million factory, mostly completed in
2008 (source: IMF Staff Report, 2009).

5

...

-23.7
61.5
85.2
-10.7
3.2

B.

Outlook for 2009-2012

Impact of the Global crisis7. Guyana is vulnerable to the global crisis, through a
19.
weakening of commodity exports (sugar, rice, timber, bauxite, and gold), a reduction in
workers remittances and reduced foreign direct investment. Since exports of sugar, rice,
timber, bauxite and gold account for 40 percent of GDP, the global slowdown in demand for
these commodities is likely to have an impact on growth. In 2009, exports of goods are
projected to decline (in value terms) by 16 percent, with a decline in all the main commodity
exports except gold (whose exports are projected to increase by 7.2 percent). The commodity
which is projected to experience the highest decline in exports (51 percent) is bauxite.
Imports are also projected to decline by 19.2 percent in 2009, which will result in a projected
increase in net merchandise trade from -484 to -365 from 2008 to 2009. Remittances, which
account for over 25 percent of GDP, are vulnerable to rising unemployment in labor markets
in the US, Canada and the United Kingdom. Remittances have held up in 2008, but are
projected to decline in 2009 by about -25%. Large investment projects under consideration,
such as the hydropower plant, are likely to be delayed.
20.
The financial sector, even with limited exposure to international financial markets, is
not immune, as the recent failure of the Caribbean Life Insurance Company (CLICO), the
Trinidad and Tobago (T&T) based conglomerate, has shown. The fallout from the CLICO
T&T was felt in the Bahamas where the liquidation process of the local company started on
February 26, 2009, and subsequently in Guyana. The Government acted swiftly and put
CLICO (Guyana) under judicial administration on March 2, 2009, with the insurance
supervisor acting as a manager. CLICO Guyana has 15,000 policy holders and holds about
17% of the National Insurance Scheme's assets. The deficit of its statutory fund is estimated
at USD 60 million according to the supervisor. The Guyana authorities are claiming USD 34
million into CLICO Bahamas, but the Bahamian liquidator has proposed to reclassify this
amount as unsecured intercompany advances, which would have a low priority in the
liquidation. The recent IMF Article IV for Guyana (February 2009) notes that as of endSeptember 2008, the Banks had capital to risk adjusted asset ratios well above 8 percent and
liquidity levels were comfortable. NPLs are high at 10 percent, but do not appear to have
risen. Stress tests, based on an update of the 2006 FSAP, with the current risks, show that
banks appear resilient, with vulnerabilities emerging with severe shocks across the economy
or a combination of shocks.
21.
Prospects in 2009 and 2010 show a slowdown in growth. These projections are
more conservative than those presented by the Government in its 2009 budget and by the
IMF in its recent Article IV (see table 1). Growth in 2009 is projected to decelerate sharply
in most non-sugar sectors. Sugar production, while projected to grow compared to 2008,
does not achieve the increase of well over 20 percent projected in the 2009 budget. In 2008,
it declined by 15% due to the impact of the flooding. Starting in 2010, a more broad based
growth would be underpinned by an expected global economic recovery, which would result
in gradual increases in export prices and remittances. Growth in Guyana could then reach
well over 3 percent in 201 0 and increase to 4-5 percent in 20 11- 13.
22.
The Government has indicated its commitment to continue fiscal consolidation in the
medium term, targeting an overall deficit after grants averaging about 3.5 percent of GDP.
This fiscal strategy is crucial to achieve healthy public finances and a sustainable debt burden
in the medium term, but it is also a very ambitious strategy. The authorities envisage a

'The current macroeconomic projections are based on available information and staff estimates.

23.
Debt Management and Sustainabili@. Guyana’s debt sustainability has improved
dramatically since 2002. The country reached the Enhanced HIPC (E-HIPC) Completion
Point in December 2003 qualifying for US$329 million o f debt relief in NPV terms,
additional to the debt relief o f US$256 million in NPV terms obtained under the original
HIPC in M a y 1999. Although the external debt burden, as measured by the NPV o f external
debt to revenue ratio, declined following the E-HIPC Completion Point, debt sustainability
concerns re-emerged in 2004 and were only eased after the implementation o f the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). In 2006/7 under the MDRI, about US$611
million o f Guyana’s debt has been written o f f by the IMF, the World Bank and the InterAmerican Development Bank. In November 2006, Japan finalized i t s bilateral debt
cancellation agreement and, in July 2007, there was a write-off US$15 million o f outstanding
debt to China. As o f end-2007, external debt declined substantially and was US$719 million
(67 percent o f GDP). Finally, in 2008, Guyana benefited from debt reduction offered by
Venezuela that cancelled US$12.5 million.
24.
The updated joint IMF-WB debt sustainability analysis (DSA)*, presented in Annex
E, indicates that Guyana remains at a moderate risk o f debt distress. The main conclusions
from the DSA highlight that while projected debt indicators are similar to those o f the
February 2008 DSA, the potential vulnerabilities have increased, namely the risk o f a weak
implementation o f the sugar modernization plan and a more prolonged global slowdown
(than currently envisaged). The total public sector debt ratios show higher vulnerability than
the external ones, underscoring the importance o f deepening fiscal consolidation. Going
forward, the DSA highlights that Guyana’s external and public debt outlook will depend on
maintaining a sustainable medium-term fiscal framework, broadening the sources o f growth,
and a prudent debt strategy.

C.

Challenges and Country Priorities

25.
The Government’s vision i s to accelerate growth by addressing several challenges.
These challenges were confirmed at the CAS consultations as the Government’s main
priorities in the next four years:

(i) Protecting the environment and managing natural resources with simultaneous
sustainable social and economic development;
(ii) Managing the sea level rise and changes in rainfall patterns through disaster
mitigation;
(iii)Improving infrastructure to promote growth and private sector development;
(iv) Improving the quality o f education;
(v) Improving the quality o f health services which i s hampered by the emigration o f
skilled health personnel;
(vi) Deepening governance and modernizing the state, while building on progress
already made; and
(vii) Preventing crime and enhancing citizen’s security.
26.
Protecting the environment and managing the country’s natural resources with
simultaneous sustainable social and economic development i s a major challenge and one
in which Guyana i s playing a global leadership role. President Jagdeo i s actively pursuing
a vision o f a low carbon development strategy and i s seeking to leverage the preservation o f
the country’s vast forests to raise capital to develop economic and social infrastructure. H e
has expressed his country’s willingness to place the Guyana rainforest under long-term
*An Addendum to the DSA with an updated scenario o f lower GDP growth is attached at the end o f Annex E.

7

protection, if adequate market-based incentives are created to make this effort economically
and socially worthwhile for the countryg. Guyana i s participating in the design o f a postKyoto climate change mitigation regime, and will be one o f the first participants in the new
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility administered by the World Bank. I t will likely receive a
US$2 million grant to ready itself to reduce carbon emissions from forests, and access larger
financial transfers in return-a grant to prepare the country’s Readiness Plan was approved in
June 2008. Guyana i s now the first country to have submitted a readiness plan. The Bank
will support the Government’s goals in this area sector through a Forestry project.
27.
Given the importance o f agriculture income in rural poverty reduction, agriculture
risks (climate and price risk) must be managed in a comprehensive manner. Inappropriate
agricultural practices, and inadequate exploration o f mineral resources, the disturbance and
degradation o f forests, and unregulated squatter settlements are the major issues related to the
sustainability o f the environment. The Government has also taken the lead in promoting, at
an international level, an approach to the climate change agenda that recognizes and
addresses human development objectives.
28.
Managing the sea level rise and changes in rainfall patterns through inter alia
disaster mitigation i s another important challenge. Drainage and irrigation systems were
constructed over a hundred years ago, and have not been adequately maintained, nor are they
designed to deal with the added stress o f sea level rise. Currently, catastrophic climate risk i s
absorbed by the Government and agriculture producers at great cost, restricting their ability
to exit from poverty and inhibiting growth and agricultural competitiveness. Given Guyana’s
need to increase agricultural competitiveness, financial instruments such as agricultural
insurance could provide a sustainable market mechanism to manage and transfer such risks to
international markets. The Bank will support the Government in addressing this challenge
through technical assistance on agriculture risk insurance.
29.
Improving infrastructure to promote growth and private sector development.
The 2006 Investment Climate Survey (ICs) revealed that access to finance (cost o f financing
and collateral), electricity, telecom services, skills and education o f available workers, and
political uncertainty or instability, were the major constraints to doing business. A growth
emphasized the poor appropriability o f returns on private investment,
diagnostics study lo
which hampers capital accumulation, innovative activities and productive diversification o f
the economy and i s linked primarily to a weak institutional framework. The Government i s
committed in its PRSP to undertake various measures to improve infrastructure, including:
improving drainage and irrigation systems; improving the roads network and the sea defense,
as well as expanding and diversifying power supply. In telecommunications, negotiations
regarding the opening o f the sector to competition are progressing well. The sector i s
currently dominated by the private monopoly provider GT&T. Once an agreement i s reached
to end the monopoly, support will be required to modernize the sector’s policy, legal,
regulatory and institutional frameworks. In addition, as competition i s likely to be
concentrated initially on the main urban centers, a comprehensive universal service program
w i l l need to be implemented. The Bank will support the Government’s goals in enhancing
the telecommunications sector through a regional connectivity project.

30.
Improving the quality of education. Guyana made significant progress in terms
of access to education, and primary school enrollment in the last few years was close to
Cf. Speech to the UnitedNations in December, 2008. http:/lwww,gina.gov.gy/unveils.hhnl
Paloma Baena, Anneke Jessen, Matthew Shearer,
Christian Schneider and Marlon Bristol, Inter-American Development Bank, GY-P0130,2007.
lo
Identifying Binding Constraints to Growth in Guyana by Edna Armendariz,

8

100 percent. However, quality and equity constitute major concerns at all levels of
education. Over the past three years, Guyana has successfully implemented a series o f
activities under the Education For All-Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI), which has supported
primary education under the Government’s Education Strategic Plan. Guyana has achieved
good results in the number o f children completing primary education (Grade 6), with the
national average at 100 percent, and the hinterland improving significantly from 85 percent in
2002 to 94 percent in 2007. Steady progress i s also being made towards achieving universal
secondary education with about 78 percent enrollment, although regional disparities persist,
repetition and drop out rates remain high, and quality indicators are below expectations.
3 1.
There have been significant gains in the last few years, but the range o f quality needs
i s wide: trained teachers in the coastland and hinterland represent only 57 percent and 38
percent o f their respective totals, student absenteeism i s high (20-25 percent), student
performance on national assessments i s low, and a proportion o f school facilities continue to
be in poor condition. These concerns justify quality as the imperative for the Ministry o f
Education in i t s future plan. The Government has focused much effort on maintaining and
improving the number o f trained teachers in the system, resulting in positive results despite
the constant outflow o f the most experienced teachers to more lucrative jobs in the private
sector, and emigration to other countries where teacher salaries are more attractive.
32.
The Government will improve literacy and numeracy and vocational and technical
education through improving teachers’ education. I t s objective i s to increase the proportion
o f trained teachers from 57 percent to 70 percent by 2012, and to upgrade the knowledge o f
the teachers in their specialized areas at the secondary level. The Bank will support the
Government’s plan through an Education project focused on the reform o f teachers’ training.
33.
Improving the quality of health services. Compared to other L A C and even middle
income countries, Guyana i s doing better in certain areas o f health such as immunizations,
but worse in others such as child and maternal mortality. Assistance during births i s also less
prevalent in Guyana than in L A C countries or MICs. In addition, Guyana had 48 physicians
per 100,000 inhabitants in 2005, a lower ratio compared to Dominica and Grenada (50) as
well as Jamaica (85). These ratios partially explain poor outcomes in maternal health care
services in Guyana-maternal mortality in Guyana i s more than twice the rate in Jamaica.
34.
The prevalence o f HIV/AIDS i s estimated at between 1.5 percent and 2.4 percent in
the adult population. The epidemic appears to be stabilizing. Services for prevention,
treatment, and care, increased dramatically in the last four years, especially aided by funding
from the World Bank, the Global Fund for A I D S , Tuberculosis and Malaria and the U S
Government’s President’s Emergency Program for A I D S . The Bank i s supporting the health
sector through an ongoing HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control project. Results show that
Guyana has made significant progress in controlling HIV/AIDS as demonstrated, in part, by
the decline in the trend o f HIV infections among pregnant women from 5.6 percent in 2000
to 2.1 in 2005l’. Major challenges s t i l l lie ahead: only 33 percent o f people needing antiretroviral therapy are accessing services and 3 1.6 percent o f infected mothers are accessing
the anti-retroviral therapy to prevent transmission o f HIV to their infants. The project i s
contributing to supporting human capital in Guyana which i s now cited (by WHO and others)
as a leader in national multi-sector responses to HIV and A I D S . The line ministry component
o f the Guyana HIV/AIDS project has become an interesting case study on mainstreaming a
national response to the epidemic.
” Ministry o f Health, 2006 Guyana National HIV/AIDS Strategy 2007-2011.

9

35.
With respect to other diseases, the prevalence o f malaria declined from about 3.6
percent o f the population in 2001, to about 2.7 percent o f the population in 2006. In the case
of tuberculosis (TB), although modest results were achieved in reducing its incidence over
the period, disturbing high levels persist in 6 out o f the 10 regions in Guyana, particularly in
the hinterland regions. According to the recently updated National Health Sector Strategy for
2008-2012, the Government aims to achieve improvements across the whole range o f public
health services through strengthening human resources and expanding infrastructure to
increase coverage.
Guyana faces a major challenge in retaining its skilled population. I t has
36.
experienced one o f the highest net emigration flows o f the region, and the estimated annual
emigration rate i s 2 percent (World Bank, 2007). However, migration also directs a
significant in-flow o f financial resources into the country. Therefore, a careful strategy that
links the diaspora to their home country may be effective in benefiting from the skilled
immigrants while abroad (Box 1). An ongoing regional study i s being undertaken at the
Bank and aims at addressing nurse migration issues.

Box 1: InternationalMigration: A Challenge and an Opportunity

m.

Guyana has one o f the highest rates o f skilled migration in the
The country has also one o f the
highest net out-migration flows o f the Latin America and Caribbean region. I t i s the largest recipient o f
remittances in the region (relative to GDP), and has the largest percentage o f households who receive
remittances. Migration in Guyana constitutes a significant challenge for socio-economic development. I t
i s estimated that between 35 and 55 percent o f Guyana’s inhabitants live abroad, and that between 80 and
90 percent o f the Guyanese with tertiary education are abroad (World Bank, 2007b). About half o f students
intend to migrate soon, and some o f them enter the university precisely in order to gain the necessary skills
to be able to migrate. Entrepreneurs, professionals, teachers, and nurses are leavin Guyana for better
opportunities, for higher pay, better work conditions, more freedom and more security”. A t the same time,
migration constitutes an opportunity for the poor who are increasingly benefiting from the remittances. I t
i s estimated that remittances constitute over 25% o f GDP, and about one-third o f the Guyanese population
receives remittances. The Poverty Assessment Report projected that “if remittances were to be
exogenously taken away from Guyana tomorrow, the poverty rate would increase from 36 to 46
percent. The poverty among current remittance receivers would have doubled to 50%.” Remittances
are an important part o f the social safety nets, and have a positive effect on education. For instance,
remittance-receiving households are more likely to keep their children in school, which has an impact on
secondary and tertiary enrollment rates.
Addressing the migration issue becomes urgent as remittances are likely to decline significantly as a
result of the global financial crisis.

37.
Deepening governance and modernizing the state, while building on progress
already made. The Government recognizes in i t s new PRSP that achieving higher economic
growth and improved public services will not be achieved without fundamental
improvements in governance and public sector institutional capacity. Corruption, weaknesses
in public accountability and local Government institutions are the key challenges that
constrain private sector development and which also explain the low social and economic
return on public spending.
38.
The Government has demonstrated its commitment to addressing governance in
its national development through the appointment o f a governance advisor and the
establishment o f a dedicated unit within the office o f the president. Interventions on
governance, both externally funded and those financed from national resources, have

’*Poverty Assessment Report, World Bank, 2009.
10

included: (1) security sector reform, (2) justice administration reforms, (3) preparation for
long overdue local Government elections, (4) strengthening o f parliamentary oversight, and
(5) implementing constitutional reforms passed by the National Assembly in 200 1. Guyana
receives support from the IDB, through Citizen Security and Justice Sector programs, from
the UNDP, in community level security improvement and elections support, from DFID in
the broad security sector, and from C I D A in the area o f local Government elections. USAID,
through the Millennium Challenge Threshold program, has been supporting some o f the
parliamentary reforms. I t i s worth noting that the reform agenda for strengthening fiduciary
oversight and parliamentary systems was developed in the context o f the World Bank
PSTAC program, which closed in 2007.

39.
The World Bank i s currently participating in the dialogue with the Government on
Governance issues in the context o f the donor-Government Governance Thematic Group.
T h i s Thematic Group meets every six weeks, and includes Government representatives (the
Office o f the President), the World Bank, IDB, UNDP, DFID, CIDA, USAID, OAS, and the
EU. Agenda items include security, parliamentary reforms (including fiduciary oversight
reform agenda), implementation o f constitutional reforms, local Government reform and
elections.
40.
Progress has been achieved in modernizing regulatory and institutional frameworks.
An Integrated Financial Management and Accounting System (IFMAS) to interconnect the
Government's financial management and accounting systems and control overall public
expenditures has been implemented. The capital budget i s prepared within the framework o f
a rolling five-year Public Sector Investment Program (PSIP), with a prioritization mechanism.
Standard bidding documents and operational manuals are now used increasingly throughout
central Government entities. The Audit Office o f Guyana (AOG) has begun implementing
international auditing standards and auditing methodologies to perform operational,
performance, and forensic audits. The legislature has moved to strengthen i t s oversight role
over the execution of the budget through legislative review o f the external audit reports, and
by questioning responsible parties about the findings from the reports. Improvements have
also been made in budget formulation and implementation.
41.
However, challenges remain, in particular consolidating the reform gains and moving
towards a programmatic and results based system. The implementation o f common internal
controls and audit frameworks, the unification o f current and capital budgets, and the
strengthening o f the linkages between budget preparation and procurement planning, are key
elements that need to be consolidated before moving towards a programmatic and results
based system. The establishment o f an effective monitoring and evaluation framework also
remains a priority. The Government will continue i t s efforts to promote governance in its
new strategy. Concrete actions include: (i)
strengthening parliament as well as public sector
efficiency and effectiveness, and (ii)strengthening the Office o f the Auditor General, and
(iii)
reforming the Integrity Commission.
Preventing crime and enhancing security. It i s widely recognized that reducing
42.
crime and improving security in Guyana i s extremely critical for the country's growth and
competitiveness, and i t i s among the Government's priorities. Crime and violence generate
fear and anxiety, fuel migration, discourage long-term investment, and severely compromise
good g~vernance'~.The Investment Climate Survey (2007) reported that crime losses and

l3Guyana Development Policy Review,

World Bank, 2003.

11

security costs spent are high. Direct crime losses o f interviewed firms are about 3.4 percent
o f annual sales.
111. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. Lessons from the last CAS

43.
The 2002 CAS marked a fundamental shift in the IDA lending strategy for
Guyana. Drawing on the experience o f previous interventions, and guided by the Bank’s
mandate for poverty reduction and i t s comparative advantage in policy dialogue, the strategy
focused on supporting the policy reform agenda o f the PRSP. The CAS shifted fiom project
lending to a series o f Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) consisting o f a series o f
single tranche programmatic credits. The pace o f reforms was seen as the constraint on how
many PRSCs could be provided, but the first PRSC (PRSC-I) program document suggested
that it might be possible to proceed at a pace o f one PRSC per year. The CAS focused on
areas where the Bank was viewed as having a comparative advantage, and sought to ensure
complementarities with other development partners.
44.
The CAS supported three key priorities o f the 2001 PRSP: (i)stimulating economic
growth through sound macroeconomic management, more efficient implementation o f the
public sector investment program (in particular in the sugar sector), and improving the
environment for private investment; (ii)improving public sector governance and
accountability by strengthening oversight systems and building capacity; and (iii)
enhancing
provision of, and access to, basic services and safety nets.
45.
While the CAS correctly identified the country’s challenges, it was extremely
ambitious and overestimated the consensus and capacity for reforms. Implementation o f
the CAS agenda was undermined by the macroeconomic program going temporarily off-track
and the acceleration o f political disruptions. The ensuing delays (even with a two year
extension) and the underlying institutional issues indicate that the original schedule o f one
PRSC per year was too optimistic. Reform efforts have been uneven. The main issues
lack o f broad consensus for reforms; (ii)
identified during CAS implementation were: (i)
even when there was consensus, the reform process was slow; and (iii)
limited management
and technical capacity to carry out reforms.
46.
Among the achievements under the previous CAS, the outcomes o f the School
Feeding Program under the EFA-FTI are noticeable. As o f December 2008, there were over
11,000 beneficiary children in 60 primary schools in the interior o f the country (hinterland).
This represented 57 percent o f all primary school children in Regions 1, 7, 8, and 9. In
communities where the program operates, student attendance has increased, a local market
for food items has developed, and parents and other community members are considerably
more engaged in the school and local activities. An on-going impact evaluation will capture
more precisely the levels o f improvement related to the objectives o f the program.
The CAS Completion Report provides a detailed assessment o f Bank performance
47.
during FY03-08 (Annex D). Box 2 summarizes the main lessons and recommendations.

12

Box 2: Lessons and Recommendations
~

~~

Selectivity and simplicity in design are key.
The strategy was wide ranging with highly optimistic objectives and implementation time.
Key performance indicators should be focused and as much as possible linked to measurable
outcomes.
Keep priorities well-focused and implementation flexible.
Lack of capacity in the Guyanese public sector i s a cross-cutting constraint.
Future operations should aim at increasing substantially public sector capacity.
Timefiame and design o f future operations should take into account capacity constraints in the
public service.
Client ownership and commitment, including champions, are critical.
The lack o f Government focus on some key reforms lowered expectations and the impact o f
the CAS.
Lack of politicaland social cohesion can undermine the reform agenda.
The Government noted that while the conditions were conducive to growth at the beginning o f
the previous CAS period, political conditions and social cohesion were not in place,
contributing to poor growth and sluggish reduction in poverty.
Political constraints often prevented reform fiom moving, as was the case with the VAT,
which was implemented in 2007 after much delay.
Improve political economy analysis in project design.
Resource flows need to be more predictable.
Unpredictable resource flows negatively impacted government programs, particularly with the
debt relief packages, where delays forced the government to scale down some investments.
Project sustainability requires retainingkey personnel,
Projects that rely heavily on highly-paid consultants who are unlikely to be retained by the
government at project completion are likely to experience weak implementation andor limited
long-term development impact.
Donor coordination needs to be strengthened.
Consider, for instance, joint missions to address common issues and pooled funds/swaps.
Choice and scope of AAA should involve more consultation with the government
Analytical work and policy notes should be demand-driven, part o f the on-going reform
process, and delivered in a timely manner.

B. Current Bank Group Program

48.
The Guyana portfolio o f IDA-financed projects i s small, comprising two projects
totaling US$21.3 million, HIV/AIDS (US$lO million) and Water Sector Consolidation
(US$11.3 million). In addition, the Trust Fund portfolio totaling US$18.9 million includes
the Education for AllEast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI) program supported by the FTI
Catalytic Fund (US$12.2 million), the Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant for the
Conservancy Adaptation Project (US$3.8 million), the Bagasse Cogeneration project
(US$2.6 million) funded by the Community Development Carbon Fund managed by the
World Bank, and a Trust Fund for National Statistics Strategy and Statistical Development
TA project (US$285,000). Ongoing analytical work includes a regional energy study
(Alternative Energy Supply) in line with the Government’s objective o f diversifiing power
supply sources, and limiting Guyana’s exposure to hydrocarbon price fluctuation. An
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment has been recently completed and delivered to the
Government (2008).

All operations are “Satisfactory” or “Moderately Satisfactory” for overall
49.
implementation and progress toward objectives. In terms o f fiduciary risk, only one
13

project-Water Sector Consolidation-has a “Marginally Unsatisfactory” rating for Financial
Management, and the other projects have “Satisfactory” fiduciary ratings. Institutional
weaknesses o f Guyana Water Incorporated (GWI) may put the Water Sector project at risk.
The Bank i s working closely with the Government on this issue, has laid out a timebound
action plan to remedy the key problems, and i s following-up on the implementation o f this
action plan. Only one project (Conservancy Adaptation) i s currently in a potential problem
status (two o f i t s three “flags” are for Country Record and Effectiveness Delay). All planned
lending and Trust Funds were approved, with the exception o f one GEF project (National
Protected Areas Systems) that was dropped.
50.
During FY03-08, IFC committed US$4.6 million in the mining sector (Guyana
Goldfield). As o f February 28, 2009, IFC’s disbursed and held portfolios totaled US$2.91
million and US$3.41 million respectively. An IFC investment in Small Business
Development Finance Trust (up to US$300,000) was approved in November 2008.
5 1.

MIGA does not have any outstanding portfolio in Guyana.
C. Country Assistance Strategy N 0 9 - F Y 1 2

52.
Main thrust of the Strategy: T h i s CAS i s both demand-driven and highly selective.
I t s design i s framed by four factors: (i)
the small IDA allocation (US$8.2 million) and its
implications for the choice o f instruments; (ii)
the need to stay engaged and remain relevant
in areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage; (iii)
the need to work in areas where
the Bank’s support could significantly leverage additional financing; and (iv) the need to
remain realistic with regards to the selection o f outcomes to be a~hieved’~.
53.
The CAS seeks to achieve i t s outcomes through a m i x o f instruments that rely heavily
on Technical Assistance and analytical work, which complement a limited lending envelope,
and that leverage other donors’ support. In both lending and AAA, the CAS will allow the
Bank to be in a position to take advantage o f opportunities as they arise, and thus
incorporates reserves for “seed money” to enable the Bank to explore areas where it can
provide analytical or project preparation activities that could leverage additional donor
financing.
54.
The CAS program i s summarized in Table 2 and in Annex B3. I t should be noted
that the amounts shown in outer years are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on:
(i)the country’s own performance; (ii)its performance relative to that o f other IDA
recipients; (iii)
the amount o f overall resources available to IDA; (iv) changes in the list o f
active IDA-eligible countries; (v) terms o f financial assistance provided (grants or loans); and
(vi) the amount o f compensatory resources received for MDRI.

55.
IDA assistance under IDA 15 comprises both the new allocations (SDR 5.6 million or
US$8.2 million) as well as the debt relief o f SDR 7.5 million (or US$11 million) provided
under the MDRI, which leaves resources in the Government’s budget.
56.
The Government submitted to the donor community a draft o f its second PRSP in
November, 2008. I t was considered prudent to proceed with the CAS ahead o f the Joint Staff
j 4 Given the limited envelope, the proposed support will only contribuk to supporting some o f government3 challenges. As a result,
the strict definitions o f the Results Framework may not be applicablehere, and several outcomes identified in the CAS may only be
“outputs” at this stage. In the longer run, when the analytical support i s operationalized, those outputs will indeed translate into real
outcomes.

14

Advisory Note for several reasons: (i)
the CAS i s fully aligned with the draft PRSP; (ii)
the
Government i s finalizing the PRSP but the timing i s uncertain as i t faces many urgent
priorities, especially in the wake o f the financial crisis; (iii)
the priorities in the Second PRSP
are clear and are not expected to change, nor w i l l they require any change in the Bank
program; (iv) the CAS i s also based on and aligned with extensive consultations with the
Government, other donors, the private sector, and civil society; and (v) given limited IDA
allocations, there i s urgent need to have a clearly defined strategy to prioritize World Bank
interventions. Further, early action would also allow the Government to seek alternative
financing for activities that the Bank i s unable to finance. Predictability o f aid flows was one
o f the constraints highlighted by the Government in the lessons learned from earlier
assistance.

57.
Pillars and Outcomes. The overall objective o f the FY09-12 CAS i s to contribute
to the Government’s overarching PRSP focus o f accelerating and sustaining growth
through two main pillars: (i)strengthening environmental resilience and sustainability;
and (i)
improving education quality and social safety nets.
58.
In the area o f strengthening environmental resilience and sustainability, the CAS
aims at contributing to achieving the following outcomes: (i)
Pilot forest areas protected
and sustainably managed by local communities; and (ii)
Improved Government’s ability to
reduce exposure to natural disasters and global climate risk. In the area o f improving
education quality and social safety nets, the CAS aims at contributinp to achieving the
following outcomes: (i)
Improved quality o f education through reform o f teacher training and
better service delivery; and (ii)
Improved institutional capacity o f the Government, and
ability to deliver an enhanced social protection program.
59.
Rationale. In addition to the reasons explained above, the selection o f the two pillars
i s also based on: (i)
the Government’s request for Bank assistance in Forestry, Education, and
Social Protection, and i t s emphasis and commitment to addressing the issues related to those
ongoing engagement with the Government on environmental resilience and
sectors; (ii)
education (such as the work on the Conservancy Adaptation Project and the efforts to reduce
Guyana’s exposures to catastrophic risk from sea level rise, hurricanes and other natural
disasters; and the EFA-FTI program); and (iii)
based on past achievements that will be
sustained and continued during this CAS.

60.
The choice o f Forestry and Education, and social protection i s based on the reasons
explained above. Other sectors are covered by other donors’ interventions, as presented in
Annex C.

Fiscal Year 2009

AAA: On-demand Economic monitoring and just-in-time analysis (e.g. policy
options to manage the impact o f the crisis)

Fiscal Year 2010

Lending: Forestry, climate change, and community project

AAA: Agriculture Risk Insurance
AAA: On-demand Economic monitoring andjust-in-time analysis
Fiscal Year 2011

Lending: Education project
AAA: Safety Nets

15

61.
The CAS inherits a Water sector consolidation and HIV/AIDS ongoing projects
whose development impact would be to support the achievement o f sustainable universal
access o f safe and affordable water; and slow the increase o f HIV infections and mortality,
respectively. Those projects are not part o f the forward looking engagements, and are not
part o f the proposed CAS pillars.

(i)Strengthening environmental resilience and sustainability. In line with President
Jagdeo’s agenda on Climate Change, the Bank w i l l assist Guyana’s efforts to protect forests
(mitigation) and prevent natural disasters (adaptation). On the mitigation side, the Bank will
accompany the country’s efforts to reduce carbon emissions from deforestation and help
negotiate external resources in return (Readiness Grant from the FCPF currently being
processed (US$2 million). An IDA project supporting sustainable forest management would
complement Guyana’s participation in the FCPF. This IDA project would: (i)help
strengthen the capacities o f national institutions in charge o f forest protection and
management; and (ii)
support community-based forest management initiatives undertaken by
local and indigenous communities. Overall, the project would promote multipurpose forest
management, including new systems o f payments for carbon and other environmental
services (water regulation and biodiversity conservation). Given the size o f the challenges
and budget limitations, this project would work on a pilot scale and help develop
methodologies that can later be replicated and scaled-up. The FCPF and IDA support might
also be complemented by a possible grant from the Japanese Social Development Fund
(JSDF) to promote community-driven enterprises in Guyana and, possibly, by a grant from
the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to protect forests and biodiversity and mitigate
climate change.

.

62.
Although the CAS completion report referred to a legal and policy framework that i s
not conducive to successful implementation o f projects in this area, implementation o f this
CAS will be different. There are strong signals o f Government commitment to
strengthening environmental resilience and sustainability. For example, after a long
delay, the Forestry Bill was passed in January 2009; and a climate change unit i s being
established in the President’s Office to facilitate continued leadership from the highest level
in the implementation o f Guyana’s low carbon growth agenda. The unit will provide the
framework at the national level for climate change and guide the concerned agencies in
implementation. I t will also act as a clearing house for various international partnerships and
ensure consistency in approach. The Bank has been requested to provide advice and
financial support to this climate change unit and contribute to building i t s institutional and
technical strength.
63.
The CAS includes analytical work that covers the agriculture risk insurance
management. Through this work, the Bank would be targeting small and vulnerable farmers,
and providing the basis for medium and long term efforts to reduce poverty, smooth
consumption, and bring fiscal stability to the economy.
64.
Two ongoing operations contribute to this pillar: A Global Environment Facility
(GEF) grant for the Conservancy Adaptation Project (2008, US$3.8 million) i s expected to
support the Government in reducing vulnerability to coastal drainage and the lowering the
potential for flooding throughout the region. In addition, a Bagasse Cogeneration Project
(2006, US$2.6 million), funded by the Community Development Carbon Fund and managed
by the World Bank, aims at mitigating the global climate change by facilitating the use o f
market-based mechanisms sanctioned under the Kyoto Protocol through support to clean
energy projects in Guyana. In addition, IDA aims to collaborate with IFC to support the

16

development o f renewable energy sources (hydropower) to further contribute to the country’s
stated low carbon objectives.

(ii) Improving education quality and social safety nets. In the context o f the
Government’s new Education Sector Strategy 2008-20 13, which aims at improving the
quality o f education in Guyana, reforming teacher education i s critical to achieving the goals
o f the strategy and the MDGs, and to reaching a target o f 80 percent trained teachers
nationwide by 20 15 15.

65.
In addition to Guyana’s EFA-FTI program o f US$20.5 million already approved in
2008, an education project will cut across all levels o f education and focus on improving the
efficiency and quality o f teacher education in Guyana, through reform o f the delivery o f
teacher training. This would also complement the Education For All - Fast Track Initiative
which i s supporting the development and implementation o f a short, modular-based
Continuous Professional Development For Trained Teachers Program (CPD) to be rolled out
in 2009. Project Preparation Facility funding w i l l be used to support the analysis o f the
current structure and quality o f delivery o f both pre-service and in-service training o f
teachers.
66.
To build on the work conducted in 2005 under the social protection component o f the
PSTAC project (which led to an action plan adopted by Cabinet in 2006), and ‘the 2008
“Strengthening Caribbean Pensions” study, the Bank will conduct a small, focused, ondemand program o f NLTA in Pensions, and Social Assistance. T h i s program will not
duplicate, but complement existing work already undertaken by the Government, and will
contribute to implementing some recommendations o f the existing work. Under Pensions,
the Bank intends to assist the Government, in the short-term, in developing a time-bound
strategy to address the effects o f the financial crisis; and in the medium-term, to strengthen
the equity, adequacy and sustainability o f the National Insurance Scheme, as well as its
administration, investment policy, and compatibility with the civil service pension schemes
(to enhance labor mobility). Under the Social Assistance program, the Bank intends to focus
on strengthening the information system and targeting capacity o f the Ministry o f Labour,
Human Services and Social Security, in order to improve social service delivery. As part o f
strengthening the targeting capacity, the assistance would include analytical work to assess
social protection needs o f the relatively poorly covered Amerindian population, with special
attention to education and food sufficiency.
67.
In the wake o f the global financial crisis, there will be a need to reach the poorest o f
the poor. Some ground work i s already underway, such as the school feeding program under
the EFA-FTI project. The project will be expanded from covering 57% o f primary school
children in regions 1, 7, 8, and 9, to eventually cover about 82% over the next three years.
The Bank will also help Guyana better target social safety net programs to reach the poorest
o f the poor for conditional cash transfers, where the Bank has a comparative advantage and a
good experience in the Latin America and Caribbean region.
Leveraging other Funds for Guyana Program. In view o f the limited IDA 15
68.
allocation, Guyana w i l l be included in demand-driven regional efforts such as the regional
telecommunications project (US$0.6 million)16, the nurse migration study, and the study on
non-communicable diseases. In addition, the Bank will make every effort to leverage other
l5The intermediate target for the next four years is 70%.

overall portion ofthe proposed regional telecommunications project is US$4.2 million, ofwhich USS$3.6 million o f
regional IDA and US0.6 million o f national IDA envelope.
l6Guyana’s

17

donor funds such as the Japanese Social Development Fund, the South-South initiatives, and
the IDF grants.
D. Partnerships

69.
The internationaldevelopment community in Guyana includes, among others: IDB
(37 percent o f O D A in 2001-2006); DFID (14 percent); USA (12 percent); EC (7 percent);
IDA (6 percent); and C I D A and CDB (4 percent). The future composition o f the donor
community, and i t s relative financial and policy leveraging capacity, however, i s set to
change. Due to the debt relief, IDB i s reducing i t s 2009-2012 assistance from US$300
million to US$120 million. In addition, DFID and C I D A will be moving towards regional
strategies supporting regional integration. However, Guyana may qualify for approximately
US$200 million from the Millennium Challenge Account, and i s experiencing a rise in
foreign aid from new players, such as China, India, and PetroCaribe. The IMF ended i t s
financing as o f September 2006.
70.
IDB i s currently the largest donor in Guyana. I t s disbursements from ongoing
operations represented 6.3% o f GDP and 11.1% o f public expenditure in 2006, and it i s
currently preparing its new Strategy for 2009-2012. As o f October 1,2008, the IDB portfolio
in Guyana consisted o f 19 loans totaling US$389.6 million, including operations in economic
growth, infrastructure, governance and public sector, and social sector. In December, 2008,
IDB approved a US$15 million Financial Sector Reform Programme aimed at modernizing
the financial sector and strengthening its supervision, and at improving access to credit. The
portfolio o f IDB’s new strategy includes projects and technical assistance in the areas of: (i)
infrastructure (electricity, hydropower, transport); (ii)
competitiveness (export diversification,
financial sector reform, telecommunications, avoided deforestation); and (iii)social
development (water and sanitation, low-income housing, basic nutrition, teehnical vocational
education, quality o f social spending). The IDB i s also planning to implement a number o f
technical assistance programs to address a number o f risks related to: (i)
the natural disasters
and environment; (ii)macroeconomic volatility (debt sustainability paper, implications o f
institutions and
graduation from HIPC, and macroeconomic impact o f remittances); and (iii)
governance (Government performance management capacity, and support for public financial
and performance management).
71.
Based on IFA recommendations, the U S Government through the MCA/MCC w i l l
focus on parliamentary fiduciary oversight, the national procurement system, and tax reform
and administration. The E C i s allocating a substantial amount in i t s 10th EDF to support
priority actions identified in the IFA, in collaboration with WB, C I D A and IDB.
72.
Donor coordination can be improved in Guyana. I t i s currently framed within a
number o f thematic groups set up by the Government that are expected to focus on sector
strategies. Each thematic group has specific terms o f reference and i s supposed to meet
regularly. This mechanism offers an important forum for the donor community and the
Government to achieve common goals and enhance donor harmonization but i t w i l l only be
effective if the Government ensures greater frequency in convening them. In addition, the
entry o f many new donors who currently do not participate in the donor coordination
mechanisms poses a challenge. More efficient alignment o f aid towards Government
priorities would happen more readily if fora existed for all donors to participate in.
73.
The World Bank team conducted a number o f upstream consultations with the
Government and other development partners. The Government agreed with the CAS focus
18

and the proposed interventions. Consultations with the donor community served to identify
synergies and possible areas o f collaboration. Further consultations with the Government,
the private sector, and the civil society took place in February, 2009 and confirmed the
alignment o f the CAS with Government priorities and the population needs.
E. IFC Program

74.
IFC’s efforts will focus on supporting the Government’s priority o f accelerating
growth and improving competitiveness. IFC will place a special emphasis on reaching the
underserved via access to finance (MSMEs, Credit bureau, trade financing), supporting the
liberalization o f the t e l e c o d T sector (notably via investments supporting rural areas), access
to basic services (e.g. investments in hydropower), and introducing sustainability standards in
extractive industries (including enhancing local benefits for local and indigenous
communities). As the Government progresses in its efforts to liberalize the economy, IFC
will look into initiatives to improve the business environment, via IDAEoreign Investment
Advisory Services (FIAS) synergies and leveraging donor financing (notably CIDA).
75.
I n response to the global crisis, IFC launchedexpanded facilities aimed at
addressing problems experienced by the private sector, which i s critical to employment,
recovery, and growth. Some o f these facilities may be made available depending on the
nature o f Guyana’s needs (notably S M E financing).
76.
Financial Sector. IFC’s financial sector strategy in Guyana i s geared towards
expanding the level o f credit to low income households and local SMEs. The range o f
financial services being currently offered to households living outside Georgetown i s
severely limited, and efforts are being made to increase banking penetration outside o f the
capital city. IFC i s also working with local financial institutions and the authorities advising
them on the establishment o f a local credit bureau and on increasing the level o f noncollateral based lending through the IFC L A C MSME Program so as to provide credit to the
underserved market.
77.
Telecom/IT and World Bank Group synergies. The most recent Investment
Climate Assessment (ICA) for Guyana highlighted that internet penetration rates for the
country were amongst the lowest in the region. Developing t h i s sector would clearly help
Guyana’s regional integration and help improve i t s competitiveness, as well as connect rural
areas to the market. An investment project i s currently under consideration, building on the
successful World Bank Group experience in the rest o f the Caribbean (OECS, Dominican
Republic, and Haiti).
78.
Infrastructure. Leveraging World Bank Group synergies, IFC w i l l develop
Guyana’s hydropower potential and the associated transmission infrastructure. In addition,
IFC can provide advisory services to facilitate private sector participation in infrastructure
with the objective o f improving access to basic services for the underserved, while leveraging
donor financing, notably CIDA.

-

79.
Introducing Sustainability Standards Natural Resource Management. T h i s i s
an area where IDA - IFC collaboration w i l l be enhanced. The IFC w i l l continue to promote
sustainable practices in mining investments (such as in Guyana Goldfields), with a particular
attention towards compliance with the Guyanese mining, legal and regulatory framework,
civil society participation, the rights o f indigenous people, and environmental impact. Given
the importance o f the mining sector in Guyana, COCPO (IBRD Policy Division, Oil, Gas,

19

and Mining) w i l l work closely with the I F C on these matters. COCPO will also be ready to
assist the Government in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) process, if i t
chooses to move in that direction and if i t requests such assistance from the Bank.

F. Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation
80.
Country-level systems for poverty, economic, and human development monitoring
are being strengthened through Government efforts and donor support. The Government i s
establishing a national M&E coordinating unit within the Ministry o f Finance, and i s
establishing Ministerial Focal Points that would monitor the PRSP implementation and i t s
related social outcomes. According to the PRSP, efforts to build M&E capacity within the
Ministries and to develop a National Statistics Strategy are planned. The Bank will use
Government systems to monitor CAS outcomes in Education, where systems were assessed
to be reasonably acceptable, and where capacity building efforts are ongoing in the context o f
the Bank’s work with the Ministry o f Education. InForestry, M&E capacity building w i l l be
embedded in the lending operation and additional capacity building efforts will be made as
part o f the support to the climate change unit in the President’s office.
8 1.
In addition, two ongoing operations are helping to mitigate the risk o f weak statistical
capacity: (i)
IDB’s Social Statistics Project, which i s currently being evaluated with expected
useful lessons for the World Bank as well; and (ii)
the World Bank’s National Statistics
Strategy and Statistical Development Project. The latter i s a continuation o f earlier Bank
M&E and statistics capacity building efforts under the Public Sector Technical Assistance
Credit, and the Poverty Reduction and Public Management Operation. The Bank w i l l also
learn from statistical development issues that are informed by the National Statistics Strategy,
and incorporate the lessons in implementing the CAS.

G. Managing Risks
82.
Based on lessons o f experience in implementing the last CAS and from other donor
experiences, and because o f the fact that CAS implementation and achievement o f expected
outcomes would depend significantly on the success o f partnering with and leveraging other
donors’ funds, the risks associated with this modest program are characterized as high. A
mid-term CAS Progress Report i s scheduled for end 2010, which w i l l allow the Bank the
chance to review and adjust the strategy as necessary.

.

83.
Policy Ownership and Commitment. The Government has demonstrated
commitment to the current policy path as stated in the PRSP and demonstrated at the
inaugural speech o f President Jagdeo to the National Assembly in 2006. Attempts will be
made to maintain a close dialogue with the Government, the opposition, and civil society to
ensure continued broad-based ownership o f the program. In addition, to mitigate this risk,
the CAS proposes the use o f a results-based monitoring framework with broad-based support
from the donors that would act as a powerful tool against policy slippage or reversal, or
against a slowdown in the implementation o f the strategy.
84.
Implementation Capacity. Capacity constraints remain a major issue in Guyana,
particularly given the prevailing high emigration rates across sectors. To mitigate this risk,
the CAS will conduct a CPPR twice a year, with systematic meetings with project
coordination units. In addition, there w i l l be tighter coordination with other development
partners to avoid duplication o f efforts and improve efficiency. To address the weaknesses
observed in the last CAS and in particular, the oversight role and frequent coordination with
the Government, the Bank has recently appointed a full time Representative in Guyana for a

20

period o f three years. In addition, capacity building efforts will continue through the lending
operations and technical assistance in collaboration with other donors (for example through
joint missions). To address the issue o f capacity constraints, the Government i s also working
on incentive measures to attract skilled personnel and retain them. For example, in the health
sector, i t i s planning on using a performance-based incentive and promotion system that
would allow for higher remuneration under the employment o f autonomous Regional Health
Authorities, in return for increased productivity. In the education sector, the Bank i s
supporting the Government with a new project to restructure i t s teacher training system, with
a particular emphasis on improving teacher quality and enhancing the capacity and efficiency
o f its training institutions. In addition, the EFA-FTI program provides professional growth
through special training for teachers, establishes learning resource centers in the hinterland,
and improves conditions for teachers through provision o f housing and incentive pay for
those stationed in remote areas. I t i s expected that the new project combined with EFA-FTI’s
ongoing support, would contribute to generation and retention o f skilled personnel.

85.
Fiduciary Risks, Accountability and Governance. While the recent IFA indicates
significant progress in the fiduciary and accountability frameworks, many challenges in the
area o f accountability and transparency remain (see paragraphs 37-42). This i s an area where
coordinated actions with other development partners could accelerate the strengthening o f the
fiduciary set up and reduce risks. The Bank will participate in, and support the functioning o f
the planned working group o f donors active in public financial management and procurement,
which would provide a forum for donor assistance in support o f strengthening accountability
and governance in Guyana. As part o f the IFA, the Bank will help the Government prepare
the Terms o f Reference for developing and costing the priority items to be included in their
action plan, based on the weaknesses identified by IFA. The finalization o f the IFA action
plan i s an important milestone in EU’s assistance to Guyana in 2009.

86.
As stated in its PRSP, the Government will implement sustainable reforms in
governance, to improve transparency and accountability. Ongoing efforts to enhancing
fiduciary oversight are already in place with IDB support. The Government allocated
resources in the 2009 budget for the strengthening o f internal control systems, enhancing
internal audit systems, and strengthening procurement and expenditure management systems.
In addition, i t will continue i t s work on strengthening the Audit Office’s capabilities in the
areas o f performance audit, forensic audit, and audit quality assurance.
87.

Insufficient Donor Coordination and Donor funding. T h i s CAS relies heavily on

an enhanced division o f responsibilities among Guyana’s development partners. The success

o f the strategy w i l l therefore depend on key complementary support from other donors.
There are also risks inherent in this strategy, as i t relies heavily on leveraging trust fund and
other donors’ contributions. Delays or poor quality outcomes o f other partners could affect
the implementation o f the strategy. The CAS expects to reduce the risk by consulting and
coordinating closely with donors during the implementation period. This objective will be
facilitated by the recent appointment o f the full time Bank Representative in Guyana as
indicated above.
Political Instability. Political instability due to division along ethnic lines has
88.
diminished in recent years but the remaining tensions could delay reforms.
The
Government’s PRSP acknowledges that this i s a risk, and that managing the political process
through implementation o f the governance policies may help build national consensus to
implement its strategy. The Government i s in the process o f “deepening a democratic
culture” and providing opportunities for conflict resolution. For example, reforms are

21

currently taking place at the legislative branch o f the Government to allow the parliamentary
opposition to play a more proactive role in i t s oversight o f the executive. The CAS will build
continued dialogue, in collaboration with other donors, and will emphasize strong support for
the disadvantaged (such as the Amerindians).

89.
C r i m e and Security. Given the Bank’s limited resources, it will rely on IDB’s
ongoing work on “Citizen Security”, and on DFID’s “Security Sector Reform” to mitigate
this risk.
90.
Exogenous Risks. Some o f these risks include commodity price volatility, particular
to agriculture and bauxite, and systemic climate shocks. The CAS will rely on a
comprehensive public sector strategy to manage and transfer such catastrophic exogenous
risks, using market based instruments, enhancing the efficiency o f public resources, and
allowing the Government to respond to such price shocks and natural disasters. The
expansion o f CCRIF to address excess rainfall (which Guyana i s more vulnerable to) i s
currently being explored by the Bank and, if viable, would be an important mitigating
measure. To help the Government mitigate the impact o f the global economic crisis on
remittances, the Bank proposes to partner with the IDB in its analytical work on the
“Macroeconomic Impact o f Remittances”.

22

Annex A:

Guyana at a Glance

Guyana at a glance

9/24/08

Guyana

Latin
America
8 Carib.

Lower
middle
income

0.74
215
-0.1
28

563
20,421
1.2
78

3.437
35.510
1.o
42

1.o
1,300
2,600

3,118
5,540
9,320

6,485
1,887
4,544

5.4
5.5

5.7
4.5

9.7
8.6

66
46
12

8
18
73
22
5

69
41
25

125
124

91
89
120
116

93
85
112
109

93
81

91
78

88
54

K e y Development I n d i c a t o r s

Age distribution, 2007

(2007)

Female

Population. mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousandsq. km)
Populationgrowth (%)
Urban population(YOof total population)
GNI (Atias method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP gram (%)
GDP per capita growth (“h)

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

parcent

(most recant astlmata, 2000-2007)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcwnt ratio at $2.00 a day(PPP, %)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and dder)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (Oh of age group)
Access to an improvedwater source (% of population)
Access to Improvedsanitation facilities (% of population)

I?

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

1880

1995

2ooo

2WB

UGuyana 0 Lam Amenca 8 me Canbbean

Net A i d Flows
(US$ mi//ionsj
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
United States
EuropeanCommission
Canada
Aid (%of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2007

42

168

107

173

5
3
4

-1 7
29
16

8
7
4

24
18
6

7.4
55

61.2
230

16.2
146

20.0
234

11.8

63.6
56.4

6.1
6.6

10.2

39.5
130

182.4
100

202.3
95

IGrowth of GDP and GDP par capita (%)

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual YOchange)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

2.5

*GDP

-

GDP per capita

1980-90 1990-2000
20007
(average annual growth %j
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.8
603

0.7
397

0.7
713

0.7
1,044

-0.4
3.1

0.1
5.4

0. I
1.6

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

23.4
35.8
12.1
40.9

(%of GDPj
38.1
31.1
29.0
24.9
10.3
8.2
37.0
39.9

29.6
23.4
7.7
47.1

-9.7
-6.2
-8.0
-1.7

5.3
8.2
9.9
3.7

-0.3
-1.4
0.8
2.0

Household6nai consumptionexpenditure
General govYfina1consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

55.4
24.2
32.8

72.4
13.6
31.1

66.2
24.7
23.8

79.9
29.9
24.8

-3.5
-0.4
-8.4

5.8
6.0
1.8

Exportsof goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

81.3
93.6

62.7
79.9
-4.0

96.1
110.7
10.5

84.5
119.0
9.9

-4.8
-6.2

5.8
4.8

Note: Figures in italics are for year? other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary. ._indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2006.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

23

I

Guvana
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2007
IGovernance indicators, 2000 and 2007

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

0
0
-104

Workers' remittances and
compensationof employees (receipts)

551
767
-265

Voice and amuntablllty

Regulatolyquality

27

218

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-100
-14.1

-123
-14.8

Reserves, including gold

297

251

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

39.5
29.4
32.2

40.6
31.6
34.3

Overall surplus/deficit

-4.8

-16.7

P o l l b ~stability
~l

Rule of law

Central Government Flnance

Technology and Infrastructure
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

33
45

33
45

Paved roads (%of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufacturedexports)

2000

2007

7.4
15

53

2.0

0.3

9
76.7

..

9
76.7
2.5

..

325,906

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Totel debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

1,364
69
824

1,162
33
382

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (YOof land area)
Nationallyprotected areas (% of land area)

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt servica (% of exports)

191.5
9.5

127.9
3.6

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

0.7

67
0

102
0

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

2.1

2.0

iBRD
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

8
0
3
1

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt servica

180
6
2

10
1
0

1
1
1

5
5
0

0

0

31

0

Foreign direct investment(net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ par kg of oil equivalent)

Composltlon of total external debt, 2006

Energy use per capite (kg of oil equivalent)

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capite)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managem surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Electricity
Stock market capitalization(% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

.

2000

2008

-

40
68.4
34

2000

2007

..
..

62.6
40.5

..

25.1

IFC (Fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfoiio
of which iFC own account
Disbursementsfor IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repaymentsfor IFC own account
MiGA
Gross exoosure

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary
..indicates data are not available. -indicates Observation is not applicable.

9/24/08

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECOG).

24

MiIIennium DeveIopment GoaIs

GUyJnJ

Wth selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalenceof malnutrition(% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that chlldren are able to complete primary scchoollng
Primaryschool enrcilment (net, %)
Primarycompletionrate (% of relevant age group)
Secondaryschool enrdlment ( g w , %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: ellmlnate gender disparity In educatlon and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys In primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagriculturalemployment)
Propoltion of seats held bywomen in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality by hvo-thlrds
Under4 mortality rate (per 1,ooO)
Infant mortalityrate (per 1,ooO live births)
Measles immunlza(ion(proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,OOO live births)
Birth attended by skjlled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptiveprevalence (% of wmen ages 15-49)
Goal 6: halt and begln to reverse the spread of HlVlAlDS and other major diseases
PrevalenceofHN(%ofpopul~onaees15-49)
Incidenceof tuberculosis (per 1W,ooO people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to bask needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improvedsanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationallyprotected areas (% of total land area)
C02 ernlsslons (metfic tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnershlp for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)
Education Indicators (K)

I990

2000

43.2
4.3

35.0
4.5
11.9

77

114
90

123
105

2007

B9

90
79

101
38
37

ea
64
73

99

99

39
20

19

29

79
58
77

70
52
06

62
46
90

95

06
37

470
31

44

67

ea

2.5
101
10

94
35

2.5

164
45

62

89
82
76.7

1.5

2.0

2.1

93
81
76.7
2.5
2.0

2.2

6.0
0.2
0.1

9.3
5.4
6.8
3.0

14.9
36.0
25.7
3.9

76.7

0.0
0.0

Measles lmmunlzatlon(K of I-year olds)

199S

T lndlcators (per 1,000 people)
1

mx,

2w2

2w4

ZDOB

+Primary net emllment raw (..)

I

OGuyana OLaUn Amedca (L me Carlbbean

Note: Figures in italics are for pars other than those spedfied.

OFixed + mbilesubscribers
mlntemet users

.. indicates data are not available.

9/24/08

Development Economics.Development Data Group (DECDG).

25

b
N

Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank of Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 01/26/2009

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/proiect)
Memorandum Item
Proi Eva1 bv OED by Number
P r i Eva1b; OED b;Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Proiects Rated U or HU by Amt

2006

2007

2008

2009

4
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.2

3
3.2
33.3
43.4
33.3
43.4
11.3

3
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.5

3
3.2
0.0
0.0
66.7
45.0
28.4

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
24
3
338.1
29.1
34.8
0.0
28.6
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

28

Annex B3: Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending
Guyana

As of 04/15/2009

FYlO

Forestry, climate
change and
communities
project

3 .O

H

H

FYll

Education Quality

3 .O

H

M

Total

6.0

29

-

Annex B4: Summary of Non Lending Services Guyana
Product
Recent
completions
Integrated
Fiduciary
Assessment
(PEFA)
Poverty
Assessment ESW
Poverty
Measurement
Planned
Economic
monitoring, on-

Completion FY

Cost (VS$OOO)

Audience

Objective

2008

118

G, D, B

KG, PS

2009

175

G, D, B

KG, PS

2008

215

G, D, B

KG, PS

G, D, B

KG, PS

2009-2010

AgricultureRisk

I 2010

I G,D,B

KG, PS

Social Safety Net

I 2011

I G, D, B

KG, PS

a.
b.

Government, Donor, Bank, public dissemination
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem- solving

30

Annex B6: K e y Economic Indicators

-

Guyana Key Economic Indicators

Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100
30
25
45

100
27
26
47

100
25
25
50

100
25
24
51

100
25
24
51

100
25
24
51

100
25
24
51

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

106
33
22
11

130
31
18
12

140
31
20
11

127
28
17
11

131
28
17
11

136
26
15
11

141
25
14
11

47
30

46
22

52
18

41
20

39

52

56

912.6

1066.4

152.0

189.7

1255.1

1474.3

1620.5

5.4

3.2

2.4

3.6

5.1

4.9

Net Imports (GNFgb
Gross domestic savings
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US% million at current prices)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 88 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.1
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
Merchandise FOB
Merchandise FOB
Net Merchandise Trade
Net current transfers
Current account balance

585.1
885.0
-397.7
216.3
-250.4

682.0
1063.0
-381.0
287.0
-193.0

789.0
1273.0
-484.0
310.0
-239.7

663.0
1028.0
-365.0
233.0
-212.1

707.0
1069.0
-362.0
258.0
-195.7

841.9
1240.1
-497.3
367.6
-186.9

914.8
1313.1
-498.2
378.0
-179.7

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private

102.4
-136.0
31.8
-167.8

152.3
-140.2
9.8
-150.0

155.0
-103.6
-3.6
-100.0

141.0
-67.3
-17.3
-50.0

131.0
-54.2
-29.2
-25.0

129.0
-28.2
-38.2
10.0

126.0
-23.1
-43.1
20.0

-43.6

-43.3

-53.1

-39.8

-36.8

-33.7

-30.7

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)

(Continued)

-

Guyana Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2006

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues and grants

Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Financing

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

2010

Projected
2011

2012

47
58
-12
12

45
52
-8
8

43
52
-9
9

44
52
-8
8

42
48
-6
6

43
47
-5
5

42
45
-4
4

79
16
147

78
18
118

78

78

79

79

79

6.7
5.6

12.2
12.3

8.2
5.2

3.6
4.0

5.0
5.0

5.0
4.9

5.0
4.8

Monetary indicators

M2IGDP
Growth o f M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth I
total credit growth (%)
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)
~_________

~~

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Consolidated central government.

31

Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
As of 01/26/2009

Indicator

2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimated
2008
2009

2010

Projected
2011
2012

Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO) (uS$m)*
1402.2 1515.0 1352.4 1023.4 1140.4 1283.8 1429.9 1542.8 1643.6
152.3
147.5
114.5
67.4
72.7
81.5
88.9
91.0
92.3
External public sector debt as % o f GDP
NPV o f External Public Debt (uS$m)*^
.. 400.5 482.3
580.7
683.3
756.0
824.5
NPV o f external public sector debt to exports (%)*^
47.4
50.1
64.0
70.5
71.8
72.4
NPV o f external public debt-to-central government
94.6
118.6
123.7
140.5
144.8
147.4
revenue (%)*^
NPV o f external public debt-to-GDP (%)*^
37.3
41.8
47.1
51.9
53.7
54.8
NPV ofpublic sector debt-t&DP net o f savings
66.1
68.2
72.0
74.0
74.5
74.1
NF'V o f public sector debt-to revenue net o f savings *
.. 167.7 193.7 189.1 200.4 201.1 199.4
TDO/GDP
179.7
183.9
148.5
96.0
99.0
105.7
110.3
111.1
110.8
* Reflccts debt relief under o-HIPIC, E-HIPIC aad MDRl as of 2007
A Excludes the Ielter of credit used for financing the sugar restructuringproject for comparability with the debt definition for the NPV of extunal debt ceiling

..
..
..
..

32

m
m

w

P

d
e4
r9
n

Annex C :

Donor Support to PRSP

Pillars
Enhancing
economic growth

Inhstructure to
support growth

Good Governance
and the business
environment

Investment in
human capital

Strengthen fiscal policy and budget
management
Strengthen financial sector
Private sector development
Restructuring sugar sector
Restructuring forestry and mining
sectors
Environmental protection
Better maintenance, quality and
coverage o f sea defenses, roads and
river transport, drainage and irrigation,
rural electrification
Public sector reforms
Improved accountability
Justice and crime reduction programs
Local Government reform
Land administration
Education
Health
HIV/AIDS

Water and sanitation
support services
Safety nets

Special
Interventions

Development Partners
IMF, CIDA, IDA, USAID

IDB, IMF, DFID, IDA
IDB, USAID, CIDA, EU
CDB, IDA, DFID, IDA
CIDA, DFID, GTZ
IDB, UNDP, CIDA,
DFID, IDA, EU
EU, IDB, CDB

CIDA, IDB, UNDP
CIDA, IDA, IDB, UNDP
USAID, DFID, IDB
IDA, USAID, CIDA
IDB, DFID, GTZ
IDB, DFID, IDA
IDB, CIDA, PAHO
UNAIDS, IDA, CIDA,
USAID, PAHO, CDC,
Global Fund for AIDS,
Malaria and Tuberculosis
DFID, CDB, IDB, IDA,
EU

Housing
Cash support for displaced workers,
subsidies for electricity and water,
support for pregnant and new mothers
Programs to boost income generation,
access to markets and access to.basic
services

Inner City Development

EU, IDB
IDB, CDB, DFID, IDA,
UNDP, UNICEF
E-HIPC, DFID, UNICEF,
EU

I IBRD, CIDA, DFID

34

Annex D:

Guyana CAS Completion Report (FY2003-2006)

Country: Guyana
Date o f CAS: M a y 17,2002
Date of Progress Reports: None
Period covered by the CAS Completion Report: September 2002 -June 2008
Authors: Norman Hicks (consultant), with input from Clara D e Sousa, Senior Economist)
Date: August 2008

1.
This CAS Completion Report (CAS-CR) evaluates the effectiveness o f IDA’S2002
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Guyana. While the CAS period covered FY03-06, no
new CAS was written after FY06 and the previous CAS remained in effect. This report
reviews the Bank’s strategic objectives, program o f support and their relevance to the
Government’s development goals for the period FY03-08. The report also assesses to what
extent the Bank was successful in meeting these objectives and draws lessons to guide the
design o f the new country strategy for FY09-12. The report i s based on reference documents
and discussions with the country team, Government counterparts and various stakeholders.
I. THE CASSTRATEGYAND OBJECTIWS

2.
Guyana’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) o f 2001 outlined a program o f
fundamental reforms to re-orient its economic and social policies towards poverty reduction
and the achievement o f the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). This policy framework,
which resulted from wide public consultations and benefits from strong donor support, rests
on seven key pillars:
broad-based, jobs-generating economic growth;
environmental protection;
0

stronger institutions and better governance;
investment in human capital, with emphasis on basic education and health;

0

investment in physical capital;
improved safety nets; and

0

special intervention programs to address regional pockets o f poverty.

The 2001 PRSP remains the strategic program o f the Government. However, a
3.
revised PRSP i s under preparation and i s expected to be issued this year.

4.
The 2002 CAS i s focused on providing support for the policy reform agenda o f the
PRSP and on helping the authorities increase the coherence o f the overall donor effort.
Previous experience with project lending in Guyana had been very uneven. Projects were
small and thus relatively costly, implementation was difficult because o f inadequate local
capacity, procurement involved too much Cabinet involvement, and projects often failed to
address major policy issues. In addition, there were many other donors, including the IDB,
already providing project assistance, and IDA’Sallocation was relatively small.
5.
The Bank therefore concluded that IDA’Scomparative advantage in Guyana seemed
to be in terms o f policy dialogue. In keeping with Bank policy and the then recently
announced Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) vehicle, the CAS proposed a

35

fundamental shift away from project lending to a program o f PRSCs -- a series o f single
tranche credits that were part o f a longer term program in support o f Guyana’s poverty
strategy. The strategy would be supported with technical assistance to help implement the
reforms, and augmented by Bank and core Economic and Sector Work to help refine the
policy agenda and monitor and evaluate the impact o f the PRSP.

6.
The CAS focused on the following pillars o f the PRSP: (i)broad-based, jobsgenerating economic growth; (ii)stronger institutions and better governance; and (iii)
investment in human capital, with emphasis on basic education and health. However, in many
areas the CAS outlined a policy agenda that went beyond the scope and detail found in the
PRSP, and reflected on-going work done by the Bank in key sectors. The CAS was
influenced by the evolving content o f PRSC-I, which was then under discussion with the
Government as the CAS was being prepared. In the water and sugar sectors, the PRSC
included actions which were originally designed to be part o f project operations. Other areas
were identified as being critical to implementation o f the PRSP, even if they were not
identified in detail in the PRSP.
Progress in Meeting CAS Objectives

7.
The overall development objective o f the CAS i s given as to “help create conditions
for a sustained reduction o f poverty levels in the country”. The CAS outlined the longer term
policy program to be su ported by programmatic lending, and identified a number o f CAS
performance indicators. If: These indicators are a blend o f actual indicators and policy steps,
so that they become in reality a list o f key steps expected that can be used to make an overall
judgment on CAS progress. T o this l i s t we have added tke poverty rate indicator, since
poverty was the overriding CAS objective. The box below gives a summary o f progress on
these indicators, for the period 2003-2008, well beyond the original CAS period. Overall,
looking at ten indicators, we judge that four were completed satisfactorily, two were partially
completed, and four were not completed at all. The prime development goal o f the CAS, the
reduction in poverty, was not achieved. Poverty rates in 2006 were virtually the same as in
2002. Nevertheless, inequality seems to have been reduced between 1992 and 2006 and
Guyana remains a country with relatively l o w inequality 1 9 , Positive results have been
achieved in the areas o f macro management, improving public financial management, and
increasing social spending. Areas o f improvement include, besides the poverty rate, the
needed enactment o f a method for budget allocations to schools, the reduction in the AIDS
prevalence rate, and the preparation o f progress reports on the PRSP that are based on regular
consultation with civil society. On this basis, we rank the overall performance o f the CAS as
marginally unsatisfactory. T h i s rating reflects the large gap between the high expectations o f
the CAS, and limited achievement, even after extending the CAS period from three to six
years. Nevertheless, some substantial progress was made in a number o f areas, as will be
discussed below.

In fact, the CAS has two lists o f performance indicators. One in the text @24) and another in Annex Table A2 which are
completely different. The discussionhere focuses on the indicators in the text.
l9Poverty rates in Guyana
lower than other L A C HIF’C countries, and inequality is l e s severe.

36

Box 1: Status of CAS PerformanceIndicators
CAS Performance Indicator
Reduce the overall rate o f poverty

Overall public deficit as a percentageo f
GDP consistent with medium term
macroeconomic framework for the
PRSP and PRGF
Timely presentation o f consolidated
budget to Parliament, fully integrating
capital and recurrent expenditures in a
medium term time fiame
Completion o f procurement reforms,
with new systems and procedures
operational

Completion o f program to strengthen
the independent Auditor General’s (AG)
Office and initiation of regular full
Parliamentary discussions o f timely
Audit Reports
At the end o f the CAS period, the Bank
will undertake a Governance Review.
An important measure o f progress
would be a rating lower than High Risk.

Increases in social sector expenditures
in line with E-HIPC targets, and
adequate balance between recurrent and
capital expenditures.
Implementation o f a transparent method
for allocating public resources across
schools
Containment o f the increase in
prevalencerates o f HIV/AIDS
Regular public progress reports and
consultations on the implementation o f
PRSP, with civil society and local
Government participation.

Actual Outcome
Latest Poverty Assessment Report shows
poverty rate o f 36% in 2006 which i s
unchangedfrom 2002.
Deficit has been generally within program
limits. (% at FY03 & FY08)

Achieved?2o

Budgets are presented on a timely basis, and
beginning in 2007 they are cast in a medium
term framework. However, there has been no
integration o f capital and recurrent
expenditures.
New procurement law and regulations have
been approved, but the capacity o f the NPTA i s
not sufficient to fully implement the law and
there i s no fiduciary oversight by a Public
Procurement Commission
New audit law and regulations adopted.
Attempts to strengthen A G office undercut by
staff attrition. Overall audit reports have been
done and presented to Parliament generally
within a year o f the end o f the fiscal year.
The Governance Review was not done, but an
Integrated Financial Assessment (IFA)
essentially covered the same ground, and was
completed in June 2008. The IFA did not give a
risk rating. I t noted that significant progress had
been made but many deficiencies remain.
Increases in social spending have exceeded
EHIPC and PRSP goals.

P

Done on a trial basis, but not implemented
country wide.

N

The AIDS prevalence rate in the adult
population i s at about 2.5%, and seems to be
growing slowly despite Government programs.
Two progress reports were issued, in 2003 and
2005, but none recently. There has been little or
no regular consultation on the implementation
o f PRSP, and very poor monitoring o f results.

N

N
Y

P

Y

Y

Y

N

8.
The Progress Indicators chosen by the CAS did not reflect the full extent o f CAS
objectives. A separate matrix o f “Policy Reform Agenda to be supported by the CAS”
highlights the major policy reform areas that were expected to be addressed by the Bank,
largely in the context o f development policy lending. While some o f these overlap with the
progress indicators, they offer a much more detailed plan for the changes anticipated during
the CAS period, keyed to three broad CAS objectives: stimulating growth, improving
governance and sector efficiency, and improving basic services and safety nets. T h i s policy
Key: Y=Yes, N=No, +Partial

37

agenda from the CAS i s given in Box 2, below. The remaining sections evaluate the progress
in implementation o f this policy agenda.

Box 2: Policy Reform Agenda o f the CAS21
Actions
status
1. Adequate macroeconomic performance under the agreed medium-term
Accomplished
economic framework.
2. Fiscal reform, includingintroduction o f consolidated, program
Partially Accomplished
budgetingwith a medium term w e w o r k , implementationof a multiyear formulaic mechanism for determining public sector wage increases,
and initiation o f a comprehensivetax reform program
3. Strengthenframework for private investment, including the enactment
Partially Accomplished
o f a new investmentlaw.
4. Implementthe agreed modernizationand investment strategy for the
Partially Accomplished
sugar sector including the eventual restructuringof the Guyana Sugar
Corporation (GWSUCO) to achieve profitability targets within the
agreed financing plm.
5. Introduce a new regulatory framework for the mining and forestry
Not Accomplished
sectors.
6. Introduce new legal and institutionalframework in the water sector,
Partially Accomplished
includingpassage of a new water bill and the introductionofprivate
sector management o f the newly-consolidatedwater utility.
B. IMPROVING GOVERNANCE & INCREASING PUB. SECTOR EFFICIENCY & ACCOUNTABILITY

Transfers and buildingthe capacity for revenue mobilizationat local

PRSP implementation, includingbroad p
improvementsin statistical measurement

national strategic plan that i s consistent with the Caribbean Regional

11. CAS OUTCOMES

9.
Assessment of PRS Implementation. As noted in the two PRS Progress Reports
and accompanying Joint Staff Advisory Notes (JSANs), Guyana has made progress in
implementing i t s PRS, but achievements fell short o f expectations. Despite a difficult
domestic and external environment, macroeconomic stability was maintained and progress
was made in implementing structural reforms, but Guyana's growth has been weaker than
2'

See next section (CAS Outcomes) for the justification o f the assessment.

38

projected. Poverty in Guyana has been declining in the last 15 years. However, poverty
decreased at a fast rate during 1992-1999 and seems to have stagnated afterwards. Progress
on poverty reduction in remote areas in the rural interior has been slow. Moderate progress
has been achieved in both urban and rural coastal areas and in both the Afro-Guyanese and
Indo-Guyanese communities. Amerindians living in remote rural interior areas, about 9.2
percent o f the total population, still register extremely high poverty rates (around 77%). In
terms o f social indicators, o f the 29 PRS goals, only 9 were attained or exceeded. An MDG
report prepared in 2007 reported that Guyana may not reach 3 o f the 11 domestic target areas
covering Goals 1 to 7. However, budgetary allocations for the social sectors have been high
and (about 20 percent o f GDP) exceeded the HIPC target by 5.0 percent points in 2007.
Pillar I.Stimulating growth

Goal: Adequate macroeconomic stability performance under the agreed medium-term
economic framework.
Result: Accomplished.

10.
Between 2002 and 2006 the Government implemented a macroeconomic program
supported by the IMF through SDR54.55 million Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF). Guyana’s economic performance was considered good by the IMF, with only minor
delays in PRGF disbursements.

11.
Growth performance has been mixed. From 2003 to 2005 GDP growth averaged -0.3,
reflecting increased o i l prices, natural disasters, the winding down o f production o f Guyana’s
largest gold mine and the deteriorating security situation. However, the growth rate
accelerated to 5.1 percent in 2006 and 5.4 percent in 2007. The persistence o f weak growth
in early part o f this period points to more fundamental structural weaknesses, namely a poor
investment climate and high emigration o f entrepreneurial skills, weak governance, and
inadequate basic infrastructure. The recent improvement in growth i s being led by relatively
strong performance in the mining, construction and agricultural sectors. The manufacturing
sector i s also showing signs o f recovery.

’

12.
The fiscal deficit has increased since 2002, to accommodate much needed
investments to modernize the sugar industry and to improve infrastructure. Expenditure
growth also was a function o f floods in 2005, and the decision to build a large stadium to
hold the cricket world cup in 2006 (partly financed with foreign assistance). The overall
Government deficit after grants increased from 5.8 percent o f GDP in 2002 to 13.6 in 2005,
and declined to 7.6 percent o f GDP in 2007. The recent improvement in the fiscal balance
reflect a stronger revenue effort, notably through improved administration and the
introduction o f value added tax in January 2007, as well as containment o f expenditure
though improved prioritization o f the Public Sector Investment Program (PSIP). However
inflation, which had been averaging only 6-7 percent per year, increased to 12% in 2007, and
i s likely to climb even higher in 2008 as a result o f the impact o f spiraling costs o f food and
fuel.
13.
Guyana’s debt sustainability improved dramatically since 2002. The country reached
the Enhanced HIPC (e-HIPC) Completion Point in December 2003 qualifying for US$329
million o f debt relief in NPV terms, additional to the debt relief o f US$256 million in NPV
terms obtained under the original HIPC in M a y 1999. Although the external debt burden as
measured by the NPV o f external debt to revenue ratio declined following the e-HIPC
Completion Point, debt sustainability concerns re-emerged in 2004 and were only eased after

39

the implementation o f the MDRI”. About US$611 million o f Guyana debt has been written
o f f by the IMF, World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.

Goal: Fiscal Reform, including introduction of consolidated, program budgeting with a
medium term framework, implementation of a multi-year formulaic mechanism for
determining public sector wage increases, and initiation of a comprehensive tax reform
program.
Results: Partially Accomplished.

14.
Some progress has been made during the CAS period in improving the budget
process. In 2007, for the first time, included a three-year forecast o f fiscal aggregates, but
there i s no detailed Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Almost all ministries
and the 10 regions have program budgets, but the use o f realistic performance indicators
remains very weak. Likewise, the goal o f integrating capital and recurrent expenditures has
only just begun with an integrated budget circular covering both recurrent and capital
spending, and a single integrated budget hearing for each ministry covering both capital and
recurrent estimates (for the 2009 budget). Investment decisions are not linked to sector
strategies. An integrated financial management and accounting system (IFMAS) to
interconnect the Government’s financial management and accounting systems, and control
overall public expenditures has been implemented. However, the system still has
shortcomings, and i s crippled by the rapid turnover o f trained staff. The capital budget i s
supposed to be prepared within the framework o f a rolling five-year Public Sector Investment
Program but the PSIP has not been produced on a timely basis.

A formula for public sector wage increases was agreed (condition o f PRSC), under
15.
which public sector wages would fully adjust for inflation, plus have a productivity
component in years with positive GDP growth. In fact, wage increases have not kept pace
with inflation, particularly in 2007 when wages were increased by only 9% despite 12%
inflation.
16.
In August 2003, the Government initiated a medium-term reform program to broaden
the tax base and increase efficiency, equity and transparency o f the tax system. Main actions
completed include: (1) adoption by Parliament o f the value-added tax (VAT) and excise tax
regulations in January 2006; (2) elimination o f the Ministry o f Finance’s power to grant
discretionary tax exemptions, (3) a limit on most income tax holidays;(4) increases in
withholding taxes, consumption taxes for certain services and personal income tax
thresholds, and (5) a program for strengthening the Guyana Revenue Authority.
Goal: Strengthen the framework for private investment, including the enactment of a
new Investment Law.
Results: Partially Accomplished.

17.
As a step to improve the environment for private investment, the PRSP envisaged
reforms to strengthen the legal and institutional environment for investment. Institutional and
legal steps completed include the appointment o f a new chief executive for investment
promotion agency (GOINVEST). An Investment Act, prepared with Bank’s support (IFC),
and a Small Business Act were passed by Parliament in March 2004. This new legislation
establishes basic guarantees and rights for investors (e.g. against expropriation) and makes
22 Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative.

40

incentives more transparent. A Competition and Fair Trading Bill, which establishes a
National Competition Commission, was passed by Parliament in 2006. A National
Competitiveness Strategy was formulated in consultation with the private sector and donors
and a program o f 122 needed actions were identified. Some actions are being implemented as
part o f an IDB project and as part o f the program for the U.S. M C A (Millennium Challenge
Account).
18.
Despite recent measures taken to improve the investment climate, significant factors
continue to constrain private sector development and Guyana's competitiveness. At the
request o f the Government, an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) was finalized after the
CAS period in 2007. According to the ICA, in addition to the difficult security and crime
situation, there are impediments to clearing goods through customs (e.g. exporters spend an
average o f 14 days in customs with a maximum time o f 23 days), and the legal and judicial
systems are cumbersome and judicial enforcement i s lengthy. Infrastructure i s a serious
bottleneck Guyana lacks a deep-water port, its road system i s deficient, electric power i s
unreliable and expensive, and telecommunications services are limited. Qualified workers
and managers are scarce because o f emigration.
Goal: Implement the agreed modernization and investment strategy for the sugar
sector, including the eventual restructuring of the Guyana Sugar Corporation
(GWSUCO) to achieve profitability targets with agreed financing plan.
Results: Partially Accomplished.

19.
Sugar accounts for 16 percent o f GDP, 25 percent o f foreign exchange earnings, and
directly or indirectly affects the livelihoods o f over 75,000 people. The Bank, working with
D f D and other donors, helped the Government construct a comprehensive program to
restructure the sugar sector. This program continues Government ownership o f industry
assets while relying on private sector management o f the Guyana Sugar Corporation
( G W S U C O ) and increasing the share o f privately-grown cane. One o f the major elements
o f this strategy consists o f placing emphasis on production in the Berbice area, through a
new, larger sugar mill in Skeldon, capable o f producing 110,000-120,000 tons o f sugar per
year, along with expansion o f sugar cane cultivation by some 10,000 hectares. In 2006 the
Government presented to the EU an Action Plan detailing the sector restructuring program to
qualify for EU financial support.

20.

After initial delays, the implementation o f the plan has gained pace and reforms are
on track. With Bank's support (through PRSC), GUYSUCO implemented measures to
strengthen i t s financial viability, including by introducing a new wage policy limiting wage
increases to inflation startin from 2001, and implementing a profit-oriented management
contract in February 2004
However, the projected labor force downsizing, and the
profitability targets for G W S U C O have not yet been attained, although more progress may
be made this year with the completion o f the new sugar mill. G W S U C O i s now able to
cover i t s operating costs without Government subsidy.

8.

21.
The Bank also supported the preparation and implementation o f an Environmental
Management Plan (EMF') for the new sugar mill and associated canefields expansion. In
particular, the EMP now requires that G W S U C O manage some 7,500 hectares o f freshwater
swamp and reef forest (conservancy areas) in a manner that will mitigate the natural habitat
Guyana is the lowest cost Caribbean sugar producer and parts of its industry may, if restructured to improve efficiency, become
competitive in the global &ee sugar market (see World Bank (2005) A Time to Choose: Caribbean Development in the 21" Century,
Report no. 31725-LAC).
23

41

loss associated with expanding cane cultivation. GEF funding o f $3.8 million (approved
January 2008) w i l l assist with water management and drainage in the conservancy area.
22.
Analytical work undertaken in the CAS period include a Sugar PSIA, which
highlights areas in which interventions could be needed to mitigate the impact o f the reform
in the sector on the communities.
Goal: Introduction of a new regulatory framework for mining and forestry.
Results: Not Accomplished

23.
The development and use o f Guyana’s considerable mining and forestry resources are
critical for Guyana’s future exports and growth. However, development o f mining and
forestry resources needs to be pursued on a sustainable basis. The Government was expected
to draft and table in Parliament a new Mining Bill improving the regulatory environment for
the mining sector (including issues such as environmental impact, taxation, and the rights o f
Amerindian communities). The Bank provided technical assistance for the preparation o f a
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) o f the mining sector to serve as a basis for the
drafting o f the new legislation. However, the submission to Parliament has been repeatedly
delayed.
24.
The forestry sector i s also growing fast, boosted by private investment. Adequate
controls to prevent over-harvesting, to minimize environmental damage, and to recognize the
land claims o f indigenous people are hence crucial. Existing legislation (from 1953) does not
adequately ensure that these objectives are met and does not provide the private sector with a
clear regulatory environment. I t was expected that the Government would approve a new
Forestry Act during the CAS period which would substantially improve the legal basis for
sustainable management o f Guyana’s forests, including clear delineation o f the rights o f
Amerindian communities. A draft bill was submitted to Parliament in early 2006, but never
brought to a vote24. Parliament did pass a law reorganizing the Forestry Commission, but
this has had only minor impact on the sector.
25.
While these two reforms, mining and forestry were high on the Bank’s priority list,
they were not a high priority for the Government, and without strong Government support
languished, despite Bank pressure. Preliminary work was a condition o f PRSC-I, while
PRSC-I1 (subsequently renamed PRPMO) was to have been conditional on passage o f the
forestry act. In fact, the Bank accepted the submission o f the act to Parliament, and did not
push for positive measures on mining.
Goal: Introduce a new legal and institutional framework in the water sector, including
passage of a new water bill and introduction of private management to the newlyconsolidated water utility.
Results: Partially Accomplished

26.
The Government has undertaken a major reorganization o f the water sector with
support o f IDA (PRSC-I) and DFID, setting up a new legal and regulatory framework,
merging the two public water companies into one (Guyana Water Inc., GWI) i n d bringing in
a private operator under a management contract. The Government also launched a program
to increase service access, particularly in urban squatter neighborhoods and rural hinterlands.

24

This was updated in the core text of the CAS (see paragraph 62). The Forestry Bill was passed in January 2009.

42

GWI began implementing a combined plan to increase revenues and reduce costs, through a
2005 tariff review, the procurement o f a new billing system, improved collection
performance, and reduction in non-revenue water through distribution network repair and
rehabilitation. These efforts and the Government’s goal o f achieving universal access to safe
water are being supported by the ongoing IDA Water Sector Consolidation Project approved
by the Board in July 2005. Following disappointing performance and frictions between the
Government, G W I Board and the Management Contractor, the contractor ceased its
operations. The goals for integrating the billing and collection systems o f the two original
utilities still have not been met, nor have the goals for improved water quality and increased
access. The utility has been hampered by staff attrition to the private sector due to an
inability to pay competitive wages. Progress in implementing the Bank’s Water Supply
Technical Assistance and Rehabilitation Project was impeded by the lack o f donor
coordination characterized by uncoordinated standards, overlapping investments, and a lack
o f coherent strategy.
Pillar II. Improving Governance and Increasing Public Sector Efficiency
Accountability

and

Goal: Public procurement reform, including new legislation and regulations, and
implementation of the agreed CPAR Action Plan
Results: Partially Accomplished.

27.
In 1999, the Bank carried out a Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR).
The implementation o f the action plan that resulted from the CPAR recommendations was
supported by the Bank through the PRSC and PSTAC. The rules governing public
procurement were revised by the 2002 National Procurement Act, which was subsequently
amended by the Tender and Procurement Act o f 2003. The PRPMO supported the adoption
o f regulations and the preparation o f standard bidding documents and evaluation criteria in
line with international standards.
28.
The 2003 Procurement Act provides the basis for improving regulatory, oversight o f
operations, and complaint management functions. Overburdened by too many functions, and
inadequate trained staff, the National Procurement and Tender Administration (NPTA) i s
unable to perform i t s role in regulating procurement practices and insuring optimal use o f
Government resources, as envisioned by the Procurement Act.
29.
The Bank’s PSTAC provided substantial technical assistance for writing o f the
operational guidelines and training o f NPTA staff, The impact o f much o f this good work
has been mitigated by staff attrition. Of 7 people trained in NPTA, only 4 are presently s t i l l
on the staff. Government salaries for technical staff cannot match their alternatives in the
private sector, either in Guyana or abroad. Despite considerable work, the development o f
standard bidding documents and operational manuals has not been completed. As part o f the
recent Integrated Fiduciary Assessment2’, a Procurement System Assessment Report (PSAR)
was untaken using standard OECDDAClWorld Bank methodology. The PSAR rated
Guyana’s procurement system as “moderately low” in terms o f legislative and regulatory
framework, and “very low” in terms o f institutional framework, operations, and
integrity/transparency .26

25

Integrated Fiduciary Assessment, Vol. I.
Findings and Recommendations, Dec. 2007. A study o f the IDB, EC and World Bank.
a four-fold rating system: Optimum, Satisfactory, Moderately Low and Very Low.

26 This i s

43

Goal: Improve public sector financial management, including enactment of a new audit
law, strengthening o f the Auditor General function, and implementation of agreed
CFAA Action Plan aimed at improving oversight of public expenditures.
Results: Partially Accomplished

30.
The Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), completed in 2002,
considered Guyana's public audit and financial management systems and processes as basic
and fragmented. I t pointed to a number o f critical weaknesses in budgeting, accounting,
audit and oversight o f the Government's finance. Recommendations were adopted by the
Government through an action plan. Since 2003, the legislative and regulatory initiatives
have addressed previously identified systems and framework weaknesses.

With Bank's support (PRPMO), a new Audit Act was enacted by Parliament in April
3 1.
2004.27 The Audit Office o f Guyana (AOG) has begun implementing international auditing
standards and auditing methodologies to perform operational, performance, and forensic
audits. Financial controls and audits have improved with the introduction o f the Integrated
Financial Management System (IFMAS), although gaps remain. Only four ministries have an
internal audit capacity. The AOG was able to deliver an audit opinion on the 2004 and 2005
Government financial statements. The 2007 IFA noted that the 2003 and 2004 AG reports
have not yet been reviewed by the Public Accounts Committee o f the Parliament, even
though they were submitted in September o f 2006.
32.
Under PRSC-I, and on the basis o f the C F A A recommendations, measures were
introduced to strengthen fiduciary oversight, which has three elements: (i)
ensuring effective
parliamentary oversight over public finances; (ii)
curtailing discretionary powers o f public
ensuring effective public disclosure o f assets o f officials. In 2005,
officials; and (iii)
consultants financed by the PSTAC prepared studies on each o f these elements. As a result o f
the first study on Parliamentary oversight**, the legislature has modified some 15-20 standing
orders, which gives the opposition more opportunity to exercise oversight roles on financial
matters. This has improved i t s oversight role over the execution o f the budget through
legislative review o f the external audit reports, and by questioning responsible parties about
the findings from the report^.^'
33.
As noted above, steps have been taken to reduce the discretionary power o f
Government officials as part o f the overall tax reform. These involve limits on grants o f tax
exemptions and tax holidays. However, much more still needs to be done in this area. In
addition, no progress has been made in the area ensuring effective public disclosure o f the
assets o f public officials.
Goal: Implement local Government reform.
Result: Not Accomplished.

34.
PRSP consultations emphasized some shortcomings related to the weak level o f local
Government services. Actions planned under the PRSC -1- in support o f the PRSP agenda
included improvements in the fiscal framework for transfers and building the capacity for
revenue mobilization at local levels. Little progress was made in these aspects o f the reform.
Some minor steps were taken to improve the system o f tax assessments, and improve the
ability o f local Governments to seize property o f tax defaulters as part o f PRSC-1. However,
"The IDB and CIDA have provided resources for the implementation of key reforms in this area.
Bradford and Associates Ltd, Guyana FiduciaryOversight Project, July 4,2005.
29 Reforms have continued with IDB and U S (MCC) support.

44

the actions contemplated for PRSC-2 in this area were not included in the follow-on P W M O ,
because o f the need to increase selectivity. The Government focused on the creation o f
institutions, notably the establishment o f the Municipal Services Department in the Ministry
o f Local Government and Regional Development and the appointment o f eight Regional
Development Officers to monitor and evaluate capital contracts within Regional
Development Councils. Local Government elections have not been held in over two decades,
and have been scheduled for 2008. If they take place, they might help push forward the local
Government reform agenda. However, local Government elections have been promised and
canceled in the past (2004,2007).
Goal: Establish framework for effective monitoring and evaluation of PRSP
implementation.
Result: Not Accomplished.
35.
A Policy Coordination and Program Management Unit (PCPRMU) was set up in the
Office o f the President in 2003 (PSTAC, PRSC) to coordinate and monitor the poverty
reduction strategy, support the implementation o f structural reforms, coordinate and support
the implementation o f social statistics strengthening activities, conduct policy analysis in
support o f the PRS and produce the annual PRS progress report. The Government also set up
the institutional framework for monitoring and evaluation. A plan for strengthening the
Statistics Bureau i s being carried out with the support o f the PSTAC and a World Bank
TFSCB grant.30However, there i s s t i l l no system for tracking budget expenditure that would
permit monitoring o f Government programs by sector and by major poverty-related programs
and inform the budget preparation process. In addition, the PCPRMU was disbanded after
the PSTAC funding ended in 2007. T h i s seriously reduced the Government’s ability to
prepare the new PRSP, as well as the PSIP, and to implement the planned PRSP monitoring
system.
Pillar III:Improving delivety and quali@ of basic sewices and safety nets

Goal: Increase access by the poor to quality education.
Result: Accomplished

36.

The Government’s Strategic Plan for Education (SPE) for 2003-07 emphasized the

twin goals o f raising access and increasing the quality o f education services. K e y goals

include improved teacher training, improved ratios o f trained teachers to students, reduced
drop-out rates, and better facilities. Secondary education reform was supported via the
Bank’s Secondary Education Reform project (1996-2004, I C R outcome rating =S). In
addition, PRSC- 1 supported some basic reforms in education designed to decentralize control
to the school and community level. Guyana i s one o f the 17 countries receiving assistance in
its education reform as part o f the Education For All-Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI).
Guyana has received three grants so far under the EFA-FTI, based on progress made under
the program. Actions in the third year o f implementation o f the EFA-FTI focused on
implementing a community-based school-feeding program at the primary level and upgrading
hinterland schools. T h i s complements the remote areas incentive payment scheme launched
by the Government in 2005 to help retain teachers by topping up the hard-living allowance.
37.
Guyana i s set to reach the MDG goals for education, and outcomes in 2005 were
broadly in line with PRSP targets. The country achieved 100 percent primary school
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building. Other major donors in this area are the IDB and the UNDP.

45

enrolment in 2004 and steady progress was made year after year towards achieving full
attainment o f secondary school enrolment, although some regional disparities persist. Guyana
also achieved good results in the number o f children reaching Grade 6, with a national
average o f about 95 percent, although there are some significant regional deviations.
However, repetition and drop out rates in secondary school remain high and quality
indicators are also below expectations. Despite training more than 4,838 teachers over the
past five years, student trained teacher ratios at all levels o f education continue to be high,
particularly in primary education. Emigration o f trained teachers continues to be a serious
problem that undercuts teacher training efforts. In addition, the formula based system for the
allocation o f resources to schools, which was introduced on a trial basis as part o f PRSC-I,
has never been generalized to the rest o f the country.
Goal: Improve the efficiency of social assistance programs.
Result: Not Accomplished.

38.
Guyana implements a range o f social insurance and social assistance programs, many
o f which are administered by the Ministry o f Labor, Human Services and Social Security
(MLHSSS). Guyana’s social protection system i s characterized by: (i)
lack o f an adequate
targeting mechanism and criteria; (ii)
l o w benefit levels; (iii)
understaffing and outdated and
inefficient service delivery systems; (iv) manual recording o f program records and
deficiencies in the documentation o f procedures and financial management; and (v) outdated
social security legislation vi) duplication and overlapping benefits. The major thrust o f the
Government’s efforts i s to strengthen its capacity through improved systems, processes and
training to better manage i t s existing social protection programs, before expanding them or
starting new ones. T o this end, the Government has carried out, with support from IDA
(PRSC-1 and PSTAC), four studies that provided recommendations in the areas o f
management information system, targeting, risk and vulnerability, labor market assessment,
social legislation, and M L H S S S needs assessment. However, little has been done to
implement the findings o f the studies and these social programs continue to be badly
administered.
Goal: Address the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Result: Accomplished

39.
The PRSC supported the preparation o f the National Plan for H I V / A I D S (2002-06).
A new National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan (2007-1 1) prepared through a broad consultative
process involving key stakeholders in Government, civil society and external donors and
multi-lateral agencies, i s under implementation. T h i s program i s being supported by the
Guyana HN-AIDS Prevention and Control project which i s financed by an IDA grant, the
Global Fund, CIDA, programs o f the United States (including PEPFAR), and other bilateral
and UN agencies.

40.

The Government i s expanding key services for prevention, treatment, care and
support. Programs targeting prevention and behavioral change among young people and other
particularly vulnerable groups including indigenous people are ongoing and services centers
for voluntary testing and counseling services have increased together with prevention o f
mother-to-child transmission o f HIV and anti-retroviral (ARV) treatment. The number o f
people on ARV treatment increased to 1,375 in 2006 (represents 50% o f the people who need
ARVs). An estimated 81% o f pregnant women are now accessing PMTCT services. There
i s 100% screening o f blood for transfusion. The Government has expanded i t s multi-sectoral

46

response to the epidemic: nine non-health line ministries are implementing HIV/AIDS
programs for their clients and staff and over forty civil society organizations are helping to
reach specific vulnerable groups: youth, miners, sex workers, orphans and other vulnerable
children, indigenous peoples, people living with HIV/AIDS, workers and armed forces with
targeted interventions. The Guyana HIV Prevention and Control Act has been revised and i s
expected to be approved this year.

41.
Thus, Guyana has achieved the CAS objective o f addressing the HIV/AIDS problem.
However, in terms o f PRSP and MDG targets, i t has not reversed the spread o f A I D S . Both
the number o f new cases o f A I D S reported, and the number o f reported cases by women aged
15-45 have risen since 2000. The PRSP target called for a decline in both cases. However, it
i s entirely possible that the increase in the number o f reported cases reflects the greater
outreach o f the new program in identifying and treating AIDS patients, rather than a spread
o f the disease.
111. IFCACTIWTIES
Table 1: Guyana IFC Activities FYO3-OS, (in US$ million)
FY

Projects

Status

Planned
Amount
(US$ million)

Approved
Amount
(US$ million)

2006

Mining GY

Ongoing

4.6

4.6

Goldfield

43.
Problems with the PRSC program arose early on when, after Board approval o f
PRSC-1 in December 2002, the revision o f the Procurement Act was delayed, and, as a
result, the credit did not become effective until September 2003. At the same time, the
macroeconomic program went temporarily off-track, political disruptions accelerated and the
implementation o f the poverty strategy was hampered. These delays, and the underlying
institutional weaknesses they reveal, indicate that that original schedule o f one PRSC per
year was too optimistic and the Government’s commitment to the CAS/PRSC agenda was
very weak.31 The CAS had assumed that the Government was committed to serious reform
in many sectors. In fact, reform efforts have been spotty at best, with some progress in
” Simplified Implementation Completion Report - Guyana Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit, Report PE-PO7385 1, June 28,2004

Full Implementation Completion Report, Report 35463, March 17,2006.

47

and

certain areas, but with little or no progress in many others. In addition, Government plans to
execute a Cricket Stadium project showed that there was little economic analysis o f public
expenditures and that political factors played a large role in decision making32. I t became
apparent that a program o f annual or biannual PRSCs would not be possible in the Guyanese
context, and that future operations would have to be less ambitious.

44.
Learning from the PRSC-1 experience, the Bank developed the PRPMO in place o f
PRSC-2. The PRPMO (Poverty Reduction and Public Management Operation, $9.6 million)
focused on a few areas where the Government had made progress, and dropped many o f the
areas foreseen as being part o f PRSC-2. I t was approved in April 2006, about a year later
than planned in the CAS. In part, it built on the technical assistance studies o f the PSTAC.
However, while major progress was made in improving the Parliamentary role in fiduciary
oversight, there were no efforts to implement the programs for limiting the use o f
discretionary powers (outside o f tax exemptions) or for improving the disclosure o f officials’
assets. Despite assurances in the Letter o f Development Policy, the program to rationalize
and improve social protection programs was not carried out.
QAGDEG. Q A G performed a Q E A review o f the PRPMO and rated the operation
45.
Moderately Unsatisfactory (4) because (i)Government ownership and commitment to the
reforms was weak, as evidenced by the slow progress in key elements o f the PRSP program
in the areas o f the regulatory framework for mining and forestry and financial accountability;
and (ii)
the poverty focus o f the operation was weak, undermining its rationale. Furthermore,
the panel i s o f the view that the overall Government expenditure program in 2006, involving
a significant expansion o f public spending as a share o f GDP without commensurate
expansion o f implementation capacity, did not justify the provision o f incremental financing
by IDA. The team contested the assessment through a rejoinder. Assessments by IEG during
the CAS period covered also projects approved under the previous CAS. For the PRSC 1 and
the PRPMO, the IEG outcomes were moderately satisfactory and satisfactory respectively.
The CAS period expired in FY05, but no new CAS was developed. The Bank
46.
decided to return to project lending with a Water Supply Consolidation Project in FY06 ($1 1
million), reflecting the complex problems o f achieving policy reforms with development
policy lending, and despite the poor performance o f the water supply technical assistance
project which had closed in FY05.
47.
Bank involvement in Guyana has continued largely through the use o f trust funds and
gant resources. Guyana has received three grants under the EFARTI for $4.0 million during
2005-07, and in 2008 a GEF grant for preservation o f the conservancy area ($3.8 million).
The EFA project has worked well, and i s likely to be renewed at a higher level. The GEF
project became effective in January 2008, i s rated as satisfactory in the latest ISR. In
addition, a small grant from the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) was
made for $285,000 to support training and improvements in the Bureau o f Statistics. T h i s
grant experienced considerable problems in implementation initially, but has recently
improved.
48.
Non-Lending Services. The Bank completed i t s program o f ESW/AAA more or less
as scheduled. This included a DPR in 2003, and a Poverty Assessment Report and an
IFAPEFA (in lieu o f the Governance Review) in 2008. An Investment Climate Assessment

32 This project was partly financed by concessionary

aid (India) and private investments, but the Government had to finance a
significant portion when private investors failed to deliver.

48

was undertaken in 2006 as well as a FSAP. Informal technical assistance was provided in
water supply and for handling the flood in 2005.

49.
In general, good technical work, such as the IFAPEFA, the ICA, and the Poverty
Assessment Report, have proven very valuable in providing the Bank, donors and the
Government with well based technical assessments o f critical areas. More general reports,
such as the DPR, have had less impact.
B. Portfolio Assessment

50.
Portfolio indicators are given in Annex Table 4. Guyana had four projects33in active
implementation at the end o f FY08, and none were considered “at risk”. In this regard,
Guyana was above average for the Latin America and Caribbean Region.
C. Aid Coordination

51.
Overall development assistance to Guyana has remained strong. In terms o f
overall resource flows, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the European Union,
the IMF, the UK Department for International Development (DFID), and the United States
Agency have been major providers o f assistance. IDA’S lending to Guyana in 2006
represented 6 percent o f the annual (net) disbursement o f official assistance.

52.
The level o f aid provided has been extensive and generally supported the goals o f the
PRSP (see CAS Annex C). Coordination among donors in the provision o f assistance in
various areas has been generally good, especially in public financial management. Sector
thematic coordination groups have been formed in many areas, including agriculture, water,
governance and competitiveness, and these are chaired by the Government and/or a lead
donor. The functioning o f these groups varies in quality.

33

According to the Business Warehouse figures.

49

Table 5: Donor Support to the PRSP
Pillars
Enhancing
economic growth

Infrastructure to
support growth
Good Governance
and the business
environment

Investment

in

human capital

Infrastructure to Water and sanitation
support services
Housing
Safety nets
Cash support for displaced workers,
subsidies for electricity and water, support
for pregnant and new mothers
Special
Programs to boost income generation,
Interventions
access to markets and access to basic
services
Inner City Development

DFID, CDB, IDB, IDA,
EU
EU, IDB
IDB, CDB, DFID, IDA,
UNDP, UNICEF
E-HIPC, DFID, UNICEF,
EU

IBRD, CIDA, DFID

V. OVERALLASSESSMENT OF THE CAS
53.
Lessons Learned from the 2002 CAS. The 2002 CAS reflected an upbeat
assessment o f the situation in Guyana; a PRSP had been written, Guyana was eligible for eHIPC assistance, and was moving toward agreement on a multi-sector PRSC program. There
were many problems facing the country, and the CAS correctly identified these and made
some o f them its fundamental objectives. In hindsight, however, i t i s clear now that the CAS
was far too optimistic about the capacity and willingness to undertake reforms and to make
institutional changes. The record shows a few bright spots where reforms have taken hold
(Parliamentary oversight, HIV/AIDs, education), but many others where reforms have fallen
short (audit, procurement, budget formulation, water supply), and s t i l l others where no
progress at all was made (forestry, mining, bureaucratic discretion, asset declaration,
targeting social programs).

50

54.

There are some fundamental problems facing Guyana:
There i s no fundamental consensus for reform. Political parties are divided
along racial lines; the opposition party has little voice or power, and what i t
has it uses largely to obstruct, rather than contribute positively.
Building consensus for reform takes time. Where reforms have taken place,
political and social consensus has been built over time, as in the case with the
VAT, which was implemented in 2007 after much delay.
There i s limited management and technical capacity to carry out reform
programs, due to both a lack o f skilled manpower and the continued
emigration o f skilled workers abroad.

Key Considerationsfor the 2009-2012 CAS
~~

~~

Selectivity and simplicity in design are key.
The strategy was wide ranging with highly optimistic objectives and implementation time.
Key performance indicators should be focused and as much as possible linked to measurable
outcomes.
Keep priorities well-focused and implementation flexible.
Lack of capacity in the Guyanese public sector i s a cross-cutting constraint.
Future operations should aim at increasing substantially public sector capacity.
Timefiame and design o f future operations should take into account capacity constraints in the
public service.
Client ownership and commitment, including champions, are critical.
The lack o f Government focus on some key reforms lowered expectations and the impact o f
the CAS.
Lack of politicaland social cohesion can undermine the reform agenda.
The Government noted that while the conditions were conducive to growth at the beginningof
the previous CAS period, political conditions and social cohesion were not in place,
contributing to poor growth and sluggish reduction in poverty.
Political constraints often prevented reform fiom moving, as was the case with the VAT,
which was implemented in 2007 after much delay.
Improve political economy analysis in project design.
Resource flows need to be more predictable.
Unpredictable resource flows negatively impacted government programs, particularly with the
debt relief packages, where delays forced the government to scale down some investments.
Project sustainability requires retaining key personnel.
Projects that rely heavily on highly-paid consultants who are unlikely to be retained by the
government at project completion are likely to experience weak implementation andor limited
long-term development impact.
Donor coordination needs to be strengthened.
Consider, for instance, joint missions to address common issues and pooled funds/SWAps.
Choice and scope of AAA should involve more consultation with the government
Analytical work and policy notes should be demand-driven, part o f the on-going reform
process, and delivered in a timely manner.

51

7

m
v)

L
Q

4 .

0

.

0

I2

B

e
0

e

.-

7
0

8

.-c

-I-

4
4

u

W

a

Q

za

a
e

E

Q

a

Q
h

5..
c.l

3

4

n
D

2

-

Annex 3: Guyana Planned Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries, FY03-OS

Source: Guyana CASs, WB Business Warehouse, Imagebank and W B Common Data Stores as o f
January 24,2008

61

Annex 4: Portfolio Status Indicators by FYO3-OS

# Projects
4
3
# Projects At Risk
0
0
% At Risk
0
0
Net Commitment Amt
51.6
32.1
% Commit at Risk
0
0
Latin America &
Caribbean
# Projects
285
265
# Projects at Risk
70
46
% at Risk
24.6
17.4
Net Commitment Amt
19,480 18,9 11
% Commitment at Risk
30
18.9
Source: W B Business Warehouse.

2
0
0
14.8
0

4
0
0
35.7
0

3
1
33.3
26.1
43.4

4
0
0
37.3
0

268
59
22.0
18,595
20.6

256
44
17.2
16,208
15.8

247
58
23.5
16,408
21.8

261
60
23
18,42 1
19.9

Annex 5: IBRDADA Net Disbursements and
Charges Summary Report for Guyana (US$ million)

Disb.

Repay

Aaat,

Amt

Net
Amt

7.5
6.2
20.9
3.6
2.5
12.3

3.8
5.7
4.9
3.5
3.9
0.1

3.8
0.6
16.0
0.1
-1.4
12.2

1.8
1.7
1.7
1.8
1.7
0.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
FY
0.0

2.0
-1.2
14.3
-1.7
-3.1
12.1

2008
1.4
0.1
Source: World Bank.

1.4

0.0

0.0

1.3

2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

Net
Transfer

chnrges

62

Annex 6: IEG Project Ratings for Guyana, Exit FYO3-08
Approval Exit
FY
FY

I

IEGOutcome

IEG
Sustainability

IEG Institutional
Development
Impact

NEGLIGIBLE

GY FINANCIAL &
PRIVATE SECTOR

2000

2003

MODERATELY
SATISFACTORY

UNLIKELY

GY WATER SUPPLY TA

1994

2004

SATISFACTORY

LIKELY

GY Poverty Red. Support
Credit I(PRSC)

2003

2004

MODERATELY
SATISFACTORY

2005

SATISFACTORY

2007
2006
lgg6
2008

t
GY- SECONDARY
EDUCATION

GY Poverty Reduction and
Public Mgmt.

I GY Public Sector TAC

2003

I
I

---LIKELY

MODEST

LIKELY

SUBSTANTIAL

SATISFACTORY

da

da

SATISFACTORY

da

da

I
I

Source: WB Business Warehouse

63

Annex E:

GUYANA Joint I M F W o r l d Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis3’

Prepared by the Staffs o f the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund3’
Approved by Gilbert Terrier and Anthony Boote (IMF)
and Marcel0 Giugale and Carlos Braga (World Bank)
February 2,2009
The debt sustainability analysis @SA) indicates that Guyana is at a moderate risk of debt
distress. Whileprojected debt indicators are similar to those of the last DSA, downside risks,
associated with dijkulties in the sugar sector and the impact of the global crisis have
increased. Further fiscal consolidation, readiness to adopt offsetting measures fi needed, and
reforms to improve competitiveness would help lower the risk of distress in due time.

Background

1.
While debt relief from the international community helped reduce Guyana’s
external debt burden significantly in recent years, vulnerabilities have increased owing
to difficulties in the sugar sector and the global crisis. In 2006/07, debt relief was provided
by the Fund, the World Bank, and the IDB under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
(MDRI), amounting to US$611 million. In November 2006, Japan finalized its bilateral debt
cancellation agreement and wrote o f f i t s claims as part o f the Paris Club 2004 Agreed
Minutes.40 In July 2007, a write-off o f US$15 million o f outstanding debt to China took
place.
2.
Guyana benefited from additional debt reduction in 2008. In March, Venezuela
cancelled a US$12.5 million debt stock. Russia also agreed to cancel about US$0.25 million
o f outstanding debt, provided that the two countries reach agreement on investment projects
to be identified in the public sector investment program (PSIP).
3.
As a result, the external public debt has declined substantially. I t declined from
US$1,043 million (114 percent o f GDP) at end-2006 to US$719 million (67 percent o f GDP)
at end-2007. Preliminary estimates suggest that in 2008 Guyana’s external debt rose by
US$115 million (of which US$56.5 million for PetroCaribe to be saved abroad), to US$835
million. The central Government’s short-term domestic debt, defined on a gross basis, has
fallen from 34 percent o f GDP in 2006 to about 29 percent in 2007.

E for an update based on the projected impact of the global crisis.
by IMF and World Bank staff. JDB staff was consulted during the preparationprocess.

38 See Addendum at the end of this Annex
39 Preparedjointly

HIPC debt relief was granted by all multilateralsbut one, Paris Club bilateral creditors, and four nowParis Club creditors (China,
India, Venezuela, and Cuba). Debt owed to Brazil and North Korea was paid offwithout relief. The other creditors have yet to provide
HIPC debt relief.

64

Macroeconomic and Financing Ass~rnptions~~

4.
The macroeconomic framework assumes that the economy will continue to
perform well. Medium-term macroeconomic assumptions (Table 1) and policies
underpinning the exercise are broadly unchanged with respect to the 2007 DSA (SMf08/44
Supplement 1).
Growth. Real GDP growth would remain strong, averaging 4% percent a year
through 2013, driven by recent large public investments in the sugar and energy
sectors and prospective significant foreign direct investment in mining,
telecommunications, and agriculture, and by sugar production. I t would stabilize at
about 3.0percent in the long term. Compared with the previous path, growth was
somewhat lower in 2008 due to problems in the sugar sector, but it i s expected to
increase with a recovery o f the sugar sector following large investments in recent
years. The envisaged growth rates reflect continued political and social stability.
Inflation. With the recent sharp drop in o i l and other commodity prices, inflation i s
projected to decline from about 6% percent in 2008 to below 5 percent in 2009, and to
stabilize at that level thereafter, supported by prudent monetary and fiscal policies.
External current account. The current account deficit i s projected to narrow
gradually to below 11 percent o f GDP by 2013 and further to 8% percent by 2028.
This i s moderately higher than previous projections, reflecting in part lower
commodity exports, partly compensated by lower o i l imports.
A gradual return to the medium-term fiscal framework would underpin debt
sustainability. While fiscal deficits would be higher than previously envisaged during
2009-1 1, the authorities envisage that the deficits would be brought in line with the previous
path beginning in 2012. Starting in 2013, the deficit would stabilize at about 3 percent o f
GDP. These assumptions are based on a return to fiscal consolidation and a slowdown in
capital spending after the completion o f major public investment projects.

6.
Foreign inflows would gradually decline in the years ahead. The current account
deficit i s expected to be fully financed by multilateral and bilateral concessional loans,
grants, and FDI, even without including the PetroCaribe loans that are expected to be saved
abroad. Over the next few years, foreign direct investment would average about 10 percent o f
GDP and concessional loans and grants together would average about the same amount. In
the long run, these same inflows would decline to about 7-8 percent o f GDP and 5-6 percent,
respectively. T h i s includes financing from Venezuela under PetroCaribe, which i s assumed to
hover around 4-5 percent o f GDP before being discontinued by 2013 4 2 . With financing
exceeding the needs, the authorities have been saving most o f PetroCaribe financing in an
overseas account for their eventual use on large projects, or to offset the anticipated fall in
In absence o f concrete plans at this stage, the DSA does not reflect the effects o f potential oil production nor o f the large
hydroelectric plant.
41

42

Projections for Petrocaribe disbursements are based on the end-2008 WE0 oil price baseline.

65

grants and external financing (both in terms o f levels and conce~sionality).~~
Therefore, much
o f this upfront borrowing i s not linked to higher deficits.

Baseline Scenario: PetroCaribe Financing on a Gross Basis
Results of the External Debt Sustainability Analysis
7.
Compared to previous projections, the end-2008 external debt position
improved. The NPV o f external debt-to-revenue i s estimated at 119 percent, 10 percentage
points lower than projected in the baseline scenario o f the 2007 L I C DSA (the next paragraph
discusses the relevance o f different debt indicators). This reduction reflects, among other
factors, lower PetroCaribe financing due to lower oil prices.

8.
External debt burden indicators are expected to improve significantly in the
long run, broadly in line with previous projections. Under the baseline scenario, the NPV
o f external debt-to-revenue ratio and external debt-to-exports ratios remain well below the
debt burden thresholds (Table 2 and Figure l).44
The NPV o f external debt-to-revenue
(excluding grants) i s expected to climb from 119 percent in 2008 to 145 percent in 2013,
reflecting large external gross financing from Venezuela, and decline thereafter to
128 percent by the end o f the projection period. The NPV o f external debt-to-exports,
estimated at 50 percent in 2008, follows a similar path. The l o w projected debt-service ratios
(about 4 percent o f exports and 10 percent o f revenue in the long term), indicate that the
Government would have the ability to meet i t s debt service payments. Along with the NPV o f
debt-to-exports and debt-to-revenue ratios, these two indicators appear to be the most
appropriate ones, given the likely underestimation o f GDP (a new GDP series i s expected to
be published this year).45 Accordingly, while the NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio breaches the
threshold temporarily, this i s not necessarily a signal of debt distress. Moreover, with GDP
believed to be underestimated, significant savings o f borrowing, and debt indicators below
the thresholds, the projected increase in the NPV o f external debt to GDP ratio by some 5percentage point o f GDP i s not an indicator o f debt distress.46
9.
Standard sensitivity analysis shows that Guyana’s resilience to shocks has
improved slightly, but i t s risk o f debt distress remains moderate (Table 3 and Figure 1).
For the external debt-to-revenue indicator, there i s a breach o f the threshold only under two
o f eight tests (as in the 2007 L I C DSA). This breach takes place under the B5 test, which
assumes that both net non-debt creating flows and real GDP grow at their respective
historical averages: the external NPV o f debt-to-revenue ratio would increase to 255 percent
in 2010 and decline below the threshold starting in 2015. Under the A1 scenario, which uses
key variables (real GDP growth, non-interest current account, growth o f GDP deflator) at
43

The weighted average grant element o f the IDB lending is assumed to be 52 percent.

44 Based on the World Bank classification, the external debt burden thresholds relevant for Guyana are (i)
NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio
o f 150 percent; (ii)
NPV o f debt-to-revenue of 250 percent; (iii)
NFV o f debt-to-GDP o f 40 percent; and (iv) Debt service-to-exports
and revenue ratios o f 20 and 30 percent, respectively.
45

See SM/08/44 Supplement 1.

Accordingly, this report does not present the high-investment, low-growth scenario envisaged in the guidance note. However, the
country specific scenario models a situation o f substantially lower fiscal revenues and lower long-term growth.

46

66

their historical averages, the NPV o f external debt-to-revenue ratio never breaches the
threshold before 2028, but has an upward trend and reaches 251 percent by 2028, just above
the threshold. If net non-debt creating flows were to grow at the historical averages (B4), the
NPV o f external debt-to-revenue ratio would be below the threshold only by very small
margins in 2010-2013 (about 240 on average with a threshold o f 250). These results
underscore Guyana’s need to sustain economic growth and maintain the concessionality o f
external financing.47

Results of the Total Public Debt Sustainability Analysis
10.
Guyana’s total public debt i s considered manageable as long as the authorities
adhere to their fiscal consolidation strategy. In light o f the sufficient availability o f
external financing, the macroeconomic scenario assumes no recourse to domestic financing
o f the fiscal deficit in the medium term and allows for a gradual redemption o f domestic
securities. As external financing falls beyond 20 12, domestic financing would marginally
increase in the long term. Thus, the NPV o f total public debt-to-revenue ratio would increase
in the medium term from 159 percent in 2008 to 170 percent in 2013, reflecting large
external disbursements, and gradually decline thereafter, to 153 percent by 2028. Given the
authorities’ assurances o f their commitment to return to the sustainable medium-term fiscal
framework, the projected primary fiscal balances are consistent with debt sustainability
(Table 4).
11.
Under alternative scenarios and bound tests, Guyana’s total public debt
indicators indicate more vulnerabilities than projected by the external DSA,
highlighting the importance of adhering to sound policies48.If GDP grow‘th were at the
historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010, adversely affecting the
revenue collection, the NPV o f public debt would reach 383 percent o f revenue by 2028
(Table 5). Likewise, if the 2008 primary deficit remained constant throughout the projection
period, the NPV o f public debt-to-revenue would climb to 384 percent by 2028 (Table 5 and
Figure 2). The sensitivity analysis underscores the importance o f pursuing sound
macroeconomic policies to achieve high GDP growth rates and low fiscal deficits, as under
shocks to these variables the public debt would increase significantly with respect to revenue,
making i t difficult to service the debt.
Alternative Scenario: PetroCaribe Financing on a Net Basis

12.
While debt indicators improve substantially when only the spent part of
PetroCaribe financing i s considered, the baseline scenario conclusions remain valid.
Given the magnitude o f the estimated savings accumulated from PetroCaribe financing
through 2013, the net debt indicators are significantly lower than in the gross-basis baseline
scenario. The NPV o f external debt-to-revenue ratio would reach 111 percent in 2013 (some
35 percentage points lower than in the baseline scenario), and in the long-term-as the
47 Given the high degree o f concessionality

of the PetroCaribe loans, replacing this financingwith less-concessionalloans would lead

to a sharp deterioration of debt indicators.
The assumptionsfor marginal lending in the case o f shocksunder the public DSA i s identical to the last DSA, with 70 percent
extemal and 30 percent domestic borrowing and concessionality slightly below the baseline.

67

savings are used-they would converge to values similar to those obtained in the baseline
scenario. The NPV o f debt-to-GDP would increase by less than three percentage points in
2009 (Table 6), compared to more than five under the baseline.
Country Specific Scenario

13.
A country-specific scenario that assumes a less-than-fully successful sugar
modernization plan highlights significant downside risks and the importance o f early
compensatory measures. I t assumes that the plan achieves only 70 percent o f the envisaged
increases in sugar production both in the short and in the long run. This would lead to lower
GDP levels, fiscal revenues, and, under the assumption o f no offsetting measures, a deficit
that would be about one percent o f GDP higher per year. The increased financing
requirements are assumed to be covered with new nonconcessional external disbursements.
As a result (Table 7), much o f the borrowing space provided by the h4DRI would be eroded,
with the NPV o f external debt-to-revenue reaching 202 percent in 2028 (128 percent in the
baseline). The NFV o f debt-to-revenue indicator would breach the thresholds o f three
additional tests and the negative shocks would have a stronger effect than in the baseline
scenario (Table 8 and Figures 3 and 4). The worsening o f debt indicators, however, would
not change the assessment o f moderate risk o f debt distress.
Conclusion

14.
Guyana remains at a moderate risk of debt distress. Relevant debt indicators are
well below thresholds but potential vulnerabilities have increased, namely the risk o f a weak
implementation o f the sugar modernization plan and a more prolonged than-currentlyenvisaged global slowdown. Public sector debt ratios show higher vulnerability than external
ones, underscoring the importance o f deepening fiscal consolidation. Going forward,
returning to the sustainable medium-term fiscal framework and broadening the sources o f
growth, as well as a prudent debt strategy, would be critical to preserve recent gains.

68

Figure 1. Guyana: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt 20082028, Baseline Scenario 1/
b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio

a. Debt Accumulation

14 >

I. 45

;;;

:::\
8-

- 25
- 20
- 15

-

I IIuI II1,1IIIl,lI

6-

\

I

42-

-

0

-10

1

I

07r

r

a

a

1

0

1

1

I

I

O w l

*I+

40

+

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

t e k m a f of new barrowkg (% ript scak)

Gmt-equident haucmg(% ofGDP)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

160

120

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

d P V ofdebt-to-revenue ratio

300
1

1

140

250

120

200

100

150

80
60

io0

40

50

20

0

0
2008

2013

20 18

2023

I
2008

2028

2013

2018

2023

2028

e.Debt service-toexports ratio

25

35
30
20

15
10

1

20
25

-l

e -

04
2008

2013

-Baseline

-

2018

I

z

I

I
2023
2028
Historical scmaio

2008

-Mostcmemeshock

2013

2018
1/

2023

2028

Threshold

Source: Staffprojections and simulations.
l / ~ h e t e ~ ~ s t r e s s t c s t i s t h e t e s t t h s t y i d d s t h c h i ~ s t r a t i o i n 2 0 1 8 . I n f ib.itconespondstoa
gure
Combination shock;in
c. to a N o ~ d e b fbw
t
shock; ind to a Combinationshock in e. to a Nondebt flows shock and inpicture E to a Combination

shock

69

Figure 2. Guyana: Indicators o f Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2008-2028

,

160

-Baseline

t

---

FxprimaryBalance

-Most cmfsneshodr Gmwh

Historicalscensrio

P V o f Debt-tWGDP Ratio

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2 2 1 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 UnS
45 0

P V o f Debt-to-Revenue Ratio Y

400

0 1
1
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

-"

35
30
2s

I

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

-

-

1s 10 -

20

0 " '

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 201 8.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

70

Figure 3. Guyana: Indicators ofhblic and PubliclyGuaranteed External Debt 20082028, Low Sugar Scenario 1/
a. Debt Accumulation

14
12

140

40
35

120

30

loo

25
20

15
10
5
0
200$1C1112&1UofDebl
-Grant

2028

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

-

100

-

/

/

0

60
40
20
0
2008

-I)

2013

2018

2023

2028

d.PV o f debt-to-revenueratio

400

1

140 120

0

so

e l a w t of nm bornwing(%right scale)
Oranf-cquivakntfinancing(%ofGDP)

c.PV of debt-toexports ratio

,

160

2023

b.PV o f debt-to GDP ratio

45

0

350

8 o l l l

/
-

1so

60

2oo

loo!50

2008

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

25

2013

2018

2023

2028

"r=-

30
20

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

25

20

15

15

10

0 -

10

5

5

0
2008

2013
-Baseline

-

2018

04

2023
2028
Historical scenario

2008

-

2013

Mostextremeshock 11

2018

2023

2028

Threshold

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
11The most ex!mne stress test i s the test that yields the highest mtio m 2018. In figure b. it corresponds to a Combinationshock; in
c. to a Non-debt flows shock; in d. to a Combination shock; in e. to a Non-debt flows shock and in picture f. to a Combination
shock

71

Figure 4. Guyana ( Low Sugar Scenario): Indicators o f Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2008-2028
-Baseline---FixRimaryBalaucc-

Mcstemaneshodr Gmwth

Historicalscenario

60-

40-

20-

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
SO0

400 350 N
O 250 -

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2'

450

200

-

150

-

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
45

Debt Serviceto-RevenueRatio 2/

40
35
30
25
20

t

15
10
5
0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

Sources: County authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 20 18.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

72

v m- 7 2
p3

22-72
0

f

. ..

.

Table 3. Guyana: SensitivityAnalyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publidy Guaranteed Extern4 Debt, 20082028
(In wrcentl
2008

2006

2010

2011

2012

Pmi.otlonr
2013 2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2028

PV of debt40 OW ratio
hseline

42

47

52

54

55

53

52

51

50

50

50

42
42

46
47

51
52

54
54

57
55

58
53

59
51

60
51

62
51

64
51

67
52

93
58

42
42
42
42
42
42

50
47
49
66
64
07

59
57
57
89
94
73

81
59
59
90.
95
78

62
60
80

Bo

58
54
54

93
75

89
72

57
55
55
83
89
71

56

ea

57
55
55

90
76

58
56
57
e5
91
73

81
87
70

53
50
52
63
69
67

70

72

72

69

67

65

64

63

63

56

63
84

09
70

73
72

75
72

75
68

76
67

77
65

79
65

81
65

84
65

110
67

5 0 8 4
50
63
50
84
50
Bo
50
78
5 0 6 4

70
88
70
121
117
70

72
88
72
120
116
72

72

69
64
69
114
111
69

67
82
67
111
108
67

65
79
65
108
105
05

64
76
64
106
103
64

63

72
119
115
72

105
102
63

02
76
02
103
100
62

56
66
56
75
75
56

A Alhnutiw Sunador
AI. Key variables at their historical average$ in 2008.2028 I /
~ 2 ~. e public
w
sector loans on l e u favorable t e n s in 2008-2028 2
R Bound tuh
81. Real GDP g M h at historicelaverage minusone standard deviationin 20092010
BZ. Ex+wl vdue gmwth at historid average minus one standard deviation in 2008-2010 3/
83. US ddlar GDP denetor at historical average minus one rtandard deviation in 20092010
64. Net nowdebt waling nom at historicel avmae minus one standard deviationin 20092010 41
E5. Combination of 81-ei using onehdf standarddeviation $hocks
Bb. 0ne.time 30 pwnt nomina depreciationrelative to the baseline in 2Mx) 51

AI. Key variables at their historicei averages in 2008.2026 I 1
A2. New public Mctw loans on l e u favorable temr in 2008.2028 2

50
50

90

58
58

84

54
55
83
88
71

R Bound Tasb
81. Real GDP pmwlh at hiatonal M r a W minus one Sllndlrd demlDOn in 20092010
82. Eapn vdw growh et hiatorid average minus one atandud devlaton n 2008-2010 31
83. US ddilr GDP denator at hialond average min& one atanderd deneuon in 20082010
64 Net nowdebt creating nom 8l h i u o n d aver8ge m nur one atandmi aemauon in 20092010 41
E5 Combinabon 01 61-64 uung onahdl allndard demaoon shocks
E4 Ona-t me 30 prrant nomind daprecation reletw to the n a u l i n in 2009 51

ea

n

63

PV of debUo-nwnm ratio
B...llne

118

124

140

145

147

146

142

139

137

196

135

129

119
119

121
123

138
140

146
144

154
147

158
144

180
141

1U
139

168
139

175
139

181
140

251
153

119
I19
119
119
119
119

131
122
130
174
I69
175

159
154
154
241
255
I99

163
158
158
242
257
205

166
101
101
242
258
209

165
159
160
240
258
207

IW
155
155
235
250
201

157
151
152
230
245
196

154
149
149
227
241
193

153
148
148
225
239
192

152
147
147
22 1
238
190

145
134
140
170
le5
181

4

A AHNndW SolMdOS
AI. K 9 variables at thoir hinorid averages in 20062028 11
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable e m s in 20082028 2

R Bound Tasb
81. Reai GDP growlh at historial averege minua one standard deviation in 20092010
82. Export value gmwul at historicel average minus one standard deviation in 2 W 2 0 1 0 3/
83. US ddlar GDP denator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 20092010
64. Net nowd&i ueatinp flows at historical average minus one slandard deviation in 20092010 41
85. Combinationof 81-64 wing one-hdf standard dewation shocks
BB. One-time 30 percdnl nomind depredation dative to the baseliM in 2009 51

Debt ~ ~ ~ l & ~ x p o
ratio
r t r
B...lln*

A

3

2

3

4

5

5

5

5

5

4

4

3
3

2
2

3
3

4

5
5

5
5

0
5

6
5

6

5

5

7

d

A

A

A

3
3
3
3
3
3

2
2
2
2
2
2

~km8fiW
SMMdOS

A I Key vanabler at t k i r hononai avenger in 2008-2026 11
~2 NOWp u t k wctw ioenr on iass favorable toms In 2008.2028 2

A

R Bound test8
81. Real GDP gmwul at historical avenge minus one standard deviationin 2008-2010
82. Export VBlue growvl at historicalaverage minus one standard devieticn in 20082010 3/
83. US ddlar GDP denator at historicel average minus one standard deviation in 20092010
84. Net now*bt walinp nom at hiatorid avenge minus one standard deviationin 20092010 41
65. Combinationof 61-64 using one-hatfstandard deviationshocks
Bb. Onetinw 30 p8rcdnt nomind depredation dative to the basdine in 2006 51

4
5
4
6

e

4

D.M urvicbto-nwnue n t i o

B.ullne

6

4

6

6

9

10

11

11

10

9

10

10

0
6

4
4

6

9
6

10
10

11
10

12
10

13
10

12
9

12
9

12
9

16
8

6
6
6
6
6
6

4
4
4
4
4
6

7
6

9
9
9
12
13
12

I1
10
10
13
14
13

11
11
11
13
15
14

12
11
12
14
I5
15

13
12
12
14
16
10

11
11
11
13
14
14

11
10
10
12
14
13

11
10
10
15
15
13

11
10
10
15
10
14

27

27

A AlhmaiVr S o l M d O S
A I Key vanades at t~ r n noriai avenges in 2008-2028 11
A2 NOWpubl c wctor ioana on IOUfavorable t o m in 2008.2028 2

6

R Bound T u h
81. Red GDP gmWm at historicalaverage minus one standard deviaon in 20092010
82. Eapn value gmwth at historic4 average minus one standard deviation in 20092010 3/
83. US ddiar GDP denator at historical average minus one standard deviationin 200&2010
84. Net nowdebt waling flm at historicalaverage minus one standard deviation in 20082010 41
85. Combinationof 81-E4 using one-hatf alandard deviationshhocks
Bb. O n e t i m 30 prcdnt nomind depreciationmiative to the baseline in 2009 51

h4smrandum k m :
Grant element assumed on residual finamng &e., financing required above baseline) 01

Source: Staff prqeclions and simulations.

7

8
8
9

---------27

27

27

27

27

27

27

27

27

27

x

0 4 4 9 4 0 Y Q Y Y Y 9 9 4 9 9 9

q f r rtt o tq q q y o o o o o o m

1497 0 4 4 9 9 4 9 4 9
N t N

f

ru)

q

N 0

h C Y 4 14 4 9 h 4 9 4 9

ru)N-u)qNOtNOy

5

r
Y)

r?

44444.:

0 0 0 0 0 0

4

Z949h

ENoY
M

+ N o =

!

m 4

4 4

* N O -

Table 5. Guyana: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 20082028
Projectbns
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2018 2028
PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratb
Basellne

68

72

74

75

74

71

64

59

66
68
68

72
74
73

76
79
75

79
E2
77

82
86
78

82
88
76

87
105
79

105
149
110

68
68
68
68
68

79
75
76
88
81

93
81
83
88
83

95
81
67
87

83

99
80
90
86
83

99
77
89
83
79

113
70
98
80
73

149
65
125
85
67

159

159

175

175

177

171

161

153

159
159
159

159
163
180

178
185
178

183
194
180

193
207
186

194
212
183

213
264
197

265
384
282

159
159
159
159
159

171
165
186
195
179

209
190
193
207
196

220
193
201
204
196

233
192
212
205
198

236
186
213
200
192

281
177
244
201
182

383
168
321
220
173

8

6

8

10

11

11

11

12

8
8
8

7
6
6

8
6
8

9
12
10

11
14
11

12
15
12

15
21
14

21
36
24

6
8
8
8
8

7
6
7
7
6

9
9
9
11
9

13
12
11
13
17

16
14
13
15
12

16
13
16
17
14

21
12
18
18
12

36
14
29
23
15

A Altem&lve scmalos
Al. Real GDP gmwth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Permanentlylowr GDP growth 11
8. Bound tests
81. Red GDP gowth is et historical average minus one standard deviatbns in 2009-2010
82. Rimery balance is at histohd average minus me standard deviations in 2009-2010
03. Comtinatim of 81-82 using me haf standard devialion shocks
B4.One-time 30 percent real depreciationin 2009
85.10 percent d GDP increase in other debt-creating flws in 2009

PV d Debt-to-RRevenue Ratio 21
Basellne
A Alternative scmalor
Al. Real GDP gowth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Permanentlyi o w r GDP growth I/
8. Bound tests
81. Real GDP gowth is at historid average minus one standard deviatbns in 2009-2010
82. Rimary balance is at histohal average minus me standard deviations in 2009-2010
03. Comtinatim of 81-82 using me haf standard deviation shocks
B4.One-time 30 percent real depreciationin 2009
85.10 percent d GDP increase in other debt-creatingflws in 2009

Debt Service-tdevenue Retio 21

B&seilne
A Alternative scennalor
Al. Real GDP gowth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primarybalance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Pennanmtly i o w r GDP growth 1/

B. Bound tests
81. Real GDP gowth is et historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
82. Primary balance is at historical average minus me standard deviationsin 2009-2010
B3. Comtinatim of 81-82 using me half standard deviation shocks
B4.One-time 30 percent real depreciationin 2009
85.10 percent d GDP increase in other debt-creatingflws in 2009

Sources: CwnbyaumorW; andFund oteffestbnstesandprcjedims.
I/
Assumes that red GDP gmWm ir at bspallrrr minus me standard dewaM divded by the length of the proicctim pedcd.
21 Werues am demed lnclusiva of grants.

f

2

3

m o
dul

J

IC0ICv)m

Ndddd

F

E

9

.
:

f

Tabla 8. Guyana: Sensitivity Analrjes for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, Low Sugar Scenario, 2008-2026
(In percent)
PfdWdOM
2013 2014

2009

2010

2011

2012

42

47

52

55

58

58

42
42
42

46
47
54

51
52
65

55

59
58
77

42
42
42
42
42
42

M

58
58

82

2M)o

2015

2016

2017

2018

2028

58

58

59

81

82

72

01
57
80

84

67
59
83

71
81
84

78
83
85

81
88
85

131
89
87

84
63

84

87

80

97
101
82

W
101
82

97
Io3
80

74
78
88

101
82

84
65
97
102
84

00

83

85
83
84

88

83

75

78

83

100
81
1C6

152
104
78

78

83

PV d &bl-to GDP ntlo

Mh
A A l m n u t h . Smwioe
A I . K a y n t ' m t k d o t l h d r h ~ l a ~ gin2005202811
m
A2. N w public ndcfbarm on h f a w r e b b t m in 20052028 2
A3. A t I m W t a Scenario :[Ccatumhe,tnta W1

55
72

57
81

B. i)ound T n t s
81. R a i G D P g m w u l a t h M ~ l a ~ m i n u s o n e . t l n d o r d d & t s n i n 2 0 ~ 2 0 1 0
82. Export uhm gmnth .t hbtodml o ~ . g minw
e
OM .tlmiard dsvi.tlon in 20092010 Y

Bo. One-time 30 pmmnl nomihidepmdatbn r*.tbto the M i n e in 2009 M

47
50
00
80
87

5%

81
81

w

(D

w

ea

91
OB
74

100
78

70

73

75

74

73

73

74

00

73
72

77
?5
101

79
73
1M

81
73
lo3

85
74
104

89

04

78
105

79
106

73

74

74

w

101

pv d d.M-cwxpolb mio

Mln.

50

AAlmnUtinsUnu!€4
A1.KqnrilMaotthdr h ~ l a w ~ i n 2 0 0 5 2 2 M 8 1 1
AZ. N w pubk Mdor IOSM
on W fawabb Ienm in 2W8-2028 2
A3. AnmmtivsScaurlo :[Caturnhe.W W S ]

50
50
50

62
84

50
50
50
50
50
50

84
83
84
92

73

70
87

m

8. Bound Tr(.
81. R a l GOP gmluu, at h i r W l u l awmge mbw one Mmiard d&tbn in 20092010
82. Export wiue gmwul .t h b b h l 0-e
minw om Nmiad d s v i . t i in 20092010 Y
83. US dollar GDP d&tc?ol hbl0doala-e
minus one Mmiard dsvi.Uon h ZM)B-2010
64. N d mndabt a m U q fbm at hbtollal awmge minw one Nmiard d&mn in 2UQO.2010U
85.ComMnUond81-84wingonbh.l.1.miardd&.tbnshock.
08. Onetime 30 pnmt l~mlltll
da$iedationr*.tbto lhe hsdlne In
M

A I Kay w r i . W . ~ t l h * r h ~ i a m p . . m 2 0 0 5 2 0 2 8 1 1
A2 N w pubk ndcf IQrm on luIawmbb t m in 20082028 2
A3 A-l
Scenarb [Caturnha,ntu til401

04

70
87
70
128
121
70

73
126
122
73

75
92
75
127
123
75

74
124
120
74

73
89
73
122
118
73

73
89
73
121
117
73

74
121
I18
74

75
91
75
121
117
75

78
119
118
78

102
103
83

120

144

153

1M)

183

184

165

100

172

175

2M

119
119
119

122

139
144
178

151
151

183
159
214

173
1M)
224

181
183
230

191
187
235

202

125
144

218
180
241

229
187
241

251
189

119
119
I19
119
119
119

132
125
132
182
174
178

180
159
158
257
200
203

170
100
167
284
278
218

178
175
175
289

182
178
179
272
285

184
180
181
272
288

187
182
184
274

228

230

231

233

237

181
1M
188
275
291
243

185
189
192
273

282

181
178
178
272
285

248

224
208
221
247
270
285

2

3

4

5

5

5

6

5

5

5

6

5

80

w

im

w

w

172
239

92

98
83

388

0. Bound T r t .
61 R a l GDP
at hldodml a ~ n minus
p
o m .Undard d.vy1Dn in zooO2010
82 Expo* uiw gmnth n h m b h a m g e m i n i om standard d . v y u n In 20092010 Y
83 US ddlar GDP ddmmr at hbmdml a m ~ mmw
e
one aundara d&mn m 20092010
84. Nd mn-deLt amting fkvm at h b t o r i c a l < w mlnw one Mnderd d&bn in 200c2010 41
85. C o m M l t l h d 81-84 wing one-h.8 Mmiard d&Uon shock.
Bo. One-Utinu30 penwnt ~ I Mdeprdd!an
I
&Wa to the M i m in 2W0 5/

81. Rmi GDP gmnth at h b b i a l a
m mlnuli one sbmiard d m W h h 2Wa-2010
B2.Exportuluegpmvlh.t hlstodwlo~eminwo~.1.ndardd&tionin20092010Y
83. US dolor GOP dofblorot hlmodcala-e
minus one sundad d&tbn in 2Wa-2010
84. N U mndebl "alq fbm at h b t o h l -a
minus om Mndard d&Uon in 2We2010 U
85. ComMnaUon d 01-84 wing onbh.H N n d . W d&Uon W k s
Bo. OneUme 30 psn;4nt mmhl d q & h
&albato the hsellm In 2009 51

289

2

3

2
2

3
3

4
4
5

5
6

5
5
8

8
5
8

8
5
7

6
5
6

8
5
6

8
6
7

11
5
6

2
2

4
3

8
4

7
5

7
5

7
5

7
8

7
5

7
5

9
5

9
8

4

8

0

10

11

12

12

12

11

12

18

8
8
6

4
4
4

6
7
7

8
9
10

10
10
12

12
11
13

13
11
14

14
12
15

14
11
14

13
11
14

14
11
15

28
13
14

8
8

4
4
4
4
4
8

7
6
7
8
9
9

9

11
10
11
14
15
14

12
11
12
15
18
15

13
12
13
16
17
18

14
13
14
18
I8
18

13
12
13
15
17
16

13
12
12
18
18
I6

13
13
13
21
22
17

17
17
17
22
23
22

3
3
3

B 1 . R m l G D P p m n t h a t h ~ i a ~ m l n u s o n e M ~ r d d ~h2Wa-2010
ion
B2.Expodnlwgpmvlhal h b b d c l l o ~ e m i n w o M M m i a r d d & t i o n i n 2 ~ 2 0 1 0 3 1
83. US d o h GDP dubtor I t hwlicala-e
minw one dandard deknlbn in 2006-2010
&
NI
d.
mndabtamtiqfkvmsth ~ r l u i a ~ ~ e m i n u s o n t , r b n d . r d d ~ n i n 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 U
85. C o m ~ n a d
h 81-84 wing onehaii ~ m i a r d
d&bn ah&
Bo. OnMime M paoa mmiltli dqrbddlm &alba to the hsdim h 2009 51

289

3
3

3
3

3
3

0
8

8
8

0
0
13
14
12

80

GUYANA Debt Sustainability Analysis
Addendum to the Joint IMFNB DSA49

The additional scenario of lower GDP growth related to the global crisis indicates that the
main conclusion of the Joint IMF/WB debt sustainability analysis (DSA), i.e. that Guyana is
at a moderate risk of debt distress, remains valid. I n this scenario projected debt indicators,
although slightly worse, are similar to those of the Joint DSA.

The macroeconomic fiamework assumes that the economy will continue to perform well.
However, as explained in the main text o f this document, due to a more prolonged global
slowdown, growth rates for 2009 and 2010 are lower than those o f the joint DSA. The current
scenario’s projections are more conservative than those presented by the Government in i t s
2009 budget and by the IMF in i t s recent Article IV. GDP i s expected to expand by just 2.4%
in 2009 and 3.6% in 2009. For the remaining forecasting period no change has been assumed.
The results o f the additional scenario are presented in the table and figures” below. Due to
lower growth in 2009 and 2010, debt ratios are marginally above those o f the baseline
scenario, however these ratios do not present any sign o f increased debt distress or o f
compromised sustainability.

49

This Addendum to the joint IMF and World Bank DSA was prepared by WB staff only.
The additional scenario i s labeled as “low growth” in the figure below.

81

szz

ce

d

' v i ti

2

c o N ( D ( D * N 0 0 P ) w N 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 + ~ < " " " ~ + + 0 0 0 0 0 " ~
t
P '

P ) r r ( D m r - 0 * r t P 0 0 0 0 0 N

0~dei<d<<0<000000d
P

r

P

"

"

a

2

e

s s.

-*

0

m

t i - g ' o s n

Guyana: Indicators o f Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2008-2028 1/

---

--

-Baseline

I

160

120

.
.

80

-

60

.

140

LowGrowth-2009-10

Fix Rimaty Balance
Histoncal scenario

-Most

extreme shock Growth

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

450

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

400

/

-

-

e

-

-

t

50
loo
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
40

25

.
.
.

20

-

15

.

IO

*

35
30

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 21

5 O

'
.
'
.
"
"
'
"
'
"
"
"
"
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test i s the test that yields the highest ratio in 2018.
21 Revenuesare defined inclusive o f grants.

83

IBRD 33416
60°W

58°W

ATLANTIC

56°W

OCEAN

Morawhanna

Mabaruma

a

ak u
Am

8°N

R. B . D E
V E N E Z U E LA

r

8°N

B A R I M A - WA
WA I N I
Port Kaituma
Port

To
Ciudad
Guayana

POMEROON-SUPENAAM

ain i
W

Matthews
Ridge

Charity

ESSEQUIBO ISLANDSWEST DEMERARA

Anna Regina

DEMERARA-MAHAICA
Parika

Arimu Mine

Bartica
Bartica

CUYUNI-MAZARUNI

Mt

M a zaru Rockstone

rai

Mt. Roraima
(2772 m)

Mara
Corriverton
Corriverton

Linden

s.

ma

Issano

M
o

Mahdia

un

ta

in
s

P O TA R O S I PA R U N I

Orinduik

Demer ara

e

Imbaimadai

Paka

New Amsterdam

er
ni

um

Ess
equibo

6°N

Fort Wellington
Rosignol

Peters Mine

er

MAHAICA-BERBICE

Paradise

Vreed
Vreed en Hoop

Cu
yun
i

M

GEORGETOWN

Ituni

6°N

Takama
Takama

UPPER
DEMERARABERBICE

SURIN AM E

tlyne
uran
Co

Kurupukari

GUYANA

B R AZ I L

Surama

4°N

Apoteri

Be

Good Hope

rb

ntlyne

u M
ts.

C o ur a

n

N ew

Ka

uk

o
quib
Esse

ice

UPPER
TA K U T U UPPER
ESSEQUIBO

Lethem

Dadanawa

To
Caracaraí

Raad

Oronoquekamp

GUYAN A

EAST
BERBICECORENTYNE

Isherton
Isherton

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
REGION CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS
MAIN ROADS

2°N

2°N

Ka

Isherton
Isherton

mo

a M
ountains

0

0

RAILROADS
REGION BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

BRA ZIL
58°W

20

40

20

60

40

80

100 Kilometers

60 Miles

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
56°W

NOVEMBER 2004

