Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 48087-PY

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
FOR THE PERIOD FY09-FY13

April 7,2009

Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay
Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Paraguay was discussed by the Executive
Directors on November 26,2003 (Report No. 27341 -PA).

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS
(As o f March 17,2009)

Currency Unit = Guarani
US$1 = 5150 Guaranis

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 -December 31

Regionalvice President
Country Director
Country Manager
Team Leader

Pamela Cox
Pedro Alba
Pedro Luis Rodriguez /Rossana Polastri
Maria Luisa Masutti

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ANNP
APC
AS
BCP
BEE
BOP
CAF
CAS
CISNI
COPACO
CPI
CPS
CY
DPL
ESW
FDI
GDP
GEF
HBS
IBRD
IDB
IDF
IFA
IFC
IFIs
IMF
INCOOP
JBIC
JICA
JSDF
LAC
MIGA
MOF
NGOs
PEP
PETROPAR
QAG
RAF
SEPA
SIAF
SMEs
SOE
TA
T EK0P0RA
UPAF
USAID
VAT
VOIP
WB
WHO

Analytical and Advisory Activities
State-Owned Port Operatori Administration Nacional de Navegacion y Puertos
Alianza para e l Cambio
Advisory Services
Central Bank o f Paraguay
Business Enabling Environment
Balance o f Payment
Andean Development Corporation I Corporation Andina de Foment0
Country Assistance Strategy
Consejo Impulsor del Sistema Nacional de Integridad
Public Telecommunications Utility KompaRia Paraguaya de Comunicaciones
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Calendar Year
Development Policy Loan
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Product
Global EnvironmentalFacility
Household Budget Survey
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Inter-AmericanDevelopment Bank
Institutional Development Fund
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
International Monetary Fund
National Institute o f Cooperatives
Japan Bank of International Cooperation
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Japan Social Development Fund
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Finance
Nongovernmental Organizations
Private Enterprise PartnershipiIFC
Paraguay Oil Company i Petroleos Paraguayos
Quality Assurance Group
Resource Allocation Framework
Sistema de Ejecucidn de Planes de Adquisiciones
Financial Management Integrated System
Small and Medium Enterprises
State-owned Enterprise
Technical Assistance
Conditional Cash Transfers Program
Upper Parana Atlantic Forest
United States Agency for International Development
Value Added Tax
Voice over the Internet Protocol
World Bank
World Health Organization

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the
Government o f Paraguay in the preparation o f this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).
In particular, the World Bank Group thanks President Lug0 and Cabinet members for
their participation in the Policy Notes discussions in June 2008 and in the Conference on
Governance in August 2008, which provided important inputs to the CPS. Furthermore,
the Bank received key inputs on the proposed program from the Economic Cabinet
Meeting chaired by President Lug0 on February 12,2009. We also thank the members o f
the international community in Paraguay, universities, think tanks, political
establishments, governors and mayors, and civil society in general for their contributions
to the preparation o f this program through the Client Survey and the consultations that
were carried out in Asuncion and Coronel Oviedo on February 13 and 14, 2009. In
particular, we would like to thank the Ministry o f Finance representatives who
participated in the consultations, including MessrdMmes. Manuel Caballero, Veronica
Serafini, Raul Monte-Domec, and Pedro Espinola.
The CPS was prepared by Maria Luisa Masutti with key inputs from Messes./Mmes:
Debora Aquino, Alexandre Arrobbio, Yanina Budkin, Jasmin Chakeri, Todd Crawford,
Karem Edwards, Ruth Gonzalez Llamas, Franz Drees-Gross, Gloria Dure, Frank
Earwaker, Lyliana Gayoso, Hermann von Gersdorff, Selva Olmedo, Carla Pantanali,
Susana Perez, Felipe Saez, Graciela Sanchez Martinez, Veronica Salatino, and Pedro L.
Rodriguez who, together with the Country Director and the Country Manager, comprised
the Core Team.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

................................................................................................ i
I.
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................... 1
I 1. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT .................................................................................
1
A . Political Context ............................................................................................... 1
B. Economic Developments and Outlook ............................................................. 2
C. Structural Challenges ....................................................................................... 8
I11. THE GOVERNMENT’S ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PROGRAM ...............13
I V. LESSONS FROM PREVIOUS ENGAGEMENT - THE FY03-07 CAS .........14
16
V . THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ...............................................
A . Strategic Context ............................................................................................ 16
B. Portfolio .......................................................................................................... 23
C. IBRD Financial Products and Services .......................................................... 25
D. Development Partners ................................................................................... -25
E. Expected Results o f the CPS .......................................................................... 28
V I. R I S K S...................................................................................................................... 28
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

TABLES
Table 1: Paraguay Key Economic Indicators. 2002-2007 ................................................... 2
Table 2: Medium term macroeconomic outlook (baseline) ................................................. 8
Table 3 : Alternative macroeconomic scenario .................................................................... 8
Table 4: Strategic Areas o f Government Action and World Bank Group Support ...........18
Table 5 : M a i n Development Partners b y Area o f Focus .................................................. 27
BOXES
Box 1: Key Parameters o f the Country Partnership Strategy ............................................ 17
Box 2: G A C in Paraguay ................................................................................................... 20
FIGURES
Figure 1: Real GDP growth .................................................................................................
Figure 2: Overall fiscal balance ...........................................................................................
Figure 3: Poverty Incidence.................................................................................................
Figure 4: Inequality and extreme poverty ............................................................................

3
3
4
4

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Paraguay Country Partnership Strategy Results Matrix
Annex 2: Paraguay CAS Completion Report
Annex 3 : CPS Preparation Process
Annex 4: Governance and Anticorruption in Paraguay
Annex 5: Meeting the Millennium Development Goals
Annex 6: Growth Prospects in Paraguay
Annex 7: Principal Areas o f Assistance by Donor
Annex A2: Paraguay at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC & M I G A Program
Annex B4: Paraguay - Summary o f Nonlending Services
Annex B6: Paraguay - Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Paraguay - Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Paraguay - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Paraguay - Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
MAP
IBRD 33464

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The victory o f Fernando Lugo, a former Catholic bishop, in the presidential elections o f
April 20, 2008 ended 61 years o f Colorado Party dominance. President Lug0 heads a
center-left coalition, the Alianza Para el Cambio (APC), consisting o f a wide array o f
political organizations with a broad ideological base and organizational capacity.
President Lugo’s victory presents an historical opportunity for Paraguay to address
longstanding governance, social and economic challenges and improve the living
standards o f i t s population. Since this i s the first time in recent history that there i s an
alternation o f power in Paraguay, the APC faces important challenges in handling an
administration that has responded for some 60 years to the interests o f a single political
tradition.
O n the economic front, between the years 2004 and 2008 Paraguay experienced i t s
strongest economic expansion since the 1970s. GDP grew b y 4.3 percent in 2006, by 6.8
percent in 2007 but slowed down to 5.8 percent in 2008 due to the global economic crisis.
This strong economic performance resulted in a decline in overall poverty levels, from
46.4 percent in 2002 to 35.6 percent in 2007. Extreme poverty has also fallen from 21.7
percent to 19.4 percent during the same period, although it increased between 2006 and
2007 due to rising food prices and lack o f spillovers from growth to formal employment.
At the same time, Paraguay has a very unequal distribution o f income and assets. For
instance, in Paraguay the richest 10 percent o f the population accounts for almost half o f
total income, while 2 percent o f the agricultural establishments (about 6,400 farms)
occupy almost 82 percent o f the agriculturally exploited land (namely, 20 million o f the
24 million hectares in agricultural use, or one-half o f Paraguay’s total area o f 40 million
hectares).
The year 2008 started o f f buoyantly, but the global crisis hit in October mainly through a
sharp reduction in trade (commodity export orders and prices f e l l and there was also a
sharp reduction in re-exports due to the depreciation o f the Brazilian Real) and workers’
remmittances. The guarani rapidly lost a quarter o f i t s value, and trade-related economic
activity slowed down (i.e., all agricultural activities and the majority o f services including
re-exports). The financial sector, mostly comprising foreign-owned banks, has
strengthened i t s capital position over the past years but, as the impact o f the global
economic crisis deepens, credit quality may deteriorate due to a slow down in the real
sector. The outlook for 2009 and beyond i s very uncertain due to the sharp fall in external
demand for agricultural products, possible further declines in commodity prices, domestic
uncertainty, and the impact o f these developments on revenue collection. However, the
authorities’ Medium Term Macroeconomic Framework i s appropriate, and includes fiscal
measures equivalent to about 2 percent o f GDP this year to buffer the economy from the
global slowdown.
O n the social front, the administration inherited a backlog in social services due to a
combination o f lack o f funds and weak state institutions, which has resulted in l o w
standards o f provision o f basic services. In the water and sanitation area, about 61
percent o f the population has access to drinkable water (only 49 percent in rural areas),
while only 8 percent o f the population has access to network sanitation. O n the education
1

front, participation rates are among the lowest in Latin America (especially in secondary
education where desertion rates are high). The health sector i s confronted with very high
maternal mortality rates, while according to World Health Organization (WHO), 39
percent o f the population does not have access to health services. Addressing these needs
in a sustainable manner w i l l require not only financial resources but also strengthening
state institutions that are responsible for delivering basic services.
In the longer term, Paraguay faces the challenge o f diversifying i t s economy away from
commodity exports to provide more rewarding jobs to citizens that today depend on low
paying activities in the rural and informal sectors. In addition, Paraguay needs to
strengthen the ability o f the State to provide social and economic services by collecting
additional resources in an equitable and non-distortionary manner.

The Lug0 administration has developed a program for Paraguay to transition to a modern
economy based on improving governance and reducing corruption, addressing the needs
o f vulnerable groups and restoring growth in light o f the global crisis. The elements o f
the Government’s program are embodied in the Ministry o f Finance Economic and Social
Plan for 2008-2013 and in the recently announced Anti-Crisis Strategy. Three major
cross -cutting and inter-related themes -governance, poverty and growth - emerge from
the Plan, and clear measures and objectives have been identified for each o f these themes.
The Bank concurs with the Government’s assessment o f the challenges ahead and has
developed the proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) to support the Government’s
objectives in each o f the cross-cutting themes with specific interventions as follows:

Governance. The Bank intends to increase i t s assistance to Paraguay in the
governance area, which i s consistent with the utmost priority the authorities have
assigned to this area, as well as with the recent selection o f Paraguay as a pilot for the
implementation o f the Bank’s Governance and Anticorruption (GAC) Strategy. In
particular, the Bank w i l l assist the authorities in obtaining concrete results in their
anticorruption drive by supporting their adherence to the WB/UNODC Stolen Asset
Recovery Initiative (StAR). The Bank will further support efforts by the authorities to
increase the effectiveness o f public investments, by assisting with the development
and implementation o f a governance framework for all Bank projects. Very
importantly, the Bank w i l l support the Government’s objective to initiate a sustainable
process for building state institutions through a series o f programmatic Development
Policy Loans (DPL) focusing on improving accountability o f public enterprises,
initiating civil service reform, and strengthening the internal control system for the
public administration.
Poverty. In close collaboration with other donors, the Bank w i l l support the
authorities to: (i)
enhance social safety nets through non lending activities that could
be followed by an investment operation; (ii)develop participatory mechanisms for
land reform through an investment project; (iii)improve the quality o f secondary
education and establishing a scholarship program for Paraguayans to receive
education abroad to improve the quality o f future civil servants and leaders through
lending; (iv) expand the coverage o f water supply and sanitation through the recently
approved Water and Sanitation Modernization Project; (v) reduce vulnerabilities for
the rural poor through the Sustainable Rural Development Project; and (vi) expand
11

community-based activities to cover the poorest 40 districts and vulnerable
populations in metropolitan Asuncion through an Additional Financing for the
Community Development Project. In addition, the DPL programmatic series w i l l
include a component to help safeguard and improve key social programs.
Growth and Environment. To help mitigate the effects o f the global crisis on the
economy and the poor, the Bank w i l l provide quick disbursing funds through the
proposed DPLs. In addition, the Bank w i l l help Paraguay make better use o f i t s
valuable hydroelectric assets perhaps through an investment project to expand the
power transmission grid. The IFC w i l l seek opportunities to engage with the private
sector in transport, financial services and, more broadly, in supporting small and
medium enterprises including through technical assistance to reduce barriers to doing
business. In addition, the Bank w i l l support Government’s efforts to better define the
longer term growth and diversification agenda through analytical work and nonreimbursable TA.

The new administration and i t s shared vision offer an historic opportunity for the
international community to engage more deeply with Paraguay and contribute to achieve
the country’s development goals. While carefully monitoring the underlying risks, the
Bank and the IFC w i l l aim at stepping up their involvement in Paraguay under the CPS,
both with lending and non-lending activities. The overall support would be selective, Le.,
focused on a few projects in areas where the World Bank has clear advantage and
expertise, and where proven implementation capacity exist. The Bank w i l l work closely
with others in the international community, as it w i l l continue to be a minor player in
Paraguay.

The CPS provides for an indicative lending envelope o f US$500 million over the five
year period through FY13. This amount implies a moderate increase in Bank exposure,
which i s justified by the challenges the country i s facing and by the strategic role the
Bank has been called upon to play in helping Paraguay achieve progress in the agreed
focus areas. The proposed program w i l l be front loaded, with about forty percent o f the
indicative envelope devoted to programmatic development policy lending and an
additional 13 percent in pre-identified investment lending. This w i l l help protect delivery
o f basic services to vulnerable populations and infrastructure investment from the adverse
impact o f the global financial crisis. The remainder o f the Bank’s indicative lending
program has not been pre-identified, so as to maintain flexibility during implementation
given the overall country and program risks, the changing nature o f Paraguay’s needs,
and the uncertainties surrounding the global financial crisis. There is, however, an
ongoing dialogue between the Bank and the authorities concerning possible lending for
financing safety nets and electricity.
The indicative envelope w i l l be reviewed at the time o f the CPS Progress Report, taking
into account the level o f absorption and implementation capacity, the Government’s
ability to maintain a sound macroeconomic framework, the progress made in the
governance, poverty and growth agenda and the Bank’s lending capacity at that time.
The CPS Progress Report w i l l hence provide an opportunity to carry out a comprehensive
assessment o f the progress achieved in CPS implementation and reassess priorities.

...

111

There are a number o f implementation challenges for the Government’s Program that
could put the CPS implementation at risk:
Creating a legislative consensus on the development agenda. Since the APC lacks a
majority in Congress, the authorities will need to make a special effort to forge a
consensus beyond i t s constituency to ensure that i t s economic and social agenda has
legislative backing. Since in Paraguay, Government implemented grants and loans
have to be individually approved by Congress outside the budget process, such
consensus should also encompass a political agreement on the role o f external
assistance in supporting the country’s development efforts. This would avoid past
controversies that blocked the approval o f external grants and loans, including those
from the Bank.
Starting a process to improve key elements of the public administration. Since
implementation capacity in line ministries and agencies i s weak, transforming policy
objectives into concrete outcomes i s a challenge. Planning, financial management,
and monitoring and evaluation capacity across ministries and agencies needs to be
strengthened in the short- to medium-term. At the same time, opportunities for civil
society to oversee, sponsor, or even implement Government’s activities will need to
be further developed.
An additional risk relates to Paraguay’s ability to address i t s fragile social situation.
Despite high economic growth in recent years, Paraguay s t i l l exhibits high levels o f
exclusion and poverty. In particular, poor social infrastructure and deficient provision o f
basic services are fueling social tensions. In addition, the high concentration o f land
ownership has escalated tensions among large landowners and small-scale and landless
farmers. The political transition has generated expectations that urgent social needs will
be met. There i s a significant risk that the authorities may not be able to meet such
expectations, thus engendering broad social discontent and eventually eroding popular
support for the Lug0 Administration.

Moreover, the less than favorable environment presents an important challenge for
Paraguay. GDP i s expected to fall in 2009 by -0.5 percent and may only recover
marginally in 2010. However, the extent and magnitude o f the global financial crisis i s
s t i l l unknown, and so i s the magnitude o f i t s impact on Paraguay. In this respect, there i s
a risk that the monetary and fiscal policies envisaged in the Government’s anti-crisis plan
may not be sufficient to partially cushion the economy from the impact o f the crisis.
The Bank will carefully monitor the above mentioned risks (as well as fiduciary and
program-specific risks) while monitoring the delivery o f expected outcomes under each
of the three cross-cutting themes identified earlier (see Results Matrix in Annex 1). The
steps that the authorities expect to take with Bank’s support, although small and specific,
are expected to help reach a critical turning point in the country’s development agenda.

iv

I. INTRODUCTION

1.
The election o f Fernando Lug0 as President o f the Republic presents Paraguay
with an opportunity to tackle more effectively i t s long standing poverty and governance
issues. Whether Paraguay will be able to take advantage o f this opportunity w i l l largely
depend upon Paraguay establishing a broad consensus on development challenges and
vision, and the Government’s ability to implement change. The Bank’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) has been developed with the objective o f assisting the new
authorities weather the global economic crisis and implement reforms that lead to
tangible results in strategic development areas, with a clear priority on issues pertaining
to governance, poverty alleviation and growth. The CPS also intends to assist Paraguay
develop a consensus on the policy agenda to address long-standing structural challenges
through programmatic analytical work and i t s dissemination. The proposed strategy will
cover the term o f President Lugo, C Y 2009 to C Y 2013. Recognizing that Paraguay’s
economy i s subject to domestic and external shocks, and that the political environment i s
volatile, the proposed CPS provides an indicative program while it incorporates
flexibility to ensure responsiveness to the county’s needs, particularly those derived from
the international financial crisis.

11. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT
A.

POLITICALCONTEXT

2.
The victory o f Fernando Lugo, a former Catholic bishop, in the presidential
elections o f April 20, 2008 ended 61 years o f Colorado Party dominance. With a margin
o f 10 percentage points above the Colorado candidate, the victory gave President Lug0
and his movement strong legitimacy. His reputation as an anti-corruption champion and
his life-long commitment to the poor confer President Lug0 a strong moral authority.
3.
President Lug0 heads a center-left coalition, the Alianza Para el Cambio (APC),
which includes one main political party (the Liberals), three minor ones, and about one
dozen political movements that span a wide range o f ideologies. Despite the range o f
political views, the coalition shares key priorities that include a deep commitment to
improve governance and government institutions and to reduce corruption, to improve the
livelihoods and opportunities for the poor in a sustainable fashion, to strengthen the
management o f the country’s vast hydroelectric resources, and to consolidate the
country’s democratic process. The APC has also adopted a pragmatic economic policy
stance based on maintaining sound macroeconomic management and a balanced view o f
the role o f the State, while safeguarding the environment. Lugo’s victory, therefore,
opens up an opportunity for Paraguay to start tackling i t s long-standing governance,
corruption, and poverty issues.

4.
While the economy i s likely to benefit from this stance, and from reduced levels
o f corruption, significant economic policy reforms may be slow in materializing. This i s
not only because addressing the backlog o f needed structural reforms i s a daunting task in
itself, but also because the Government faces an uphill battle in obtaining the passage o f
reforms in Congress, where i t does not have a solid working majority.
1

B.

ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENTS
AND OUTLOOK

Economic Recovery (2003-2007)

5.

Over the past four years, Paraguay experienced its biggest economic
expansion since the 1970s. Paraguay went through a period o f economic stagnation in
the late 1990s and early 2000s, as a result o f terms o f trade shocks, a domestic banking
crisis and the economic turbulence in the Southern Cone. Between 2003 and 2005,
supported b y a successful stabilization program, the macroeconomic situation turned
around, with growth averaging 3.6 percent during this period. Growth momentum
continued in later years, supported by a favorable external environment and continuation
o f sound economic policies. GDP grew by 4.3 percent in 2006 and by an exuberant 6.8
percent in 2007 (Figure 1), and was set to continue at a comparable pace in both 2008 and
2009.
The resurgence of growth was driven by agriculture and the recovery in
6.
domestic demand. Between 2003 and 2007 agricultural production grew 7 percent per
year on average. Related sectors, such as beef processing (accounted for under
manufacturing) were also very dynamic, advancing 6 percent on average during the same
period. While these sectors were driven mainly by the upsurge in commodity prices,
productivity gains also played a r o l e - e v e n in the livestock sector which has traditionally
been based on extensive practices. Also dynamic were assembling industries and
communications, which grew on average more than 8 percent each during the period.
And with free private sector entry into ports and shipments, logistics also started to catch
up, although large opportunities remain for further efficiency gains. On the expenditure
side, consumption growth accounted for 82 percent o f total GDP growth between 2003
and 2007, with investment accounting for the rest. Investment was particularly dynamic
in the latter years o f the period when it expanded very sharply. O n the external front,
import growth fully offset export growth during this period.
Table 1 : Paraguay Key Economic Indicators, 2002-2007
Real GDP growth (%)
CPI inflation (eop, % change)
Central government fiscal balance (% o f GDP)
Current account (YOo f GDP)
Public debt (YOo f GDP) I/
incl. Central Bank debt ( % o f GDP)

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

0.0
14.6
-3.2
1.8
56.7
58.5

3.8
9.3
-0.4
2.3
57.7
61.1

4.1
2.8
1.6
2.1
44.5
48.1

2.9
9.9
0.8
0.2
38.5
43.7

4.3
12.5
0.5
0.8
30.5
37.5

6.8
6.0
1.o
0.2
22.2
30.9

I / Includes domestic and exlernalpublic debt of the non-financialpublic sector.
Source: Ministry of Finance and Central Bank of Paraguay. See Annex Table 86.

7.
Prudent fiscal management from 2003 through 2007 contributed to the
recovery. The restoration o f macroeconomic stability, which re-established confidence
and pushed up consumption, was anchored in a tight fiscal stance. But fiscal policy also
contributed to recovery in an indirect manner: tax policy reforms, coupled with
improvements in tax and customs administrations, brought about an important first wave

2

o f economic formalization. While tax revenues remain significantly below comparable
middle income countries, these reforms supported a stabilization o f revenues around 18
percent o f GDP. Since the level o f primary spending was maintained at about 16-17
percent o f GDP, it was possible to achieve an average primary surplus o f 2 percent of
GDP. Most state-owned enterprises (SOEs) were also kept under a strict budget
constraint2 (Figure 2), although that was achieved primarily through cuts in investment
rather than in recurrent spending. The resulting overall fiscal surplus for the consolidated
government was about 1 percent o f GDP for the 2004-07 period.
8.
Public debt levels are low. Sound fiscal policies, lower interest rates, higher
growth, and the strengthened guarani all contributed to a fall in public debt. The public
debt to GDP ratio, including domestic debt by both the government and the Central Bank
o f Paraguay (BCP), decreased rapidly from 59 percent o f GDP in 2002 to around 30
percent in 2007.3 The interest rate profile o f central government external debt i s highly
favorable: 33 percent has a fixed interest rate (most o f i t at 3 percent or less), while the
remaining two-thirds that carries variable interest rates i s owed to multilateral and
bilateral creditors. The Government has observed a policy o f providing no explicit
sovereign guarantees to state-owned enterprises since 2003. To counterbalance the effects
o f the global financial crisis on the economy, the Ministry o f Finance plans to run small
primary deficits over the next few years. With limited domestic options to issue longterm debt,4 the government i s likely to increase i t s external borrowing from multilateral
and bilateral partners in the short- and medium-term.
Figure 1: Real GDP growth
(annual YOchange)

Figure 2: Overall fiscal balance
(Yo o f GDP)
1

2
1
0

-1
-2
-3
-4

2001

2002

2003

-.c Central Admnistration

Source: Central Bank of Paraguay.

2004

-

2005
*r-

State-%

2008

2007

ned Enterprises

Source: Ministerto de Hacienda.

9.
Paraguay’s external position strengthened. The current account went from a
deficit o f 4.1 percent in 2001 to a peak surplus o f 2.3 percent in 2003, mainly on the
.~
2003 and 2007, the surplus remained
account o f stronger export p e r f ~ r m a n c e Between
I

This i s the case for instance o f commerce in informatics, a key activity in Ciudad del Este (the country’s
second largest city and a well known center for intermediating goods from abroad mainly to the more
protected market o f Brazil under a legal tourist regime).
An exception to this i s PETROPAR, the state-owned petroleum company, which has run up a significant
stock o f commercial debt due to subsidization o f diesel fuel consumption.
3
While the government’s debt has been falling rapidly in recent years, the Central Bank accumulated debt
through the issuance o f significant amounts o f sterilization bills.
4
Domestic bonds are o f short maturity (less than 3 years) and are primarily bought by domestic banks.
The CBPY does not have a system to register re-exports through Ciudad del Este, and the country’s two
large hydropower (co-owned with Brazil and Argentina, respectively) are treated as foreign companies.
These make the BOP (and National Accounts) statistics very unreliable in Paraguay.

3

between roughly 1 and 2 percent o f GDP. Paraguay did not run large current account
surpluses when commodity prices increased in 2006 and 2007 because imports started to
boom due to strong domestic demand and high o i l pricesS6The strong rise in international
commodities prices that began in 2007 resulted in a surge in foreign exchange inflows,
supported also by higher levels o f worker's remittances, and by increased corporate
social responsibilities and infrastructure spending o f the two hydroelectric plants. These
put pressure on the guarani to appreciate from Gs.5,300/US$ at the end o f 2006 to below
Gs.4,000/US$ in mid-2008. Between June 2007 and June 2008, the Central Bank
accumulated US$1 billion in international reserves in an effort to moderate this
appreciation.
10.
Despite progress in recent years, poverty and inequality remain high relative
to other Latin American countries. Incidence o f moderate poverty peaked at 46 percent
in 2002, and has since then fallen to 35.6 percent. Extreme poverty has fallen from 21.7
to 19.4 percent during the same period (Figure 3). This fall suggests that the recent
economic growth has been to some extent pro-poor. Despite this positive trend, poverty
levels are now only back at the levels observed in the late 1990s, and extreme poverty
increased between 2005 and 2007. The increase was due to rising food prices and lack o f
spillovers from growth into poverty, suggesting that poverty i s a structural problem that
requires a concerted and holistic effort to be addressed effectively. Moreover, the nature
o f poverty appears to have changed: while moderate poverty used to be a primarily rural
phenomenon, it has recently become more prevalent in urban areas.' Paraguay also
suffers from high income inequality. A t 0.55, Paraguay's Gini coefficient o f income
distribution i s the fourth highest in Latin America (Figure 4). The richest 10 percent o f
the population accounts for between 42 and 47 percent o f total income. Similarly,
inequality in land distribution i s among the highest in the world. Reducing poverty and
inequality in a sustained manner thus remains an important challenge, particularly with
regards to access to productive assets, possibilities to accumulate human capital, and
labor market opportunities.

*

::.'
500 -

35 0
30

25 0

-

200

.

150 100

,

......'

..,m . . . . ,' B . , ,

.'.....

" B . . , '1.

,

-

Figure 4: Inequality and extreme poverty
ERill
CObrnb,.

P.W"lY
P.".rn.

WM.
Gualimala

'. .

Ecuador
U C

Chh
Hlrko

El S.N.dor

50.
00,

14 9
13 0
32
13 8

t&."D".

Zmmwan R

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

-

PWU

,

RIU

CG
".

M0.M".

37
51

UWW."
".,"ZWh

0400

0420

0440

0460

0480

0500

0 520

0 540

0580

0580

iource: Staflcalculations based on household survey data.

6

The economy i s depends fully on oil imports, but has abundant hydroelectric production capacity.
This trend will need to be confirmed once the revised methodology for calculating poverty i s in place. The
World Bank i s providing technical assistance to update the methodology.
7

4

Macroeconomic outlook and the effects of the global crisis

11.
The year 2008 started o f f buoyantly, but the global crisis hit in October. This
was mainly through a sharp reduction in trade (commodity export orders and prices f e l l
and there was also a sharp reduction in re-exports due to the depreciation o f the Brazilian
Real) and workers’ remmittances. The guarani rapidly lost a quarter o f i t s value, and
trade-related economic activity slowed down (Le,, all agricultural activities and the
majority o f services including re-exports). The financial sector, mostly comprising
foreign-owned banks, has strengthened i t s capital position over the past years but, as the
impact o f the global economic crisis deepens, credit quality may deteriorate due to a slow
down in the real sector. GDP growth which advanced at rates higher than 7 percent midyear, closed the year at 5.8 percent due to the global crisis.
12.
The administration’s medium-term macroeconomic policy framework i s
appropriate. The administration i s committed to continue implementing prudent
macroeconomic policies, and i s focusing on fiscal sustainability, improved
competitiveness and equitable growth - as laid out in the Government’s Strategic
Economic and Social Plan for 2008-13 presented in September 2008. A key objective o f
the Plan i s to create fiscal space, particularly on the revenue side, to allocate more
resources to priority social and investment programs, especially those aimed at reducing
poverty. In order to achieve this, the Government i s committed to maintaining inflation
within single digits, gradually increasing tax collections through better administration and
the introduction o f new taxes, and improving the efficiency o f public spending. The plan
also envisages important reforms to SOEs that would help address the contingent
liabilities that these companies represent.8
13.
At the same time, the less favorable external environment presents an
important challenge. As a small open economy with limited access to international
financial markets, Paraguay w i l l be affected by the ongoing financial crisis primarily on
the real side. Falling commodities prices and a decline in global demand for Paraguay’s
exports represent the main transmission channels and will especially affect the agriculture
sector, a key driver o f growth. Prices for soy beans, one o f Paraguay’s main exports,
have already fallen 42 percent since their peak in July 2008, and there are indications that
demand for meat in some o f Paraguay’s main export markets has begun to decline. As a
result, Paraguay’s current account f e l l into deficit (estimated around 2.2 percent o f GDP)
in 2008 for the first time since 2001. The economy w i l l also be affected by the fall in
remittances and foreign direct investment, although the impact i s expected to be less
pronounced than in the case o f trade.’
The effects o f the financial crisis on Paraguay’s currency have already
14.
become apparent. Mirroring the devaluation o f the Brazilian real as investors fled to
safety, the guarani depreciated sharply in recent months. In October the Central Bank
reversed intervention policy course and began to sell international reserves in order to
8

Due to the lack o f audited information and the fact that many liabilities are in the form of short-term
commercial credits, these contingent liabilities cannot currently be reliably quantified.
9
In 2007, remittances (as recorded in the balance of payments) reached U S 2 0 0 million (approximately 2%
o f GDP), while foreign direct investment amounted to approximately US$240 million.

5

contain the slide in the guarani (Figure 5). While this intervention led to a loss o f US$460
million in international reserves, at US$2.8 billion (or 3.7 months o f imports) the Central
Bank's foreign exchange cushion remains comfortable and well above historical levels.

15.
The deterioration in the real sector presents a significant risk for the
financial sector. Since the last banking crisis in the early 2000s, the level o f financial
intermediation has improved, and the banking sector i s generally considered to be sound,
with an average capital adequacy ratio well above the regulatory floor o f 10 percent."
Dollarization remains high but i s on a declining trend: 39 percent o f bank credits to the
private sector are now denominated in U S dollars, down from 47 percent in 2005. But
credit grew fast between mid-2007 and end-2008, raising some concerns over the quality
o f banks' credit portfolio. The expected economic slowdown will be more acute in
agriculture (which accounts for 26 percent o f outstanding bank credit) and the services
sector. This may lead to an increase in non-performing loans, which currently account for
1 percent o f banks' loan portfolio. Preliminary estimates suggest that banks could
withstand a moderate to significant deterioration in their loan portfolio. To deal with
higher credit risk, commercial banks are already reducing and becoming more cautious in
their lending, which may restrict liquidity.
16.
The outlook for the non-banking financial sector i s uncertain. Cooperatives
account for 30 percent o f total loans in the system and for 16 percent o f total deposits,
and they are interlinked with the banking system through loans and deposits. Unlike
banks, financial cooperatives fall under the supervision o f the National Institute o f
Cooperatives (INCOOP), whose supervision capacity i s s t i l l weak. In addition, the
regulations applied to cooperatives are weaker than those applied to the banking sector.
Information about the sector i s scarce, outdated and o f uncertain reliability, making it
difficult to adequately assess potential risks.
17.
I n light o f the evident deceleration o f the economy, the Government has
announced its intention to implement an economic anti-crisis plan for 2009." The
plan consists o f a set o f monetary and fiscal policies: (i)injection o f liquidity into the
financial system; (ii)fiscal expansion to safeguard priority social and investment
spending programs; (iii)
provision o f financing to the productive sectors o f the economy
through a second-tier state-owned development agency Agencia Financiera para el
Desarrollo (AFD); and (iv) mobilization o f financing to ensure adequate resources for the
plan, including approximately US$300 million in fast-disbursing IF1 loans and lines o f
credit to the AFD. The fiscal measures are equivalent to about 2 percent o f GDP and are
targeted to buffer the economy from the global slowdown. The CPS will contribute to
this plan through the existing portfolio and the series o f development policy loans.

IO

Even though the regulatory floor i s above the Basel minimum o f 8 percent o f risk-weighted assets, it
should be noted that Paraguay does not fully observe international capital adequacy standards. As a
consequence, the ratio presented here tends to exaggerate the capital cushion o f banks.
' I The plan i s formally called Plan de Reactivacidn Econdmica.

6

Medium-term outlook

18.
Under a baseline scenario, economic growth will fall from an estimated 5.8
percent in 2008 to -0.5 percent in 2009, in line with lower global and regional
economic growth forecasts. On the supply side, the growth reduction w i l l come
primarily from a fall in agricultural production, caused by the decrease in soy and other
agricultural commodity prices as well as reduced yields due to the ongoing severe
drought. Activity in other sectors, especially livestock production and re-exports o f
manufactured goods i s also projected to slow down significantly. On the demand side,
there w i l l be a significant slowdown in private consumption and investment. In the
medium term, as global growth recovers, Paraguay i s expected to converge towards a
long-term growth rate o f 4.5 percent (Table 2). Key assumptions for this baseline
scenario are (i)the successful implementation o f the Government’s priority spending
programs in 2009 and the maintenance o f higher levels o f public investment; (ii)the
recovery in global economic growth beginning in 2010; and (iii)a gradual recovery in
commodity prices.
19.
The authorities foresee running a counter-cyclical fiscal policy to counteract
the effects o f the crisis. In the short term, tax collections will decrease as a result o f
lower imports. Revenue from V A T on imports, import duties, and excises (representing
55 percent o f total tax revenues) w i l l fall, as w i l l corporate income tax revenue from
export and import related activities. Expenditures in 2009 are expected to increase from
the very low levels observed in 2008, due to moderate public sector salary increases, an
expansion o f social safety net programs and, most importantly, a significant increase in
capital spending. Even though the public sector’s ability to execute non-wage spending,
particularly investments, remains low, there i s a backlog o f infrastructure programs
initiated in 2008 that i s expected to be implemented within the coming months. Overall,
the base case scenario foresees a primary deficit o f 1 percent o f GDP for 2009 and an
overall deficit close to 2 percent o f GDP, which will gradually improve as tax revenue
recovers. Although Paraguay’s fiscal position provides some headroom for
countercyclical fiscal policy, the country w i l l need to rely on an estimated US$300
million financial package o f support from i t s international development partners,
including the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the Andean
Development Corporation (CAF) and the Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA), to ensure sufficient resources, especially if tax revenues are affected more
strongly than currently expected. The authorities have not requested support from the
IMF, but have agreed to bi-annual Article I V missions.
Paraguay’s debt burden and debt servicing indicators are manageable under
20.
reasonable assumptions. Under the baseline scenario, public debt levels w i l l remain
sustainable. Public debt’* would increase from 19.3 percent o f GDP in 2008 to 22.9
percent in 2010, and would then gradually fall to 19.1 percent by 2013. Under an
alternative scenario in which the primary deficit expected for 2009 i s maintained
throughout the projection period, debt levels would be higher at 22.5 percent in 2013.
Sensitivity analyses suggest that the main vulnerabilities o f Paraguay’s debt position stem
from low growth and a depreciation in the exchange rate, as a large share o f public debt i s

’’Excluding BCP debt.
7

denominated in foreign currency. Contingent liabilities - such as a major recapitalization
o f banks, financial cooperatives or SOEs - also pose important risks. If the economy
grew on average 1.6 percentage points less than under the baseline scenario throughout
the projection period, debt levels would reach 23.4 percent by 2013. A contingent
liability shock or a 30 percent real depreciation over the baseline would have a much
greater impact on debt levels, pushing them up to 29 percent by the end o f the projection
period.13
Table 2: Medium term macroeconomic outlook (baseline)
2008
Real GDP growth (%)
CPI inflation (eop, % change)
Central government fiscal balance (% o f GDP)
Current account (% o f GDP)
Public debt (% o f GDP) I/

58
75
28

-2 2
I9 3

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

-0
6
-1
-3
21

15
63
-1 7
-2 9
22 9

30
60
-1 2
-2 6
21 0

45
60
-0 7
-2 8
20 7

45
60
-0 3
-2 9
19 I

5
7
6
1
8

I Yon-financial public sector excl Central Bank Source Government and staffprojections based on RMSM-X model

21.
There are important downside risks to the baseline scenario. An even more
pronounced fall in commodity prices and a stronger reduction in Paraguay’s agricultural
production resulting from the ongoing drought and/or a credit squeeze would have
important effects on growth. Thus, a stress-test was performed on the base case with the
following assumptions: (i)commodity prices for soy fall by an additional 10 percentage
points in 2009 compared to the baseline scenario and continue depressed in 2010; (ii)
production o f soy, wheat, corn and meat falls an additional 10 percentage points; (iii)
remittances from Paraguayan workers abroad fall by 50 percent. Under this scenario, to
the economy would s h r i n k by 2 percent and the current account deficit would increase to
5 percent o f GDP in 2009 and 2010 (Table 3). l4 The exchange rate depreciation would be
even more pronounced than under the baseline scenario. This simulation suggests that
Paraguay’s vulnerability to external factors i s very high.
Table 3: Alternative macroeconomic scenario
2009
201 0
201 1
Real GDP growth (%)
CPI inflation (eop, % change)
Central government fiscal balance (% o f GDP)
Current account (% o f GDP)

-2.0
6.5
-2.2
-5.0

0.5
6.2
-1.6
-4.9

2.5
6.0
-1.4
-4.4

2012

2013

3 .O
6.0
-0.9
-3.2

4.5
6.0
-0.4
-2.7

Source: Staffprojections based on RMSM-X model

C.

STRUCTURAL CHALLENGES

22.
Paraguay faces a number o f important long-term developmental challenges which
the new administration will have to address in order to transform Paraguay into a
transparent, equitable and dynamic economy. These challenges broadly relate to three
areas - governance, poverty, and growth and environment.

o f this DSA are included in Annex 6 o f the DPL document.
The impact on the current account i s dampened somewhat because imports w i l l fall in response to lower
domestic demand.
l 3 Details

l4

8

Governance

23.
The public sector exhibits significant weaknesses in the formulation and
implementation o f public policies as well as in the delivery o f public services. Underlying
these findings i s the fact that Paraguay’s institutions have suffered from limited political
competition, poor checks and balances among state powers and limited accountability
and transparency in the public administration (Annex 2 provides a broader description o f
governance). The recent presidential elections are a clear indication that a healthier and
more competitive political process i s starting to get underway, with the expectation o f
improved public debate and social consensus building. There are also increasing efforts
in the public administration to offset the systemic practices o f patronage and corruption.
The initial steps towards the development o f a professional c i v i l service i s an important
goal in this process.
24.
Paraguay faces very serious challenges in the area o f corruption control.
According to a recent as~essment,’~the perception o f corruption i s high in all
governmental institutions, including state-owned enterprises and the two binational
enterprises. According to this report, a high degree o f corruption i s associated with
campaign finance, and public contracts or concessions, although large scale corruption
also thrives in contraband and other illicit activities. Corruption also affects multiple
aspects o f daily life. These findings corroborate the outcome o f an earlier survey
conducted b y a publidprivate Council established to promote integrity in 2005 (the
“Consejo Impulsor del Sistema Nacional de Integridad-CISNI“).
Poverty

25.
In spite o f recent improvements in poverty and income inequality rates since
2002, both welfare measures remain high relative to the rest o f Latin America (see para.
10). In addition, current official data shows no progress in poverty reduction when seen
over the last decade. Part o f income inequality originates through inequalities in access to
basic opportunities among children. It i s therefore useful to focus social and economic
policies o n the need to increase opportunities for all. A World Bank study o n the equality
o f opportunities in access to basic services among children in Latin America shows that,
although Paraguay i s close to having universal access to electricity, it s t i l l has a long road
ahead in education and water and sanitation. The study suggests Paraguay needs to focus
on increasing coverage rates and, in particular, o n paying close attention to the coverage
rates o f disadvantaged groups.

26.
Social Exclusion. Indeed, Paraguay faces tremendous challenges in terms o f
social exclusion that condition many o f the high expectations that the new Government
faces as i t enters office. In the rural areas, as noted above, Paraguay has the highest
concentration o f land ownership in the world. While significant investments in capital
and land improvements are being made by some o f the large stakeholders,
nonagricultural rural jobs are scarce. Thus, about 24 percent o f the rural population lives
in extreme poverty, and a total o f 35 percent lives below the poverty line overall.

’’

Evaluacion de la Corrupcion - Paraguay; Mimeo by Benjamin Crosby and Laurence Beck from
Management Systems International, July 2008

9

Indigenous people (about 87,000 people nationwide or about 1.7 percent o f the national
population) face particular challenges: in the 4 12 indigenous communities registered
nationwide, only 55 percent o f residents have secure land access (either titled or with title
in process). Only 26 percent o f these communities have their o w n health centers or posts.
In addition, the habitat occupied by many indigenous communities has undergone
deforestation in recent year and consequent environmental degradation, and in many
cases cannot provide the communities with adequate sustenance. As a consequence of
these problems, many peasants and indigenous people have migrated to cities and settled
in marginal zones.

As the rural poor move to urban areas, they face a shortage o f minimum-standard
27.
housing, public services and employment opportunities. In the Asuncion Metropolitan
area alone, some 150,000 people live in 78 informal settlements. Demographically,
Paraguay i s a young country with 2/3 o f the national population below 30 years o f age
and some 36% below 15. One in three Paraguayans between age 7 and 17 works, often in
an ill-defined and insecure environment. According to the 200 1 Integrated Household
Survey, some 38,000 minors between the ages o f 5 and 17 worked as domestic servants
in private homes. Only 3 in 10 poor children between the ages o f 5 and 9 have a national
identity card, a circumstance that limits access to public benefits and programs.
Social Protection. Paraguay features limited risk coverage through participation
28.
in the formal labor market. In addition, despite a decrease in formal unemployment,
underemployment and informality are on the rise. International experience has proven
that well targeted conditional cash transfers are an effective means o f combating extreme
poverty. The most important effort Paraguay has made in this direction i s through the
conditional cash transfers program (TEKOPORA) which was initially introduced in the
poorest areas o f the country. However, program coverage has so far been limited, due to
the large number o f public social programs under implementation which are competing
for limited management and financial resources. In the short-term, therefore, Paraguay
needs to focus on prioritizing social programs, with a view at concentrating i t s resources
on the most effective ones. Moreover, with the projected deceleration o f the economy, a
well targeted set o f social programs will be needed in order to protect the most
vulnerable.
Health. The new Government faces urgent challenges in the health sector,
29.
including high infant and maternal mortality rates, and poor quality and limited access to
health services. Provision o f public health i s inadequate and has suffered persistent
deterioration over the last ten years. Paraguay has also been exposed to epidemics that
affect the population, such as outbreaks o f malaria, dengue, and yellow fever. The
deterioration in health outcomes has occurred despite an increase in Government
spending for health by US$18 per capita in 2007. The l o w impact o f increased public
spending i s attributable to fragmentation in the provision o f public health care between
the Ministry o f Health and the pension and health fund - with a vibrant but often
unregulated network o f private providers filling in numerous gaps. Despite these
overlaps, according to the WHO, almost 40 percent o f the population does not have
access to health services. Overall, public spending focuses substantially on inputs,
particularly human resources, where incentives and tasks are not always well defined.
Finally, the sector i s affected by a significant degree o f politicization.
10

30.
Education. In the last decade, Paraguay’s .education system has made
considerable strides, including an improvement in system coverage at all levels, increases
in the average educational level o f the population, and improvements in the sector’s
internal efficiency. In addition, public expenditure on education (around 4 percent of
GDP) i s one o f the highest in the region. Despite these achievements, participation rates
in Paraguay are among the lowest in the region, especially in secondary education where
desertion rates are high. Therefore, Paraguay needs to carefully evaluate the results of
educational reforms and prepare a program for the near future, which i s the focus of
current efforts by both the Bank and other donors. The medium-term agenda includes,
inter alia, an expansion in the coverage o f middle level education (grades 7-9),
improvements in equity in access to the third cycle o f elementary education and middle
level education, as well as improvements in system efficiency and in educational quality
in view o f increasing coverage.
3 1.
Public Pensions. With only 0.6 percent o f workers in the lowest income quintile
participating in the system, Paraguay i s the country in Latin America with the lowest
coverage and the most inequitable access to pensions. Therefore, in the medium-term,
there i s an urgent need for Government to gradually improve the pension system, with the
objectives o f making the system more uniform and equitable, and o f increasing i t s
coverage.
Growth and Environment

32.
Paraguay’s long run growth performance has been disappointing. GDP per capita
grew by 1?4 percent on average since 1960, but over the past 25 years, GDP per capita
declined by a yearly average o f ?4 percent. The recent growth acceleration between 2004
and 2008, the largest expansion since the 1970s, was welcomed, but sustaining it will be
a challenge due to a number o f weaknesses in the economic structure. While private
investments have contributed to the development o f new products and opened new
markets over the past few years (e.g., beef exports to Israel and Russia, sesame exports to
Japan, stevia exports to the region, and organic sugar to Europe), the export base i s s t i l l
narrow and highly dependent on commodities. The investment in private ports and a
public-private association for animal health has eased some o f the logistics and
certification barriers faced by products such as soy bean and beef. As noted above,
Paraguay has improved education coverage, particularly at the primary level. However,
Paraguay’s economic potential i s s t i l l constrained by weak human and physical capital, as
well as the economic and financial volatility the country has experienced (see Annex 4 on
Growth Prospects).
33.
Agriculture. Beyond the macro trends described above, agriculture in Paraguay i s
a story o f three sectors - a highly productive, mechanized agricultural sector focused on

exports (concentrated on soybeans and beef which together represent about 90 percent o f
registered exports) which exists alongside large extensions s t i l l under-utilized and a large
number o f poorly educated smallholders with little access to effective agricultural
extension services, land and capital. Within small landholders, some are so poor and
deprived o f land, human capital and basic services that they are unlikely to survive
without significant social assistance. Others, however, have had better access to basic
11

services-particularly education-and are slowly forming a small but successful middle
class in rural areas, devoting time to both agricultural and service activities. Among small
landholders, the youth has for the most part migrated to Asuncion or to Argentina, Spain
or the United States.

34.

Transport, Communication and Water. There are a number o f infrastructure
bottlenecks that limit social inclusion o f the poor and the country’s competitiveness as an
exporter. The paved network, although accounting for less than 10 percent o f the overall
road network, connects major trade centers within the country and with Mercosur. The
challenge ahead i s to deploy an appropriate program o f routine maintenance to avoid
losing this key investment. The rural roads network comprises very few all-weather
roads, providing rural communities with limited access to markets and basic social
services. In river-based transportation, the key issue i s the lack o f dredging and signaling,
which imposes excessive logistic costs. This i s currently an unfunded mandate for the
public entity that administers the country’s state ports, Administracidn Nacional de
Navegacidn y Puertos (ANNR), which i s also responsible for regulating private ports.
The ANNR and the Ministry o f Public Works are exploring ways to address this issue,
including the possibility o f unbundling the functions o f ports and waterways regulator
from those o f operating the country’s ports. In addition, the private sector (key river users
such as private ports, barges operators, and load owners) have expressed willingness to
create a public-private partnership that would be responsible for river maintenance and
signaling. In telecommunications, despite a significant liberalization o f the cellular
network, fixed lines and fiber optic cable were until recently under the monopoly o f
Compafiia Paraguaya de Comunicaciones (COPACO), the country’s state-owned
enterprise. This monopolistic situation i s responsible for the very limited penetration o f
broadband internet and lack o f affordable and good quality long-distance dialing. The
new administration has shown a strong commitment to address this issue and, in March
2009, issued a resolution (with World Bank technical support) that opened access to fiber
optic. However, the liberalization o f Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), over which
COPACO s t i l l enjoys a monopoly, i s s t i l l pending. In the water supply and sanitation
sector, with only 61 percent o f the population connected to piped water supply networks
(and only 49 percent in rural areas), service coverage in Paraguay remains low even in
comparison with other lower middle income countries. Only 8 percent o f the national
population has access to piped sanitation.

35.
Business Climate. Paraguay’s overall ranking in the Doing Business indicator
dropped from 108 in 2008 to 115 in 2009, which i s below the average for L A C and for
lower middle income countries. The downward change reflects lower rankings in four
areas: starting a business, registering property, getting credit and trading across borders.
While Paraguay continues to fare comparatively well in the first three areas, the
deterioration in the latter area puts the country in the lowest quartile. Improvements in
ranking were achieved in two areas: closing a business and enforcing contracts, although
Paraguay continues to lag behind comparator countries in both o f these areas. Paraguay’s
poorest performance i s in employing workers, trading across borders, and closing a
business. The country also needs to consolidate i t s 2007 gains in the opening a business
indicator, by modernizing the handling o f relevant transactions by the city o f Asunci6n
and other major cities.
12

36.
Electricity. While Paraguay i s blessed with abundant hydropower generation
capacity, key weaknesses in transmission and distribution hamper the development o f
productive activities in both rural and urban areas, as well as the prospects for formal
exports. While electricity coverage reaches 93.8 percent o f all households (just below the
L A C average o f 94.6 percent), average per capita consumption per year was only 853
kWh, far lower than in Chile or in Brazil. Moreover, system losses are very high and
well above the 13.5 percent weighted average for the L A C region. The authorities are
currently discussing with Brazil possible ways o f making the bilateral treaty on the Itaipu
damn more flexible, thereby allowing Paraguay to better utilize this important asset.
Environment. Paraguay has lost at least 80 percent o f i t s forests over the last 50
37.
years and losses o f 500 hdday occurred between 1966 and 1991. O f the remaining 2
million ha in the Upper Parana Atlantic Forest (UPAF, i.e. forests east o f the Paraguay
River), only an estimated 800,000 are s t i l l considered productive. This i s due to
destructive logging practices that have degraded the forests, and a result o f deforestation
that has fragmented much o f the UPAF into unmanageably small remnant patches. While
deforestation appears to have slowed recently in the east-due both to resource depletion
and some success with a “Zero Deforestation” law-it i s estimated to have increased in
the Arid Chaco, which i s home to 78 percent o f Paraguay’s remaining native forests.
With the right incentives and institutions, however, Paraguay could exploit i t s
comparative advantage in forestry, as rates o f return for key varieties in Paraguay appear
to be higher than in other countries in the Southern Cone. To this end Paraguay started to
promote forest conservation and payments for ecological services. The country has also
started to reform i t s Forest Management Services by granting the institution greater
autonomy.

111.

THE GOVERNMENT’S ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PROGRAM

38.
The new Government’s vision i s based on the need to improve governance and
reduce corruption, address the needs o f vulnerable groups, and restore growth in light o f
the effects o f the international financial crisis. The elements o f a program to achieve
these goals were outlined in various presidential addresses and are now embodied in the
Ministry o f Finance Economic and Social Plan for 2008-2013’6. The Plan i s part o f a
broader Government’s Program that the new administration i s preparing and updating on
the basis o f submissions by the individual Ministries, and has been adjusted in light o f the
global economic crisis (see para. 17).
39.
The main features o f the program can be subsumed into three major cross-cutting
themes below.

P Governance: Strengthening state institutions to improve policy making, public
service provision, and the rule of law. Given past political interference in the
public sector, the emphasis i s on beginning a process to modernize the public
administration through civil service reform and to increase the efficiency and
governance o f state-owned enterprises (where alternatives ranging from
16

See httop:llwww.haoienda.gov.py?web-hacienda/index.php?c=2
18

13

appointing capable managers and re-launching investment programs,
recapitalization and private public partnerships are being considered).

to

>

Poverty: Improving investments i n the social sectors andfocusing public spending
on the extreme poor. While the emphasis will be on employment generation and
poverty mitigation, a comprehensive agrarian reform and a reorganization o f the
cadastre will also be launched. While the specifics o f this reform have not been
developed, which has created uncertainty among investors, the authorities are
addressing the long standing issue o f lack o f opportunities to access land by the
rural poor.

>

Growth and Environment: Fostering growth with a focus on employment
generation and on improving income distribution, without destabilizing the
country’s macroeconomic framework or the environment. In light o f the global
financial crisis, the emphasis i s on continuing sustainable macroeconomic policies
and maintaining stability in the financial sector, while investing in basic public
infrastructure, education and in improving the business climate to increase
productivity and competitiveness. Also important for the administration i s to
better use the potential o f the two hydro power plants that the country co-owns
with Brazil and Argentina, respectively.

40.
Assessment. The new Government has established an agenda to initiate a
transition to a transparent, equitable and dynamic economy that will benefit from the
support o f the international community. The Bank agrees that substantial progress in the
three cross-cutting themes and in the sub-areas identified in the Economic and Social
Plan, i s needed for Paraguay to reach a turning point in i t s development agenda. The CPS
will therefore focus on assisting the authorities achieve progress in selected aspects o f the
three cross-cutting themes underpinning future Bank and IFC support. However, the
Bank i s a relatively small donor in Paraguay and, as such, it will be highly selective in i t s
interventions with the expectation that these will be complementary to the efforts
undertaken with the assistance o f other international donors.
IV.

LESSONS FROM PREVIOUS ENGAGEMENT - THE FY03-07 CAS

41.
Starting in 2003, the Bank initiated a process o f reengagement with Paraguay
after a long period o f inactivity. The Bank responded quickly and positively to the
professional management demonstrated b y the new administration upon i t s coming to
office in April 2003 by preparing a new CAS for FY03-07 (subsequently extended to
FY08). The program included an Economic Recovery Loan for US$30Mto help address
the financial crisis and meet significant budgetary shortfalls at the time. The CAS also
envisaged engagement in new sectors such as health, roads, pensions and social
protection, and provided support in preparing a strong package o f financial sector
reforms.
42.
Implementation o f the CAS faced significant difficulties and fell short o f the
expected outcomes. Only US$146.5 million in loans were approved for the extended
CAS period FY04-08 out o f the base case envelope o f US$325 million. Only five loans

14

reached effectiveness and two additional projects were approved but are s t i l l not
effective”. With the benefit o f hindsight, implementation o f the CAS program would
have been stronger if the Bank had better taken into account various factors including:
0

0

The complexity o f governance issues in Paraguay, particularly as they pertain to
the relationship between the executive and the legislature. The constitutional
requirement that Congress approves each loan individually after Board approval
led to substantial delays in the effectiveness o f projects, and ultimately to the
cancellations o f the Maternal Child Basic Health Insurance Project, as well as the
Strengthening o f the Ministry o f Finance Technical Assistance loan and the
Financial Sector Technical Assistance loan.
The limited capacity o f the public administration to plan, execute and monitor
public investment operations. The establishment o f quality project teams
constitutes a serious challenge that affects project implementation, particularly at
the initial stages. There is, overall, a low level o f professional capacity in the
public sector and it has taken a prolonged Bank involvement in sectors such as
rural water supply and education to build strong counterpart teams. In some
cases, less intricate project design would have reduced the difficulties
encountered in building implementation capacity.
Limited Bank presence on the ground has implied a lack o f continuity in policy
dialogue, and an inability to provide timely preparation or implementation
support. To address this problem, project management was in some cases
outsourced to external agencies, which was clearly unsustainable. The field office
i s being gradually strengthened to ensure there i s sufficient local professional
capacity to respond to implementation challenges.

43.
The success o f the A A A program was also lower than expected. A 2007 QAG
assessment found the AAA program moderately satisfactory overall, and highly
satisfactory in terms o f i t s strategic relevance, coherence and integration. However, the
program was rated only moderately satisfactory in terms o f i t s likely impact, local
participation, consultation and dissemination. Nonetheless, some AAA products were
deemed useful by the Government (e.g., the FY08 Integrated Fiduciary Assessment, the
FY08 Education Sector Study, and the FY08 and FY03 Policy Notes) and others added
long lasting value to the development agenda in Paraguay as, for example, the FY07
Land Tax study, which i s being used by the Lug0 administration as a key input into i t s
own tax policy reform program. Since the QAG panel report was issued, the Bank has
increased i t s emphasis on client participation to improve ownership and has enhanced
collaboration with other donors.
44.
Many lessons can be drawn from the experience o f the 2003 CAS, including the
need to invest in building broad project ownership during the preparation stage, and that
o f leveraging technical assistance with grant funding to the extent possible. In
conclusion, the 2003 CAS served as a tool for the Bank to maintain a seat at the policy
table and had a limited but s t i l l significant development impact. The shortfall in the
delivery o f the lending program limited the degree o f partnership and risk-sharing
17

The Sustainable Rural Development Project for US37 million and the Water and Sanitation
Modernization Project for US$63 million

15

arrangements that lending instruments would have provided. Despite Bank’s efforts to
re-engage under the 2003 CAS, the Bank’s presence in Paraguay remains limited. The
outcomes and recommendations o f the CAS Completion Report which carefully reviewed
the 2003-2008 program (see Annex 5) formed part o f the dialogue with Government and
informed the design o f this CPS.

V. THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A.

45.
This CPS proposes an increased engagement o f the Bank as Paraguay initiates a
new phase in i t s efforts to surmount significant and entrenched development challenges.
The process ahead will most probably be difficult and there are no guarantees o f success.
However, the new Administration’s key strategic priorities constitute a solid basis for the
Bank to focus i t s support. In the near term, there i s also strong coincidence in the
approach proposed by the authorities to mitigate the effects o f the global financial crisis,
which will also be an important focus o f our partnership. The Bank’s proposed strategy
also seeks to further strengthen the efforts undertaken b y civil society to transform
Paraguay into a more democratic, equitable and prosperous society. In this context, and
in order to ensure an effective response to the emerging needs arising from changing
domestic and external conditions, the Bank proposes to focus on the following strategic
initiatives:
0

Supporting ongoing efforts to introduce changes in the country’s governance
structure around a series o f Programmatic Development Policy Loans (DPLs)
which will also provide the backbone o f Bank’s financial assistance over the
coming years. While the focus o f the DPLs will be on the new administration’s
state modernization agenda, it i s expected that the DPLs will underpin the
governance reform efforts o f the Lug0 Administration. Parallel knowledge
assistance on broader governance issues will be addressed in the context o f the
G A C initiative discussed below. The first operation in the programmatic DPLs
series i s being presented to the Board together with this CPS.
Supporting the poverty alleviation efforts, mostly through the Bank’s continued
engagement in investment lending and knowledge assistance in the human
development and social infrastructure areas. The Bank’s past involvement in the
education, rural development, safety nets and water and sanitation sectors will
provide the basis for an expanded and more effective dialogue with the Lug0
Administration on poverty alleviation and increased social equity. A new area for
Bank involvement will be enhancing land access through participatory
mechanisms, where the Bank can provide relevant international experience and
which i s a top priority in the Government’s reform program. As part o f the
poverty alleviation agenda, a Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project
was approved recently, building upon a long tradition o f Bank’s successful
involvement in the sector.

16

0

Supporting the Government’s sustainable growth agenda with direct I F C
assistance to private enterprises in the areas o f trade financing and transport, as
well as increased private sector involvement in the infrastructure sector. In
addition, the Bank will seek to provide assistance to the new administration in
some infrastructure investments, particularly in the areas o f transport and
electricity that are deemed to have significant potential for enhancing growth.

The proposed program, while clearly delineated, has some built-in flexibility to
allow the Government to make adjustments as the economic, political, and social
environment evolves. Therefore, only the initial two years o f the CPS indicative program
will be identified, with the outer years left open in order to accommodate future‘needs
(see Box 1 below for key program parameters).

46.

Box 1: Key Parameters o f the Country Partnership StratePy
An average indicative Bank lending program o f about $100 million per year up to a total of $500
million i s projected for the five year period FY09-FY13. The CPS, however, does not propose a
detailed lending program beyond FY 10, with the identified program being about U S 2 6 5 million, or 53
percent o f the entire envelope.
There i s a clear recognition of the significant risks involved in the implementation o f the proposed
strategy. The political environment, the country’s implementation capacity and uncertain external
conditions constitute significant factors that could end up adversely affecting the viability of the
proposed assistance scenario. Thus, it i s proposed that intensive monitoring and flexibility be
considered critical elements o f CPS implementation. The Bank will engage the authorities periodically
in order to assess progress and will be prepared to change the proposed partnership terms if adverse
conditions would make the proposed strategy impracticable.
Up to 40 percent o f the CPS envelope (Le. $200 million) will be in the form o f Programmatic
Development Policy Loans (DPLs) in the governance area. The indicative program also includes about
US$65 million in identified investment lending in the three thematic areas (see Table 4 below).
Non-lending support will also be provided in the form of AAA, grants and fee for services, when
appropriate, in support o f government priorities and the lending program.
The indicative envelope o f $500 million over the FY09-FY 13 period would increase Bank exposure in
US dollar terms, but still leaving the Bank a relatively minor creditor. The indicative envelope would be
revised at the time o f the CPS Progress Report in the third year o f implementation, subject to the level
o f absorption, implementation capacity and Government’s ability to maintain a sound macroeconomic
framework, as well as the Bank’s lending capacity at that time.
At the proposed lending levels, and under the macro-framework presented in Annex Table B6, total
IBRD debt i s expected to remain below 3 percent o f GDP and converge to 14 percent o f total public
debt over the medium term. Debt service to the World Bank i s expected to represent less than 2 percent
o f total fiscal revenues.
The Bank plans to collaborate closely with IFC, particularly in sectors that could enhance growth or
offer new opportunities to increase value added, such as finances, infrastructure, SME development,
agribusiness and trade.

The CPS was prepared on the basis of extensive consultations with the
Government, the international community and civil society. This broad consultative
process helped shape the CPS and informed i t s design (see Annex 6). In addition, during
implementation o f the CPS, a special effort will be made to strengthen donor
coordination for all activities, moving from coordination to joint activities and missions
and even to seeking formal co-financing for our projects.

47.

17

Program Objectives and Instruments

48.
The Bank Group’s program w i l l seek to make a selective contribution towards
helping the Government meet i t s broad objectives o f improving governance, reducing
poverty and sustaining growth-both in the short and medium term. Specific targets
identified by the authorities in these areas (and the sub targets associated with Bank’s
assistance) are included in the program matrix. Details on the Bank Groups’ indicative
program by area o f Government action are provided in Table 4 below.
Table 4: Stral

2. Poverty Reduction

1. Governance

-oup Support
3. Sustainable Growth
and Environment

1. Identified Lending:

Grants (underwayhew),
Fee for Services (FFS)
Cost Sharing (CS)

ESW and N L T A

IFC Barge Proiect
(FY09)
IFC Trade Lines (FY09)
Electricity (FY I O , $tbd)
I

DPL 111 ( Y12, $50m)
Land Access (FY I O ,
$35M)
Education (FYIO, $30M)
Safety Nets operation
IFY 1 I.thd)
DFID Gov (FY08,
JSDF Indigenous Land
$0,2M)
(FY08.$ I.7m)
Payments -FFS
JSDF Indigenous
(FY08.$0,3M)
Communities. (FY08,
$1.6m)
StAR program (FY09)
IFC Business Enabling
Environment (CS)
(FY09)
GAC support (to be
mobiIized)
IDF for Congress (FYIO,
$0.4M)
TFSCB Statistics (FY09,
$0.1M )
TFSCB Statistics (FY I O ,
$0.4M)
Quick Response Note
Quick Response Note
(Civil society FY I O )
(tbd)
Programmatic. Public
Programmatic Poverty
N L T A (FY I O )
Sector. NLTA (FYIO)
Programmatic. Safety.
Net & Labor (FY I O )
Health Service Delivery
(FY I O )

Participatory Policy Notes (FY

Source: Annex Tables B3 and B4

18

”

Environmental. Services.
(FY08,0,2M)
IFC Business Enabling
Environment (CS)
(FY09)
GEF for Biodiversity.
(FYIO. $4.5M)

Quick Response Note
(tbd)
rn IFC Airports (FY09)
Financial Sector N L T A
(FY I O )
rn Programmatic Growth
N L T A (FY I O )
rn State o f the Environment.
ESW (FYIO)
B Municipal service ESW
(FYIO)
B IFC Business Enabling
Environment (FY I O )
rn

Governance

49.
The Lug0 administration i s placing governance at the forefront o f i t s reform
agenda. In particular, President Lugo’s program emphasizes the need to break with past
practices that enabled corruption and to establish a new standard o f governance for the
country based on improved democratic dialogue, increased accountability, transparency
and integrity. Within this overall context, and in line with Paraguay’s recent decision to
become a pilot for the implementation o f the Bank’s GAC strategy, the Bank intends to
significantly increase i t s governance assistance to Paraguay (See Box 2). The GAC
provides a broad framework for the various initiatives through which the Bank w i l l
provide i t s governance assistance to the country. The main expected outcome o f Bank
support in this field w i l l be that the current administration w i l l mark the turning point o f a
credible process through which Paraguay will attain adequate governance standards and
institutional development.
Lending. A series o f three Programmatic Development Policy Loans (DPLs), with a
tentative envelope o f US$ 200 million, w i l l support fiscal management and public
sector reforms, including improved accountability o f public enterprises, civil service
reform and the overhaul o f the internal control system for the public administration.
Technical Assistance for supporting the authorities’ reform efforts i s being provided
by several bilateral donors including the EU, USAID and Japan. In addition, the
DPLs will provide timely budget support to ensure that critical social spending i s not
affected. This program w i l l contribute to the Government plan’s overall objective o f
achieving sustainable and more equitable growth by providing direct support to three
o f i t s areas o f focus: macroeconomic policy, state-owned enterprises and state
modernization. The DPL series i s also designed to assist the Government in i t s
efforts to contribute to the anti-crisis plan from January 2009.
Non-Lending. The Bank’s program w i l l contribute to furthering the governance
agenda through the various GAC initiatives (See Box 2)
Other. Equally important would be to support the Government’s effectiveness
agenda in the area o f service delivery, by incorporating a governance component into
Bank-financed investment operations --building on the successful experience o f the
Roads Maintenance Project, which includes a Governance Action Plan which
supports the supply side o f governance and encourages social participation, control
and accountability.

IFC. The IFC aims to ease the microfinance environment via improved regulation
and a potential expansion in advisory services. In early FY09, the Business Enabling
Environment (BEE) o f LAC’S Advisory Services (AS) Facility visited Paraguay and
presented to the Government and to the private sector experiences in other countries
on simplifying processes for attaining construction and operating licenses. This was
well received and the BEE team i s prepared to work on this topics should the
authorities request it. IFC i s willing to place an investment officer in the World
Bank’s office if their program in Paraguay warrants it.

19

Box 2: GAC in Paraguay
The Paraguay GAC strategic objective i s to establish the Bank as an advisor o f choice for the Government
o f President Lug0 in its mission to develop a viable governance path towards increased social equity,
economic growth and stronger democratic institutions. The Bank recognizes there are important
development partners that have been playing a proactive and substantive role in supporting governance
related activities in Paraguay and the Bank will work in close coordination with them. Building on
previous areas o f involvement, the GAC Pilot seeks to engage the government in a multi- pronged GAC
agenda dealing with:
Broad governance issues where the Bank can play a facilitating role in placing governance as a
priority in the overall public policy agenda. In this area the Bank supported an International
Conference on Governance and Development convened by President Lug0 in August 2008 with the
objective of presenting to the domestic political community relevant international experience in the
handling of governance challenges. The Government has made two additional requests for assistance
in: (i) facilitating the return of stolen assets through the StAR initiative: and (ii)improving the
domestic investigative and sanctioning capacity to handle corruption. Both these activities respond to
specific government needs and enjoy strong ownership by the new administration. The Bank
envisages to take a leading role in both initiatives, while ensuring close coordination with other donors
in the respective fields.
0

0

0

Country fiduciary agenda derived mostly from our recent Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA).
The IFA has provided the analytical basis for a reform agenda aimed at improving transparency and
accountability in key government functions, i.e., public investment planning and implementation, civil
service reform, state enterprise oversight and improved internal and external control mechanisms. This
proposed agenda will be supported by a series o f programmatic DPLs over the next years, together
with a strong effort to coordinate the reform agenda with other development partners providing
technical assistance support in these areas.

An investmentportfolio agenda consisting in the mainstreaming o f all Bank funded operations within
the regular state structure (thus, doing away with PIUs and the outsourcing o f project implementation
to international agencies) and in increasing reliance on country systems in key fiduciary areas. This
agenda faces significant governance challenges, as it has implied phasing out ring fencing
arrangements which were customary in Bank operations and tackling the civil service, organizational
and fiduciary challenges derived from the increased reliance in country systems. In line with this
agenda, the Government has recently issued new civil service rules to attract qualified personnel in the
handling o f internationally funded investment projects.
A sector andproject specific agenda. Starting with the path-breaking Road Maintenance Project, new
operations are expected to develop explicit governance frameworks to deal with governance challenges
in the respective sector. GAC-related incremental preparation budgets have enabled the conduct o f
governance related analytical work in the education, rural and water and sewerage sectors. It i s
expected that new operations in these fields will have a much stronger governance content. One
specific challenge for the rural sector i s the development o f detailed frameworks to introduce increased
transparency and accountability in community driven projects, users’ associations and the broader
communities.

In implementing the GAC, the Bank will seek to mobilize trust funds and other resources which would
allow the country to make progress in the various areas and initiatives.

Poverty

50.
The Government’s broad and ambitious objective o f reducing poverty entails,
inter alia, a reduction in poverty levels through employment creation, an improvement in
social indicators, a decrease in inequality through increased access to public services and
land, and a reduction in the incidence o f child labor. Within these broad objectives, i t i s
20

expected that Bank support will contribute to improving living conditions for the rural
poor through improving access to and the effectiveness o f social programs in education,
water and sanitation, safety nets and access to land (see Annex 5 for country’s indicators
with respect to MDGs).
0

Lending. In the immediate term, and to mitigate the impact o f the global financial
crisis on the vulnerable population, the DPL series i s expected to provide the
resources needed by the Government to maintain the social programs already
included in the 2009 budget. In addition, the proposed additional financing to the
Community Development Project w i l l continue past support to local communities,
and the recently approved Water and Sanitation Modernization Project will support
an expansion in coverage o f water supply and sanitation services. In the mediumterm, the Bank program i s expected to assist the authorities in designing and
implementing a market based land reform through a proposed Land Access and
Administration operation. In addition, a Secondary Education project i s included in
the first two years o f the indicative program under the CPS. I t i s expected that this
project w i l l contribute to improve educational coverage and outcomes, particularly in
the rural areas, and help the authorities establish a scholarship program to develop a
future cadre o f Government officials. The Bank and the authorities are also discussing
possible Bank engagement in expanding safety nets through non-lending activities
that could be followed by an investment operation.
Non-lending. In terms o f AAA, the Bank w i l l continue an active engagement with
the authorities in the poverty area. The successful poverty assessment non-lending
TA, which helped to improve poverty measurements and also carried out, jointly with
local researchers, an analysis o f poverty issues, will be continued. This will be
supported by a programmatic dialogue on safety nets, and on the coverage o f
vulnerable populations through the country’s formal health and pension systems. In
addition, the Bank w i l l continue to mobilize grant funding, including from the Japan
Social Development Fund, to address the needs o f vulnerable groups (two JSDF
grants supporting indigenous groups are currently ongoing).

Sustainable Growth and Environment

51.
The authorities’ key objective i s to foster sustainable growth with a focus on
employment generation and managing better the country’s hydroelectric potential, while
safeguarding macroeconomic stability and the environment. The Bank and IFC w i l l
support this objective through programs for the short- and medium-term. In the shortterm, the focus w i l l be on safeguarding macroeconomic stability and, in particular, on
helping mitigate the effects o f the global financial crisis on economic activity,
employment and poor households by providing quick disbursing funds as part o f the
proposed programmatic DPLs. The IFC’s immediate focus will be on facilitating
financial intermediation and helping the authorities improve the investment climate. The
Bank and IFC w i l l also launch programs for the medium-term aiming at either supporting
interventions that unambiguously enhance growth prospects, or facilitating the internal
dialogue on how best to promote sustainable growth (See Annex 6 on Growth Prospects).
Specific interventions would include:

21

0

Lending. The Bank i s considering to co-finance the medium-term program to
improve the electricity grid, jointly with other potential financiers (such as the
European Investment Bank and, potentially, private sector sources). In addition, there
i s ongoing dialogue on other possible infrastructure interventions (e.g., rural roads,
public ports and airports, and key waterways) but no specific project has been
identified so far. These initiatives will build on the ongoing Road Maintenance
Project which, among others, supports private sector participation in road
maintenance and will aim at increasing access to markets in the rural areas o f San
Pedro and Caguazu (the country’s two poorest departments).
Non-Lending. The Bank will launch a programmatic dialogue on growth related
issues in Paraguay, which will consist o f an exchange o f experiences between
countries in a similar situation, and will lead to the preparation o f short analytical
reports on specific issues, such as the effects o f contraband trade on the economy and
the potential for diversification o f the agro-industry and export businesses away from
soy and beef products. Other donors are expected to be involved in this type o f
analysis, which will look at the big picture, but also focus on sustainable rural
development and on the development o f small cities. Given Paraguay’s financial
sector vulnerability to a potential economic downturn, the Bank will support the
Government’s efforts to monitor these vulnerabilities, and take action to strengthen
supervision when required, through a non-lending TA.

Other. The Government has expressed interest in a country environmental
assessment which would prioritize interventions in a range o f environmental areas
(such as deforestation, water contamination, indoor/outdoor air pollution). The Bank
will further support the environmental agenda through a Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) program, including a US$20m (US$4.5m GEF grant) program to
conserve biodiversity in the Atlantic Forest o f Eastern Paraguay. Looking forward,
Paraguay has yet to commit a significant portion o f i t s Resource Allocation
Framework (RAF) for biodiversity and climate change under GEF-IV. The Bank will
look for opportunities to develop GEF projects, particularly in areas that maximize
synergies with Bank lending. The Bank further supports Paraguay’s participation in
the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) and will seek to mobilize support for
this initiative from a bilateral donor.
IFC. IFC i s renewing i t s engagement with Paraguay. So far this fiscal year, IFC has
committed an additional trade line with a third local bank, and i s pursuing additional
operations with financial institutions focused on SMEs, microfinance and
agribusiness and with a strong presence outside the capital city in order to maximize
reach. As part o f the strategy to improve transport services and trade in Paraguay, IFC
has also committed and disbursed this fiscal year a US $60 million loan to the largest
barge operator on the Parana-Paraguay river system. Further, IFC i s considering
projects in the agribusiness sector, as well as in the cellular telecommunications
sector. Given the need to improve infrastructure in Paraguay, IFC and the Bank will
coordinate closely to identify projects that could be supported by the World Bank
Group. O n the Advisory side, IFC’s pipeline consists o f two projects: one with a
local microfinance institution, helping it to expand i t s services and in turn access to

22

finance, and another one to simplify local regulation in Asuncion to ease the cost o f
doing business for entrepreneurs.
Program Monitoring
52.
Beginning in mid-FY 10, yearly CPS review missions (or program discussions
during the Annual Meetings) will review with the authorities progress made in the
implementation o f the CPS and the proposed lending operations, as well as analytical
work and non-lending activities for the ensuing years, in order to ensure their continued
relevance and jointly agree on the need for changes to the indicative program. The
program will take into account the Government’s needs, i t s absorption and
implementation capacity, as well as integrity and the projects’ perceived impact.

53.
The flexible nature o f the CPS creates a need for clear guidelines as to when and
where - and how intensively- the Bank should be engaged in Paraguay. Because o f
Paraguay’s financial circumstances following the global financial crisis and i t s
development agenda, all future engagement will be demand-driven. However, the Bank
will also ensure that i t s work in Paraguay serves the institution’s broader goals and meets
institutional standards. For this purpose, management will regularly monitor both the
pace o f reforms and the overall macroeconomic environment to ensure that Bank
resources are properly utilized. The Bank will also ensure that governance safeguards are
in place prior to utilizing Bank resources. This will require regular monitoring o f
Paraguay’s reform efforts, particularly in the various aspects that contribute to improving
transparency and governance. Indicators for governance, social needs and millennium
development challenges, and growth will be regularly monitored and benchmarked
against other countries through non-lending work and in collaboration with other
multilateral agencies and bilateral donors.
54.
In addition to monitoring performance indicators, implementation o f Bank
projects will also be closely monitored through bi-annual portfolio reviews, despite the
fact that the portfolio i s currently very small. In addition, the design o f projects classified
as “risky” will include self-regulating triggers which would delay or suspend preparation
in case o f failure to carry out reforms that are fundamental to the project’s success.
55.
The success o f the CPS will be measured in terms o f Paraguay’s ability to take
tangible steps towards addressing the challenges faced under the three areas o f focus (see
paras. 49, 50 and 51) and that the extent to which the Bank Group contributed to these
results. As the program i s demand driven, the continued interest by the Government in
obtaining increased assistance form the Bank would be an indication that the Bank i s
being responsive to the country’s assistance needs. Finally, the Government’s ability to
mobilize effectively the Bank’s financial and technical resources will be the key driver to
the successful implementation o f the CPS.

B.

PORTFOLIO

56.
The Bank’s portfolio in Paraguay i s small, consisting o f two projects under
implementation (the Road Maintenance Project for US$74 million approved in FY07, and
23

the Secondary Education Project for US$24 million approved in F Y 2004), and three
projects awaiting effectiveness pending Parliamentary approval (the US$37.5 million
Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development Project approved in FY08, the US$9
million additional financing for Community Development Project, also approved in
FY08, and the Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project)'*. Overall, the
portfolio i s considered satisfactory, as indicated by the satisfactory rating o f the two
projects under implementation and the two projects which have recently closed (the
initial phase o f the Community Development project and the Fourth Rural Water Supply
Project). However, the two project awaiting effectiveness for over six months have been
downgraded to unsatisfactory status given delays in their approval by Parliament.
57.
From the beginning o f 2006, the Government and the Bank made a strong effort
to improve portfolio performance in a context o f high fiduciary risk. Particular focus was
placed on institutional aspects o f operations, ensuring not only fiduciary compliance but
also capacity building. A systematic financial management and procurement assessment
o f the portfolio i s carried out on a regular basis. In addition, the SEPA (Sistema de
Ejecucibn de Planes de Adquisiciones) i s expected to be introduced as the portfolio
grows in size to ensure greater transparency in the procurement process. The system has
been presented to the Government and i s currently being implemented by the Road
Maintenance Project. It w i l l be subsequently implemented by the Sustainable Agriculture
and Rural Development Project and the additional financing for the Community
Development Project as soon as they become effective. The expectation looking forward
i s to continue deepening this effort in particular in the design o f new operations.

58.
However, the main challenge to portfolio performance continues to be posed by
extensive delays in obtaining Congressional approval o f new projects, as in Paraguay all
externally funded loans and grants require Congressional approval on a case by case basis
outside o f the budget process. The Executive i s committed to increase the flow o f
information to Parliament on donor funded projects and the Bank w i l l support these
efforts by ensuring that information on planned Bank funded projects i s readily and
widely available However, since major improvements are needed in the institutional
processes whereby the Executive and the Legislative branches approve external
assistance, which are also at times politicized, this issue will continue to pose serious
consequences for the predictability and level o f development assistance.
59.
Progress in portfolio management was accompanied by positive steps towards
strengthening financial management. The 2006 budget law prohibited the use o f
outsourcing in the implementation o f new projects. This w i l l initiate a strong effort to
strengthen state structures for the management o f investment projects. In addition, an
important tax and customs reform was initiated in 2004, and technical improvements to
the budget process were implemented in the areas o f financial planning, cash
management, and budget accounting. With the support o f the IDB and the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), the Comptroller General o f the
Republic has been strengthened, which has contributed to some improvement in the
external audit function. Despite these efforts, external audit s t i l l exhibits considerable

'*

This project was almost unanimously approved by the upper chamber o f Congress on March 26,2009,
but awaits approval by the lower chamber.

24

weaknesses, including the limited effectiveness o f follow-up on audit recommendations.
The Government i s also initiating reforms o f the internal audit function (Auditoria
General del Poder Ejecutivo, AGPE); nonetheless, AGPE’s current institutional capacity
i s s t i l l not sufficiently developed to allow it to carry out i t s duties effectively. In
procurement, modern legislation has been recently adopted. This, together with the
creation o f the General Directorate for Public Procurement and the development o f a
public procurement system, has strengthened transparency.

60.
Despite these accomplishments and the commitment o f the new Government to
improve public financial management and the accountability and control environment,
substantial challenges remain for both the authorities and the donor community. In the
areas o f financial management and control, the initiatives undertaken are too recent to
show significant results and need to be monitored. More efforts are required to strengthen
control agencies. The Bank w i l l continue i t s dialogue with the authorities during the CPS
period in order to identify opportunities to assist the Government in planning and
implementing reforms for improving public financial management and accountability.
This w i l l be carried out by expanding non-project fiduciary work and by identifying
opportunities for providing support through grant funding.
61.

IFC. During the last CAS period, IFC committed and fully disbursed US $15

million to finance the expansion o f a cellular telecommunication company. In FY08, IFC
extended two trade lines o f US $5 million each to two local financial institutions with the
goal o f strengthening the financial sector while expanding access to finance for exporters.

C.

IBRD FINANCIALPRODUCTS
AND SERVICES

62.
IBRD offers a full array o f financing and risk management products, which could
provide flexibility to Paraguay in managing i t s debt, including the ability to change the
financial characteristics o f existing and future loans as to better manage financial risks
relating to currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility. Within this
context, Paraguay may want to consider engaging staff o f the World Bank’s Treasury to
become fully aware o f the flexibility, depth and breadth o f IBRD’s full menu o f banking
products and services, including IBRD’s technical assistance in designing and
implementing a broad strategy for public debt management aimed at reducing both
market risks and overall costs o f funding.

IBRD recently introduced a new pricing structure that makes IBRD loans more
63.
competitive for Paraguay. Furthermore, maturity o f IBRD loans was recently extended,
allowing for maturities o f up to 30 years. This combination o f pricing and extended
maturities should be very attractive to the Government o f Paraguay as it pursues i t s own
developmental agenda throughout the new CPS period.
D.

DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS

64.
A large number o f international organization and bilateral donors are active in
Paraguay. Paraguay, however, lacks a formal aid coordination mechanism and, up to
recently, donor coordination has taken place largely on an ad hoc basis. Since the

25

appointment o f President Lugo, the Government has made concerted efforts to take the
lead in coordinating donor support, and the donor community now meets regularly,
jointly with Government counterparts, to identify a common strategy in support of the
new administration. Efforts notwithstanding, Paraguay’s weak financial and institutional
capacity provides the ground for a donor-driven set o f investment programs. Through the
proposed CPS, the Bank will support the Government’s efforts to assume the leading role
in reviewing investment programs and particularly in deciding which projects to include
in the indicative program for the latter part o f the CPS period.

65.
In the past, the Bank has maintained an active dialogue with other international
organization, including the IADB, and key bilateral donors, including the United States
and Japan. In addition, the Bank has been in close consultations with the I M F team,
which carries out bi-annual Article I V consultations after the country successfully
completed three successive arrangements, and has maintained close ties with the IFC,
particularly as it plans to step up i t s involvement in Paraguay over the coming years. The
Bank has also coordinated with other relevant donors at the sectoral level and at the level
of individual projects. For example, the Bank has engaged very closely with key partners
in the policy areas covered by the DPL, including tax system, public sector financial
control, expenditure management and human resources management. Table 5 below
provides details on key donors’ assistance programs and Bank collaborative efforts. For
details on principal areas o f assistance by donor, see Annex 7.

26

Table 5 : IV in Development Partners by Area of Focus
Inter-American
Development Bank
(current loans and
grants portfolio)

Japan International
Cooperation Agency
and Japanese Bank
for International
Cooperation

Ongoing and/or Planned Support
93 programs (24 sovereign-guaranteed loans, 6 non sovereign
guaranteed loans, 40 technical cooperation grants, 17 FOMIN
9
operations, and 6 small productive grants) totaling U S 7 16M in
commitments, o f which US$474M undisbursed.
The 2009 program amounts to US$366,6M. It includes a PBL to
improve the public administration (US$SOM), a road project
(US$65,6M), a rural sanitation project (US$48M) and a liquidity
facility for growth sustainability (US$ZOOM). Technical
cooperation and FOMIN is programmed to be behveen US$9M
and $10M.
.JlCA priority areas include -Over the 2002-2006 period annual support from JICA has been in
Poverty Reduction,
the range of JAF'Ji1.6-2.1 billion (or about US$15.6-2l.lmillion),
which has also been maintained for more recent years. Specific
including human
support included Technical Cooperation Projects to help:
development and income
improvement for small
Poverty. Medical Education, Mental Health, Small Cooperatives
farmers
in the Southeastern Paraguay.
Economic Competitiveness
Growth. Agricultural Technology Center, Quality and
for Growth
Productivity Center, and Improvement of Social Infrastructure.
Improve of the Public
Governance. Strengthening of the Civil Service and, starting last
Administration and Good
FY, Local Government Capacity Building.
Governance
1 MERCOSUR. Regional Cooperation on Animal Health, Impact
MERCOSUR
of Tariff Unification on Paraguay, Tourism.
Environment. Starting last FY, Decentralizationin Environment
Conservation of the
Environment and
Management, Solid Waste Management.
sustainable development
Support also includes studies on Integrated Rural Development for
Small Farmers; and Civil Society Initiatives, including productive
.JlCA (recently merged with activities for low income women.
-JBIC's most recent project supports the construction of the lguazu
JBIC) i s also providing
hydropower station (JAPY.21.4billion or US$215 Million)
support through investment
-JBIC also supported a feasibility study for export corridors in the
xojects
Western and Eastern areas of Paraguay (completed, loan request in
process) and a feasibility study for water supply in the
metropolitan area of Ciudad del Este (March 2009)
. In December 2007 Paraguay - Pre-2007 supporl:
md the EU signed a MoU on 1 Poverty Reduction via general budget support(€28M
:ooperation for 2007-13 for
committed €14M disbursed, 7 to be disbursed in 2009)
31 17 million in grants
supporting two sectors:
- Support on the Dec 2007 MOU:
:ducation and economic
Education. Sectoral budget support (first financing agreement
integration. It builds on
of 54M€ pending signature). Prevision of a first €lOM
ingoing support for the
disbursement in 2009
>overnment's poverty
1 Integration. Project approach. first financing agreement of €
,eduction strategy. - The EU
6M pending signature.
ias two programs of
- TA:
rechnical Assistance under
1 Governance: State Reform (€.6M)
mplementation on growth
ind governance
1 Growth: Competitiveness (E13M)
' Furthermore, the EU
supports a number of social
- Civil Society: 25 contracts in 2009 in areas such as'
sector initiatives implemented 1 Agro-Ecological Production
hrough civil society,
Strengthening of Peasant and Indigenous Communities (support
imounting to about € 7M.
for the legalization of land distributions)
' Paraguay also benefits from
Fight Against Poverty, Education and Literacy (Teaching for
TA and cooperation from the
Adults)
2U-MERCOSUR, and EU1 Civil Society Participation and Human rights.
>AC programs
The US program focuses on
I"Threshold Program under the Millennium Challenge Account
:conomic growth and social
focused on fighting corruption, financial management, judiciary
ustice, while fighting
system, customs, and formalization ($34.6M completed in 2008)
:orruption, narcotics and
* 2ndThreshold Program approved, focusing on anti-corruption in
)ther forms of illegality that
law enforcement, customs, healthcare and judicial sectors
indermine national
($30.3M)
ievelopment
1 Debt for Nature Swap ($7.4M)
1 Democracy and civil society Programs
Peace Corps program
Support for competitiveness and formalization through Paraguay
Vende and other initiatives
1 OPICKitibank have a program supporting SMEs ($95M).
Key Areas of Focus
Governance
Poverty and inclusion
Growth and
Competitiveness

1

-

European Union

USARJSAID

27

Collaboration with the Bank
Progress in harmonizing
fiduciary arrangements
1 Consultations and joint
meetings with counterparts
on the Education Project and
DPL programs
Joint ESW Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment

Consultations on civil service
reform and agriculture
1 Joint outputs for previous
pensionkafety nets work
(including joint missions)
Possibly formal or informal
co-financing arrangement for
DPL
1

Joint ESW for the Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment
1 Joint Missionhleetings on
Education program
Continuous team
consultation to ensure
synergies
1

.

Continuous team
consultation to ensure
synergies
1 Close coordination on DPL
and Integrated Fiduciary
Assessment

E.

EXPECTED
RESULTS
OF THE CPS

66.

Indicative outcomes and results indicators are presented in the annexed CPS
Results Matrix. Expected CPS outcomes as indicated in the Matrix will be further
refined as the needed information becomes available, and are therefore subject to change.
These changes will be reflected in the CPS Progress Report which will be prepared at the
end o f the third year o f CPS implementation. The CPS Progress Report will take stock of
program implementation at mid-term and the revised indicators will reflect the status of
program implementation at that stage. A Client Survey will also be carried out at the time
o f preparation o f the CPS Progress Report.

VI.

RISKS

67.
Notwithstanding Paraguay’s economic expansion and strong performance over
the past four years, a number o f important risks must be acknowledged. Some o f these
are external risks, others are country related risks, and we will only address those risks
that could affect the delivery o f the program under the CPS.
68.

Political and Governance Risks. The minority hold o f the APC coalition in the
Legislative and i t s limited government experience may negatively impact on the
Government’s ability to formulate and implement i t s development agenda.

This may have two operational consequences for the Bank’s program and, more
generally, for all programs o f external assistance. First, the preparation o f new projects
might take longer than expected while consensus i s being reached among Government
and stakeholders. While in some sectors, such as education, a well defined sectoral
strategy i s already in place, other projects are more likely to suffer preparation delays,
such as land redistribution. The Bank will seek to carry out non-lending activities in
areas o f strategic priority for the authorities to help clarify options and unify views. In
addition, project preparation should set as a critical priority the development o f consensus
and ownership o f specific investment initiatives. Second, there i s also a risk that even if
there i s consensus o n a sector strategy, a highly fragmented Congress may fail to approve
new investments (with Bank’s or other donors’ support) once these have been prepared.
To mitigate such risk, the Bank will continue to increase the knowledge available to the
various stakeholders. A Communication and Governance grant will be implemented to
help strengthen the communication skills o f both the Government and the executing
agencies. Despite these efforts, this risk i s assessed as high, since the current institutional
environment i s conducive to suboptimal decision making in this area.
69.

70.
Social Risks. Despite high economic growth and advances in employment, the
social situation i s fragile, given the high levels o f exclusion in the country. The lack o f
housing and social services, as well as the recent increases in food prices, are fueling
tensions in the urban areas. In the regions, the high concentration o f land ownership has
escalated tensions among large landowners and poor small-scale farmers and landless
peasants. The political transition has generated high expectations, particularly among the
poor, that urgent social needs will be met and the new Government i s expected to
implement social emergency measures. There i s therefore a social risk associated with the
28

authorities not being able to deliver on their program as quickly as the public expects, or
in a manner that meets expectations. This could engender social discontent leading to
lack o f support for the Government. Despite the fact that much o f the Bank’s and other
partners’ programs are geared to help improve social conditions in the short and mediumterm, the social risk i s assessed as high.
71.
Fiduciary Risk. The ineffectiveness o f the control system, together with the
inefficiency o f the budget process and the lack o f fiscal transparency, are the main
challenges Paraguay faces in procurement and financial management. These
shortcomings, coupled with Paraguay’s underlying political and institutional weaknesses,
are particularly harmful to the smooth implementation o f donor funded operations. As
public sector investment depends crucially on IFIs and bilateral donors’ lending and
grants, continued weakness o f the fiduciary environment would seriously undermine the
implementation o f the Government’s program. The Bank w i l l ensure close supervision o f
the program under implementation over the CPS period. The new administration’s strong
commitment towards improving the integrity environment and the actions that it plans to
undertake in the near future -including those under the Programmatic DPL-should lead
towards a gradual improvement o f fiduciary conditions in the country. In the meanwhile,
the fiduciary risk i s assessed as high.

72.
External Shocks and Natural Disasters. Paraguay i s highly vulnerable to further
deceleration o f the world economy, and additional setbacks in international prices and
demand for the country’s export products. A sustained drop in growth could also affect
the credit quality o f the domestic financial system, and may particularly affect financial
cooperatives. In addition, although not likely in the short to medium term, supply shocks
related to higher international oil prices could become a drag on the economy. Lastly,
Paraguay’s economic activity i s highly prone to natural disasters such as fires, droughts
and floods. The Bank w i l l help address the risks through flexibility in i t s program,
thereby allowing resources to be redirected quickly towards areas o f need during the CPS
implementation period.’’ Also, in the past, the Bank has made available to the authorities
o f the treasury services it offers to help the country navigate external shocks. A future
area o f engagement may consist, precisely, in a more active use o f those services.
Continued prudent economic management w i l l be critical to reduce the likelihood and
impact o f such shocks. The risk associated with external shocks and natural disasters i s
assessed as high.

19

Other donors are actively helping Paraguay develop its natural disaster response capacity.

29

-

N

C

f

Y

'p

c

.

I-

. .

.

.

. .

.

.

.

.

I.

.

I.

.

.

d
.-e
.-

.-8

-k
3

$

.-e
5
L
M

.-

E
co

Annex 2
Page 1 o f 27

FINAL DRAFT
February I S , 2009

PARAGUAY: CAS Completion Report
Date o f CAS: November 26,2003: Report No. 27341-PA
Period covered by the CAS Completion Report: FY04-FY08
CAS Completion Report completed by: Frank Eanvaker, Consultant, September 2008

Summary
This document evaluates the achievement o f CAS objectives in Paraguay together with the respective contributions o f the
Government and the Bank.
The 2003 CAS was prepared at a time when Paraguay was emerging from a long period o f economic decline and deepening
poverty. After President Nicador Duarte Frutos was elected in April 2003 he espoused a far-reaching agenda of structural
and policy reforms aimed at correcting fiscal imbalances, fostering growth and reducing poverty. At the same time, he
sought to restore confidence in Government and encourage greater civic participation.
The Bank responded positively and promptly by preparing a CAS based upon discussions with the new administration.
Following upon a long period o f low Bank activity in Paraguay and l i t t l e lending, the CAS was structured in terms of reengagement. I t proposed a strong program o f lending and AAA for the CAS period FY04-07. I t was later on decided not to
extend the CAS period to FY08 through a Progress Report, but rather to wait for the new administration to take office in
order to synchronize the CSP period with the electoral cycle and design a new CSP which more adequately reflected the new
administration’s priotrities
The operational re-engagement o f the Bank under the FY04-07 CAS began with an Economic Recovery SAL (ERL) that
was presented to the Board in December 2003 along with the CAS. The ERL successfully provided financial support for the
Government’s short- and medium-term action program in the areas of fiscal stabilization, deficit reduction, taxation,, public
administration. financial sector reform, pension reform and the fight against corruption. Results in terms o f renewed
economic growth and poverty reduction exceeded the targets o f the CAS.
The CAS envisaged substantial additional ad.justment lending in the financial sector but that had to be scaled back because
the financial sector reform agenda did not move forward on as broad a front as expected. At the same time, differences
emerged between the executive and the legislature which made it difficult for the Government to get Congressional approval
for external loans as required by the national constitution. As a result, some Bank loans were withdrawn or cancelled before
loan signingieffectiveness. O f the 13 lending operations envisaged in the base-case CAS scenario only four were approved
and became effective.
I t i s now clear that the CAS overestimated the prospects for Bank lending under a new administration and actual lending fell
far short o f the CAS program. Nevertheless, the Bank was able to re-engage effectively with Paraguay. Even when projects
were dropped, withdrawn or cancelled the Bank was able to achieve positive results i n helping the reform agenda move
forward with other instruments such as grant financing and analytic work. Project preparation work also contributed directly
to progress with the Government’s reform agenda, particularly in areas such as financial management and budgeting.
The program o f AAA envisaged in the 2003 CAS was effectively delivered. An assessment o f AAA in Paraguay by a QAG
panel concluded that the program was highly satisfactory in terms o f its strategic relevance to the issues confronting
Paraguay. I n many cases analytic work was undertaken in cooperation with other international agencies including the IMF,
the I D B and the European Union. I t has served to advance and enhance the policy dialogue with the Government. As a
result, the Bank and Paraguay are now well placed to move ahead further with a broad-based policy dialogue backed by
selective lending operations strategically targeted at areas where the Bank can contribute most effectively to foster growth
and reduce poverty.

Annex 2
Page 2 o f 27

I. INTRODUCTION

1.
The FY04-07 Country Assistance Strategy for Paraguay was written at a time when
the outlook for Paraguay appeared brighter than it had for many years past. The country
was emerging from a long period o f economic stagnation during which time income per
capita (according to the World Bank Atlas methodology) had fallen from US$1,8 I O in 1998
to US$1,170 in 2002 and 46 percent of the population had fallen below the poverty line.
Poor economic performance had been exacerbated by declining world prices for soybean
and cotton exports and by financial turmoil in neighboring countries, including a
devaluation o f the Brazilian currency in 1999 and an economic collapse o f Argentina in
December 200 1.
2.

With the election of President Nicador Duarte Frutos in April 2003, a window of
opportunity was opened for reforms that could arrest and reverse the economic decline of
Paraguay. The new administration espoused a structural reform agenda that focused on
five key areas: (i) correcting fiscal imbalances; (ii) restoring confidence in government;
(iii) fostering economic growth with social equity; (iv) reducing poverty; and (v)
encouraging greater civic participation in government. The Government moved quickly to
build a coalition of support for i t s reform agenda and also sought the support o f the
international financial community. The Bank responded promptly by preparing Policy
Notes that served as a basis for discussions with the Government on critical policy issues.’
Following those discussions the Bank also prepared a CAS that was presented to the Board
together with an Economic Recovery SAL in December 2003 - only four months after the
new administration took office. In parallel to those efforts, the Government reached an
agreement with the IMF on a 15 month stand-by arrangement. Other international and
bilateral financial institutions, including the IDB, were also forthcoming in extending
support.

11. PARAGUAY’S NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS

3.

The Government clearly explained i t s development strategy in a letter of
development policy dated November 19, 2003 and delivered to the Bank in the context of
an Economic Recovery SAL. Additional and more detailed information on economic and
financial policies were contained in a Letter o f Intent dated December 5, 2003 and
delivered to the IMF in the context of a 15 month stand-by agreement.

4.
In its letter of development policy the Government candidly acknowledged that many
years o f economic stagnation had exacerbated poverty and insecurity in Paraguay. It also
acknowledged serious shortcomings in the ability o f the Government itself to provide basic
infrastructure and social services. The situation called for a radical change in the country’s
development model and, in articulating the vision, objectives and strategic guidelines for a
medium-term program o f action, the Government identified four strategic objectives.
5.
The first strategic objective was to restore confidence in the State and its
representatives. To that end, the Government undertook to modernize the public
administration, make it more efficient, more transparent and less prone to corruption. In
particular, state institutions were to operate within a clearly defined rules-based framework
and their performance would be assessed on the basis of results.

’ “Policy Options for the New Administration”

Report No. 25894-PA; June 6, 2003

Annex 2
Page 3 o f 27

6.
A second strategic objective was to foster an active participation of the citizenry in
building democratic institutions. In that context, the Government would seek to involve
civic society in the processes o f policy formulation and program implementation. The
country’s “social capital” would be enhanced by strengthening the institutional framework
o f citizen cooperation.

7.

A third strategic objective was to revitalize economic growth and employment by
investing in physical and human capital within the context of a sound macroeconomic
framework. The need to strengthen financial sector institutions and restore sound
management to fiscal and monetary policy was clearly understood. In particular, there was
an urgent need to regain control o f the public finances and place them on a basis that would
be sustainable in the long-term.

8.

The fourth strategic objective was to fight poverty, corruption and insecurity.
Programs o f basic health care, and education were to be strengthened and extended to
sections o f the population that were underserved. Likewise, basic infrastructure services
including low-income housing were to be provided to lower-income communities.

111. THE BANK’S PROGRAM OF SUPPORT

9. The program proposed in the CAS was broadly supportive of the Government’s
program while recognizing that progress would depend critically upon the effectiveness
with which the authorities pursued structural and policy reform. Since there had been a
long period o f low Bank activity in Paraguay and little lending, the CAS was structured in
terms of re-engagement. The proposed strategy took into account a long-history o f
political difficulties and institutional weaknesses that had obstructed reform efforts in the
past. In a situation which was recognized to be “high risk / high reward” the CAS
incorporated clear performance criteria according to which lending would be tied to the
administration’s progress in matters o f economic management and reform. A base case
lending scenario was proposed subject to compliance with key triggers in public
administration, fiscal and financial sector reforms and portfolio implementation. If the
triggers were not met, lending was to revert to a core program o f investments in support of
the millennium development goals. The CAS also included a high case scenario although it
was acknowledged that Paraguay was unlikely to meet the criteria for the high case until
the latter years o f the CAS period at best. Within those constraints, the proposed program
o f Bank assistance was based on four pillars.
10. .The first pillar was to support key structural reforms needed to stabilize the public
finances and strengthen the financial sector. An Economic Recovery SAL was presented to
the Board at the same time as the CAS and it provided financial support commensurate
with an ambitious program o f reforms that the new administration had submitted to
Congress for approval. The intention was that a stable structure of public finances and a
strengthened banking system would bolster the confidence o f private investors and thereby
lay the foundation for sustained economic recovery. Analytic work was also envisaged to
advance the Bank’s dialogue on key economic reforms.
11. A second pillar o f Bank support was to assist the Government in its effort to improve
governance and the transparency o f public administration. I t was envisaged that support
would be provided though a series o f technical assistance loans and grants. In that context,
a loan to transform the Ministry o f Finance into a “ministry o f excellence” by
professionalizing the civil service staff, upgrading internal procedures and controls and by

Annex 2
Page 4 o f 27

reorienting i t s institutional goals towards service to the public, was viewed as a flagship
project to be followed by similar initiatives in other ministries and at other levels o f
government including municipalities which would then be better prepared to accept
responsibility for decentralized public services. I t was envisaged that the operations
program would be supported and complemented by analytic work including a land tax
study and an institutional and governance review.

12. A third pillar o f the CAS was to support sustainable growth by helping to improve the
business environment and thereby foster private sector development. At the same time,
special attention was to be given to increasing production and productivity in rural areas
where the majority o f the poor live. A wide range of initiatives was envisaged, including
investments in rural roads and in water supply and sanitation. Agricultural extension and
natural resource management were to be upgraded and support would be provided for
sustainable forestry management with a view to developing Paraguay’s huge potential for
forestry products.
13. The fourth pillar for Bank support focused on the Government’s program for social
inclusion - closely linked to poverty reduction and rural-based growth. Support was to be
provided for systemic social sector reforms to better target the rural poor including
outreach to the indigenous population. A program of lending and A A A was proposed in
such areas as education reform, maternal and child health insurance, social protection and
pension reform.
IV. CAS OUTCOMES

14. The 2003 CAS was results based. Explicit country performance indicators were
specified in a CAS Program Matrix, which i s included at the end o f this completion report
as Attachment 1 along with actual outcomes. N o clear distinction was made in the CAS
between overall country indicators and indicators specific to the CAS itself.
15.

Actual outcomes for the country performance indicators were mixed. In broad terms
the outcomes for fiscal and financial stabilization were generally good, as were the
outcomes with respect to sustainable growth, By way o f contrast, outcomes in the areas o f
governance and social inclusion f e l l far short o f the targets in many cases.

16. It i s clear in restrospect that the CAS was overly optimistic with respect to the
structural and policy reforms that could be successfully implemented by a new
administration. Notwithstanding the bold reform agenda that was articulated by President
Nicador Duarte Frutos when he first took office, the administration underestimated the
challenges in delivering such an ambitious program, particularly those related to
governance and institutional competence. Not only did outcomes fall short o f targets but
progress was slower than envisaged in many areas.
17. It i s also clear in restrospect that the CAS overestimated the prospects and
possibilities for new lending in areas where the Bank had previously only a limited
presence. The CAS proposed a base-case lending program o f thirteen operations but only
four o f them were approved and became effective. In many cases the shortfall was directly
related to the inability o f Government to obtain legislative approval for projects that were
well prepared and ready for implementation. In other cases, the high priority given to
reforms such as those in the financial sector and social security diminished as time passed.

Annex 2
Page 5 o f 27

18. However, when due allowance i s made for the initially ambitious targets, steady and
significant headway was made in the overall country relationship with Paraguay. The
country dialouge has flourished both at the macro level and at the sector level, underpinned
by a high-quality program of analytic and advisory work. Overall project implementation
has been good and in some sectors, such as transport and water supply, the Bank has helped
with the introduction o f innovative development strategies. Even when projects were
withdrawn or cancelled, the Bank was able to contribute to moving the reform agenda
forward by mobilizing other intruments such as grant financing. During the CAS period the
Bank deepened i t s engagement in Paraguay and became a strong partner. The Bank’s
recent broader involvement in issues o f governance and the adoption o f Paraguay as a pilot
country for the GAC initiative i s further evidence of a deeper and broader country
relationship.
Pillar I : Fiscal and Financial Stabilization
Overview

19. This pillar of the CAS was clearly perceived as an urgent priority driven by the
difficult economic circumstances confronting the Government when it took office in
August, 2003. Country outcomes were good as evidenced by a consistently strong
economic performance throughout the CAS period. The indicative indicators that were
targeted in the CAS were largely achieved as shown in Attachment 1. CAS outcomes were
good overall. Although a flagship Economic Recovery SAL was outstandingly successful,
a follow-up Financial Sector Adjustment Loan had to be reduced in scope and content
because the pace of reform was slower than anticipated. Analytic work undertaken by the
Bank was strategically relevant and of high quality.
Macroeconomic Performance

20. By most indicators Paraguay has performed better than anticipated during the
2004-07 CAS period. I t can be seen from Table 1 below that real GDP growth has
averaged 4.4 percent compared with only 3 percent projected in the CAS. The driving
forces behind that growth have been threefold. First, macroeconomic management was
generally sound. Second, the strong performance of neighboring countries, particularly
Argentina and Brazil, had a ripple effect. Third, Paraguay has benefited from strong
commodity prices with exports growing at close to 35 percent a year in nominal dollar
terms. However, by the same token, Paraguay i s now even more vulnerable to external
shocks because imports have also grown at a rapid pace that may be unsustainable if the
external economic environment were to deteriorate. Another crisis in neighboring
countries or a roll-back in commodity prices would have serious repercussions for
Paraguay.

21.

Macroeconomic management was generally sound during the CAS period. The IMF
affirmed that performance under the 2003 stand-by arrangement was satisfactory and
largely achieved the objectives o f restoring stability and starting a reform process to create
conditions for sustained growth and poverty reduction. Another stand-by arrangement was
requested by the Government on a precautionary basis and it was approved in May, 2006.
In the context of a fifth review of the arrangement in December 2007, IMF staff stated that
“All quantitative performance criteria established for end-September 2006 under the IMFsupported program were met, and the expectation i s that quantitative targets for endDecember 2007 will also be observed.” It i s particularly noteworthy that the relative size o f

Annex 2
Page 6 o f 2 7

public sector debt has declined much more rapidly that was anticipated in the CAS. It now
stands at a manageable 20 percent of GDP.
Table 1 : Projected macroeconomic indicators and actual outcomes
2004

CAS November 26th 2003
2005
2006

2007

2004

Latest estimates
2005
2006

2007

Real Sector
Real GDP gowth ( O h )
CPI Inflation (%)
Gross Domestic I n v e s t m a t (%GDP)
Exports (%gowth)
Imports (%gowth)

23
70
19 0
4 4
33

2
6
20
5
5

8
0
0
1
2

32
50
20 0
5
59

3
4
20
3
3

5
0
5
2
5

41
28
16 8
31 9
26 9

29
99
17 5
17 1
22 8

43
I2 5
17 5
31 5
31 7

68
60
18 9
56 5
396

Central Government Finances (%GDP)
Revenues
Expenditures
O f vhich interestpayments
Primary Balance
Overall Balance

16 5
17 6
24
13
-I I

17 2
17 5
24
2 1
-03

17 5
17 6
25
24
-01

17 5
17 5
24
23
-01

18 4
16 8
I 1
27
16

18
17
I
2
0

3
5
2
0
8

18 4
17 8
I O
15
05

17 9
17 0
08
18
10

Public Sector Debt (WBGDP)

47 3

46 4

43 I

39 8

34 4

29 4

24 3

19 9

10

13

06

00

20

05

-1 7

51

Balance of Payments
Current Account (%GDP)

The Bank program of support

22. I n parallel to the CAS, the Bank prepared an Economic Recovery Structural
Adjustment Loan (ERL) in the amount o f U S 3 0 million to support the Government’s
reform program. The CAS and the ERL were presented to the Board together in
December 2003, just four months after the new administration took office. By providing
financial support for the Government’s short- and medium-term action program in the areas
of fiscal stabilization and deficit reduction, taxation, public administration, financial sector
reform, pension reform and the fight against corruption, the ERL contributed directly to
fiscal and financial stabilization as well as other objectives identified in all four pillars of
the CAS.
23. The ERL was structured as a single tranche operation to help Paraguay more
effectively finance the large financing gap that was revealed in 2003. A set of policy
actions was identified as a condition for Board presentation and a second set o f benchmark
indicators was identified to assess the continuity of progress in the reform program after the
formal closing date o f the loan. I t was anticipated that follow-up loans, such as a planned
Financial Sector Adjustment Loan, would provide a vehicle for monitoring and ensuring
continuity of the Government’s reform program.

24. An implementation completion report for this operation found the achievement of
project objectives to be satisfactory or highly satisfactory. By providing early support to
the administration’s economic and institutional reform agenda, the ERL helped the
Government avoid a severe financial crisis, meet its short-term debt obligations and gain
time to restore a fiscal balance.
25. Fulfillment of the fiscal stabilization objective in particular was highly satisfactory.
An overall fiscal deficit amounting to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2002 was turned around to a
surplus in 2004 that exceeded the target established by the IMF Stand-By arrangement.
The improvement was the result of a strong increase in public revenues together with tight
control over public spending.

Annex 2
Page 7 o f 2 7

26. Tax policy objectives were also met satisfactorily. During 2004 tax revenues
increased by 36 percent (or 2 percent of GDP) over the previous year as a result o f efforts
to reduce evasion and corruption, and increase efficiency. The approval o f a Tax Reform
Law in July 2004 was an important breakthrough which introduced new revenue
instruments, broadened the value-added tax and extended the coverage of the company
income tax to agriculture and ranching.
27. Progress in putting the public sector pension system on a sound financial footing was
also satisfactory. In December 2003 Congress enacted measures to reduce the financial
deficit o f the system and introduce greater consistency between pension plans. Specific
changes included raising the contribution rate from 14 to 16 percent and raising the
mandatory retirement age to a uniform 62 years across the board.
28. Financial sector objectives were also met satisfactorily. The enactment o f a Deposit
Guarantee and Bankruptcy Law would make it easier to resolve another banking crisis if
one were to arise in the future. The public sector’s contingent liabilities were thereby
effectively reduced.
29. Finally, there was satisfactory progress in meeting the program objectives with
respect to a more efficient and less corrupt public administration. A new Customs Code
was adopted in 2004 to modernize procedures and curtail corruption. Public procurement
practices were improved and information on public procurement was posted on the internet.
A census o f public sector employees was undertaken to help rationalize the management o f
human resources.
30. Collectively, these achievements constituted a propitious beginning for the new
administration and vindicated Bank support through the ERL.

3 1. The CAS envisaged additional follow-up support for financial sector adjustment
with a financial sector adjustment loan (FSAL). A Program Document proposing a twotranche FSAL in the amount o f US$60 million was distributed to the Board of Executive
Directors in August 2004 but it was subsequently withdrawn to allow the Government
further time to submit a new banking law to Congress and thereby satisfy a condition o f
Board approval. A draft banking law, satisfactory to the Bank, was eventually submitted to
Congress in December 2004. However, Board presentation of the FSAL was also
conditioned upon other financial sector reforms which did not proceed as smoothly as
anticipated. To better manage perceived risks to the program posed by uncertain progress
with the reform agenda, the Bank and the Government agreed to a strategy o f risk
mitigation whereby Bank support for Paraguay’s financial sector reforms would be
restructured on a programmatic basis. Under this approach, a sequence of three singletranche programmatic financial sector loans was envisaged. They were to be presented to
the Board in line with measurable progress in the reform program. Bank support was to be
back-loaded to reflect the perceived increased risk.
32. The first o f this sequence, a programmatic financial sector adjustment loan (PFSAL I)
in an amount o f US$15 million, was approved in April 2005. I t provided up-front support
for prior reforms. The Government encountered a long delay in securing Congressional
approval for the loan and the deadline for effectiveness had to be extended beyond the
customary 18 month Bank policy deadline. The delay in Congress did not necessarily
reflect a lack o f Congressional support for financial sector reform. Other Bank loans were
similarly blocked at the time as well as loans from other international and bilateral financial
organizations. The situation was reflective of a wider political confrontation that resulted

Annex 2
Page 8 o f 2 7

in a stale-mate between the executive and the legislature. As a result, some other Bank
loans had to be cancelled. In parallel to PFSAL I,a Financial Sector Strengthening
Technical Assistance Loan was designed to assist Paraguay with the modernization of i t s
financial system by strengthening the Superintendence of Banks, streamlining the
settlement of payments and monitoring the progress of other financial reforms. However,
the loan was withdrawn after the Central Bank decided that did not wish to finance
technical assistance with loan funds.

33.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, the implementation completion report for PFSAL
I indicated that the Government has remained in compliance with the reforms supported by
the loan and there have also been advances in other areas that were to be supported by
subsequent Bank loans.2 However, overall progress was insufficient to justify moving
forward with additional Bank support for the program although the Bank continued its
policy dialogue with the Government and stood ready to provide an effective response to
new financial sector initiatives.
34. Among the achievements o f PFSAL Iwhich s t i l l remain in effect, the following merit
particular mention. The Central Bank established specific criteria to identify troubled
financial institutions so that measures may be taken to improve their financial condition.
Financial institutions were prohibited from pledging their assets as security for deposits
held by persons in the same institution. The Government reached an agreement with
commercial banks to renegotiate public bonds. The Central Bank established norms
concerning asset classification, loan loss reserves, accrued interest payments and
refinancing operations as they apply to bank lending. The Central Bank also approved a
strategic plan to improve banking supervision. A draft banking law was submitted to
Congress in 2004 although it has not yet been enacted. Amendments to simplify the draft
law are currently being considered. A draft law to combat money-laundering was also
submitted to Congress in 2004 although it took until December 2007 for Congress to
approve a new penal code for money laundering. Under Paraguayan law, the
implementation o f the new penal code will be delayed for one year to allow for the training
o f judges and prosecutors.

35.

The Bank closely coordinated the design o f PFSAL I and the broader underlying
program with both the IMF and the IDB. At the time of loan approval, the IMF had had in
place a stand-by program which included structural benchmarks for financial sector reform.
The IMF continued to monitor financial sector developments under a follow-up stand-by
arrangement which the Government entered on a precautionary basis. The IDB has
focused, in particular, on assisting Paraguay with the consolidation of state owned banks
and with developing a regulatory framework for the cooperatives sector.

36. The operational program in support of fiscal and financial stabilization was
accompanied by analytic work in key areas. A review of the Paraguay country AAA
was undertaken by a QAG panel which found that, in terms of its strategic relevance, the
program was highly satisfactory. This finding was particularly applicable to the analytic
work in the areas of fiscal and financial stabilization.

37. In 2005 a Financial Sector Assessment was undertaken at the request o f the
Government and in the context of the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment

’“Implementation Completion and Results Report” Report No: ICR0000525; June 28,2007

Annex 2
Page 9 o f 27

Program (FSAP).3 The Assessment noted that the recovery of the economy provided a
window o f opportunity to address key financial vulnerabilities that would otherwise pose
an obstacle to future growth. It advocated a more comprehensive effort to financial sector
reform that would contribute to building trust in the financial system. It made specific
recommendations for strengthening the prudential regulation of the fast-growing credit
cooperatives sector, drastically restructuringthe BNF (a publicly owned bank), overhauling
insolvency procedures, regulating pension funds and upgrading the payments system.
Those issues continue to figure prominently in the policy and reform dialogue between the
Government, the IMF, the IDB and the Bank.

38. A public expenditure review was also undertaken in 2006.4 It advocated revenue
raising measures to provide additional resources for needed investments in basic
infrastructure and social services which are presently insufficient for economic growth. At
the same time it underscored the importance o f controlling the growth of current
expenditures, especially with respect to public sector wages. It noted that public
employment, in addition to consuming an overly large proportion of public spending i s
structured according to patronage rather than discharging the functions of the state. It also
advocated strengthening the presently weak budget process to better prioritize investments
and facilitate the effective delivery of public services. The effectiveness of the review was
enhanced by a concise executive summary which clearly identified the principal
recommendationsfor policy makers.
39.

Of particular significance was an Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) undertaken
by the Bank with support from the IDB and the European Union.’ The Assessment was the
first of its kind in Paraguay and it incorporated the indicators-based methodologies of
PEFA and of OECD-DAC which provided crucial insights into the efficiency and
credibility of the budget and procurement processes. In the absence o f lending, the IFA has
become a key instrument for a continuing policy dialogue with the Ministry o f Finance.
Seminars were held with the Ministry to review the results of the IFA and non-lending
technical assistance was mobilized to help the Ministry design an action plan. The
collaborative manner in which the IFA was undertaken enabled the Government to take
ownership o f the process and of the product. That, in turn, made it a more effective
instrument for improved fiscal management.

40.

Other analytic work that clearly had a bearing on fiscal and financial stabilization as
well as other pillars of the CAS included (i)a study o f Real Property Taxation which
constitutes a major, but as yet underutilized, source of revenue for sub-national government
and (ii) a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA). Both tasks contributed
effectively to the country dialogue. Technical assistance to the Ministry o f Finance for
improved governance and transparency (reviewed under Pillar 2 below) also contributed to
better fiscal management.

Pillar 2: Governance and Transparency in Government
Overview

41.

The CAS was strongly supportive of the Government in its desire to restore
confidence in state institutions by improving governance and transparency in the public

3

“Financial Sector Assessment Paraguay” FSAP Report No. 36218; May 2006.
“Paraguay Public Expenditure Review” Report No. 32797-PY; May 3 1,2006
5
“Paraguay Integrated Fiduciary Assessment” April 2008

Annex 2
Page 10 o f 27

administration. However, country outcomes were mixed and generally f e l l short of the
targeted indicative indicators (see Attachment I).Paraguay improved its relative ranking in
the Corruption Index of Transparency International but did not rise from the fifth to the
fourth quintile as targeted. The Bank program of assistance likewise f e l l short of the CAS
objectives but nevertheless helped the authorities improve governance and transparency in
a number of key areas.
The Bank program o f support

42. The most prominent instrument o f Bank support for improved governance and
transparency was a project for the modernization of the Ministry of Finance. The
scope of the proposed project was ambitious and the goal was to transform the Ministry
into a “ministry of excellence” by streamlining i t s internal procedures, professionalizingthe
staff and strengthening a tradition of service towards the public. It was envisaged that
improved management practices within the Ministry of Finance would be linked to similar
improvements in line ministries such as Education which was also aiming to improve
management practices with Bank assistance from an ongoing Education Reform Loan.
Hence, the modernization of the Ministry of Finance was envisaged as a stepping stone to
parallel changes in other ministries and eventually to other levels of the public
administration including municipalities.

43.

The modernization loan was approved by the Board on April 5, 2005 in an amount of
US$7.5 million. There was a considerable delay before the loan was signed because the
Government first waited for Congress to approve a financial sector adjustment loan to
which the modernization loan was linked. Once the loan was sent to Congress, it became
clear that prospects for timely Congressional approval were remote and the Bank decided
to cancel the loan in March 2007.

44.

In part, the lack o f Congressional approval for the modernization loan reflected
differences between the executive and the legislature that resulted in a stalemate. However,
there was also widespread resistance to the idea that Government should borrow externally
to finance technical assistance especially when grant funding i s available from many
bilateral donors for that purpose. In addition, the ambitious scope of the project may have
provoked resistance from a conservative and cautious bureaucracy.

45.

Yet the cancellation o f this loan did not presage an end to modernization and reform
in the Ministry of Finance. The modernization agenda continued to move forward in a
number of areas, albeit at a more moderate pace, and the Bank continued to play a role with
resources from trust funds in some cases. An IDF grant remained active until 2007 and it
financed a number of initiatives that had been identified and targeted in the course o f loan
preparation. In part it financed analytic work aimed at enhancing the broader framework of
fiscal management such as public sector deficit financing, an analysis of social
expenditures within the budget and the adoption of multi-year budgeting. Other initiatives
financed by the IDF grant were more administrative and organizational. They included the
development of guidelines for public hearings on contracting; a seminar on procurement;
the design of security systems for an electronic data base; a workshop on monitoring and
evaluation and the purchase of hardware and software for that purpose; equipment, training
and technical assistance for the Transparency Office of the Ministry and; the design o f a
data base for the management o f human resources. Supervision revealed that all those
initiatives were effective in helping the Ministry of Finance improve its operational
efficiency.

Annex 2
Page 1 1 o f 27

46. The Bank also provided support for improved management efficiency in the
Ministry of Education. One of the primary objectives of the Education Reform APL that
was approved in June 2003 was to assist Paraguay improve the management and efficiency
of the education system by “creating additional capacity for sector analysis, planning,
monitoring and evaluation, and improving management and development of human
resources’’.6 The. project successfully pursued that objective during the CAS period. By
June 2008, the revised closing date, a model for the selection and contracting of personnel
had been designed, approved and implemented nationwide. Certification and accreditation
policies had also been designed and approved and will start to be implemented in 2008. The
entire administrative planning and budgetary systems have been re-engineered and, in
Decmber 2008, the new system will be introduced to the Ministry o f Education and to the
Department of Asuncion on a pilot basis. I t i s anticipated that the improved planning and
budgetary systems will increase efficiency and contribute to greater transparency and the
better management of human resources.
47. The CAS also envisaged a deeper extension o f governance and public sector
reform to improve fiscal management at the municipal level. However, a municipal
finance project proposed in the base case program was not prepared. In part, that was
because the project would focus on a better application of the real property tax which i s the
main (but greatly underutilized) source o f municipal revenue. Until a study of the real
property tax was undertaken, the analytic underpinning o f the project could not be put in
place.
48. A real property tax study was finalized towards the end of the CAS period.’ I t
concluded that the current yield of the tax i s far below international norms. To increase the
yield without incurring the expense and long gestation period of creating a full national
cadastre, it proposed a revision of the property tax law based on the principle of selfassessment o f property values that has worked well in many other countries. A selfassessment system could quickly develop a market value tax base that would greatly
improve the revenues of local government while, at the same time, create incentives for the
more effective and efficient use o f rural land resources. The study provides valuable
source material that could constitute a strong analytic base for addressing governance
issues at the local level in Paraguay going forward.
49. The World Bank Institute has also been active in Paraguay ever since 2000 when
the Government invited the W B I to give orientation and training to representatives of
civil society on how other countries have approached the issue o f corruption. With
WBI support, a Government-sponsored Anti-Corruption Commission (later renamed the
National Integrity Commission) developed a plan to combat corruption in the three areas o f
customs, procurement and the judiciary. The Commission presented its plan to the donor
community and the IDB responded with support for additional work on procurement and
on customs. The Bank focused on the judiciary and, in that context, mobilized an IDF
grant to support Paraguay’s legal and judicial reform. The grant focused on assisting the
Supreme Court in three areas as follows: (i)strengthening the judicial function; (ii)
improving the administrative framework of the judiciary; and (iii)strengthening the public
registries and judicial statistics. The grant effectively complemented technical assistance
provided by the IDB, UNDP and USAID and successfully achieved its strategic objective
6

7

Project Appraisal Document; Report No:25630; page 3.
“Paraguay Real Property Tax” (in two volumes); Report No. 37456-PA; May 16,2007

Annex 2
Page 12 o f 27

of strengthening the capacity of the Supreme Court and the Council of Magistrates to
perform their functions.

50. IDF grants were also mobilized in support o f Paraguay’s civil service reform
and to assist the National Congress streamline i t s internal procedures and gain ready
access to legislative information, With respect to civil service reform, grant funds were
successfully employed to strengthen the National Secretariat for Public Administration
(NSPA) by helping to develop an action plan for training key personnel and for upgrading
personnel data. As a result, in 2004, the NSPA designed and carried out a national census
o f public employees to provide up-to-date and reliable information for the management of
human resources. Support for the modernization o f Paraguay’s Congress began in 2005
and continued beyond the end of the CAS period. It includes support for (i)improving the
channels of communication by updating the Congressional website, (ii) adopting best
practices from internationally recognized legislative bodies including the establishment o f a
congressional research center, (iii) accessing the Global Legal Information Network
(GLIN) system and (iv) increasing transparency and efficiency through an electronic
document management system, modernizing the Library of Congress and establishing a
workflow management system to manage and monitor legislative initiatives.
Pillar 3: Sustainable Growth
Overview

51. Growth i s a multi-sector endeavor and the program envisaged by the CAS for this
pillar was correspondingly multi-faceted. It included support for the development of
infrastructure; investment in agriculture and forestry; and support for private sector
development. Progress was made in all of these areas but at a slower pace than had been
envisaged in the CAS. Nevertheless, country outcomes were generally good with respect
to indicative targets as documented in Attachment I. CAS outcomes varied greatly from
sector to sector. I n sectors where the Bank had a long-standing presence progress was
generally satisfactory. However, the CAS was not able to move forward in new areas such
as private sector development and municipal development.
Agriculture and Forestry

52. A sustainable rural investment project was programmed for FY05 but was
postponed to allow for the completion of an ongoing Natural Resources Management
Project (PARN) and a thorough evaluation of its outcome. Although that project dated
from the mid-nineties, the loan was not closed until 2006. Hence, a significant part of
project implementation took place during the period of the 2003-07 CAS. Notwithstanding
implementationproblems which had resulted in delays and necessitated major restructuring
after a mid-term review, the project achieved most o f i t s objectives satisfactorily. As a
result of the project, the implementationcompletion report concluded that improved natural
resource management and more sustainable approaches to agriculture are now an accepted
paradigm in Paraguay while participatory decision-making and working with smallholder
farmers and indigenous peoples i s more commonplace.* The infrastructure development
component o f the project was also rated satisfactory and some 400 km of local roads were
rehabilitated. However, the institutional development component of the project was rated
unsatisfactory due principally to an overly ambitious attempt to decentralize while, at the
same time, coordinating many agencies and attempting to strengthen weak institutions.

* ImplementationCompletion Report No. 38266; December 28, 2006

Annex 2
Page 13 o f 27

53.

The successor project that had been anticipated for FY05 was prepared as a
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development Project (SARD) in 2006-07 and a loan for
US$37.5 million received Board approval in January 2008. The project drew upon the
lessons learned from P A W and also from the experience gained from an ongoing
Community Development Project (PRODECO). Whereas the 2003 CAS had envisaged
that the micro-catchment model for agricultural extension and natural resource
management would be expanded nation-wide, the project area was delimited more
manageably to 39 municipalities in the two poorest departments of the Eastern Region o f
Paraguay. Other lessons incorporated into the successor project included an effective and
transparent process of participatory and decentralized planning and decision making;
flexibility to accommodate the culturally-defined decision making mechanisms of different
ethnic groups; and strong support from technical agencies to the beneficiaries. The PARN
further effectively included indigenous people as project beneficiaries. This i s a positive
lesson from experience and indigenous communities will continue to be actively included
as beneficiaries under PRODERS.

54.

The implementation difficulties encountered with PARN and the delay in preparing a
successor project serve to underscore the need for careful project design and preparation
even at the cost of extending the time-horizon. A Forestry Development Project, initially
programmed for FY06 was put on hold pending a clearer definition of the Government’s
position vis-&vis the regulatory framework for sustainable forestry management including
transport regulation, pricing and royalties, plantations and reforestation. The projecthas
now been cancelled. . Meanwhile, GEF resources have been mobilized to support a
Maracayu Nature Park Reserve project and more GEF finance i s proposed for supporting
biodiversity in areas that will overlap the SARD project.

55. Analytic work in support o f lending for agriculture and forestry included the study o f
Real Property Taxation already cited above. That study cites evidence pointing to a
considerable underutilization of land and it suggests that the absence of significant tax
revenues from rural land enables underutilized land to be held without cost. A conclusion
of the study i s that a well structured reform of land taxation could well enhance the
efficiency of land use in rural areas. It also suggests that, in view of the widespread
deforestation that has occurred in the past, a new land tax exemption for natural forests
managed in a sustainable manner could be an effective instrument to encourage
environmental conservation.
Infrastructure

56. A loan in the amount o f US$74 million for a Road Maintenance Project was
approved in August 2006 as envisaged in the CAS. In many ways the project marked a
new beginning for the Bank in the road sector of Paraguay, notwithstanding a history o f
previous loans for highways in the eighties and nineties. Whereas earlier projects had
focused on building new roads, the 2006 project i s concerned with road maintenance. The
development objective of the project i s to establish a sustainable road management strategy
that ensures the upgrading and maintenance of the road network making optimal use of
scarce resources. That involves developing the institutional capacity of the Ministry of
Public Works, arresting the deterioration of the priority road network and improving access
for the poorest rural communities. With Bank assistance, Paraguay has been able to
fundamentally reshape its approach to prioritizing road maintenance.

Annex 2
Page 14 o f 27

57. As with many other Bank loans, it took longer than anticipated to obtain the approval
o f Congress but the loan became effective in January 2008. Notwithstanding the delay, the
Ministry of Public Works has moved forward with a number of project activities including
the preparation of a Road Strategy, the establishment of a Road Planning Directorate and
the adoption o f an action plan to improve procurement and financial management. In
addition, bidding has begun for the design o f a Road Plan, a budget monitoring system and
a new toll system. Several elements of an Improved Governance Framework have been put
in place and the overall progress of the project i s judged to be satisfactory by Bank
supervision staff.
58. The Bank has had a long association with Paraguay in water supply and
sanitation. A fourth rural water supply and sanitation project dating from 1997 was
still under implementation during the first part of the CAS period. The project was
innovative in that: (i) it developed a sustainable model for service delivery through local
private participation via minimum subsidy concessions; (ii)it increased access to water
supply and sanitation for indigenous populations; (iii) it introduced low-cost piped
sewerage for small towns; and (iv) it provided for technical assistance to local Water-User
Boards through a second-tier system o f water user associations. Most importantly, in
October 2004, the Government adopted a uniform national policy for financing water and
sewerage investment in rural areas based on financial policies developed by the Fourth
Rural Water and Sanitation Project. In addition, innovative schemes for private sector
inverstment have been introduced. Altogether this i s an extraordinary achievement that
few other LAC countries have been able to attain. A Water Sector Modernization project
that was planned for the last year of the CAS period i s actively being prepared and i s
anticipated for FY09.
59. However, other planned projects have not materialized. A Technical Assistance Loan
for Private Sector Development was not pursued because the authorities do not favor
financing technical assistance by borrowing from abroad. A Municipal Services and
Infrastructure Project was also not pursued, in part because it was linked to a reform o f the
Real Property Tax that would increase municipal revenues and provide additional resources
for local roads, water supply, sanitation and solid waste management. The Bank finalized a
study of the Real Property Tax in 2007 but it may take time for the authorities to consider
i t s recommendationsand take action.

60.

The Bank also undertook a study o f the Investment Climate in Paraguay for
submission to the new administration that takes office in 2008. The study was based on
information from a 2006 survey of 613 private registered firms operating in Paraguay, of
which 25 percent were located in the capital, Asuncion. Hence, the data related exclusively
to the formal sector of the economy. Many firms cited unfair competition from the
informal sector as an obstacle to business because informal businesses did not have to
comply with the same standards as the corporate sector. The study constitutes a valuable
source of information to help the Government identify and relieve perceived bottlenecks
that constrain private sector development.

Pillar 4: Social Inclusion
Overview

61.

The CAS envisaged a broad program of Bank support for the Government’s Poverty
Reduction Strategy, particularly as it affected education, health, social protection and
community development. Country outcomes with respect to indicative targets for these

Annex 2
Page 15 o f 27

sectors were mixed as evidenced in Attachment I. Likewise, CAS outcomes varied greatly
from sector to sector. There was good progress in meeting objectives in education and
community development, but outcomes with respect to health and social security fell short
o f the CAS objectives.
The Bank Program o f Support

62. An Adaptable Program Loan in the amount o f US%24 million for an Education
Reform Program was approved in July 2003 and was implemented during the CAS
period. The development objectives o f the program were to improve the management and
efficiency o f the system and to improve education outcomes and equity o f opportunity in
secondary education. Improvements in management and efficacy were successfully
achieved as indicated in the section above on governance. Substantial progress was also
made with respect to expanding access to secondary education and improving the quality o f
education. The net enrollment for secondary schools increased from a base o f 33 percent in
2001 to 40 percent by end-2007 which constitutes a substantial improvement albeit short of
the 44 percent end-of-project target. Also by end-2007, the complete redesign o f
alternative secondary education programs was well under way based on results from a first
round o f field testing. The final redesigned modules are expected to be completed by mid2008. A program o f scholarships for low-income students has been introduced and the
end-project target o f 4,500 scholarships was already reached by 2006. Overall project
implementation has been successful in reaching i t s development goals.
63. The Bank also successfully completed an evaluation o f secondary education as
envisaged in the CAS.9 The work was done in close collaboration with the Ministry o f
Education and with other stakeholders including the IDB. The collaborative nature of the
work enhances its value as a tool for education management and planning in Paraguay. It
will also serve to underpin a second phase of the adjustable program lending which i s being
prepared for FY09.
64. The CAS also envisaged a strong program o f Bank support for the health sector
in Paraguay. Analytic work on the health sector was effectively delivered in 2006.”
Several conclusions from the report fed directly into a Maternal-Child Basic Health
Insurance project for which a loan of US$22 million was approved by the Board in April
2005. However, when the Government submitted the loan to Congress it was rejected. The
reasons for the rejection are threefold. First, it reflected a stand-off between the executive
and the legislature that affected many other projects as noted elsewhere. Second, the
structure of health care finance i s a contentious issue in Paraguay. Third, there were
perceptions that a previous Bank loan for a Maternal Health and Child Development
Project had failed to achieve the expected results. Indeed, the implementation completion
report for that earlier project rated the outcome as unsatisfactory and the sector report on
health service delivery concluded that the project fell significantly short o f its service
delivery goals. That shortfall i s reflected in the low utilization o f installed capacity in
health facilities which i s less than 50 percent in Paraguay.
65. Nevertheless, the effort that went into preparing the Maternal-Child Basic Health
Insurance Project has been fruitful in assisting the Government move forward with a
number of initiatives that were conceived as part o f the project. The Ministry o f Health
9
IO

“Educacidn Media en el Paraguay” Report No. 42665-PY; February 7,2008
“Health Service Delivery in Paraguay” Report No. 33416-PY; January 25,2006

Annex 2
Page 16 o f 27

now deploys mobile medical teams to deliver medical services to less accessible areas. A
health insurance manual that was written as part o f project preparation i s now in use to
establish a health service delivery network.
66. Social protection was another area identified in the CAS for Bank support.
Analytic work on social protection policies, including the pension system, was delivered in
2004 as envisaged in the CAS.” The study sought to articulate a strategic vision for social
protection policies that would embrace programs devoted to the alleviation of poverty and
those that seek to provide economic security to the elderly. It also reviewed issues relating
to the financial management o f social protection policies. The study was well received and
many of the findings were incorporated into a National Strategy to Fight Poverty that was
adopted by the Government in 2006 and later into a Strategic Plan for Reform of the
Pensions system that was adopted by the Ministry o f Finance in 2007.
67. The CAS also envisaged that the Bank would finance a Social Protection Technical
Assistance Project. Preparatory work was begun but, by end-2005, it became clear that the
authorities were disinclined to finance technical assistance by borrowing externally and
project preparation was suspended. Nevertheless, the Bank’s preparatory work effectively
assisted the Government redesign the social security system as documented in a paper
delivered to the Government in June 2006 and entitled “Paraguay; Resultados de la
Asistencia Te‘cnica del Banco Mundial 2004-2005 a1 Sector de Seguridad Social”. In
addition, the Bank, in cooperation with the IDB, assisted the Government in designing a
conditional cash transfer program (TEKOPORA) as well as the operational framework of a
Fund for Social Equity that was established in 2005.
68.

I n 2002, just prior to the CAS, the Bank had approved a loan of US$9 million

for a Pilot Community Development Project (PRODECO) and the project was

implemented during the CAS period. PRODECO has proven to be one o f the most
successful social sector initiatives for addressing the development potential o f the very poor
in Paraguay. The project sought to test a decentralized, bottom-up development approach
as a means of enhancing incomes and increasing the quality of l i f e of poor rural and
marginalized urban communities in three Departments in the south o f the country. The
project provides grant finance for small-scale demand-driven initiatives prepared and
submitted by beneficiary groups. Eligible initiatives include income generating projects
such as artisan workshops as well as community development projects that would
complement productive investments. An important component of PRODECO has been to
strengthen the capabilities of local communities to design, implement and monitor incomegenerating and community development initiatives.

69. Supervision ratings have been consistently satisfactory both for the development
objective of the project and for implementation progress. By end-2006 it had already
surpassed the quantitative beneficiary targets defined at project appraisal. Some 500 subprojects had been approved benefiting more than 5,100 families and almost 30,000 persons.
Those figures compare with an original target of 3,700 families and 18,500 persons.
Nearly 30 percent of the sub-projects benefit vulnerable and socially marginalized groups
(including indigenous peoples, women and youths). That figure exceeds the original target
by a factor of 75 percent.

II

“Paraguay: Defining a Strategy for Social Protection Policy” Report No. 27352-PA; May 24, 2004

Annex 2
Page 17 o f 27

70. A mid-term evaluation of the project and other monitoring data reveal that the project
has been able to decentralize decision making to the local level. Reviews o f the quality o f
supervision show that the project has effectively contributed to a culture of results,
transparency and social participation, although a recent ex-post review of procurement has
also highlighted the need to strengthen the oversight o f community-procured TA services.
PRODECO i s recognized as a key contributor to the country’s poverty reduction strategy in
the three departments where it operated. On that basis the Board approved additional
funding o f US$9 million in March 2008 so that the program may be extended to a further
five departments.
V. OVERALL BANK PERFORMANCE
The Lending Program

71.

The CAS was structured in terms of the Bank re-engaging with Paraguay after a long
period of little lending. A base case program o f thirteen loans was envisaged for a total o f
US$325 million. In the event, only seven loans were approved during the FY04-07 CAS
period and in FY08 , but three of them were either withdrawn or cancelled prior to loan
effectiveness. Of the remaining six projects proposed in the CAS, three were dropped.
Another three were postponed and are likely to be approved in the following CAS period.
Total lending in the FY04-08 period amounted to only US$146.5 million - less than half of
the base-case scenario notwithstanding the fact that the triggers for base-case lending were
substantially met (see Attachment 4).

72. In retrospect it would appear that the base-case lending program proposed in the CAS
was overly-ambitious given the country situation at the time. The administration of
President Nicador Duarte Frutos began its term of office in 2003 with far-reaching plans for
reform and it was right for the Bank to respond positively. In order for the reform program
to be effectively implemented with financing from the Bank, however, the executive branch
would need to work in close cooperation with the legislature and this proved to be a
stumbling block. Since Congress, in accordance with the constitution, must approve all
external borrowing, the Bank program was particularly vulnerable to the deadlock that
quickly emerged.

73.

Even if Congress had been supportive the successful implementation of an active
lending program would have been a challenging task after a long period in which the Bank
had only a minimal operational presence in Paraguay. The Bank underestimated the
support it would need to provide in order that Paraguay may reactivate and execute a
lending program on the scale envisaged. The resident mission in Asunci6n was not
strengthened commensurately with its expanded responsibilities and it had to rely on backup support from the Buenos Aires office. In some cases project supervision had to be
outsourced to the UNDP. Those shortcomings are only recently being addressed.

74. Yet it would be a mistake to infer that the shortfall in actual lending signified a failure
of the Bank to reengage effectively with Paraguay. Even when projects were dropped,
withdrawn or cancelled the Bank was able to achieve positive results in helping the reform
agenda move forward with other instruments such as grant financing and analytic work.
Project preparation work also contributed directly to progress with the Government’s
reform agenda, particularly in areas such as financial management and budgeting. In
addition, the program of AAA was very successful as indicated in the corresponding
section below.

Annex 2
Page 18 o f 27

Portfolio Quality

75. Over the 2003-08 period the total active portfolio o f projects under implementation in
Paraguay averaged only five projects. Because the active portfolio i s so small, performance
problems that may be encountered with just one or two projects appear to have a large
effect on the total portfolio in percentage terms. It can be seen from Table 2 below that the
percentage o f projects classified as problem projects or projects at risk has varied greatly
from year to year from zero to 100 percent. Hence, the analysis o f aggregated portfolio
data i s not particularly illuminating in the case o f Paraguay.
76, Nevertheless, operational experience over the past several years points to a number of
special circumstances in Paraguay that frequently impact the performance o f projects
financed by the Bank and by other external donors. The fact that Congress i s
constitutionally required to approve each and every external loan can result in a long
interval between loan approval by the Board and loan effectiveness. Bank policy requires
loans to become effective within 18 months of Board approval.
In exceptional
circumstances the Regional Vice President may approve an extension o f the effectiveness
deadline. The deadline for many loans to Paraguay had to be extended beyond 18 months.

Table 2: Paraguay --Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
(Data as of M a y 27,2008)
Fiscal Y e a r
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number o f Projects Under Implementation
(I

Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent o f Problem Projects by Number ,'
Percent o f Problem Projects by Amount ,'
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Number ,'
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amount ,'
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesino)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2003

2004

2007

2008

5
6.3
20.0
20.7
60.0
52.9
15.2

4
5.1
25.0
19.5
100.0
100.0
19.6

4
3.3
0.0
0.0
50.0
63.8
8.5

319
79.8

Yes

Yes

539
107.8

718
179.5

0.0
14.3
15.9
27.8

19.1
50.0
39.6
26.5

4
2.9
50.0
74.4
75.0
93.0
23.7

536
76.6

617
102.8

Yes
590
147.5

Last Five FYs
Proi Eva1 by OED/IEG by Number
34
8
Proj Eva1 by OED/IEG by Amount
(US$ millions)
768.0
241.0
YOo f OEDIIEG Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
39.4
42.9
YOo f OED?IEG Projects Rated U or HU by
Amount
41.5
24.7
a As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation
progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at
the beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
Sources: S A P and Business Warehouse

Yes

Annex 2
Page 19 o f 27

77. Experience shows that Paraguay has institutional weaknesses and governance
constraints which adversely affect the pace of project implementation. As a result, closing
dates frequently have to be extended beyond the time envisaged at appraisal. That, in turn,
means that follow-up projects are pushed back until later in the CAS period and may be
deferred beyond the CAS period altogether. The Secondary Education and Community
Development projects are cases in point. A longer-than-expected implementation period
may sometimes be necessary in order for the development objectives to be attained and
fully secured. That may, however, also increase supervision costs.
AAA

78. The program of AAA envisaged in the 2003 CAS was delivered in full with the sole
exception of a Poverty Update that was postponed until FY09 (see Attachment 3). In
addition to the CAS program, other major analytic work was also undertaken. Reference
has already been made to an Integrated Fiduciary Assessment which has become the single
most important vehicle for advancing the Bank’s policy dialogue with the Ministry of
Finance. The Bank also prepared Policy Notes for the incoming administration of 2008.
The Policy Notes review policy options in many sectors, including sectors where the Bank
already has an operational presence or where it may develop an operational presence in the
future.
79. An assessment of the Paraguay program of AAA was undertaken by a QAG panel
which concluded that the program was highly satisfactory in terms o f its strategic relevance
to the issues confronting Paraguay. The AAA was also rated highly satisfactory in terms of
the coherence and the integrated nature o f the program. The internal quality of the work
was also found to be fully satisfactory.
80. However, local participation, consultation and dissemination were identified as areas
in which the AAA program f e l l short o f its otherwise high standards. The QAG report
made it clear that the moderately unsatisfactory rating for these aspects of the program
reflected, to a large extent, the reluctance of the authorities to engage proactively with other
stakeholders. Nevertheless, and irrespective of the cause, unsatisfactory participation,
consultation and dissemination i s a shortcoming that can seriously detract from the overall
effectiveness of the AAA program. Accordingly, the Bank has taken steps to strengthen
this aspect of AAA in Paraguay.
81. Since the QAG panel made its assessment, the Bank has undertaken additional
analytic work with a heightened emphasis on client participation, consultation and
dissemination. In that respect, the Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) already referred
to in paragraph 35 above was of particular importance. From its very inception the IFA
could count upon the support and participation of senior staff from the Ministry of Finance
including the Vice Minister o f Administration and Finance and the Director of Budget.
Workshops were held to agree upon a calendar of activities and upon the areas of
responsibility for the Government and for the Bank-IDB team respectively. A follow-up
action plan to the IFA has also been agreed on a participatory basis. In the absence of
lending, the IFA has become a key instrument for pursuing a dialogue with the Ministry o f
Finance on policy and structural reforms.

Annex 2
Page 20 o f 27

Table 3: Comparative Costs of Bank Program
(FY07-OS, U$S Thousand)
Source: Business Warehouse as o f May 20, 2008

Country

Average
Preparation

Average
Supervision
cost
per Project

Supervision
cost
Ranking

cost
per Project

Preparation
cost
Ranking

79
85
87
78
71
83
101
99

6
4
3
7
8
5
1
2

391
239
370
166
216
319
443
184

2
5
3
8
6
4
1
7

Paraguay
Argentina
Bolivia
Chile
Dominican Republic
Moldova
Peru
Tunisia

Average
cost

AAA
Report

AAA
cost
Ranking

I32
155
133
135
1l7*
145
141
144

7
1
6
5
8
2
4
3

* Only one AAA during FY07-08.
Costs reflect FY07 actuals plus FY08 estimates.

Program Costs

82. The cost of AAA in Paraguay i s in line with other comparator countries in Latin
America and elsewhere although the spread between them i s not very great. Paraguay also
compares favorably with respect to supervision costs. In terms o f project preparation,
however, Paraguay appears to be relatively high cost and i t s unfavorable ranking i s made
more significant by the relatively high spread between comparator countries. This may
reflect preparatory work done on projects that are dropped from the program before Board
presentation. On the other hand, preparatory work done on projects that do not move
forward i s not necessarily lost. It may very well contribute directly and indirectly to the
achievement of the overall objectives o f the CAS.
Collaboration with other donors

83. The Government does not have an established framework for coordinating donor
assistance. Nevertheless, the Bank endeavors to coordinate its operational and analytic
work with other donors on an ad hoc basis as appropriate. In some cases there are Bankwide agreements with other agencies for working together on AAA o f common interest.
Reference has, already been made to an Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) which was
undertaken within the framework of the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
program (PEFA). The fact that PEFA i s an international partnership between the World
Bank, the European Community, the UK’s Department for International Development, the
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, the French Ministry o f Foreign Affairs, the
Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the IMF and the Strategic Partnership with
Africa undoubtedly engaged the interest of the Paraguayan authorities and motivated them
to cooperated proactively in the IFA. Other analytic work done jointly with other donors
include a 2006 Financial Sector Assessment based on the joint IMF-World Bank FSAP and
a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) prepared jointly with the IDB.

Annex 2
Page 21 o f 2 7

84. Where warranted, the Bank has also cooperated on occasions with other agencies in
specific project work. A Community Development Project has defined a common strategy
with two complementary grants from the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) targeted
at indigenous areas in Eastern Paraguay. Similarly, a Sustainable Agriculture and Rural
Development Project has also coordinated with the JSDF and with other donors that are
active in rural development including KfW, IFAD and the IDB. There i s liason with the
IDB in many projects financed by the Bank.
VI. LESSONS LEARNED

85.

The Bank has effectively re-engaged with Paraguay and re-engagement has produced
positive results in assisting Paraguay make progress with its reform agenda.
Lesson: The Bank should continue with a policy o f engagement in Paraguay.

86.

The effective delivery o f the Bank’s assistance program i s affected by the
uncertainties that prevail in terms of Government policy priorities and legislative prospects.
It i s also subject to higher transaction costs because o f institutional weakneses and a fragile
fiduciary environment.
Lesson: The Bank should seek to expand its operational program in Paraguay
gradually to mitigate potential risks.

87. The successful implementation of an expanded lending program would require
strong support from the Bank.
0

Lesson: Staff and budget resources devoted to the Paraguay program, including the
resident mission in Asunci6n need to be strengthened in order to manage the risks
posed by a fragile institutional, fiduciary and governance environment.

88. Issues o f governance in Paraguay are complex, particularly as they concern the
relationship between the executive, the legislature, the judiciary and civil society.
Experience shows that the CAS program may encounter difficulties as a result o f these
complexities if they are not fully understood or resolved.
Lesson: The Bank should consult widely with multiple stakeholders, including civil
society to ensure that there i s a broad consensus with the objectives of the CAS and
the instruments for attaining those objectives.

89.

Experience in Paraguay shows that CAS objectives can be successfully attained with
a variety of instruments including lending, technical assistance, the use of grant finance and
AAA. If one of these approaches (such as lending) encounters obstacles, other instruments
can be mobilized to advance the CAS objectives.
Lesson: The Bank should adopt a flexible approach in designing and implementing
the country assistance strategy to Paraguay. It should be selective in matching
instruments to changing policy priorities and political circumstances.

90. Technical assistance can play an important role in enabling Paraguay to move
forwards with a program of structural and policy reform. However, experience shows that
there i s resistance to financing technical assistance with external loans.
Lesson: The Bank should seek to finance technical assistance by mobilizing grant
funds wherever possible.

Annex 2
Page 22 o f 2 7

91. In a small country such as Paraguay, a sustained commitment in sectors such as
transport and water supply has allowed the Bank good access to key decision makers and
has thereby enhanced the effectiveness o f economic and sector work.
Lesson: The Bank should continue to expand and sustain an active operational
presence in key sectors.

92. Experience shows that there are significant risks associated with implementing a CAS
program in Paraguay.
Lesson: The CAS should be designed to mitigate risk by undertaking fiduciary
assessments and by employing instruments such as programmatic adjustment lending
or adaptable program lending that can facilitate risk management where the sector
policy framework i s incomplete.

*.. .

0

.

. . . . ...

.. ..

0

.

.

... .. .
4
0
N
0

... .. . .

Annex 2
Page 25 o f 27

Attachment 2
Comparison o f programmed and actual lending FY04-08
Product envisaged in 2003 CAS

I

~

million

)

1

Status of Delivery as o f M a y 2008

I

US$
(million)

Annex 2
Page 26 o f 27

Attachment 3
Comparison o f programmed and actual AAA 2003-08
Product envisaged in 2003 CAS (base case)

Social Protection Policy

I PER
Investment Climate
Land Taxation
CEM
Rural Sector Strategy
Financial Sector Update
Evaluation o f Secondary Education
Poverty Update
I

[

Status o f delivery as o f M a y 2008

Done: Report No. 30084-PY; August 26,2004
Done: “Defining a Strategy for Social Protection
Policy” Report No. 27352-PA; May 2004
and Policv Note No. 13: 2008
Done: “Health Service Delivery in Paraguay”
Report No: 33416-PY; January 25,2006
Done: Report No: 3 1763-PY; June 2005
Done: Report No. 32797-PY; May 3 I,2006
Done: Policy Note No. 4; 2008
Done: “Paraguay Real Property Tax” 2 volumes
Report No. 37456-PA; May 16,2007
Done: “Development Policy Review” (draft)
Report No. 29607-PA; June 30,2004
Done: Joint with F A 0
Done: “Financial Sector Assessment”
Joint IMF-World Bank FSAP; May 2006
Done: “Educacion Media en e l Paraguay”
Report No. 42665-PY; February 7,2008
Now planned for FY09
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (PEFA)
Policy Notes for new administration in 2008

Annex 2
Page 27 of27

Maintenance o f a satisfactory macroeconomic
framework.

Achieved with support from an I M F stand-by program
which the Government now treats as precautionary.

Program.
Progress in providing titles to indigenous
communities for already demarcated lands.

Achieved: National Strategy for the Fight against
Poverty adopted in 2006
Achieved. Land titles o f four communities in Caaguazh
have been fully regularized; nationwide, 45 are in the
pipeline as o f May 2008.

.

Governance and Public Accountabilit) Triggers
Satisfactory progress in implementing agreed
Procurement Action Plan. including, for example,
establishment of agency procurement units and an
electronic information and procurement system,
and strengthened contract management.
Satisfactory progress in implementing agreed
Financial Management Action Plan, including, for
example, introduction o f accrual accounting in
central administration and implementation o f
integrated financial accounting system (SIAF) in
decentralized agencies.

Partially achieved. Agency procurement units have
been established, and information on public
procurement is disclosed electronically. However, an
e-procurement system is not yet in place and contract
management has not been significantly strengthened.
Partially achieved: Commitment stage has been
introduced in the budget, but S I A F has not been
extended to decentralized agencies.

Structural and Pectoral Triggers
No decline in net assets (patrimonio neto) o f
Petropar below level of December 3 1, 2003.
Substantial progress on tax and Government
pension reform, leading to passage and
implementation o f these proposed laws.
Satisfactory progress on financial sector reform, as
evidenced by, for example, strengthened bank
provisioning standards, satisfactory
implementation o f a new deposit insurance
scheme, and adoption o f a modern (least cost)
banking resolution process.

Not achieved: Net Assets o f Petropar declined from
US$-22.5 million in 2003 to US$-83.7 million in 2006.
Achieved: Strategic Plan for Reform o f the Pension
System adopted in 2007, Tax Reform Law enacted in
July, 2004.
Achieved. Deposit insurance fund i s operational and had
US$23 million in reserves as o f May 2007. Resolution 8
was issued and partially implemented, but changes in
provisioning and risk classification have been
postponed. New bank resolution practices have been
adopted and successfully applied.

Portfolio Implementation Triggers
No more than 20 percent o f projects rated
Unsatisfactory on either IP or DO, and an annual
disbursement radio o f about 20 percent.

Achieved: These ratios vary greatly from year to year.
For the period FY03-08 the average ratio o f
unsatisfactory projects was 20 percent and the average
annual disbursement rate was also 20 percent.

Annex 3
Page 1 o f 4

CPS Preparation Process

The CPS was prepared on the basis o f an extensive consultations process initially (during
the third quarter o f 2008) focused on strategic policy direction at the country or sectoral
level, followed b y consultations on the proposed CPS itself. Key results o f the
consultations processes include:

The initial client survey offered important insights on the perception (positive and
negative) that key stakeholders had about the work o f the World Bank in
Paraguay. I t also indicated a number o f broad areas where the Bank could serve
as a development partner for Paraguay.
During the Policy Notes discussions in June 2008, the elected Government
expressed strong interest in working with the World Bank in areas such as: land
access and rural poverty, the modernization o f the public administration and the
management o f state owned enterprises, regulation, infrastructure (transport,
water, and electricity), as well as safety nets and education. Follow-up meetings,
including a detailed discussion on the CPS with the enlarged economic cabinet in
February 2009, helped to better define areas o f Bank support as well as the
instruments to be used (e.g., existing portfolio, new lending, and non-lending
technical assistance). Consultation with the international community on the draft
CPS helped the Bank to better define some o f the issues and understand potential
synergies with multilateral and bilateral programs.

Discussions with Civil Society provided ideas for enhancing a number o f the
proposed activities. For instance, the focus o f a proposed Education operation was
sharpened to include a process to review the needs for reforms in higher
education, while starting with a small program o f scholarships abroad. Also, Civil
Society participants proposed that the dialogue on safety nets, which might lead
to project preparation when the authorities consider it appropriate, be enhanced
with a discussion on the type o f training and retraining needs to enhance labor
mobility, particularly during the current economic slowdown. C i v i l Society also
encouraged the Bank to clarify the ways in which it can assist the authorities in
increasing their participation in the public investment program-especially in
those programs that are co-financed by the World Bank-and the Bank agreed to
prepare a quick response note for civil society on this matter.
A. Strategic Dialogue:

Strategic discussions on policy direction took place with the new Government prior to
i t s coming to office. In particular, the newly elected President, Fernando Lugo,
chaired a one day seminar in Asuncion in June 2008 to discuss the findings o f
fourteen Policy Notes prepared by the Bank on topics ranging from fiscal

management and the wage bill, to social inclusion and infrastructure. The seminar,
and bilateral discussions between Bank and the elected government team organized

Annex 3
Page 2 o f 4

the day before, generated a close dialogue on key aspects o f the new Government’s
program and in defining the framework for future Bank support.
To continue with i t s strategic engagement, the Bank, jointly with other donors,
assisted the Government in organizing a high-level seminar on governance and
development. The seminar, with key note speaker including Ricardo Lagos (former
President o f Chile), included participants such as the vice President o f the Oriental
Republic o f Uruguay and Directors o f the World Bank and the Inter-American
Development Bank, and addressed a large audience, comprising, inter alia, the media,
academia, political figures and private sector representatives. At the strategic level,
the seminar provided the elected authorities and key stakeholders with a tool to
openly engage on country priorities and direction, and to discuss the role o f social and
infrastructure policies.
A Client Survey was completed in August 2008 to better understand the overall
situation in Paraguay and how the Bank i s perceived by i t s main interlocutors, and
other key stakeholders. The Survey provided very useful information and was a
valuable guide to the Bank as it seeks to move forward in increasing i t s support to
Paraguay. A summary o f survey’s objectives, methodology and main finding i s
provided below (see Box 1 below).
Box 1 : 2008 Client Survey - Aligning World Bank’s Priorities in Paraguay
Objectives: A client survey was conducted in August 2008 to assist in understanding how stakeholders in
Paraguay perceive the Bank and better inform the preparation of the CPS.
Methodology: Mail-in quantitative surveys were sent to 453 potential participants in June 2008. Potential
participants were drawn, among others, from the office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister or State
Secretary, federal government staff, Parliamentarian members or staff, bilateral or multilateral agencies,
private sector, NGOs, academia, the media, professional associations and the judiciary. The response rate
was fairly low at 34%. As 93% o f respondents were from Asuncion, comparisons among geographic
locations were not possible. The process was managed on the ground by a local professional services
company.
Overall Findings: Governance i s identified, overwhelmingly, as key development priority in Paraguay.
The Bank’s focus on governance i s therefore validated by survey findings. However, education emerges as
key contributor to poverty reduction and faster growth.. Therefore, stakeholders would like to see the Bank
play a significant role in education, an area where the Bank has been successfully involved in the past.
Stakeholders recognized the value o f Bank involvement in other critical area such as infrastructure,
governance and poverty. Going forward, Paraguay wants the bank to focus on tangibles - Le. access to
education and basic infrastructure- to reduce poverty.
Perceptions of the Bank: Overall perception o f the Bank and its efforts to collaborate and include
stakeholders i s very positive. There i s a c all for greater Bank involvement in Paraguay. However, NGO
respondents have a negative perception of the Bank on certain issues (albeit number o f respondents in this
category was very low), which i s often picked up by the press in articles against the Bank in general or
specific government interventions supported by the Bank in the past.
Perceived weaknesses: Not enough i s being done to prevent corruption in Bank projects. The Bank i s
technocratic in light of political realities, and its flexibility i s a concern. Finally, the Banks’ ability to adapt
knowledge i s somewhat low.
Familiarity with the Bank: Familiarity with the Bank i s low among certain groups of stakeholders
(NGOs, media). This might explain the respondent NGO’s negative perceptions of the Bank on certain
issues. There i s a need to increase Bank awareness among stakeholders, as higher familiarity i s correlated
with more positive views o f the Bank.

Annex 3
Page 3 o f 4

B. Consultations on the Proposed CPS:
Consultations with the international community and with civil society were carried out
by the Bank, in partnership with the Government o f Paraguay, in December 2008 in
Asuncion and in February 2009 in Asuncion and Coronel Oviedo (the third or fourth
largest city in the country, and a place where it i s easy to invite participants from a vast
rural part o f the Eastern side o f the country).

Consultations with the donor community were very positive. The representatives o f
the international community were supportive o f the Bank’s approach as outlined in
the CPS and expressed appreciation for the Bank’s transparency and for i t s openness
in collaborating with them. In particular, the European Union, Spain, Germany and
Uruguay concurred with the Bank on the need to support the state modernization
agenda through a series o f development policy lending operations (DPLs). Some
donors questioned whether governance should be given as much prominence in the
CPS, but it was agreed that the CPS’s focus on governance i s appropriate given that
the Government’s program i t s e l f i s heavily centered on this issue. The question o f

whether the CPS was excessively loaded with non-lending T A was raised, but most,
including the representative o f the IDB, welcomed the proposed technical focus and
praised the important role that the World Bank has been playing as a leading source
of knowledge for both the Government and the entire donor community in Paraguay.
0

The main message emerging from consultations with civil society in both Asuncion
and Coronel Oviedo i s a call for the Bank to help incorporate civil society’s views
and participation in the Government’s public investment program, particularly those
programs with financial support from the Bank. I t was explained that the
Government’s program supported b y the World Bank has involved civil society in
various ways (e.g., directly, as in the Community Development Project, and less
directly, as in the Road Maintenance Project), and it was evident that the mechanisms
o f engagement promoted by the Bank were not clear to civil society representatives.
In this regard, it was proposed that the Bank commission a policy note to address this
issue in FY10. This would serve the purpose o f both explaining the type o f
government-civil society partnerships that were forged in the past, and opening a
dialogue on new way in which this collaboration can take place in the future.
Members o f civil society also noted the need for the Bank to facilitate the consensus
building dialogue over public policy priorities, such as, for example, on the effects o f
the global financial crisis in Paraguay and on the appropriate response to the crisis. .
I t was suggested this could take place in the context o f the Bank’s proposed dialogue
on growth.
Members
facilitated
audiences
particular,

o f the central or local Government, who attended the consultations,
significantly the dialogue and helped the Bank explain to the various
how it operates in order to support a country’s development agenda. In
we would like to thank:

Annex 3
Page 4 o f 4

o The representatives o f the Minister o f Finance that took part in the meetings,
including:

..
.

.
..

Mr. Manuel Caballero, Viceminister for Economy and Trade
Ms. Veronica Serafini, Head o f the Social Unit o f the Ministry o f
Finance
Mr. Raul Monte-Domec, Head o f the Subnational Unit o f the Ministry
o f Finance
Mr. Pedro Espinola, the recently appointed Advisor to the Executive
Director for Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay.

o The representatives o f subnational governments in Coronel Oviedo, including:

The major o f the city o f Coronel Oviedo
The Governor o f the Department o f Caaguazu

Annex 4
Page 1 of 3

Governance and Anticorruption in Paraguay
Context

1.
Paraguay presents serious challenges in the areas o f governance and control of
corruption. The recent Presidential elections had a strong focus on the need to improve
governance and bring about significant change in what i s perceived as a critical
handicap for moving into a more advance phase o f development. The Lug0
Administration obtained a strong mandate from the electorate to improve governance
conditions in the country and has shown a strong commitment and determination to
take serious steps in that direction.
2.
The root o f the problem can be traced back to Paraguay's history and political
economy. Under a dictatorship during most o f the second half o f the 20th Century,
Paraguay started in the early nineties a timid transition to democracy under the same
party -the Colorado Party - that had been the cornerstone o f the dictatorship and had a
firm grip over all state activities. Since the nineties, there has been a steady progress
toward political competition and democratic processes. However, there has been
limited progress in removing the pervasive culture o f patronage, clientelism and
political control in the management o f Government that continues to be the legacy o f
the Stroessner's dictatorship. One dimension o f this culture i s the exorbitant powers
provided to Congress over the selection and salary scales o f civil servants. As a result,
Paraguay's civil service i s amongst the weakest and most politicized in Latin America,
despite the fact that Paraguay's expenditure on public sector salaries i s well above the
regional average (Figure 1). A n independent diagnostic o f the key manifestations of
corruption i s presented in Box 1 below.
Box 1: Governance Assessments

According to a recent assessment', the perception o f corruption i s high for all powers o f government,
including the state-owned enterprises and the two hydro power plants jointly owned by Paraguay with the
governments o f Brazil and Argentina, respectively. The lack of transparency and controls over social
spending in Paraguay by the Itaipu binational enterprise particularly noteworthy. Corruption affects
multiple aspects of daily l i f e o f a Paraguayan citizen, including transit policy "fees" and "payments made to
ease the handling o f key processes by a highly complicated bureaucracy. According to this report, large
corruption i s associated mainly with campaign finance, and government's contracts or concessions.
Although cronyism, patronage, and traffic of influences are present and frequently visible in day to day life,
it i s the corruption associated with illegal activities on a large scale, such as contraband, money laundering,
and drugs, which influences the politics and economy o f the country the most, even though it i s less visible.
Complementingthese results are the findings o f a 2005 comprehensive survey to diagnose the incidence o f
corruption conducted by a public/private Council established in 2005 to promote integrity (namely the
"Consejo impulsor del Sistema Nacional de Integridad-CISNI"), which signals that the political parties
are perceived as the most corrupt institutions in the country. Others institutions perceived as fostering
corruption include the Customs Administration, the Supreme Court, the General Prosecutor's office, and
congress2.

I

See Evaluaci6n de l a Corrupci6n - Paraguay; Mimeo by Benjamin Crosby and Laurence Beck from
Management Systems International, July 2008
2
See Patrones de Comportamiento y de Desempeilo Institucional, Gobernabilidad y Corrupcion en e l
Sector Publico en Paraguay, 2005. CISNI, September 2006

I

Annex 4
Page 2 o f 3

Fieure 1: Oualitv o f the Civil Service

3.

Over the past ten years, Paraguay has made some progress in selected areas o f
governance. The Bank through WBI played an important role in helping the country
define i t s first Anti Corruption Strategy in the late 1990 and, as a result, there has been
some tangible progress in the areas o f public procurement and customs. Despite this
progress, overall achievements remain limited and public distrust in the state and i t s
institutions i s deeply rooted.
Paraguay has, however, shown some relative
improvement in the drive and strength o f i t s c i v i l society, and has exhibited an increase
in social and political openness and an improvement in political stability as the political
system has more systematically abided by constitutional rules. As clearly reflected in
the recent presidential elections, there i s growing impatience in society as a whole for
the slow progress achieved in the areas o f control o f corruption, government
effectiveness and the prevalence o f rule o f l a w in resolving social and political conflict.
The decision by the electorate to vote out the Colorado Party and bring a broad
opposition coalition to govern the country i s a reflection o f both the increased maturity
o f Paraguayan democratic institutions and the strong urge by the citizenry that there i s a
need for radical change in all the dimensions o f governance.

4.

During the last Administration, there was a significant effort to improve
governance effectiveness which had been seriously eroded to the point that the state’s
short term financial viability was at stake. Improving tax collection and strengthening
the revenue base became a critical priority. The Duarte Administration achieved an
important success in this area, as evidenced b y an average budget surplus o f 1% o f
GDP since 2004. This effort has been complemented by important initiatives aimed at
modernizing fiscal institutions. The strengthening o f the Ministry o f Finance and i t s
various dependencies was identified as a key priority and an area in which the Bank
played an active role.

5.

Despite some accomplishments in modernizing fiscal institutions, most
institutions and fiduciary systems remain weak. There is wide scope for collusion in
public procurement, despite the progress made in increasing transparency and
improving competition. The new Government will continue to face challenges in the
fiscal area, including the need to develop a fiscal framework to evaluate and prioritize

Annex 4
Page 3 o f 3

expenditures and to introduce further improvements to public expenditure management.
The budget process remains very weak, while treasury and payments systems are
rudimentary. In addition, the new Government will have to address the issues o f i)
reforming public employment and compensation and ii)improving the management o f
the public investment program.

6.

There are also new demands for action in other critical governance areas. The
strong stance taken by the new Administration regarding the treatment o f corrupt
practices i s very quickly straining the Government’s ability to investigate and sanction
corruption. There i s also a growing concern that a dysfunctional judiciary may soon
become a bottleneck for the type o f progress the Government i s expecting to achieve in
the anticorruption front. There i s also the need to make progress in other areas that may
help prevent corruption, including improving transparency and access to information on
public decision and activities and introducing c i v i l service reform. In all these areas
there will be a need to ensure coordination with other donors who are also actively
assisting Paraguay in handling this far reaching, emerging agenda.

1

E

1

I

Annex 6
Page 1 o f 6

Growth Prospects in Paraguay'

1. Paraguay's long-run growth performance has been disappointing. GDP per capita grew
by 1?4percent on average since 1960, but over the past 25 years, GDP per capita declined by
'/z percent on average per year. The
Per capita income, in '000 of constant 2002 US$
improvement in the 1970s was largely 3 5
related to the construction o f the Itaipu
hydropower
plant,
with
important
spillovers to the economy, and to the
development o f agriculture in the eastern
part o f the country. Higher growth in the
1970s contributed to bridge the gap with
other Latin American countries, but then
the gap stagnated in the 1980s. Paraguay
fell behind throughout the 1990s and has
only now returned to the same per-capita
income relative to the rest o f Latin
America where i t started 45 years earlier.*

3o
25

1o
0.5

60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96 00 04

2* The recent growth
Source: World Bank Development Indicators.
between 2004 and 2008, the largest
expansion since the 1970s, was welcomed, but it highlighted a number o f weaknesses o f the
economic ~ t r u c t u r e .A~t the aggregate level, as demand accelerated over the past years, the
economy started to show signs o f overheating. Analyses prepared by the IMF suggest that
current growth may be higher than its potential. Equally important, while some diversification
occurred (the demise o f cotton production was met with a major supply response by country
producers to opportunities that arose in the world market for soy bean and beef; also, new
products such as stevia, sesame seeds and sugar cane, are now important source o f income for
small and medium farmers). The challenge o f a growth strategy is, thus, to find a mixture o f
policies that w i l l lift sustainable growth upwards over the long run, while at the same time help
diversifying in terms o f both products and markets.
Growth Accounting and Determinants4

3. The growth accounting methodology allows analyzing the contribution o f factor
accumulation and productivity to growth. Table 1 summarizes the findings o f a growth
breakdown made by Loayza et. al. (2005) for the period 1960-2000 and extends their results for
2000-2006. In the first breakdown, TFP i s constructed as the residual o f the contribution o f labor
force and o f capital. In the second breakdown, labor i s adjusted by increases in education

' Prepared by Pedro L. Rodriguez, Country Manager, LCC7

' The trend i s similar if GDP per capita i s measured in purchasing power parity or at market exchange rates.
For example, as construction demand accelerated in 2006, the state-owned cement company, which enjoys a monopoly given
the recent ban imposed on clinker imports, collapsed due to lack of maintenance and continued political interference on the
company's operations. This situation paralyzed the construction sector-which i s a key channel o f transmission from the export
boom into employment generation.
This section relies heavily on the comprehensive analysis o f growth accounting and growth determinants in Latin America and
the Caribbean developed by Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Calderon (2005). I t extends their results for the most recent period not
covered in their paper.

Annex 6
Page 2 o f 6

accomplishments. Finally, in the third breakdown, both labor and capital are adjusted for their
level o f utilization, proxied b y the employment rate.

4. The contribution o f total factor productivity has been negative during the 1980s, as in
other Latin American countries, but, unlike them, it has not recovered until the early
2000s. Negative productivity growth was a common trend in Latin America during the 1980s (1 7
countries experienced such negative TFP according to Loayza et. al.), but most countries showed
positive TFP contribution during the 1990s. Paraguay i s one o f the few countries in the region
that was unable to recover from the fall in i t s productivity growth o f the 1980s. The continued
negative TFP growth in the 1990s may reflect the political uncertainty in this period which has
reduced the incentives to invest in Paraguay, as suggested by Fernandez and Monje (2004). B y
contrast, Paraguay experienced positive TFP growth since 2000, and all the more so since 2003.
As i s shown in the next section, this i s related to better terms o f trade, but also to improvements
in the macroeconomic situation and to the implementation o f structural reforms.
Table 2. Growth Accounting, 1960-2000 (percentage)

1961-70

Simple
GDP
Labor
Capital
TFPI

1971-80 1981-90

1991-00 2001-06

2003-06

9
1
7
3

2
1
2
-0

8
9
9
5

2
1
1
-1

0
8
7
1

2 8
0.6
1 .o
1.3

3 7
0 5
1.1
2.1

Adjusted for H u m a n Capital
4 3
8 9
GDP
2 0
2 9
Labor
Capital
2 1
4 7
0 9
3 9
TFPI

2
2
2
-2

8
9
9
2

2
1
1
-1

0
9
7
2

2.8
0 6
1 1
1 2

3.7
0.5
1.2
2 .o

A d j u s t e d for H u m a n Capital a n d I n p u t Utilization
GDP
...
...
2.8
2 .o
Labor
...
..,
2.7
1.3
Capital
...
...
2,8
1.5
TFPI
...
..,
-1.7
-0.2

2.8
0,7
1.2
0.9

3.7
1.1
2 .o
0.6

4
1
2
1

3
4
1
9

8
2
4
5

S o u r c e s : Loayza. Fajnzylber, Calderon (2005), a n d author's estimates
after 2 0 0 0

5. Another methodology to assess growth performance consists in studying the
determinants of growth, such as structural and stabilization policies and cyclical factors.
Loayza et al. (2005) have estimated the impact o f such factors over 1976-2000 for a panel o f
Latin America countries. Table 3 presents the coefficients o f these models, as well as the results
for Paraguay and extends the analysis to the most recent period. According to the model, the
decline o f per capita GDP growth in the early 1980s i s explained mainly as a correction after the
overheating o f the late 1970s, combined with growing economic instability and a negative termsof-trade shock. The economy recovered somewhat in the late 1980s, in part because o f improved
terms o f trade, higher trade openness, and a favorable exchange rate. The continued deterioration
o f economic growth during the 1990s was caused mainly by the succession o f banking crises that
affected Paraguay from 1996 until 2002. Since 2000, economic growth recovered, following a
cyclical upturn after the banking crises, but also because o f improved terms o f trade and
structural reforms.

Annex 6
Page 3 o f 6

6. Economic instability has been one o f the main factors explaining the poor performance
o f Paraguay until recently. The lack o f macroeconomic stability became a significant constraint
on the overall performance o f the economy during the 1990s period and contributed negatively to
growth for the entire period o f analysis-Trade shocks over the 1995-2003 period, and financial
sector instability between 1998 and 2003 explain instability during these years. Thus,
maintaining the achieved macroeconomic stability, and reducing overall macroeconomic
volatility, w i l l continue to be an important component o f the growth agenda for Paraguay.
Table 3 Growth Determinants, 1976-2005

Econometric growth regression
Determinant
Variable

Dependant variable

Coeff.

Stdev

Contribution to change in GDP growth
81-85 86-90 91-95 96-00 01-05
76-80 81-85 86-90 91-95 96-00

Change in growth rate of GDP per capita

Converaence Factors
Initial GDP Per Capita
Cvclical Reversion
Initial Output Gap

-00176

-3 8

-0.65

0.11

-0.06

-0.04

0.17

-02371

-8 52

-1.83

0.99

-0.05

-0.19

0.27

00172
00066
00096
-00154
00071

67
428
3 14
-3 18
271

043
-003
-011
-0 15
025
039

-0 01

-016
034
005
015
037

0 31
036
054
-004
018
135

044
018
-001
-030
026
057

0 35
-021
012
019
005
050

-00048
-02771
-00061
-00289

-1 89
-376
-3 9
-742

000
-0 18
-006
000
-024

-005
068
030
000
093

004
019
005
-058
-030

004
-004
-001
-231
-232

000
023
0 12
173
209

0072

498

-085

076

-040

-035

026

-1 45

044

-064

-0 13

01216

279

Projected change
Actual change

-4.63
-8.64

3.62
1.99

-0.10
-0.20

-2.46
-2.45

3.29
2.82

Memorandum
Average GDP growth per capita
Change of GDP in Latin America and the Caribbeans
Contribution of structural policies in Latin America and the Caribbeans
Contribution of stabilization policies in Latin America and the Caribbeans

-197
-36
-068
023

002
17
0 15
039

-018
18
039
087

-263
-06
007
061

018

Structural Policies and Institutions
Secondary enrollement
Education
Financial Depth
Private domestic creditlGDP
Trade Openness
Structurally adjusted trade volume/GDP
Government Burden
Log of government consumptionlGDP
Public Infrastructure
Log of main telephone lines per capita
Total
Stabilization Policies
Lack of Price Stability Inflation rate, in log [100+inf rate]
Cyclical Volatility
Std Dev of output gap
REER Overvaluation Log index, overvaluation if > 100
Banking Crises
Frequency of years under crisis 0-1
Total
External Conditions
Terms of Trade
Growth rate of terms of trade

Other
Period shift
Intercept

Specific to 5 year periods

No. Countries / No. Observations

78 / 350

Source Loayza and al for the panel estimation of the model and the results until 2000, author's estimation for the extension in 2000-05

7 . By contrast, structural reforms have generally been supportive even during bad times.
The contribution o f structural reforms has been positive although their contribution to growth fell
during the second half o f the 1990s. Over the entire period o f analysis, the contribution o f
structural policies has generally been higher than in other Latin American countries, reflecting
mostly Paraguay's increased trade openness, improved education, and financial deepening.
Strengthening policy efforts in all these areas should also remain high on the growth agenda.

Annex 6
Page 4 o f 6

8. W h i l e a consensus i s reached over the sources o f growth a n d the policies that are to b e
used to foster it, there are a number o f sectoral policies that are important in any case.
These include five important areas:
Transport. The high costs o f transport and logistics, together with access to finance, are the
major obstacles to private sector development, especially for export industries. The share o f
costs associated with transport i s by far the largest among the logistical costs faced by
private sector enterprises. The main causes for high transport costs include factors such as
the poor condition o f the road network, lack o f coordination among operators and users of
fluvial ports, and a lack o f dredging and signaling along the fluvial transport system. The
inefficiency o f the customs system further contributes to increasing costs. Currently only
14% o f the total road network i s in good condition, which largely corresponds to the total
proportion o f the network which i s paved. While 50% o f imports and 47% o f exports
(2006) are transported by river, the lack o f sufficient dredging and signaling along major
waterways (particular the Rio Paraguay) imposes additional transport costs estimated at
US$l50 milliodyear, since barges cannot be fully loaded and - in many areas - can only
operate during daylight. Finally, air transport i s also plagued by institutional weaknesses in
sector planning and airport operations as well as underinvestment in airport infrastructure
which limit airfreight volumes and passenger traffic. In view o f the current constraints and
the importance o f the transport sector to private sector development, it w i l l be necessary to
strengthen management o f the road network, and to prioritize the allocation o f scarce
resources to rural roads and to the overall network maintenance. In the medium-term,
important steps may include an improvement in the systems used for road network
planning, as well as a modernization o f the toll system, and improved budgetary execution.
In terms o f fluvial transport, there i s a urgent need to improve dredging and signaling as
well as customs processing. Air transport could benefit, among others things, from
integrated multi-modal sector planning, and a separation o f the roles o f sector planning,
regulation and airport operations under efficient operators.
Telecommunications. Paraguay continues to face bottlenecks in fixed-line
telecommunications services due largely to underinvestment and inefficiencies in the
public telecoms monopoly (COPACO) that undermine growth opportunities in information
technologies and call centers as well as the use o f the internet for e-government and in
schools. A t only 0.9%, the depth o f broadband penetration lags significantly behind
MERCOSUR partners such as Brazil (4%), Argentina (6.6%) and Chile (8.8%)5.
COPACO’s monopoly on fiber optic cable access has led to internet access charges that are
approximately 10 times higher than those in the U S or 12 times higher than those in
Korea6. While COPACO charges about US$0,4l/minute for calls to the US and Canada
and about US$0,66/minute for calls to Europe, average prices from Latin American
countries that have liberalized internet access7 run about US$0.03 and US$O.OS
respectively.
Source: CISCO broad band barometer. IDC. CONATEL, December, 2007.

‘Charges for 1 Mb/s service from COPACO under a 1 year contract run about US$600/month. while 1.44 Mb/s services (without
a time-bound contract) by VERIZON (USA) run about US$60/month and 2 Mbis, services (without a time-bound contract) from
Korea Telecom cost about US$SO/month.
Chile, Peni, Panama, El Salvador, Guatemala, Colombia, Argentina, Mexico, Brazil, Bolivia, and Republica Dominicana have
been used for comparison.

’

Annex 6
Page 5 o f 6

0

The Electricity Sector. While Paraguay i s blessed with abundant hydropower generation
capacity (primarily from the Itaipu and Yacyreta dams), key weaknesses in transmission
and distribution hamper the development o f productive activities in both rural and urban
areas, as well as the prospects for true formal exports. While electricity coverage reaches
93.8% o f all households (‘just below the L A C average o f 94.6%), average per capita
consumption per year was only 853 kWh, far lower than in Chile (2.745 kwhlcapitdyear)
or in Brazil (2.166 kwhlcapitalyear). Moreover, system losses (31.1% overall -- 8.1% in
transmission and 23% in distribution) are very high and well above the 13.5% weighted
average for the L A C region.

0

Agriculture and Natural Resources. The agriculture sector i s the mainstay o f Paraguay’s
economy, representing approximately 21% o f GDP and 55% o f exports. I t also employs

about 32% o f the national labor force. During 1991-2005 the agriculture sector’s share o f
GDP grew at a rate o f 3.7% annually and experienced a shift in production, away from
cotton and increasingly concentrated in soy and beef, which together represent about 90%
o f total exports. Although overall productivity in the sector has increased, that o f small
farmers has deteriorated, thus contributing to an increase in extreme poverty in the rural
areas. The uneven distribution o f agricultural land, a high concentration o f both production
and exports in a few products, and the lack o f off-farm employment and processing of
agricultural crops in rural areas, are among the most pressing challenges. Paraguay’s land
ownership GIN1 coefficient i s the highest in the world. The sector i s also faced with limited
access to neighboring markets. Important priorities in a reform agenda for the short t e r m
include (i)development o f a coherent national policy for land administration and land
access combined with financing to promote land acquisition and productive investments by
small (or landless) farmers: (ii)efficient agricultural extension services specifically
targeted to small farmers ideally through cooperation with agricultural enterprises and
cooperatives which could transfer know-how; and (iii)the creation o f rural off-farm
employment. In the medium-term, it will be important to develop a strategy o f agricultural
diversification and to attract additional investment to rural areas in order to encourage local
processing o f agricultural products. Perhaps the single greatest weakness in terms of natural
resource management in Paraguay lies in the forestry sector. Paraguay has lost at least 80
percent o f i t s forests over the last 50 years and losses o f 500 hdday occurred between 1966
and 1991. O f the remaining 2 million ha in the Upper Parana Atlantic Forest (UPAF, i.e.
forests east o f the Paraguay River), only an estimated 800,000 are s t i l l considered
productive. This i s due to destructive logging practices that have degraded the forests, and
a result o f deforestation that has fragmented much o f the UPAF into unmanageably small
remnant patches. While deforestation appears to have slowed recently in the east -- due
both to resource depletion and some success with a “Zero Deforestation” law -- it seems to
have now moved west into the Arid Chaco, which i s home to 78 percent o f Paraguay’s
remaining native forests.
Business Climate: Paraguay’s overall ranking dropped from 108 in the 2008 report to 115,
which i s below the average for L A C and for low-middle income countries (see Table 1).
The change reflects stronger downward shifts in four areas: “starting a business”,

“registering property”, “getting credit” and “trading across borders”. While Paraguay

Annex 6
Page 6 o f 6

continues to fare comparatively well in the first three areas, the deterioration in the latter
area puts the country in the lowest quartile. Improvements in ranking were achieved in two
areas - “closing a business” and enforcing contracts”, but Paraguay continues to lag behind
comparator countries in those areas. Paraguay’s weakest areas are “employing workers”,
“trading across borders”, and “closing a business”.
Table 4: Doing Business in Paraguay: A comparison
Low-middle income

Annex A-2
Page 1 o f 2

Paraguay at a glance
Paraguay

Latin
America
8 Carib.

Lowermiddleincome

6.1
1,710
10.5

563
5,540
3,118

3,437
1,687
6,485

1.9
3.6

1.3
2.1

1.1
1.5

76
73
22

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2007
Population, midyear (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

2/20/09

Developmentdiamond'

Life expectancy

-

Average annual growth, 2001-07
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
Per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year avallabie, 2001-07)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (YOof total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

36
58
72
32
4
61
95
104
106
103

91
90
118
120
116

42
69
41
25
86
89
111
112
109

1987

1997

2008

2007

3.5
25.1
26.4
16.5
14.4

8.9
26.5
44.0
11.7
14.3

9.3
19.6
53.7
15.1
24.8

12.2
18.0
50.9
15.0
21.1

22.0

-7.3
1.1
27.7
6.3

0.8
1.8
36.9
7.3

0.2
1.3
29.1
6.4

1987-97

1997-07

2006

2007

2007-11

3.6
1.1
11.9

1.8
-0.2
3.0

4.3
2.4
14.6

6.8
4.8
9,6

4.2
2.2
2.0

5

Gross
primary
enrollment

1
Access to improved water source

~~-

Paraguay
Lower-middle-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debtfGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtfGDP
Present value of debtfexports

j

Economic ratlo9

I

Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

~ ~ P a r a g u a y
Lower-middle-incomegroup

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1987

1997

2006

2007

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

273
225
141
50 1

185
227
154
588

20 2
20 4
13 7
59 3

22 0
20 0
12 0
58 0

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't Rnal consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

764
71
349

769
114
58 8

73 7
11 2
56 2

74 1
10 8
53 9

1987-97

1997-07

2o06

2007

44
34
-0 5

36
05
04

34
18
25

143
10
-1 2

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturinq

Growth of capltal and GDP (%)
30
20

I

T
I

10

0
-10

-20

1
~~

GCF

h G D P

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

:i
to
5

II

Annex A-2
Page 2 o f 2

Paraguay
~

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1987

Domestic prices
I% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Governmeni finance
(% of GDP, includes current grantsj
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1997

2006

2007

lnflatlon ( O h )
~

21 8
30 3

6.9
4.3

9.6
8.5

25r
20

8.1
10.2

15
10

5

81
15
07

16.9
2.3
-2.3

18.3
4.6
0.5

17.6
4.6
1.o

1987

1997

2006

2007

803
125
101
450
1,049
532
103
14

3,328
494
73
2,239
4,192
1,252
287
928

4,401
439
34
2,495
5,022
533
691
1,754

5,471
890
47
2,686
6,027
451
715
2,577

116
128
91

96
126
76

113
153
74

1987

1997

2006

2007

1,036
1,304
-267

3,983
4,847
-864

5,154
5,406
-252

6,324
6,487
-163

-93
27

33
181

-96
426

-184
373

Current account balance

-334

-650

78

26

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

347
-13

867
-216

309
-387

701
-727

846
2,177.9

1,703
5,635.5

2,462
5,032.7

1987

1997

2006

2007

2 522
372
44

2,461
143
33

3,422
234
19

3,561
217
18

239
65
1

279
36
2

421
39
2

450
38
2

15
60
35
5
0

23
145
84
236
0

12
-1 5
-10
171
0

7
-36
61
244
0

0
19
37
-18
30
-48

40
41
28
14
11
3

74
32
28
4
13
-8

30
11
29
-18
11
-29

02

03

05

04

GDP deflator

JxmJs-Y

07

06

*CPI

TRADE

(US$ m//l/onsj
Total exports (fob)
Soy products
conon
Manufactures
Total imports ( a n
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (7994=700j
Import price index (7994=700)
Terms of trade (7994=700j

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
7,000
6 000

5 000

4 000
3 000
2 000
1000

0
01

02

03

05

04

06

07

rn Imports

Exports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ m/ll/onsl
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ m/ll/onsj
Conversion rate (DEC local/US$j
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ rnilhons)
Total debt outstandinq and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official qrants
Omcial creditors
Private creditors
Foreiqn direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest Payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Current account balance to GDP (%)
2 1

1

Composition of 2007 debt (US$ mill.)

I"

I

1131

8

I
592

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D -Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F .Private
G - Short-term

4/9/09

Annex B-2
Page 1 o f 1

-

CAS Annex 8 2 Paraguay
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 02/23/2009

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a'
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
YOof OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2006

2007

2008

2009

6
3.2
33.3
19.1
50.0
39.6
26.5

4
2.9
50.0
74.4
75.0
93.0
23.7

4
3.4
0.0
0.0
50.0
63.8
10.0

4
4.0
50.0
40.1
75.0
88.3
4.7

YES
677
85

YES
626
89

YES
380
76

NO
274
68

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
34
4
768.0
101.8
39.4
33.3
41.5
14.7

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

h

d

-

111I

b

n

E

h

E
I

a

n
0
+

2 2 2
m m m

.
m

€

rE
E

n
C
E

iS

-aa
U

.-0In
.-In

a

e

c

E

c

U

B

a
C

2P

ET

a

:
C

E

n

9
0
N

2
0

N

:0

N

Annex B3
Page 2 o f 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Paraguay
Paraguay - I F C and M I G A Program, F Y 2006-2009
as o f 1/31/09
IFC Commitments (US$m)

2006 2007 2008

0

0

2009
63.4

Sector (YO)
Infrastructure
Financial Sector

95
5

Investment instrument(%)
Loan
Guarantee
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

95
5

Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

-

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services Paraguay
As Of Date February 23,2009

Product
1. Recent completions
ESWlDialonue
Land Taxes
Joint Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
- Follow Up
Education Sector Study
Policy Notes
Mercosur Trade Study
Transport Sector Assmt
Social Protection Dialogue
Grants
Institutional Support to Congress
Social Capital Strenghtening for Poor Comunities
2. Underway
ESW
Programmatic Poverty Assesment
-with women in the economy grant
Fee For Service
Payments System (wl FFS)
Grants
JSDF Indigenous Land Regularization
JSDF Development of Indigenous Communities
DFlD Governance Dialogue
Compensation for Environmental Services

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$OOO)

FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FY08
FYO9
FYO9
FYO9

202
173
237
153
409
130
80
40

BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB

PD
Gov1Do no r
GovlD o no r
PD
GovlPD
Gov
PD
Gov

Public debate
Knowledge
Public debate
Prob. solving
Public debate
Public debate
Public debate
Knowledge

FY08
FY08

400
867

TF
TF

PD
PD

Prob. solving
Prob. solving

FYO9
FYI0

300
25

BB
BB

GovlPD
GovlPD

Knowledge
Knowledge

FYO8-12

319

FFS

Gov

Prob. solving

FYO8-12
FYO8-12
FYO8-09
FYO9-12

1710
1599
170
200

TF
TF
TF
Dev Market
Place

PD
PD
PD
IDENPB

Prob. solving
Prob. solving
Public Debate
Prob. solving

FY 10-13
FYIO-11
FYI0
FYI0
FYIO-11
FYIO-11
FYIO-11
FY 10-1 3
FY 10-13
FY12-13

TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD

BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BBRF
BB
BB

GovlPD
GovlPD
GovIPD
PD
PD
GovlPD
GovIPD
Gov
GovlPD
GovlPD

Public Debate
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Public Debate
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Public Debate

FYO9-14
FYO9-13
FYO9-13
FYO9-13
FYO9-15
FYI 0-15
FYI 0-13

4500
400
103
394
1500
1000
200

GEF
TF
TF
TF
TF
TF

PD
Congress
Gov
Gov
Gov
PD
Gov

Prob. solving
Prob. solving
Prob. solving
Prob. solving
Prob. solving
Prob. solving
Prob. solving

Audience a

Objective

-

3. Envisaged
ESW
Quick Response Notes (civil society, taxation, pensions, etc)
Programmatic Public Sector Reviews (civil service, SOEs, PER)
State of the Environment Report
Municipal Service Provision in Asuncion
Programatic Dialogue on Sources of Growth
Health Service Delivery (regulation)
Programatic Social Protection Dialogue (CCTs, labor market, etc.)
Financial Sector NLTA
Programatic Poverty NLTA (continued from 2. above)
Participatory Policy Notes
Grants t o be mobilized
GEF in Support of Biodiversity and the North Atlantic Forest
IDF for Congress 2
TFSCB Country Statistical Strategy
TFSCB Statistical Capacity Building
Governance TFs (actual mobilization depends on awards rules)
JSDF for Inclusion of Vulnerable Groups
Communication for Development Grant (to be mobilized)
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

TF
,.

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 2

CAS Annex B6

Paraguay - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as YOo f GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

*
2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

2008

2009

Pro'ected
2010
2011

2012

100.0
21.7

100.0
21.1

100.0
20.2

100.0
22.0

100.0
22.0

100.0
20.0

100.0
19.8

100.0
19.8

100.0
19.8

Industry

21.2

20.7

20.4

20.0

19.4

19.7

19.6

19.6

19.3

Services

57. I

58.2

59.3

58.0

58.5

60.2

60.6

60.6

60.8

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

84.8
18.7
4.0
14.7

84.6
19.3
4.1
15.2

84.9
19.1
4.2
14.8

85.0
17.4
3.8
13.6

88.9
17.6
2.6
15.0

89.1
15.7
4.0
11.7

88.2
16.2
4.6
11.6

86.9
17.0
4.8
12.2

86.6
17.4
4.9
12.5

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

46.0
50.0

51.2
55.6

53.7
58.2

50.9
53.9

56.4
60.5

51.0
55.8

52.3
56.7

54.4
58.3

55.1
59.1

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

15.2
17.8

15.4
17.8

15.1
24.8

15.0
21.1

11.1
13.0

10.9
12.9

11.8
13.4

13.1
14.5

13.4
14.8

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

6,950

7,473

9,275

12,222

15,421

14,277

14,290

4381

15,237

1,080

1,240

1,490

1,710

2,070

2,260

2,320

2,270

2,3 10

Real annual growth rates (YO,calculated from 94 prices)
4.1
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
5.7

2.9
1.3

4.3
4.5

6.8
8.4

5.8
9.3

-0.5
0.6

1.5
1.1

3 .O
2.7

4.5
4.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
2.1
0.9
Total consumption
2.6
2.8
Private consumption
2.5
2.0

2.4
-0.3
-0.6

4.8
8.9
9.5

4.0
10.5
11.3

-2.2
1.9
0.7

-0.2
-1.2
-0.8

1.2
-0.4
-0.3

2.7
1.9
2.2

4,045
3,352
4,158
3,814
( 1 13)
160
(1 1)

5,218
4,409
5,406
5,022
(188)
426
219

6,324
5,471
6,487
6,027
(163)
373
26

8,701
7,95 1
9,334
8,763
(633)
374
(344)

7,274
6,5 I O
7,966
7,4 10
(692)
3 14
(404)

7,47 1
6,699
8,109
7,543
(638)
319
(405)

7,937
7,126
8,503
7,923
(566)
332
(359)

8,392
7,538
8,998
8,390
(606)
346
(394)

32
-30
-80
50
99
-180

47
-138
-40
-98
248
-146

179
-2 5
-15
-10
14
-387

194
-96
-67
-29
603
-727

209
-48
-34
-14
678
-495

105
199
217
-18
-690
790

110
-1
94
-95
259
38

115
13 1
139
-9
220
-107

121
-4
29
-3 3
407
-130

1.2

-1.5

-2.0

-1.3

-4.1

-4.8

-4.5

-3.9

-4.0

Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissior
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (YOo f GDP)

.

3,489
2,861
3,406
3,105
83
131
79

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Paraguay - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Lndicator

2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

Projected
2010
2011

2009

2012

Public finance (as OO/ o f GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
18.4
olw tax revenues
11.9
olw royalties
4.3
Current expenditures
12.9
oiw personnel spending
7.2
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
5.5
Primary surplus (+) or deficit (-)
2.7
Capital expenditure and Net Lending
3.9
Foreign financing
-1.6

18.2
11.8
3.9
13.5
7.2
4.8
2.0
4.0
-1.1

18.3
12.0
4.0
13.7
7.5
4.6
1.5
4.2
-0.6

17.6
11.4
3.6
12.9
7.2
4.6
1.8
3.7
-1.0

17.8
12.2
3.2
12.4
7.3
5.4
3.4
2.6
0.0

16.6
10.8
3.5
14.2
7.8
2.4
-1 .o
4.0
1.7

17.2
11.0
4.0
14.2
7.6
3 .O
-0.9
4.6
1.4

17.7
11.6
4.0
14.2
7.5
3.5
-0.5
4.8
1.6

18.3
12.3
4.0
14.2
7.3
4.1
0.1
4.9
1.5

Monetary indicators
M2IGDP
Growth of M 2 (%)
Total private sector credit growth (%)

14.4
24.6
13.0

15.0
16.1
14.0

15.3
15.3
6.8

18.2
40.2
46.3

17.2
10.3
48.6

17.9
10.3

18.2
10.1

18.2
9.2

18.2
10.8

...

...

...

...

Price indices( YR94 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

00.4
80.8
24.3
58.4

91.8
04.9
87.6
56.4

96.1
126.0
76.3
62.0

113.3
153.4
73.8
69.3

131.5
171.7
76.6
76.9

120.5
154.6
77.9
70.2

121.7
157.3
77.4
68.5

122.8
159.6
77.0
67.9

123.7
162.0
76.3
67.7

4.3
11.8

6.8
8.1

9.6
8.5

8.1
10.2

10.2
10.2

7.0
7.0

6.5
6.5

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.0

Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a. GDP at market prices

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$iLCU denotes appreciation.

-

Annex B 7
Page 1 o f 1

-

CAS Annex 67 Key Exposure Indicators Paraguay
As of 3/23/2009

3,33 1

3,054

3,022

3,092

3,088

3,267

3,437

3,427

3,456

Net disbursements (LJS$m)a

-30

-138

-25

-96

-48

199

-1

131

-4

Total debt service (TDS)

478

476

42 1

435

445

530

528

503

506

88.0
47.9
12.6
26.3

69.2
41.7
10.8
25.8

51.6
32.6
7.2
25.8

44.0
25.3
6.2
25.1

32.9
20.0
4.7

41.6
22.9
6.8

42.8
24.0
6.6

40.4
23.5
5.9

38.6
22.7
5.7

13.9
90.2

11.8
84.6

12.3
79.9

12.8
80.8

14.4
72.9

11.8
80.3

12.8
83.8

15.3
94.8

14.2
96.7

1.2
246

223

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO~XGS~
TDOiGDP
TDSiXGS
ConcessionaliTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (YO)
IBRD DSipublic D S
Preferred creditor DSipublic
D S (%)'
IBRD DSiXGS

IBRD TDO (US$m)d

0.8

0.6
234

0.6
227

0.5
222

0.6
297

0.7
329

0.7
369

O f which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f I B R D portfolio (YO)

...

...

. I .

. I .

...

...

,..

...

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.4

IDA TDO (Us$m)d

22

21

19

18

17

15

14

12

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

15.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

61.0
0.0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity i c
MIGA

Source Central Bank of Paraguay and staff estimates
a Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short- term capital Excludes debt o f ltaipu and Yacyreta
b "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances
c Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements
d Includes present value of guarantees
e Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments

0.6
371
I . .

0.4
11

' " O W 0
r r r - O )

r-m-

r

Annex B8
Page 2 o f 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Paraguay
Paraguay
Statement o f IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f 1/3 1/2009
(In US Dollars Millions)
Committed

FY Committec Company
2009
Banco Continent
2009
lnterbanco
20031 2009
UABL

Outstanding

Loan
Equity Quasi
Partic Loan
Equity Quasi Partic
0.00
0.00
0.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.32
000
0.00
000
0.39
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.20
0.00
60.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
60.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33464R
62W

60W

58W

56W

54W

18S

18S

B OLI VI A
PARAGUAY

Capitán
Pablo
Capitán Pablo
Lagerenza
Lagerenza

To
Santa Fé

20S

To
Boyuibe

20S

Puerto
Bahía Negra

ALTO

Cerro León
(1,000 m)

P A R A G U AY

General
Eugenio
General Eugenio
A. Garay
A. Garay

Fortín
Madrejon

Fuerte Olimpo

B RA ZIL

Fortín Carlos
A. Lopez

Kilómetro
160

C

AMAMBAY
Aquidabán

Verde

Concectión
Concepción

rag

uay
Rosario

yo

To
Formosa

PARAGUARI

A
GUAIR

San Juan
Bautista

IO

N

To
Cascavel

Abaí

A

Santa
Rita

26S

Caazapá

CA

Ú

DEPARTMENT CAPITALS

(842 m)

IS

BUC

Paraná

Itaquayry

Ciudad del
Este

Paraguari Cerro Pero

M

NEEM
Desmochado

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

Curuguaty

Villarrica
Villa
Oliva

24S

CANENDIYÚ

Coronel
Oviedo

Caacupé

ASUNCIÓN

Pilar

Salto del
Guairá

SAN
PEDRO

CORDILLERA CAAGUAZU

CENTRALIta

PA RAG U AY

Lima

San
Estanislao

Villa
Hayes

ARGENTINA

San
Pedro

NA

H AY E S
Pilc
om
a

26S

Capitán
Bado

PRESIDENTE

Monte Lindo
Fortín
General
Díaz
Fortín Teniente
Rojas Silva

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Pedro Juan
Caballero

Yby Yaú

CONCEPCION

Pozo
Colorado

Pa

To
Las Lomitas

To
Dourados

Puerto Pinasco

Fortín Ávalos
Sánchez

24S

22S
Puerto
La Victoria

RA

Fortín
Leonida Escobar

n

co

PA

yo

G

ma
co
Pil

ra

Filadelfia

ha

AZ

A
AP
á

Doctor
Doctor
Pedro P.P.Peña
Pedro
Peña

O

Mariscal
Mariscal
Estigarribia
Estigarribia

To
Campo
Grande

I TA P U A

Pa
ran

BOQUERON

LT

Fortín
Infante Rivarola

Puerto
Tres Palmas

San Ygnacio San Pedro
del Paraná

ES

Coronel
Bogado

Encarnación
To
Santo Tomé

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

28S

PAN-AMERICAN HIGHWAY
MAIN ROADS
0

RAILROADS
DEPARTMENT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

0
60W

58W

56W

50

100

50

150 Kilometers

100 Miles
54W
JULY 2006

