Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 48665 - RO

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
ROMANIA
FOR THE PERIOD July 2009-June 2013
June 12, 2009

Central Europe and the Baltic Countries Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
USD 1 = RON 2.9664
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytical and Advisory Activities

IFC

International Finance Corporation

CEM

Country Economic Memorandum

IFI

International Financial Institution

CP

Convergence Program

IMF

International Monetary Fund

CPS

Country Partnership Strategy

IL

Investment Loan

DPL

Development Policy Loan

IT

Information Technologies

EBRD

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

LA

Lisbon Agenda

EC

European Commission

MIC

Middle Income Country

ECA

Europe and Central Asia

MSME

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

ECB

European Commission Board

MTEF

Medium-term expenditure framework

EERP

European Economic Recovery Plan

NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organization

EIB

European Investment Bank

NBR

National Bank of Romania

EU

European Union

NHIF

National Health Insurance Fund

EU8

Member States that joined the EU on May 1, 2004,

NGO

Non-governmental organization

excluding Malta and Cyprus

NRDP

National Rural Development Plan

EU8 Member States that joined the EU on

NRP

National Reform Program

January 1, 2007, excluding Malta and Cyprus

OECD

Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development

OP

Operational Program

PAL

Programmatic Adjustment Loan

PEIR

Public Expenditure and Institutional Review

PISA

Programme for International Student Assessment

PPP

Public Private Partnerships

ROSC

Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes

SBA

Stand-By Arrangement

SME

Small and medium enterprises

TA

Technical assistance

USD

United States dollar

VAT

Value Added Tax

EU10

FDI

Foreign direct investment

FIAS

Foreign Investment Advisory Service

FIRST

Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative

FRL

Fiscal Responsibility Law

FSAP

Financial Sector Assessment Program

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GEF

Global Environment Facility

GMI

Guaranteed Minimum Income

IBRD

International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development

IBRD

IFC

Vice President:
Shigeo Katsu
Country Director: Theodore Ahlers
Task Team Leader: Benoit Blarel

Vice President:
Director:
Task Leader:
2

Jyrki Koskelo
Shahbaz Mavadat
Kaikham Onedamdy

Acknowledgements:

The Country Partnership Strategy was prepared by a core team comprised of the following
World Bank Group staff: Benoit Blarel, Country Manager (TTL), Penny Williams, Senior
Country Officer, Catalin Pauna, Senior Economist, Ana Maria Mihaescu, Chief of Mission, IFC,
Kaikham Onedamdy, Strategy Officer, IFC, Toni Koleva, Operations Analyst, Cornelia
Boranescu, Operations Analyst, Eugen Scanteie, Consultant, Iolanda Staniloiu, Communications
Officer, Mihaela Dumitrascu, Executive Assistant, Raluca Banioti, Program Assistant.

3

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY July 2009-June 2013
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary

5

I.

Country Context
A. Political Environment
B. Recent Economic Developments
C. Impact of Crisis
D. Social Outcomes
E. Economic Outlook

5
5
6
9
10
12

II.

Country Development Program
A. Public Sector Reforms
B. Growth and Competitiveness
C. Social and Spatial Inclusion

15
16
18
19

III.

The World Bank Group Program
A. Implementation of 2006 CPS and Lessons Learned
B. External Partners and the Bank’s Value Added
C. The Proposed Bank Strategy
D. Strategic Pillars of the Proposed Program
Pillar 1: Public Sector Reform
Pillar 2: Growth and Competitiveness
Pillar 3: Social and Spatial Inclusion
E. Consultations and Partnership with the Government and other Stakeholders
F. Measuring Results

22
22
24
26
28
28
29
33
35
36

IV.

Risk Management

36

ANNEXES
A1. Romania At A Glance
B2. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3. IBRD/IDA Program Summary
B3. IFC Investment Operations Program
B4. Summary of AAA Services
B5. Social Indicators
B6. Key Economic Indicators
B7. Key Exposure Indicators
B8. Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
B8. IFC’s Committed and Disbursed Investment Portfolio
C. Results Framework
D. CPS Completion Report
E. Consultations
F. Map

4

Country Partnership Strategy for Romania
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
After eight years of rapid economic growth and impressive gains in poverty reduction,
the shockwave of the global economic and financial crisis has exposed the growing imbalances
and economic vulnerabilities in Romania’s economy, rooted in weak economic management and
a large, unfinished agenda of public sector and governance reforms.
2.
The new Government faces the difficult task of reconciling short-term fiscal
consolidation with the need to mitigate the social costs of the crisis and restore the sources of
sustainable and equitable growth. The new Government has moved rapidly to take fiscal
measures aimed at containing the impact of the crisis, to mobilize an international financial
package spearheaded by the IMF, the EU and the World Bank, and to resume the structural
reform agenda that had faltered since EU accession on January 1, 2007.
3.
The World Bank Group will complement and support this program by i) helping the
Government to implement structural reforms to help mitigate the crisis by reducing social and
economic vulnerabilities and ii) putting in place the basis for sustainable economic growth in the
medium-term. In the first few years of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), the Bank
program will center on a programmatic series of Development Policy Loans (DPLs), the existing
investment portfolio, and Advisory and Analytical Activities (AAA). A mid-term CPS progress
report would articulate the Bank program for the outer years of the CPS period. This CPS is
fully consistent with a forthcoming Regional Framework that will set out the Bank’s value-added
and key areas of activity across Central and South Central Europe and the Baltics region.
Notwithstanding the current economic crisis, Romania’s EU accession is resulting in increased
market access and commercial banking activity, with a gradually declining role for the IFC. IFC
therefore, envisages a phased reduction of its involvement within a period of 5 years, subject to
market conditions, offering support to selective sectors and activities in which IFC can still
provide value addition and in which the commercial sector and market cannot fulfill. In the short
term, IFC's investment strategy is to play a crisis response role by helping to recapitalize the
major banks which are considered vital to the financial system and offering trade finance to
financial institutions in Romania.
I.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Political Environment

4.
Between 2001 and 2006 stakeholders in Romania united behind the objectives of
joining NATO and the EU, but since 2007 reform momentum has slowed sharply. After EU
accession on January 1, 2007 political differences escalated and reform fatigue set-in. This
affected the consistency and coherence of public policies, and complicated the adoption and
implementation of longer-term policies and programs. Coalition politics is expected to prevail
over the period covered by this Partnership Strategy but the global economic and financial crisis
may provide the necessary impetus for renewed political accommodation that has, prior to EU
accession, enabled minority or coalition governments to undertake important reforms.
5

5.
In late December 2008 a coalition Government took office following parliamentary
elections a month before. The current Government, which enjoys a 70 percent majority in the
Parliament, is formed by a coalition between democrat-liberals and the socialdemocrats/conservatives alliance under a political pact - Partnership for Romania. Given its
large majority in the Parliament and the support of the President, the coalition Government in
principle controls the important legislative initiatives needed to manage the crisis and renew
reform. The breadth and depth of these legislative and policy measures will be necessarily
limited to the areas of overlap between the respective agendas of the coalition members. At the
same time, these measures will necessarily have cross-party support and therefore may be more
likely to be sustainable. However, the Presidential elections scheduled for Fall 2009 could strain
the coalition as candidates from the two main coalition parties are likely to compete for the
Presidency.
6.
The crisis provides stimulus for reform consensus. The crisis has forced strong
austerity measures and a re-evaluation of populist policies, including in public sector wages and
pensions. Success in mitigating the impact of the crisis hinges on the commitment and capacity
of political institutions to work together to enact bold reforms and to mobilize key stakeholders
and the population behind them.
B.

Recent Economic Developments

Growing macro imbalances and the build-up of vulnerability
7.
The Romanian economy experienced an economic boom during 2003-08, associated
with the process of accession to the EU, leading to rapid gains in poverty reduction. Growth
averaged over 6.5 percent per year during that period, reaching over 7 percent in 2008. Absolute
poverty declined from 35.9 percent in 2000 to 5.7 percent in 2008. A large part of the domestic
absorption boom was driven by private investment: with EU accession prospects becoming more
certain, capital flows, particularly foreign direct investment, were attracted by perceptions of
lower investment risk that made Romania a favorable investment location. Sharp increases in
asset prices and rising collateral values added a self-reinforcing momentum to the absorption
boom.
ECONOMIC GROWTH & POVERTY, ROMANIA 2002-2009
12000

35
30

10000

28.9
25.1

25
20

8000
18.8

6000
15.1

15

13.8
4000

10

9.8
5.7

5

2000

(p
ro
je
ct
ed
)

20
08

20
07

20
06

20
05

GDP per capita, 2002 prices

20
09

Poverty Rate

20
04

20
03

0

20
02

0

7.4

Source: Romania - Rapid assessment of the economic crisis on poverty.
Joint note by UNICEF and the World Bank, April 2009
6

8.
The strong economic growth was accompanied by widening current account
imbalances. Although exports to the EU countries grew at a robust pace, domestic demand grew
at an even faster rate, and the current account deficit rose from just over 5.0 percent of GDP in
2003 to 12.4 percent of GDP in 2008.
9.
At the same time, in the past two to three years, the composition of the capital
inflows moved increasingly towards private debt flows—in large part the result of borrowing
by banks, often by subsidiaries of foreign banks from their parent banks but also as a result of
direct borrowing by corporates.
Figure 1.
Growing
current
account
deficits
were
increasingly financed with private borrowing
until 2008….

Figure 2.
.. and the structure of private debt shifted toward
shorter maturity

Percent of
GDP

Percent
of GDP

20

60

Other incl E&O
Pvt
borrowing
(net)

10
Pvt bor (net)

0

FDI

Pub bor
(net)

Current
Account

Other incl E&O
Public borr (net)

FDI

FDI

Current
Account

Current
Account

50

Public
MLT

40

-10

Private
MLT

30
NBR Res

-20

NBR Res

NBR Res

20

Other incl E&O

-30

Short-term
debt

10
Pvt
borrowing (net)
Public borr (net)

-40

0

2003

2007

2008

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

10.
The domestic overheating and external imbalance were exacerbated by the fiscal
policy stance. Fiscal policy in Romania has been highly pro-cyclical in recent years with fiscal
management lacking in medium term orientation. Following efforts of fiscal consolidation during
2003-05 that led to a narrowing of the fiscal deficit to 0.8 percent of GDP in 2005, the fiscal
deficit widened again progressively to reach 4.9 percent in 2008 (while the structural fiscal
deficit increased from 0.7 percent of GDP in 2005 to 6.5 percent of GDP in 2008) as a result of
excessive public spending policies. Government spending doubled between 2005 and 2008
pushing the public sector share of economic activity from 31 percent of GDP to 37.8 percent of
GDP. The public sector wage bill more than doubled over these three years due to high wage
increases combined with a huge increase in government employment. In the final months of
2008, further expenditure hikes in the run up to the November 2008 parliamentary elections left a
legacy of precarious financing of the deficit. This doubling of government spending was not
matched by a corresponding increase in the amount and quality of public services.

7

Figure 3.
Fiscal policy was pro-cyclical and deficits grew..

Figure 4.
..driven in large part by loose public pay policy

Percent of GDP
Gross wage (2003=100)
0

350

-1

300

-2

250

-3

200

-4

150

Fiscal balance
Structural balance

-5

100

-6

50

-7

Economy wide
Public Administration
Education
Health

Ed
EW

PA

Health

0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2005

2006

2007

2008

11.
The overheating and large capital inflows complicated monetary policy. Monetary
policy was relatively tight—with the National Bank of Romania (NBR) increasing reserve
requirements and interest rates in an attempt to dampen inflationary pressures. In addition, a
number of measures were undertaken to contain credit expansion, especially in foreign currency
lending. Between 2004 and 2008, policy interest rates were raised, as were minimum reserve
requirements (to 18 percent on local currency liabilities and 40 percent on foreign currency
liabilities); measures were taken to limit household debt exposures, especially with regard to
mortgage debt; prudential regulations were strengthened to limit lending to un-hedged borrowers
of foreign exchange, and restrictions on household debt service ceilings were tightened. These
measures contributed to the subsequent deceleration in household credit growth, but pressure
from an expansionary fiscal policy and capital inflows caused the NBR to miss its inflation target
in 2007 and 2008. At the same time, the interest rate differential between domestic and
international rates and the restrictions on credit growth mentioned above, may have served to
further encourage direct external borrowing and short term capital inflows. In particular, large
firms began to borrow directly abroad as reflected in an increase in direct borrowing by firms
from the equivalent of 4 percent (on a net basis) of GDP in 2005 to nearly 11 percent of GDP in
2007.
12.
Romania’s financial system—which is dominated by commercial banks—played an
integral part in the domestic overheating. Between 2003 and 2007, total financial system
assets more than doubled from about 36 percent to 74 percent of GDP (with the banking sector
accounting for 83 percent of total assets). At the end of 2007, foreign-owned banks (mostly
subsidiaries) accounted for 88 percent of total banking sector assets. Growth in real private
sector credit rose from 23 percent per year in 2003 to over to 60 percent in 2007 before slowing
slightly to 54 percent in 2008. Much of banks’ lending was directed towards households, three
quarters of which towards consumer credit. Between 2003 and 2007, claims on households rose
from 12 to 28 percent of total banking sector assets (19.5 percent of GDP in mid-2008), while
claims on companies declined from 37 to around 30 percent of banks’ assets.

8

13.
The proportion of banks’ lending funded from non-deposit sources—particularly
foreign borrowing—rose progressively. While deposits grew relatively steadily, lending
significantly outpaced the growth in deposits with the loan to deposit ratio increasing by over 43
percent during 2003-2008 to reach 130 percent at end 2008. The large resort of banks to external
financing of lending is reflected in the rise in net foreign liabilities of banks from the equivalent
of -2 percent of GDP in 2003 to around 18 percent at end 2008.
14.
The indebtedness of households and corporates also grew rapidly, with much of the
borrowing denominated in foreign currency. Total borrowing by the corporate sector grew at
an annualized rate of 44 percent between 2004 to mid-June 2008 entailing a near doubling of
indebtedness to 28 percent of GDP. Although the proportion of foreign currency (FX) borrowing
declined slightly over the period, it was still over 70 percent in 2008. While household
disposable income grew at an average annual rate of 20 percent, household debt increased at a
rate of 77 percent, with FX denominated borrowing rising even more rapidly; by mid-2008, the
share of FX borrowing in total household borrowing had risen to 56 percent (from 45 percent in
2005).
15.
In sum, the Romanian economy had become vulnerable to liquidity and foreign
exchange risks by the time the global financial crisis unfolded.
C.

Impact of crisis

16.
The economy has been hit hard by the global economic downturn. Economic activity
declined sharply in the last quarter of 2008 and has fallen further in early 2009. Real GDP
growth shifted from an average of 9 percent (quarter on quarter annualized) during the first three
quarters of 2008 to a 13 percent decline in the fourth quarter. The decline was driven primarily
by a drop in domestic demand. Export growth also slowed. With imports dropping even more
sharply, the correction in the current account deficit began towards the end of 2008. For the first
quarter of 2009, early indicators (confidence, industrial production, retail sales and tax revenues)
all point to a continued sharp drop in GDP, along with rising unemployment as well as poverty
incidence.
17.
Asset and financial markets have been severely affected by the effects of the global
crisis and economic downturn. The stock market has lost 65 percent of its value since the peak
in August 2008. The inter-bank market was disrupted in October 2008 by rumors of liquidity
problems at a commercial bank, leading to a spiking of rates; these rates remained relatively high
thereafter due to lingering concerns about counterparty risk, high risk aversion, and market
segmentation due to an uneven distribution of assets (T-bills) eligible for discount with the NBR.
Balance of payment pressures drove a 15 percent depreciation of the leu against the Euro from
October 2008, putting pressures on household, corporate and bank balance sheets. To dampen
currency volatility, the central bank intervened in the spot market, with some EUR4½ billion in
reserves since end-October. Despite the depreciation, financial conditions tightened significantly
on increased sovereign credit default swap premium and monetary policy tightening. Romania’s
international credit rating was cut in late 2008 by a larger margin than those of other countries in
the region, reflecting market concerns about the sustainability of Romania’s large current
account deficit, uncertainties surrounding the outlook for fiscal and incomes policies, and the

9

financial health of banks with subsidiaries or branches in Romania. This has translated into
significantly higher external borrowing costs for Romanian banks and corporates.
18.
As conditions in the financial markets have worsened, the financing of the fiscal
deficit has been increasingly concentrated at very short maturities. This has exposed the
Government to roll-over risks in the current environment of de-leveraging.
19.
Romania’s deteriorating macro-financial environment has created risks for
financial stability. Over the last few months, liquidity risk has become substantial in view of the
difficulties in parent banks and the downgrading of Romania’s sovereign rating to below
investment grade by major international ratings agencies in late 2008 leading to a decline in the
capital account flows. A sharp contraction or reversal of inflows could threaten macroeconomic
and financial stability through a drying up of credit to the private sector, resulting in an even
sharper slump in economic activity and larger increases in loan defaults. In addition, a reversal of
capital inflows would put additional downward pressures on the exchange rate. While banks’
direct exposures to foreign exchange risk reflected in their net open positions are low, as noted
above, many households and businesses are exposed to un-hedged foreign exchange risks.
Banks, therefore, have substantial indirect foreign exchange risk exposures, in the form of credit
risk.
20.
The rapid deterioration in economic conditions and depreciation of the leu will place
strains on bank capital positions. The banking system entered the crisis well capitalized and
with high liquidity buffers. Stress testing has already been performed by the National Bank of
Romania. A strengthening of capital positions may be warranted and, in line with commitments
made in Vienna and in Brussels, parents of most foreign owned banks have agreed to maintain
lines of credit to their subsidiaries and borrowers in Romania and to increase their capital in
order to comply with the minimum agreed level of solvency. In addition, banks will need to be
proactive in enhancing loan quality by developing and implementing effective debt restructuring
or workout procedures for household and corporate clients.
D.

Social Outcomes

21.
Growth was highly successful in reducing poverty for the large majority of the
population. The rapid growth witnessed over most of this decade has led to a dramatic decline
in absolute poverty to 5.7 percent in 2008. The number of absolute poor fell from 2.1 million in
2007 to about 1.2 million in 2008. Poverty remains concentrated among vulnerable groups, in
particular in rural areas where 75 percent of the poor are found. Besides rural areas, children, in
particular those of large familes, the youth, the Roma, the unemployed and the self-employed
(especially in agriculture), are at higher risk of poverty.
22.
Poverty reduction gains are at risk, with both core and transient poverty expected to
increase. The onset of the crisis is expected to partially reverse the important gains in overall
poverty reduction derived from past economic growth. Poverty is expected to rise to 7.4 percent
of the population in 2009, and the proportion of children living in absolute poverty is projected
to increase from 7.8 percent in 2008 to 10.7 percent in 2009. Although most of poor continue to
reside in rural areas, poverty is expected to increase faster in urban than in rural areas (by 40 and
30 percent, respectively), and the self-employed (outside of agriculture) where the impact of the
10

crisis is expected to be most pronounced. The budget transfers needed to finance increased
demands on social assistance from the chronically poor, the unemployed and those vulnerable to
transient poverty will be a challenging task given the reduced fiscal space.
Figure 5. Effectiveness of Social Assistance Programs across EU member states
percent reduction in poverty after non-contributory social benefits
60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

EU

(2
EU 5 c
(1 oun
5
co tries
un )
tri
Sw es)
e
D den
en
m
a
C
ze F rk
ch inla
R nd
N epu
et
he blic
rla
G nd
er s
m
Sl any
ov
en
Fr ia
an
c
Au e
s
H tria
un
ga
Ire ry
la
B nd
Lu elg
xe iu
m m
bo
u
U
ni Slo rg
te
d vak
Ki
ng ia
do
m
M
al
Po ta
la
Es nd
to
Po nia
rtu
g
C al
yp
Li rus
th
ua
R nia
om
an
ia
La
tv
Bu ia
lg
ar
ia
Sp
ai
n
Ita
l
G y
re
ec
e

0%

Source: World Bank Policy Briefs, 2009

23.
Social protection schemes do not address poverty well. Romania’s social protection
expenditure per capita is the lowest in the EU, and spending on poverty-targeted programs is low
in proportion to GDP and to needs; it has actually declined in recent years. Only a few safety net
programs perform well, while the overall system of social assistance cash benefits performs less
well than in other EU countries in reaching the vulnerable and in providing them with adequate
protection (figure 5). Most of the social assistance benefits have a low adequacy, representing
only 10-20 percent of the minimum wage, and cover less than 30 percent of the household
consumption of the poorest beneficiaries. The total social assistance benefits are not costeffective from a poverty reduction perspective: 13 RON are spent for 1 RON reduction in the
poverty gap (not taking into account administrative costs). Leakages and inequity in social
assistance programs are high (figure 6): only 17 percent of the social assistance benefits reach
the poorest quintile, 29 percent of the poor are excluded from the system (“remaining poverty
gap” in figure 6), and half of the funds spill to the wealthier quintiles. Spending on povertytargeted programs has decreased relative to GDP in recent years. Well-targeted programs such as
the Guaranteed Minimum Income Program (GMI) or income-tested family allowances are underfunded, leaving out 60 percent of the rural poor and 77 percent of the urban poor.

11

Figure 6. Effectiveness of Social Assistance Programs in Romania

Poverty Gap and SA spending, RON constant prices

Performance of Social Assistance (SA) cash transfers in reducing the Poverty Gap

Spillover

Total SA spending

Poverty Gap
covered by SA
transfers

Poverty Line
Remaining Poverty Gap

2004

2005

Social Assistance cash transfers spillover

Poverty Gap after transfers

2006
Portion of the Poverty Gap covered by social assistance cash transfers

Source: World Bank Policy Briefs, 2009

E.

Economic Outlook

24.
The economy is expected to contract by about 4 percent in 2009 (Table 1). Domestic
demand will contract as foreign direct investment and capital inflows, which previously helped
finance high consumption and investment growth, will drop sharply. With no fiscal space and
tight financing conditions, an easing of fiscal policy to cushion the downturn will not be
possible.
25.
The Government has already initiated substantial measures to address the fiscal
deficit. The 2009 approved budget contains important spending cuts and revenue increases
yielding around 3 percent of GDP in total. These measures include i) an increase of 3.3
percentage points in social contributions; ii) higher property taxes due to an overdue increase in
appraisals; iii) removal of a reduced VAT rate for the purchase of a first house; iv) significant
cuts in the public wage bill by reducing bonuses and other benefits and by eliminating 137,000
vacancies (previously used to grant higher allowances to existing staff); and v) substantial cuts in
spending on goods and services as well as subsidies. It is estimated that the fiscal measures
already approved in the budget would reduce the fiscal deficit to about 5.2 percent of GDP and
the structural deficit would fall by about 1.7 percent of GDP.
26.
The Government has sought multilateral support, including from the IMF, the EC
and the World Bank Group. The Fund’s program of support seeks to i) strengthen fiscal
policy further to reduce the Government’s financing needs and improve long term fiscal
sustainability; ii) maintain adequate capitalization of banks and liquidity in domestic financial

12

markets; iii) sustainably reduce inflation; and iv) secure external financing and improve
confidence.
Table 1: Selected macro indicators
2005

Actual
Projected
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Annual percentage change

Output and prices
Real GDP
Domestic demand
Consumer price index (CPI av)
Unemployment rate
Nominal wages
Public sector wages
Private sector wages

4.1
8.3
9.0
5.8
17.0
25.9
14.7

7.9
12.8
6.6
5.8
18.9
27.3
16.5

6.2
7.1
-4.1
14.3
8.9
-8.2
4.8
7.8
5.9
4.3
4.0
8.9
22.6
23.6
5.9
18.5
31.0
5.1
23.2
21.2
6.2
In percent of GDP

0.0
-3.3
3.9
9.7
3.8
3.9
3.8

5.0
6.0
3.5
7.7
5.2
3.5
5.7

Savings and investment
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings

23.3
14.4

26.5
16.1

31.1
17.3

31.4
19.0

30.8
23.2

29.9
23.4

31.9
25.7

General government
Revenue
Expenditure
Fiscal balance
Privatization proceeds
External financing
Domestic financing
Structural balance 1/
Gross public debt (direct debt only)

30.1
30.9
-0.8
1.3
0.5
-1.0
-0.6
15.6

31.0
31.6
-0.6
0.4
0.1
0.1
-2.1
15.4

32.5
35.6
-3.1
0.1
0.1
2.9
-4.2
17.5

32.6
37.5
-4.9
0.1
0.5
4.4
-6.5
20.1

33.0
37.5
-4.6
0.0
2.8
1.8
-3.8
23.6

33.4
37.0
-3.6
0.0
1.1
2.4
-1.7
25.7

33.1
35.8
-2.7
0.0
0.2
2.5
-1.2
25.7

6.6
15.9

6.5
5.1

11.5
3.2

-

-

-

-7.5
-7.5
-2.4
3.1
-56.8
23.4
64.2

-6.5
-6.6
3.3
3.7
-55.8
26.1
68.5

-6.2
-6.8
7.8
3.7
-54.1
25.6
64.0

Annual percentage change
Money and credit
Broad money (M3)
Credit to the private sector

36.5
-

28.1
54.5

33.7
60.4

Interest rates
Euribor six months
NBR policy rate
NBR lending rate (Lombard)
Interbank offer rate (1 week)

2.8
7.5
14.0
7.0

3.2
8.7
14.0
7.4

4.8
7.5
12
7.8

17.6
33.7
In percent
3.5
10.2
14.2
15.9

In percent of GDP
Balance of payments
Current account balance
Merchandise trade balance
Capital and financial account
FDI
International investment position
Gross official reserves
Gross external debt

-8.9
-9.9
15.6
6.6
-29.9
22.0
39.0

-10.4
-12.0
15.7
8.9
-35.3
23.4
42.9

-13.8
-14.4
17.3
5.8
-40.9
22.1
47.1

-12.4
-13.5
13.9
6.7
-52.9
20.5
53.4

Exchange rates
RON per euro (eop)
3.7
3.4
3.5
4.0
Real effective exchange rate
CPI based (depreciation -)
17.9
7.6
9.0
-4.2
-10.3
-2.1
1.3
Nominal GDP (bn RON)
289.0
344.7
412.8
504.0
531.3
568.5
634.1
Nominal GDP (bn Euro)
79.7
97.8
123.6
136.8
119.7
118.8
130.7
1/
Actual fiscal balance adjusted for automatic effects of internal imbalance (output gap) and external imbalance (absorption gap).
Source: IMF.

13

27.
Under the Fund’s program, the fiscal deficit is expected to further narrow to 4.6
percent of GDP in 2009 from 4.9 percent of GDP in 2008. Fiscal measures yielding an
additional 1.1 percent of GDP are to be implemented in 2009 as prior actions for the IMF
program, concentrating on expenditure reductions. The fiscal deficit for 2009 is thus expected to
be 0.3 percentage points lower than 2008, at 4.6 percent of GDP. In order to safeguard the
targets, spending plans will be back-loaded and their execution will be conditional on revenue
performance. The structural fiscal deficit would decline by nearly 3 percentage points of GDP
(from 6.7 percent to 3.8 percent of GDP). The authorities envisage additional adjustment efforts
in 2010 to bring the deficit down to around 3.7 percent in that year, and to bring it to well below
3 percent of GDP in 2011 to meet the Maastricht deficit criterion.
28.
The current account deficit is projected to decline from 12.5 percent of GDP in 2008
to 7.5 percent in 2009 and further to 6.5 percent in 2010. This adjustment process is expected
to be driven primarily by a sharp import decline arising from the drop in domestic demand and
the depreciation in the real exchange rate.
29.
The balance in the capital and financial account is expected to fall from a surplus of
EUR18.8 billion in 2008 to a EUR2.7 billion deficit in 2009. FDI is expected to decline
considerably in 2009, and trade credit contracts will fall in line with import compression,
consistent with developments in recent months. The capital and financial account is projected to
reach a EUR3.8 billion surplus in 2010, on the back of a slight recovery in FDI and reduced
capital outflows.
30.
Romania faces considerable balance of payments financing needs over the next 24
months. Based on the projected current account deficit and stock of short term and maturing
medium and long-term debt, Romania’s gross financing needs would amount to EUR44 billion
in 2009. Under the assumptions of average rollover rates for amortizing debt in 2009 of around
90 percent for banks and 70 percent for corporates, a financing gap of approximately EUR11¾
billion would emerge. For 2010 and the first quarter of 2011, the Fund’s macro framework
assumes that a strong adjustment program will reduce the financing gap to about EUR8¼ billion,
bringing total financing gap under the program to EUR20 billion, as the current account is
expected to continue to adjust and rollover rates and FDI to improve due to higher confidence in
economic policies and the expected incipient recovery in the world economy. The financing gap
for 2010 includes a build up in gross international reserves of about EUR3 billion, increasing
reserves coverage to about 100 percent of short-term external debt at end-2010 from about 75
percent at end-March 2008, significantly reducing external vulnerabilities.
31.
Over the medium term, a gradual economic recovery is expected, whose pace and
strength will reflect the restoration and broadening of the economic reform agenda
initiated before EU accession. Output is projected to follow a U-shaped adjustment pattern,
and while positive growth is expected to resume by the second quarter of 2010, it would remain
near zero in 2010. Beyond the economic stabilization and fiscal consolidation efforts under way,
economic reforms will decide the evolution of the economy after the crisis, in particular how
quickly and strong the economic recovery will be. In the short-term, Government priorities are
to stimulate confidence in the economy, protect the poor and vulnerable from the effects of the
crisis, protect employment, and contain the slowdown in demand, with focus on the financial
system and fiscal policy.
14

32.
Consistent with the European Economic Recovery Plan, short-term actions are
anchored on a longer term strategy aimed at fostering sustainable growth and employment
by addressing the development challenges facing Romania. The quality of the fiscal
adjustment in reducing economic vulnerabilities and depth of the crisis would hinge on public
sector reforms in the areas of public financial management, public administration, and
macroeconomic management, complemented by governance and sector reforms to increase the
efficiency of public spending and quality of public service delivery (notably in health, education,
transport). The lack of sustainability of recent growth underscores the need for Romania to
diversify its sources of growth in line with the recommendations of the Lisbon Agenda on
enhanced competitiveness and business environment, better skills through education and
innovation, and better infrastructure in transport, communication and energy; particularly
important is capturing the growth potential of agriculture, a sector largely by-passed by growth
over the past two decades. Finally, because the crisis will boost transient poverty, and the already
significant core poverty will swell, economic growth must be accompanied by social policies to
ensure social and spatial equity, through access to gainful employment and public services, and
through well-targeted social assistance and sustainable social insurance programs. The severity
of the crisis and the political support of the coalition Government offer a rare opportunity to
address these structural and institutional reforms.
33.
The outlook is, however, subject to exceptional uncertainties and risks. The recovery
depends on global events, and on addressing structural challenges through a credible and
sustained reform effort. In the near term, output could be further compressed through balancesheet effects arising from a further RON depreciation and higher-than-expected inflation,
especially if capital outflows are larger than anticipated. It would also be affected by a further
worsening of global growth prospects, notably in Europe.

II.

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

34.
Romania’s overarching objective is to achieve convergence with the EU in terms of
income and living standards. With a GDP per capita of slightly over 40 percent of the EU 27
average, Romania has a large unfinished development agenda. The approach to pursuing the
convergence agenda has been consolidated in the National Reform Program (NRP) for
promoting sustainable and equitable economic growth in the context of the European Lisbon
Strategy. The NRP, updated annually and reviewed by the European Commission, complements
the four themes of the Lisbon Agenda – investing in people and modernizing labor markets,
unlocking the business potential, especially of SMEs, investing in knowledge and innovation,
and energy and climate change – with the need to improve the quality and management of
administrative capacity and government expenditure in the context of prudent macroeconomic
policies.
35.
The May 2009 Convergence Program of the Government reaffirms Romania’s
objective of joining the Eurozone in 2014. The document emphasizes the importance of
promoting sound macroeconomic management and coordination of policies to gradually correct
the existing imbalances. The Convergence Program aims to reduce the budget deficit to less than

15

3 percent of GDP, in line with the provisions of the EU Growth and Stability Pact, and inflation
to 3.2 percent by 2011 to allow Romania to join the Exchange Rate Mechanism in 2012.
36.
The political agenda of the governing coalition is articulated in the Government
Program for the period 2009-2012. The objectives of the Program are two-fold:
•

dealing with the effects of crisis by stimulating the confidence in the economy and
mitigating its adverse impact, especially on the poor and vulnerable; and

•

anchoring these short term measures in a medium-term structural reform agenda
that would support economic growth and resume progress towards convergence with EU
living standards, social cohesion and eventual entry into the Euro-zone.

37.
The Government program recognizes the need to re-focus the policy attention on the
large unfinished structural reform agenda laid out in the National Reform Program to pull
Romania out of the crisis and converge sustainably with the EU. The measures proposed by
the Government are organized into three broad categories: (i) reforming the public sector; (ii)
rebalancing the foundations of growth and enhancing competitiveness; and (iii) promoting social
and spatial inclusion.
A.

Public Sector Reforms

38.
The Government has taken steps to develop its public financial management system
to optimize resource mobilization and generate fiscal savings within a more transparent,
predictable and accountable framework. In the short term, the Government has adopted a
series of policy decisions which led to a sizeable fiscal consolidation (see paragraph 26). The
authorities recognize that weaknesses in managing public spending have been at the core of the
fiscal deficits and the poor delivery of public services. Therefore, they have initiated key fiscal
reforms which are structural benchmarks under the IMF program: (i) the approval of a Fiscal
Responsibility Law (FRL). The FRL would provide a framework for improved multi-year
budgeting, fiscal rules on expenditures, public debt and the primary deficit, and for managing
guarantees and other contingent liabilities. The FRL would also set limits on the frequency of
intra-year budget rectifications, and create an independent Fiscal Council; (ii) the adoption of
legislation for the introduction of unified, simplified public compensation, which would
consolidate most payments under the base salary; and (iii) the adoption of legislation for a
revised pension system which would index benefits to inflation, raise and eventually equalize
retirement age between men and women, and restore projected increases in contributions to the
second pension pillar. These measures will test the commitment of the authorities to address key
sources of economic vulnerabilities.
39.
The medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) process will be strengthened so
that it guides strategic planning in line ministries and prioritization of expenditures. As an
intermediate step towards performance-based budgeting, the MTEF would provide line
ministries with incentives to prioritize expenditures within their policy agenda, better plan capital
investment projects, arbitrate trade-offs between personnel costs and capital expenditures, and
allow a priori agreements between the Government and the Parliament on the budget priorities in
the case of unexpected changes in revenues. In the short-term, the MTEF should facilitate the
mobilization of the significant EU Funds available to Romania; in the medium-term, the MTEF
16

should enhance the strategic allocation of resources and fiscal discipline. The challenge is,
however, to aggressively implement the MTEF agenda, whose main elements have already been
drawn up in the context of the program with the IFIs.
40.
To remove disparities in pay and promote performance, a unitary public sector pay
system will be gradually introduced, using analytical work provided by the Bank as a basis for
reform. The Government has already taken steps to reduce non-wage compensation and
integrate allowances into base salaries and has engaged trade unions in consultations. Beyond
the establishment of the unitary pay system, there is also scope to rationalize the public
administration in line with current priorities and needs, and strengthen its capacity to perform.
Functional reviews of central government institutions will be undertaken to improve
performance and resource allocation across public sector entities, reduce bureaucracy, cut
administrative costs and lead to savings which can be used to, for example, implement the
unitary pay system and advance decentralization.
41.
The Government has maintained the flat 16 percent income and profit tax, and
recognizes the need for sustained reform of tax administration to improve revenue
collection, reduce administrative costs and tax burden for tax-payers. As a share of GDP
tax revenue collection remains low compared to other EU members, while costs are high in spite
of improved tax administration management in recent years, indicating that there is still
substantial room to enhance tax compliance and reduce costs. The Government has taken steps
to reduce the number of taxes and simplify submissions to improve tax revenue collection,
reduce the bureaucratic burden for the tax-payers as well as administrative costs of tax
collection. More remains to be done, however, to reduce the administrative burden for the
business environment and improve the interaction of the business sector with the administration.
42.
The Government has begun implementing a rapid decentralization of public
services. Efforts to decentralize have so far been partial and have not resolved the key issues
affecting sub-national public administration. The new Government appears strongly committed
to move forward the decentralization agenda rapidly. A strategy for health decentralization has
been drafted and presented to the Government. The approach to decentralization of education is
also in an advanced design phase. The changes pursued seek to improve the efficiency of service
delivery at local level and enhance sub-national investments quality. One key challenge would
be for the Government to advance the process of decentralization at a pace which is
commensurate with the establishment of an appropriate accountability framework and capacitybuilding for local governments to warrant the transparent and effective use of the public
resources at sub-national level.
43.
The reform of the judiciary is led by the commitments assumed by Romania in the
EU accession process. The framework for reforms is defined by four benchmarks established
within the Co-operation and Verification Mechanism agreed with the EU. One benchmark
requires measures aimed at enhancing the capacity and accountability of the Superior Council of
Magistrates, and three other benchmarks cover integrity and anti-corruption matters. The
judiciary still faces systemic problems to courts’ efficiency, magistrates’ accountability and
corruption. To address these key challenges, the Government has set a bold agenda, which needs
to be implemented: (i) the adoption of the new Civil and Criminal Codes and Civil and Criminal
Procedure Codes; (ii) the adoption of a human resources policy in the judicial system, together

17

with a new salary policy; and (iii) the adoption of a reformed court management system. The
four draft Codes are currently under Parliamentary debate and expected to be adopted in 2009.
Regulatory impact assessments are planned to be undertaken after their adoption. The reform of
the court system requires, however, renewed attention by the Government.
B.

Growth and Competitiveness

44.
The Government recognizes that sound macroeconomic management is more
critical than ever to address the financial crisis and make progress towards the mediumterm objectives of resuming growth and joining the Euro-zone. To reduce macroeconomic
vulnerabilities, fiscal discipline is being strengthened and coordination between fiscal (including
debt management) and monetary policies is improving in the context of the program with
international partners. The 2009 budget has been rectified to reflect the more constrained
economic and financial environment, and redirects expenditure to priority areas – especially
critical investments funded from EU funds and social protection - and seeks to contain the
deficit. In line with the recommendations of the European Economic Recovery Plan (EERP),
short-term prudent fiscal policies will be anchored in a medium-term program of reform,
supported by the adoption of the Fiscal Responsibility Law and the gradual introduction of the
MTEF.
45.
In the financial sector, the priorities of the Government include the management of
liquidity and addressing eventual solvency problems, access to finance, improved financial
sector supervision, and contingency planning. Maintaining credit for private enterprises,
especially SMEs and agro-businesses is critical to stem the economic and social impacts of the
crisis. Contingency planning would require stronger coordination between regulatory agencies,
the Ministry of Finance and similar agencies in home countries of parent banks, and a more
flexible framework for bank intervention and resolution. Regulatory and supervisory authorities
in the financial sector will be strengthened by introducing a merit-based appointment process for
prospective Board members. In the medium term, the Government seeks to support further
deepening of the financial sector.
46.
Improving the business environment is also on the agenda of the Government. The
business environment is affected by uncertainty about regulatory policies, excessive number and
rates of taxes including high non-wage labor taxation, excessive and inefficient government
bureaucracy, and slow and unpredictable settlement of business disputes. The Government has
initiated a program to cut or eliminate 179 taxes and tariffs out of 489 and envisages further
measures to reduce bureaucracy. While this is a good start, reforms need to continue. The
implementation of the “Better regulation strategy for 2008-2013”, prepared as part of the EU
accession commitment, provides the appropriate framework for advancing the reform agenda.
The implementation of the Service Directive, which requires a firm though feasible schedule, is
also expected to be a challenge.
47.
A National Pact on Education concluded in 2008 between all major stakeholders sets
ambitious objectives for 2015 to increase the quality and relevance of education, access by
vulnerable groups, and expansion of adult education. In pre-university education, proposed
measures include legislation in 2009 of a new structure better aligned on European standards;
reform of school curricula and associate training of teachers and school managers; updating of

18

student evaluation norms and procedures; accelerated decentralization of financial and human
resources, and of administration and curricula; and a comprehensive program to upgrade
teaching staff and school management. In university education, measures include external
evaluation of public and private institutions and study programs, full autonomy of universities in
managing human resources, improved access and quality of student services and students’ voice
in decisions, introduction of student loans, etc. Finally, continuous learning would be promoted
through the adoption of appropriate legislation, government financial support, and information
and communication campaigns.
48.
The policy in agriculture is driven by the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
Under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), Romania has now access to significant financial
resources, totaling EUR 14.5 billion for 2007-2013, to support the development of its agriculture
and rural areas. Romanian farmers can therefore benefit from the opportunities offered by market
integration and enhanced stability and predictability of the CAP policy, and its significant
financial support framework. This would allow Romania to address the significant restructuring
and competitiveness challenges resulting from the dual farm structure and missing markets
(commodity, inputs, credit, land, credit) that characterize its agriculture. Since adopting the
National Rural Development Program, Romania is making clear progress towards accessing
CAP funds, but the actual absorption of funds by farmers and their impact on effective sector
restructuring and rural economic development remain to be measured and assessed carefully.
49.
The Government is focused on the development of transport and communication to
enhance competitiveness and increase mobility. The policy agenda in infrastructure includes
developing a medium-term strategy for transport, a program and financing plan and the
restructuring of state-owned companies. The Government aims to mobilize the important
amounts of resources available for Romania from the Structural and Cohesion Funds, largely
untapped to date, together with private funding where feasible, to boost investment in
infrastructure as a means of mitigating the effects of the crisis and boosting growth. This would
require significant reforms of sectoral policies and institutions, which remain to be firmed up.
50.
The 2007 Energy Strategy for 2007-2020 provides a basis for action in improving
energy efficiency and climate change mitigation. The Government plans to mobilize resources
from the EU Structural Funds and by selling surplus CO2 emission rights under the Kyoto
Protocol Mechanism to finance improved energy efficiency and the development of the
considerable potential for renewable energy generation. Gas supply sources could be diversified
within a regional, possibly European, approach, and Romania is a strong supporter of this. The
continuation of mining sector reform is still a challenge for Romania due to the large state
subsidies provided to the sector. The Government is looking into finding suitable solutions for
adjusting the size of the mining sector in alignment with the energy sector development.
C.

Social and Spatial Inclusion

51.
In the short-term, the Government’s focus is on containing and mitigating the
increase in transient and core poverty caused by the crisis. The policy focus is on a more
cost-efficient mix of social assistance programs, and better targeting of benefits, within the fiscal
constraints. The relatively well-targeted Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI) is a priority for
expansion, but it has suffered from limited and declining funding, while the income-tested family

19

benefits program is also underfunded. A recent Government decision to grant all retirees a
minimum pension of just under USD100/month is expected to have a positive impact on poverty.
The Government has increased the resources allocated to social assistance programs through the
recent budget rectification. In addition, the level of the unemployment benefit has been
increased and the duration extended.
52.
In the medium-term, the aim of the Government is to strengthen the safety net
measures and make them more inclusive, while also promoting more active policies. There
have been efforts to bring social assistance benefits under a single body – the National Agency
for Social Benefits (NASB) - under the Ministry of Labor, Family and Social Protection, with a
single form for all benefits, a single payment system and a single beneficiary registry. However,
this system is not fully operational yet. It will be important to improve the social safety net for
those disadvantaged and vulnerable categories or people who have not benefitted from economic
growth, and to improve the monitoring and evaluation of the impact of these social assistance
programs. To increase economic opportunities, it will also be important to strengthen linkages
between social assistance, education, and labor policies, with particular attention to education,
skills upgrading and employment generation.
53.
The Government has launched an ambitious reform program in health, aimed at
improving the access to quality health services at all levels of service in a more cost effective
manner. The main measures promoted include: (i) the improvement of the drugs pricing
mechanisms and adoption of the generic drugs prescription; (ii) redressing the balance from the
costly hospital based services towards the less costly outpatient and primary care services; (iii)
definition of a realistic package of health services covered by the social health insurance system;
(iv) introduction of co-payment with exceptions targeted to those unable to pay; (v) improvement
of the provider payment mechanisms and (vi) the introduction of the voluntary supplementary
health insurance.
54.
The Government is contemplating further reforms of the pension system to improve
the fiscal sustainability of the public pillar and enhance the equity of the multi-pillar
system. To improve the balance of the public pension fund, the social assistance contributions
have been increased by 3.3 percent in 2009. Parametric reforms for the consolidation of the first
pillar are envisaged in the context of the program with the IFIs, such as switching to inflationbased indexation and gradually increasing and equalizing the retirement age. Policy changes to
restore the level of contributions to the second pillar, in which about 3.5 million workers
participate, are also contemplated. The special non-contributory pensions, from which a number
of public sector categories benefits, are expected to be integrated into the standard system, while
the establishment of private occupational pension schemes is also envisaged. These measures
are key for addressing the aging of the population, the imbalance between pension contributors
and beneficiaries, and containing the budget deficits in both short and long term.
55.
The Government is implementing the Strategy for the Improvement of the Roma
Situation, adopted in 2001 and updated in 2006. Roma policies are aimed at increasing the
accountability of central and local authorities in order to address Roma issues, promote an
intellectual and economic Roma elite expected to facilitate social inclusion initiatives, eliminate
discrimination, and induce a positive change in the public opinion regarding Roma. At the same
time, efforts are being made in order to promote tolerance and social solidarity, stimulate the

20

participation of Roma in economic, social, education, cultural and political life through sector
assistance and community development programs, prevent social discrimination and ensure
equal opportunities for Roma and a decent living standard. However, the Roma continue to be in
a marginalized and vulnerable situation as evidenced by important indicators such as poverty
rates, infant mortality, and school enrollment.
56.
Some population groups have not benefitted from economic growth. Rural
dwellers, in particular, were left behind during the period of national economic growth. Out
of the four million farms which provide the main source of livelihood for 90 percent of the
people living in rural areas, three million survive at the margin of subsistence on less than a
hectare. Many of them are past or fast approaching the retirement age, and not appropriately
covered by pensions or social assistance schemes, suggesting the need to explore social
assistance policy options to address their needs. A recent Government decision to grant all
retirees a minimum pension of just under USD100/month is expected to provide some relief in
this area.
57.
Romania guarantees gender equity and equality opportunities in law, but women
are more likely to be poor. The Romanian Constitution guarantees equal opportunities for men
and women and a special law on equal opportunities for women and men was passed in 2002
ensuring equal pay for equal work, measures for employees’ protection against dismissal in case
of gender discrimination, and employers’ responsibility to inform employees about legal
provisions in this area. A National Action Plan for Equal Opportunities was adopted in 2000 to
implement the legislation. EU accession and the adoption of the acquis legislation for equal
opportunities have strengthened the rights of individuals and improved their protection. In
practice, however, wages of women remain though below those of men for equal qualifications.
Women are concentrated in low paid sectors and are under-represented in managerial positions
and in politics. Poverty among households with women head of families is higher, according to
the Bank’s Poverty Update (2007). Trafficking of women still exists, but the Government and
NGOs are actively engaged in preventing and fighting against it. Another challenge is to
translate equal gender opportunity policies into practice to raise the labor force participation of
women in a way that reconciles their professional and family lives, such as through accessible
social care facilities for the elderly and children, and flexible work arrangements.
58.
The Government relies substantially on the EU Structural and Cohesion Funds to
pursue its regional policy agenda. Regional development is supported by large net inflows of
EU funds during 2007–2013. The Regional Operational Program is specifically targeted towards
regional and municipal development, but most sector operational programmes, especially the
Environment Operational Programme and the National Rural Development Plan, have territorial
development dimensions that affect regional and municipal development, and axes and measures
that rely heavily on local public authorities for success. These programs finance a range of
social services and provide key infrastructure services, including water, wastewater, and solid
waste, particularly critical, as Romania has to comply with standards specified in the EU
environmental acquis. However, the EU funds cover only a small part of the required
investments and the Government, municipalities and other beneficiaries will need to mobilize
significant counterpart and private sector funding in order for Romania to comply with EU
directives. A key challenge for the Government is to address the existing institutional
weaknesses, including by better defining the regional development model it wants to pursue.

21

III.
A.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM

Implementation of 2006 CPS and Lessons Learned

59.
The FY06-09 CPS Bank program failed to establish a partnership with Romania,
despite being well aligned on Romania’s priorities prior to and after EU accession and well
coordinated with the EU at both policy and technical levels. The result was that while Romania
made significant progress against its development goals, the CPS did not achieve many of the
outcomes it sought. The CPS did not anticipate the pressure of populist policies stemming from
the high expectations of the population following EU accession. It also underestimated the rapid
inflow of other lower cost sources of finance and the desire of the Ministry of Finance to
diversify its financing sources. The CPS did not identify areas of the Bank’s value-added vis-àvis other external partners and was perceived as being inflexible and having high transaction
costs in comparison.
60.
IFC’s portfolio has performed well. IFC was relatively less affected than the Bank by
the change in Government financing preferences and the shift towards EU institutions as
preferred partners. During the CPS period IFC invested a total of $383 million of its own fund
and help mobilized $191 million in 15 projects. These included 8 projects in the financial sector,
a project to support the modernization of refinery, a project to improve river transportation, a
project to support the first private hospital chain and a project in transportation and warehousing.
Additionally IFC invested in regional projects in private equity funds, which allowed
investments in smaller competitive companies as well as in oil and gas exploration. IFC-Bank
cooperation throughout the period was strong. The CPS envisaged some links, for example with
IFC supporting privatizations in infrastructure and energy proposed through the Programmatic
Adjustment Loan (PAL) series, but these were stopped when the policy loan series was dropped
and a halt in privatization of utilities by the Government.
61.
The Bank program was too optimistic and highly dependent on the anchor which
was to be provided by policy-based lending. The program was highly integrated, which
worked well when the whole agenda moved forward as planned. However, when the PAL series
was dropped, the associated investment loans also suffered, the program lost focus and
coherence. Other financing sources replaced and exceeded Bank lending, but the associated
technical assistance to line Ministries remained in demand. The Bank lending program was
reduced to 40 percent of the indicative amount projected by the CPS and technical assistance was
curtailed.
62.
The implementation of the portfolio was affected by the deterioration of the country
dialogue. As the dialogue around the PAL series weakened, implementation problems in the
associated investment loans multiplied, commitments at risk increased and disbursement
performance deteriorated. Commitments at risk rose from zero in FY05 to 36 percent in midFY09, twice the average rate Bank-wide. Disbursements declined from a peak of 27 percent in
FY03 to 10.9 percent in FY07, well below Bank-wide performance. Disbursement performance
recovered to 18 percent in FY08 owing to more pro-active portfolio management and a new
generation of faster disbursing projects.

22

63.
Portfolio implementation problems notwithstanding, the Bank maintained a
dialogue with many stakeholders, based on a solid body of analytical work. Analytical work
on policy issues positioned the Bank to take an effective role in advising the new Government on
the reform agenda in the short- to medium-term. This includes the 2006 Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review; the 2008 Public Sector Pay Practices; the 2007 Notes on Pensions, Health
Sector Policy, and Education Policy; the 2007 report on Private Sector Development Strategy;
the 2008 Notes on Municipal Finance and on Regional Development; the 2007-08 Programmatic
Poverty Assessments; the 2008 report on Financial Sector Literacy and Consumer Protection, the
2008 Discussion Paper on a Student Loan Scheme; the Policy Briefs issued in January 2009; the
2009 joint IMF-WB Financial Sector Assessment Program; the 2009 ROSC on accounting and
auditing; and the ongoing Public Expenditure Review Update. The recommendations of these
reports have inspired some of the decisions made by the new Government in response to the
crisis. The proposed new DPL series resumes structural reforms launched under the 2003-2007
PAL program, which supported reforms in public finance management, education, health, social
assistance, pensions, judiciary, and private sector development.
64.

The following lessons can be drawn:

•

Identify the Bank’s comparative advantage vis-à-vis other external partners and
design the program around these areas. The Bank did not heed sufficiently the need for
a different approach towards a MIC client no longer dependent on Bank financing. The
program continued to emphasize large investment loans when other larger, faster, cheaper
and more flexible financing sources were available. The Bank did not re-focus its role as a
knowledge-provider or technical adviser. More could also have been done to experiment
with more flexible, outcome-oriented investment loans that would support performance
based budgeting and allow for lower non-financial transaction costs, by taking advantage of
new opportunities and innovations –such as country systems pilots— that arose during the
CPS programming period. As a result, the dissonance between the desire of line ministries
for Bank projects to secure programs and predictable budgetary resources as well as
knowledge on the one hand, and the desire of the Ministry of Economy and Finance to
diversify its sources of financing to increase flexibility and reduce financing costs on the
other, was not resolved. Bottlenecks in project financing due to budgetary constraints and
limited fiscal space hindered successful implementation of several projects. The Bank
should focus on its areas comparative advantage in some key reform areas, and on lowering
its non-financial transaction costs (see Section B below).

•

Allow flexibility in a CPS to manage changing circumstances and the prevailing needs.
Given the fact that the program spanned such an important historical moment for Romania,
the CPS program was somewhat over-determined with a program of loans outlined for all
four years of the CPS. The Bank appeared to have a pre-set agenda and was unable to adjust
with sufficient flexibility in line with the Government’s revised priorities. While Investment
Loans (ILs) and Advisory and Analytical Activities (AAA) can reinforce a Development
Policy Loan series, they should not be so inextricably linked as to create an ‘all-or-nothing’
program. Likewise, investment projects should not be overly complex (in technical and
financing terms), which results in implementation delays and the need for restructuring or
capacity building during implementation. The program should be designed so it can be
scaled up or down according to the Government’s demand. As the lack of interest in lending
23

manifested itself, the Bank could have stepped-up its AAA program to demonstrate its
value-added and develop a new knowledge partnership, but instead AAA declined in line
with the lending program.
•

Anticipate and manage political transitions. The CPS acknowledged that much of the
commitment to reforms had been due to EU accession aspirations, but anticipated this
reform commitment would continue to achieve convergence. In doing so, it underestimated
an understandable reform fatigue after years of reforms in preparation for accession. At
times, the Bank heard only the voices it chose to or sought agreement to its plans from other
parts of Romania’s governance structure. Such dialogue was counter-productive. The Bank
should maintain dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders across the political spectrum, at
all levels of the civil service and with a wide range of public stakeholders, including
businesses, special interest groups and other non-governmental organizations.

65.
This CPS has been designed to reflect these lessons, although the circumstances under
which it is presented are very different to those prevailing at the time of the last CPS. The Bank
is focusing on a series of budget support operations, presented alongside the CPS, with lower
non-financial transaction costs for the Romanian authorities. However, unlike the last CPS, the
other operations are not so intricately linked to the DPL as to make the whole program hostage to
the success of this operation. Instead, the DPL is underpinned by analytical work that can be
used to take forward Romania’s objectives in a variety of ways, when needed. The program
could be scaled up in the near-term only with significant cancellations within the current
investment portfolio; in the absence of reform or ownership it could be scaled back to a limited
portfolio of activities in areas of greatest need and ownership. A revitalized communications and
outreach program is being implemented.
B.

External Partners and the Bank’s Value Added

66.
The EU and EU-related institutions have become Romania’s main external partner.
The EU has committed more than EUR 32 billion in grants to Romania over the period 2007-13,
equivalent to about 25 percent of Romania’s GDP in 2009, to further the EU’s objectives of
convergence and cohesion, support for SMEs, environmental sustainability, innovation,
development of trans-European transport and energy networks, and sustainable and secure
energy.
67.
EIB and EBRD are key supporters of Romania’s development objectives. EIB is the
largest institutional investor in Romania with a portfolio of EUR 6.2 billion and planned
activities of EUR 1.5 billion for 2009 and 2010. The EIB plays an important role in providing
required co-financing for the EU structural and cohesion funds and also technical assistance to
support the convergence, infrastructure, environment and energy goals. The EIB lending focuses
on industry, transport, and energy. The EIB lends at both national and sub-national lending
levels. EBRD invests in both the private and public sectors in areas such as power, transport,
municipal infrastructure, financial institutions and the corporate sector. EBRD is supporting
Romania’s efforts to decrease the intensity of its carbon fuel consumption and is promoting
energy efficiency projects and energy efficiency loans via the banks.

24

68.
As the crisis unfolded, the Government requested an international support
package of EUR19.95 billion for the 2009-10 period. The IMF would contribute EUR12.95
billion, the EU EUR5 billion, the World Bank EUR1 billion, IFC EUR100M in 2009-2010 and
EUR100M in 2010-11 (subject to market conditions) and EBRD and EIB the remainder. The
programs supported by the various partners are complementary. The IMF Stand-By Arrangement
(SBA) envisages a new Fiscal Responsibility Law that will, among others, set up procedures for
improved multi-year budgeting supported by DPLs; similarly, the SBA envisages a reform in key
parameters of the pension system and financial sector reforms coordinated with DPL actions.
The EU funds would support fiscal consolidation and fiscal governance reform, strengthening of
monetary and financial sector policies, and structural reforms in public administration, quality of
public services, and business environment. EBRD intends to double its investment in the private
sector in Romania to EUR1 billion during the 2009-10 period. Approximately half of this
amount would support the financial sector. EIB’s additional resources (total amount of lending
envisaged for 2009 is EUR 1.5 billion) will be targeted to investments both in the public sector
(e.g. infrastructure) and the private sector (e.g. industry, energy, and support of SMEs lending).

For the 2007-13 period,
Romania has been allocated
EUR 19,67 billion: EUR 19,21
billion under the Convergence
objective and EUR 0,46 billion
under the European Territorial
Cooperation
objective.
Together with the national
contribution of EUR 5,53
billion, total financing for
Cohesion policy activities
would amount to EUR 25,2
billion over the seven-year
period.
Romania’s
contribution to the EU budget
will amount to EUR 10.2
billion.

Table 2- Breakdown of EU funds by operational
program 2007-13
EU
Operational Program
allocation
EUR mln
Development of Human Resources
3476.14
Operational Programme
Administrative Capacity Development
208.00
Operational Programme
3726.02
Regional Operational Programme
Increase of Economic Competitiveness
2554.22
Operational Programme
4565.94
Transport Operational Programme
4512.47
Environment Operational Programme
Technical Assistance Operational
170.24
Programme
European territorial cooperation
Objective
454.56
TOTAL OPs

19.667.60

CAP - Pillar 1
CAP - Pillar 2 (NRDP)

6127.50
8022.50
TOTAL CAP
14150.00
Source: European Commission, staff calculations

69.
The World Bank can contribute significant value-added to Romania’s development
policy agenda, especially in structural reforms. Building on past support to reform and
analytical work, it can play an important role in supporting crisis management and reform in the
25

areas of public finance management in general and public expenditure in particular, public sector
pay, education, health, social protection, and the financial sector. These specific areas were
chosen as a focus for the DPL series in consultation with the Government and external partners,
based on two main considerations: the Bank’s knowledge through past sector involvement,
analytical work, and regional experience; and the competence available from other sources. The
Bank’s role in supporting social sector reform is particularly critical, given that this area is
largely excluded from the EU acquis and EU-supported programs.

The Bank can provide value-added in four ways:

C.

•

Substance: The Bank can be a strategic partner in sectors for which there is limited or no
coverage in the EU acquis communautaire, i.e. health, education, social protection, pensions and
public administration.

•

Approach: The acquis sets the goals and standards to be achieved by Member States, but usually
leaves the choice of implementation path to achievement of those goals to the individual
countries. The Bank can assist with a diagnosis of the degree of readiness to achieve European
goals, present options, and provide capacity building for implementation, i.e., to help with the
‘how to’ of complex policy and reform issues. For example, all member states need to achieve
the 20-20-20 climate change targets, but may not know whether it is most efficient and effective
to do so by changing the mix of power generation sources or by reducing the demand for energy.
The Bank can help design implementation plans, identify costs, benefits and areas of
vulnerability, build capacity and – with other partners – assist in the implementation of the plans.

•

Cross-sector integration: Some topics demand a holistic, cross-sector response, which the Bank is
well-placed to provide. For example, the demographic shifts currently taking place in EU10
countries will require solutions that incorporate a range of structural reforms, including in health,
education and pensions.

•

Global perspective: The Bank can both draw on experience in other countries to bring innovative
ideas, examples and lessons, as well as learn from EU-10 countries to enhance programs across
the range of the Bank’s client countries. One example of sharing global ideas is the conditional
cash transfer programs that were initially developed in Latin America and are now being applied
in the US and in Europe.

The Proposed Bank Strategy

70.
The dual objective of the Bank is to support Romania deal with the economic and
financial crisis, and to broaden and deepen the reform program for sustainable and
equitable growth.
71.
The proposed Bank program is largely defined for the first two years, and outlined
for the outer years. Learning from the earlier CPS, the approach of this CPS seeks flexibility
and ability to respond to evolving circumstances and demand by adopting a results-based
program centered on development outcomes and objectives that, on the one hand, reflect the

26

Government priorities and, on the other, are aligned with the Bank’s comparative advantage and
value-added.
72.
The main thrust of the engagement program is three-pronged, drawing on: existing
projects, the DPL program, and opportunities for lending and AAA engagement depending
on supply and demand factors. In the first two years, the Bank program consists of the
following activities: the portfolio of on-going projects, the proposed DPL program, and
analytical and advisory activities (AAA) centered around the implementation of the reform
program supported by the DPL. To the extent possible, the Bank will tap additional resources,
e.g., through Trust Funds such as the Financial Sector Reforms and Strengthening Initiative
(FIRST), and partnership opportunities with the EU and other IFIs. A mid-term review of the
CPS with Government would define the program for outer years and could also include new
lending activities (subject to available lending headroom) that would need to be defined in terms
of objectives and modalities (general budget support, or sector specific budget support), and a
program of new analytical and advisory activities.
73.
In the first two years of the CPS, the Bank’s lending program in Romania would be
dominated by a EUR 1 billion programmatic series of three DPLs as part of a joint
program with the IMF and the EC. In line with the respective mandates of other partners, the
Bank’s engagement would focus on the financial sector, social sector reforms and public sector
reforms. Selective investment lending outside the DPL program could be considered provided
there is ownership, with priority given to areas which have the required absorption capacity and
aligned with the Bank’s comparative advantage which are outlined below. A substantial
portfolio restructuring exercise is underway to free up resources from existing loans that no
longer match the Government’s priorities and to create headroom for such operations.
74.
Lending would be complemented by a substantive AAA program to inform and help
guide the implementation of individual reforms. Special emphasis will be place on peerlearning and dissemination, including sharing best practice in project design and implementation.
AAA work is anticipated around the core reform topics supported by the DPL including
education, health and pensions as well as public financial management issues with an emphasis
on decentralization, tax and civil service reform. AAA will also be used to maintain a dialogue
with strategically important sectors not covered by the DPL, including agriculture, infrastructure
and the environment.
75.
The program is characterized by uncertainties. If the pace of global and European
economic recovery is slower than currently anticipated and/or the Government’s interest to
pursue reforms is sustained, lending may continue into the outer years of the CPS beyond the
DPL series (subject to available lending headroom). If, however, the pace of economic recovery
is rapid and/or the Government’s commitment to reform weakens, the focus of the program may
shift towards a knowledge-sharing agenda based on AAA and a cost-sharing relationship. While
the early years of the program are reasonably well defined, the outer years are not and will be
defined following a mid-term review and consultations with the Government.
76.
As of end of April 2009, IFC’s portfolio in Romania stood at about $470 million
which represents IFC’s 3rd largest portfolio in Europe and Central Asia after Russia and
Turkey. However, IFC envisages a phased reduction of involvement in Romania within a period
of 5 years (subject to market conditions), offering support to selective sectors and activities in
27

which IFC can still provide value addition and in which the commercial sector and market
cannot fulfill. In addition, IFC’s activities will maintain their focus on managing its existing
portfolio of investments. IFC has begun withdrawing from sectors and lines of business in
Romania where the private sector is ready to take over. For example, IFC does not participate in
FDI in projects below US$50 million where commercial banks are willing to finance and also
IFC does not offer credit lines to large banks, with the exception of special types of financing
(energy efficiency, long term local currency, agriculture lending and MSMEs financing). In the
short term, IFC's investment strategy is to play a crisis response role by helping to recapitalize
the major banks which are considered vital to the financial system and offering trade finance to
financial institutions in Romania. IFC’s effort will contribute to speed up economic recovery and
boost job creation while reducing the impact of the financial crisis. Also, IFC will consider
investments, on a very selective basis, in banks and sectors that have a very strong development
impact in frontier regions or in the areas of agriculture, climate change, infrastructure and health
and education.
Table 3. Proposed IBRD Lending Program 1 and Selected AAA Services
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program

Calendar
Year
2009
2009
2010

DPL 1
DPL 2
DPL 3
TOTAL
Recent/Proposed AAA Services
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review Programmatic
Pensions for the Elderly Poor
Macro Monitoring
DPL Education Reform TA
DPL Health Reform TA
DPL Civil Service – Public Financial Management TA
DPL Financial Sector TA
Tax Administration TA
Poverty Monitoring Programmatic Series
Student Loans TA
IT Assessment at NBR TA
Pension Annuities TA

1

Subject to IBRD financial capacity
28

Amount
Euro (M)
300
360
340
1,000

Completion Calendar Year
2009-10
2009
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009
2010-11

D.

Strategic Pillars of the Proposed Program

77.
The Bank’s envisaged strategic partnership with Romania would be based on three
pillars: (i) public sector reform; (ii) growth and competitiveness; and (iii) social and spatial
inclusion.
Pillar 1: Public Sector Reform
Goals: in the short-term to secure fiscal savings without adversely affecting priority services
and social assistance; and in the medium-term to modernize the public administration to
improve the accountability and responsiveness of its staff and predictability and efficiency in
public resource management.
Public financial management - Objective: reduce fiscal vulnerabilities by restoring budget
discipline, improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditures, and improved
resource mobilization.
78.
The IMF’s SBA program supports a Fiscal Responsibility Law which aims to streamline
the budget process and ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term. As a complement, the
World Bank will work with the authorities through the DPL program to improve the quality of
annual budget planning by anchoring it more firmly in a credible medium-term expenditure
framework and then to start to implement this process with selected line ministries. Through this
process, the Bank will aim to strengthen national policy formulation; better link budget
allocations with outcomes and performance; build capacities for economic analysis and
forecasting; and improve the capacity of the Parliament and civil society for economic analysis.
As a result, it is expected that the efficiency and effectiveness of Romanian public expenditure
will be improved in the medium-term.
79.
A programmatic series of Public Expenditure Review updates will complement the DPL
series with the first in the series focusing on identifying opportunities for short-term savings and
efficiency gains in major expenditure categories of the public budget, including education and
health, transport and agriculture. Later updates will also cover issues around the systemic and
institutional aspects of budget formulation and execution. In parallel to the Public Expenditure
Review, the World Bank would also focus its analytical and advisory services on fiscal
decentralization and tax administration where the needs are large.
80.
In the outer-years of the CPS, output-based investment operations could be considered in
support of decentralization, tax administration and performance-based budget support in selected
sectors (for example, providing financing for the implementation of the per capita education
scheme).
Public administration reform - Objective: improve the public pay system to enhance
transparency and predictability, motivate performance among public sector employees, attract
and retain critical skills.
81.
The DPL program will support changes to Romania’s public pay system to enhance
capacity to attract and retain critical skills in the public administration. The reforms would aim

29

to keep personnel costs in line with GDP growth, improve the delivery of public services and
limit discretion within the system. AAA work on civil service reform will be considered as a
complement to the DPL. Overall, the program hopes to upgrade the Romanian public
administration to align it better with European practices. Functional reviews and institutional
reforms in selected public sector entities could be supported by DPLs; the former could be
addressed by Advisory and Analytical Activities on a fee for services basis if so requested by
Government.
Governance - Objective: strengthen the efficiency and accountability of the justice system.
82.
Improved governance is implicit in many of the Bank-supported operations, and will be
an important objective of the DPL-sponsored public sector reforms and supporting technical
assistance and analytical work. A Judicial Reform project already in the portfolio will continue
to increase the efficiency of the Romanian courts and improve accountability of the judiciary, in
support of Romanian and EU objectives in this area.
Pillar 2: Growth and Competitiveness
Goals: in the short-run to put in place crisis-management measures in the financial sector; and
in the medium-term to establish the building blocks for a resumption of growth for sustainable
convergence to EU-average living standards through improved business environment, enhanced
skills, upgrades in the infrastructure network and more efficient agriculture.
Financial sector - Objective: deepen and strengthen the resilience of the financial sector.
83.
The DPL series will include measures across the series drawn from a recent Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update. Some aspects of contingency planning have begun
under the IMF program. The Bank’s program will support adoption of a Strategic Action Plan to
further this process to guide the response to a potential financial crisis, dealing particularly with
potential future interventions in the financial sector, guidelines for mortgage and corporate debt
restructuring, and amendments to the Insolvency Law. The DPL program will also seek to
strengthen consolidated supervision of the financial sector and ensure the political and financial
independence of financial sector regulators, and support the implementation of Basel II.
Analytical work on the financial sector is up-to-date, but more may be needed in the outer years
of the CPS, especially if external conditions or regulations change. The overall aim of the Bank
is to help the authorities to strengthen their financial sector to underpin a resumption of growth
and become more resilient to future shocks. IFC will selectively and in the short-run enhance its
crisis response initiative by helping restore liquidity and confidence by working with other
partners to provide appropriate funding to banks and by supporting trade finance. IFC's role in
Romania in this context, is to: a) work together with other IFIs to develop and implement support
programs for main banks in the country, subject also to further support from the parent banks and
from the Romanian authorities (where applicable); and b) signal IFC's confidence and strong
support for the Romanian banking sector through investments in systemic banks.
84.
The degree of financial intermediation, remains at one of the lowest levels in Central
and Eastern Europe and the system continues to offer limited products and services. Moreover,
the global liquidity crisis has weakened the access to finance to underserved segments such as

30

MSMEs and the agriculture sector especially in rural areas of the country. In light of this, IFC
strategy in the financial sector is to support existing clients, particularly those that are deemed
systemic in their respective countries, to continue to strengthen financial intermediation to
MSMEs, to facilitate trade and to introduce new financial products and services, such as local
currency products, agriculture finance and energy efficiency lending. Success of the MSMEs
sector is critical to the health of the Romanian economy as MSMEs represent more than 90
percent of registered companies, 70 percent of GDP and an important share of employment. IFC
will also continue to finance private equity funds which are targeting SMEs. These funds will
help local enterprises expand and improve their competitiveness.
Business environment - Objective: improve the business environment, including institutional
and policy framework for R&D and innovation, and the development of a knowledge-based
society and economy.
85.
A Knowledge Economy project in the portfolio supports the Government in improving
e-government services, including for small and medium enterprises. Advisory work is being
considered on tax administration to reduce the tax (and tax processing) burden on businesses in
Romania and corporate financial reporting. The Bank-wide Doing Business report may provide
the basis for further analytical work in the outer years of the CPS. The Bank could also consider
support the Romanian authorities in implementation of their Better Regulation Strategy for 20082013, with particular emphasis on simplifying the top 10-15 regulations identified by business
surveys as being most onerous. Additionally, after the recommendations of the 2008 Accounting
and Auditing Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (A&A ROSC), the Bank may
assist Romania to further implement the EU acquis communautaire as it relates to corporate
financial reporting, including by advising Romania on the set-up of the audit oversight system
that is crucial to enhance external audit quality in Romania. This assistance could be financed
under a Bank fee-for-service arrangement, similar to the ones that are already in place with
several new EU Member States under the Swiss Enlargement Contribution. On June 26, 2008
Switzerland and the EC signed a political declaration of intent to extend the Swiss Enlargement
Contribution to the 2007 new Member States, Bulgaria and Romania, adding CHF 257 million
(approximately US$255 million) to the existing funding of CHF 1 billion, subject to approval by
the Swiss Parliament (which still needs to take place) and the negotiation of Bilateral Framework
Agreements (expected by the end of 2009). The Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
(SECO) has already indicated its wish that the Bank-managed TA program on corporate
financial reporting should also be extended to these countries using a portion of the Contribution,
a move which is facilitated by the active policy dialog associated with the A&A ROSC.
Education, skills and knowledge - Objective: support the Government in improve access to
and quality of education in a fiscally sound manner.
86.
The DPL takes education as a focus sector for implementation of key reforms measures
to improve the efficiency of resource use while enhancing the quality and access of public
services. The series of loans will support a reform of education financing in primary and
secondary education, which will free up resources for improving quality, while an on-going
Rural Education project in the portfolio focuses on quality and access issues through
rehabilitation and innovation. Technical assistance work will support the careful design and
implementation of the decentralization of primary and secondary education, while at the tertiary
31

level a technical assistance program will support the introduction of a Student Loans scheme,
which will boost the revenue base of the education system and provide an alternative and
complement to the existing grant (scholarship) system. A Knowledge Economy project in the
portfolio helps to connect disadvantaged communities with public services, and also supports the
Government to adjust the delivery of its services (e.g., primary education) or introduce egovernment services, including for small and medium enterprises. The overall objectives are to
enhance the transparency and accountability of public sector activities through full and timely
access to public information. Further support in this sector could be considered in output-based
investment operations and/or technical assistance. IFC will also consider investments in
education provided that the private players become more transparent.
Agriculture - Objective: provide advisory, technical and financial assistance to support the
market-based restructuring and competitiveness of Romanian agriculture.
87.
The Bank remains active in the agriculture sector with three projects: one that supports
the implementation of land tenure and titling reform and enables greater absorption of EU funds;
another aims to improve the competitiveness of farmers and agro-processors through improved
advisory services, to modernize the agricultural research apparatus, and to improve food safety,
in line with EU requirements; and a third supports the rehabilitation and reform of irrigation
systems to increase agricultural productivity. Complementary analytical work could include a
review of the optimal mix of EU Common Agriculture Policy and national funds to maximize
the impact on competitiveness. Analytical work (in the Public Expenditure and Institutional
Review) and technical assistance may also be considered to strengthen the capacity of those
Government departments responsible for agriculture and rural development to enhance their
strategic planning and programming capacity as one of the key expenditure categories in the
budget. The Romanian agriculture sector is often referred to as a significant beneficiary of
European Union membership because EU integration can give Romanian farmers access to a
market with more than 500 million consumers. Despite the comparative advantages of the
country, namely, an abundance of arable land and a favorable climate, the Romanian agriculture
sector suffers from fragmentation and obsolete production methods. Investments are needed to
raise the sector’s competitiveness and to help local farmers improve efficiency through upgraded
technology. IFC will selectively support direct investments in agribusiness as well as financial
institutions which provides financing to the agriculture sector, which has been largely ignored by
the financial sector. IFC’s support of this key sector can help to encourage additional investment
from the financial community.
Transport - Objective: improve the efficiency of the roads and railways sub-sectors, help
reduce the overall costs of transportation, improve road safety, and reduce the negative impacts
of traffic congestion and pollution in selected cities.
88.
The portfolio of transport projects in the current portfolio is expected to close in the first
few months of the CPS. However, as a major expenditure category in the budget, the PER will
consider opportunities for fiscal savings and efficiency gains drawing on the Bank’s experience
in this sector. While other institutions, particularly EIB and EC, remain the key counterparts on
transport issues, a future Bank role in this sector could be envisaged in the areas of strategic
planning, institutional and policy reforms, safety and development of PPP projects. IFC will
closely coordinate with EBRD and EIB to finance PPPs with significant developmental impact.

32

Energy and Environment - Objective: assist Romania in meeting its commitments in respect
to energy market liberalization and EU 20-20-20 targets, implementation of EU Water and
Nitrate Directives, and in reducing environmental, social and economic vulnerabilities to natural
and technological disasters.
89.
The Bank’s support in this area has been declining and now focuses on rehabilitation of a
hydropower station and a guarantee operation of a privatization agreement for electricity
distribution companies under a new regulatory framework, and the closing of mines in an
environmental safe manner together with the regeneration of economic activities in the mining
areas. Should the Government decide to resume the privatization process to include the
remaining state-owned energy companies and mining companies, the Bank may consider
supporting this process and/or the associated institutional and regulatory issues. The Bank has
also recently supported lending (including a GEF grant), analytical and technical assistance to
support companies’ adoption of energy efficient technologies. It is hoped that this work may be
furthered during the CPS period as Romania has to meet the EU’s ambitious climate change
targets and could draw significant revenues from the sale of surplus CO2 emission rights under
the Kyoto Protocol.
90.
An Integrated Nutrition Pollution Control loan and associated GEF grant in the portfolio
will help Romania to meet the EU Nitrates Directive requirements by reducing pollution
discharge into water bodies and strengthening institutional and regulatory capacity. The ongoing Municipal Services projects is assisting Romania meets its commitments with respect to
water quality, and also in the absorption of EU funds. In collaboration with the Bank, IFC may
support new investors in the power sector (generation and distribution) and other network
utilities (water, gas, district heating), where emerging regulatory frameworks are not yet welltested and constitute an element of uncertainty and "political risk" which may otherwise
constrain investor interest. IFC will also work with local financial institutions to provide energy
efficiency lending and invest in renewable energy projects (wind and/or biomass).
91.
The on-going Hazard Risk and Emergency Preparedness in Romania project aims to
reduce environmental, social and economic vulnerabilities to natural and technological disasters
by enhancing the Government’s institutional and technical capacity for disaster risk
management. This includes establishing an integrated disaster information management system,
developing earthquake scenarios, conducting public awareness and preparedness programs. The
Bank may also discuss Catastrophic Risk Insurance options with the Romanian Government.
Pillar 3: Social and Spatial Inclusion
Goals: in the short-term to protect the new and existing poor populations from the adverse
effects of the crisis; in the medium-term to promote social inclusion and regional development.
Social assistance - Objective: improve the cost effectiveness and targeting of social assistance
programs to mitigate the impact of the crisis on the poor and vulnerable.
92.
Social protection is a core theme of the DPL series, which will aim to improve the design
and increase the coverage of the most efficient and well targeted social assistance program - the
Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI) – while progressively rationalizing the coverage of the less
efficiently targeted programs. The Bank has some considerable analytical and advisory work
33

already in place on this topic, but will continue to deepen this through a programmatic poverty
monitoring series to help in particular with the monitoring and evaluation, and the design of
future improvements. Further lending or technical assistance work to support implementation of
the measures could be considered in the outer years of the CPS, notably in helping the
development of activation policies and programs.
Social Inclusion - Objective: improve the social inclusion and living conditions of the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable people in the Romanian society.
93.
The Bank’s program already has a Social Inclusion operation that aims to improve the
living conditions and social inclusion of the most disadvantaged in society, which in Romania
include the Roma, persons with disabilities, children at risk and victims of domestic violence.
The programmatic poverty monitoring program will provide further analytical coverage of these
issues. Three other programs in the current portfolio also have a strong inclusion focus: the
Knowledge Economy project specifically targets remote and disadvantaged communities to link
them electronically to broader society; the Rural Education project supports school-based
innovations in remote regions; and a Mine Closure project provides socio-economic regeneration
opportunities to mining communities and local authorities. Further work in transport or
communications would continue to focus on connectivity and inclusion.
Health sector - Objective: support the design and implementation of health sector reform
program to improve health outcomes.
94.
As with education, the DPL takes health as a focus sector for implementation of key
reforms measures to improve the efficiency of resource use while enhancing the quality and
access of public services. Specific reforms to be supported include those that would support the
Government’s decisions on drug pricing and adoption of legislation to promote the prescription
of generic drugs; improve the design of the benefits package and in particular introducing a copayment system with exemptions for the poor; promoting the development of supplementary
insurance rationalizing hospitals and shifting to a focus on primary care services which would be
supported by provider payment reforms. This program will be supported by analytical work and
further lending for health could be considered in the outer years of the CPS given the extensive
reform agenda. An on-going health project is supporting the modernization of maternity and
emergency services. IFC will seek to help stimulate the growth of the private healthcare sector
in Romania, as well as support the delivery of higher quality and better reach of services by
offering advisory services within the World Bank programs and promoting private sector
participation. IFC will also help establish benchmarks for delivery of private health services in
the country.
Pension system - Objective:
equity of pension system.

strengthen the performance, financial viability, integrity and

95.
The DPL series will support reforms in the pension system to put it back onto a
sustainable footing, including indexation of benefit adjustments to inflation, raising and
gradually equalizing the retirement age and increasing the contribution rate to the second pillar.
Other important aspects of the Bank’s program include analytical work, which could be followed
by implementation support, to provide better social protection for elderly poor (effectively a zero

34

pension pillar) and implementation of a capacity building program for the pension system
administration. The Bank may also advise on strengthening pension annuities in anticipation of
the time when the second, private pillar will start to pay out.
Regional development - Objective: address the disparities across regions by focusing on
strengthening the administrative and financial management capacity with the view to improve
the quality of public service delivery at sub-national level.
96.
The Bank supports the regional development policy of the Government through
investment lending in municipal infrastructure and advisory services. Under a Bank-financed
project Master Plans for water and wastewater infrastructure are prepared for eleven (out of forty
two) counties for financing by the EU funds. Another project provides TA to Roma communities
to prepare projects (small roads, water, sanitation, small housing investments) for financing
through EU funds and capacity building and training at local level for preparation of investment
projects for EU financing. The Bank stands ready to continue to offer support in lending and
analytical and advisory services for regional and municipal development. Areas for assistance
could be envisaged in planning, institutional and policy reforms, including decentralization,
capacity building at sub-national level and co-financing of EU funds.
E.

Consultations and Partnership with the Government and other Stakeholders

97.
To be effective, the Bank will need to forge a true partnership with the Government,
based on sharing of goals and mutual trust, and anchored on broad support among other
stakeholders. The Bank will seek to continue the practice of regular portfolio reviews with the
authorities to ensure a good alignment of priorities and prompt follow-up where issues arise.
Such reviews could take place every six months with officials, and at least once a year at
Ministerial level.
98.
The FY10-13 World Bank Group CPS was prepared by drawing on intensive
dialogue and feed-back mechanisms. The CPS teams used a variety of consultation
mechanisms. Stakeholder consultations were the main instrument for identifying key challenges
and possible CPS themes in May 2009. These workshops involved national and local
Governments, civil society, the business community/private sector, academia, unions, youth
groups, and other development partners. Further live and online consultations are envisaged
through CPS implementation. Other tools included a series of consultations on policy notes,
issued in early 2009, dissemination and consultations of individual analytical or TA reports
produced by the WB (e.g. social protection, regional development, municipal finance, students
loan, civil service pay), and an on-line feedback mechanism via the website (See Annex E for
more details).
99.
The consultations provided a venue for a meaningful exchange of views with various
stakeholders on the critical challenges of current economic crisis affecting Romania and
long-term prospects as well as policy options and programs that would address these
challenges. The key messages and implications for further Bank Group support are summarized
in Box 1. The goal of these discussions was to listen to a wide spectrum of voices and to
incorporate the most relevant opinions and comments in the CPS design. A detailed feed-back

35

report will be sent to all participants and posted on the Bank’s Romanian website to inform the
public about messages and recommendations.
Box 1. Key Messages from Stakeholder Consultations
Lessons learned from past and ongoing work of the World Bank in Romania. Need to scale up
successful experiences, including reforms piloted by Bank-financed projects. Need to bolster information
and communication on policies and projects. Need for better coordination among donors/lenders.
Consistency of proposed Bank program with needs and expectations. The Bank program should
consider sectoral strategies and not only 3 main national programmatic documents (GP2009, Lisbon
Agenda, NRP 2007) Advice extended to the Bank on balancing flexibility with the need for firmness,
especially concerning agreed reform objectives and specific project outcomes.
Political and economic context, risks and opportunities. Coalition politics create risks for sustainability
of both reform and project implementation. General concern about the commitment and capacity to design
and implement needed reforms. Reservations about the extent to which current cooperation of the
Government with IFIs goes beyond financial needs and is driven by genuine acceptance of the need for
reform.
Scope for resuming reform. Education was unanimously identified as the neediest area for reform.
Teachers’ pay must be linked to broader reform objectives and outcomes. Public Sector is seen as lacking
lack professionalism and management skills. Perceived inefficiency of the bureaucracy, lacking
communication and coordination, is hampering delivery of public services.
Governance. Concern with implementation capacities in both central and local administrations. Need for
better inter-ministerial coordination and at local level. Virtual consensus on inability to address governance
issues.

F.

Measuring Results

100. The proposed Bank engagement is expected to support the achievement of key
Government objectives. The envisaged lending and AAA program would be supportive of key
Government objectives in selected policy areas. The results framework (Annex C) largely
reflects the results anticipated from the existing portfolio activities (lending, and analytical and
advisory) and those new activities planned for the first years of the CPS. The Bank program
would be small in the context of Romania’s overall development program and the actions of
other parties – Government or other outside agencies – will also play a part in contributing to
these outcomes. Nevertheless, the specific outcomes identified in Annex C are those that the
Bank will try to influence and those which can be attributed to the Bank’s interventions.
IV.

Risk Management

101.

The proposed Bank strategy carries risks.

102. Institutional capacity risks relate to policy formulation and coordination capacity,
medium-term vision, implementation, and accountability. Capacity constraints could delay key
elements of the reform program to be supported by the Bank. The Bank’s program has a strong
focus on capacity building in both the executive and legislative branches of the Government with
emphasis on public financial management and public administration reforms. AAA could play
an important role in addressing capacity constraints and building institutional capacity where
needed.

36

103. External economic and financial risks relate to the uncertainty of the global economic
outlook, the risk that financial markets may remain frozen over a prolonged period, the risk that
the economic downturn in the EU may be more severe and protracted than currently envisaged,
and that the perceptions of institutional investors and risk-assessment agencies may be more
pessimistic than expected. Should that happen, Romania’s growth could be further compressed,
especially if capital outflows exceed expectations. This risk is exogenous and cannot be
mitigated. The Bank has limited headroom to increase lending in the near-term.
104. Domestic economic risks include the ability of Romania to withstand external shocks, the
response of the economy to reforms, and the capacity to mobilize and absorb external funds. The
relatively large size of the package may provide sufficient space for building up reserves, that
would help deal with worse than expected capital outflows, and prolonged distress of the
financial sector. The DPL program and associated analytical work aims to help Romania to
identify efficiency savings and to maintain manageable fiscal balances.
105. Social risks stem from popular expectations, the persistence of core poverty relatively
unaffected by economic growth, and the rise in transient poverty during the crisis. The Banksupported DPL and other programs target assistance towards those in poverty or socially
excluded.

37

Annex A1
Page 1 of 3

Romania at a glance

9/24/08

Romania

Europe &
Central
Asia

Upper
middle
income

21.5
238
-0.2
54

445
23,972
0.0
64

823
41,497
0.6
75

75-79

158.4
7,370
10,980

2,694
6,051
11,116

5,750
6,987
11,868

30-34

6.6
6.5

6.8
6.7

5.8
5.1

10
..
72
16
4

5
11
69
23
..

..
..
70
22
..

98
96
105
104

99
96
98
96

94
92
112
109

88
72

95
89

95
83

Key Development Indicators

Age distribution, 2007

(2007)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

Female

60-64
45-49

15-19
0-4

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

10

5

0

5

10

percent

(most recent estimate, 2000–2007)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

30
20
10
0
1990

1995

Romania

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
European Commission
Germany
France

2000

2006

Europe & Central Asia

a

1980

1990

2000

2007

..

243

432

914

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

..
..
..

62
68
0

264
25
17

695
51
42

10

..
..

0.6
10

1.2
19

1.3
42

5
0

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

-5
-10

Long-Term Economic Trends

-15
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..
12.1

..
13.6

45.7
44.3

4.8
12.7

..
..

0.0
83

2.2
100

2.4
90

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–07
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

22.2
..

23.2
38,299

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

16.4
56.6
..
27.0

23.7
49.9
33.8
26.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

53.7
12.3
36.3
..
..
..

22.4
37,053

21.5
169,283

0.4
1.3

-0.3
-0.6

-0.6
6.1

12.5
36.4
14.5
51.1

6.4
37.1
21.9
56.5

1.9
-1.0
..
..

-1.9
-1.2
..
0.9

7.1
5.6
..
5.1

65.9
13.3
30.2

79.0
7.2
19.5

75.3
7.6
31.1

..
..
..

1.3
0.8
-5.1

6.8
7.1
9.4

16.7
26.2
21.5

32.9
38.5
15.4

29.5
43.5
17.6

..
..

8.1
6.0

10.4
12.4

(% of GDP)

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2006.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

1

Annex A1
Page 2 of 3
Romania
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2007

10,366
13,054
-1,930

40,445
70,245
-23,740

Voice and accountability

96

8,569

Regulatory quality

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-1,355
-3.7

-22,826
-13.5

Reserves, including gold

3,396

37,211

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2007
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services
Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

31.1
29.2
31.8

30.6
28.5
29.2

Overall surplus/deficit

-4.0

-2.8

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

40
25

25

50

75

100

2007

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

16
16

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2007

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

49.5

30.2

29

126

5.5

4.4

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

65
27.7
..

63
27.7
2.5

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

..
54.8

1,955
..

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

3.9

4.2

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

4.2

5.3

1,616

1,772

2000

2007

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

1,898
384
91
104

2,634
232
211
132

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

284
112
17

438
391
47

5

162

20
0

138
0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

11,160
2,500
–

88,374
11,721
–

30.1
20.1

47.1
19.0

1,037
58

9,834
301

Composition of total external debt, 2006
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)
IDA, 0

IMF, 104

IBRD, 2,481
Short-term,
17,725

Other multilateral, 3,631

World Bank Group portfolio

Bilateral, 583

(US$ millions)

Private, 30,591

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax administration
Tax rates
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2008

–
–
–

10
3.6
83

2000

2007

..
..

35.6
34.1

2.9
8.6

27.1
8.9

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

2

9/24/08

Annex A1
Page 3 of 3
Millennium Development Goals

Romania

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
Romania

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
9.9
..

1995
..
25.4
8.9
..

2000
..
36*
8.2
3.7

2007
9.6
13.9
8.2
..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

81
96
92
99

..
86
..
..

94
102
81
98

93
101
86
..

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

99
..
34

..
42
7

100
46
7

100
46
11

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

31
27
92

26
21
93

22
19
98

18
16
95

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

..
..
..

..
99
57

..
98
64

24
98
70

..
74
..

..
112
..

0.1
136
9

0.1
128
79

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

76
72
27.8
..
6.7
2.9

80
72
..
..
5.5
3.5

85
73
27.7
..
3.9
4.2

88
72
27.7
2.5
4.2
5.3

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

10.2
0.0
0.0
0.2

13.1
0.0
0.1
1.3

17.4
11.1
3.6
3.2

20.0
106.2
55.7
14.8

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

125

100

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)
150

100
75
75

100

50

50

25

50
25

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2006

2000

2002

2004

2006

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary &
secondary education

Romania

Europe & Central Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. * national data
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

3

Fixed + mobile subscribers
Internet users

9/24/08

Annex B2
CAS Annex B2 - Romania
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 06/08/2009

Indicator
2006
2007
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
22
21
Average Implementation Period (years) b
3.2
3.3
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
4.5
14.3
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
5.4
26.3
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
4.5
14.3
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
5.4
26.3
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
12.0
10.9
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year: Joint Portfolio Review held in 2007, Q2, 3, 4, 2008, 2009
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2008

2009

20
3.7
15.0
12.3
15.0
12.3
18.2

17
4.3
35.3
35.5
35.3
35.5
10.6

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
65
14
5,395.7
1,007.1
18.5
0.0
22.0
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

1

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2
CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary - Romania
As Of Date 08/06/2009

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

2010

2011

Project ID

Euro(M)

DPL 1

300.0

DPL 2

360.0

Sub-total

660.0

DPL 3

340.0

2

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation
b Risks (H/M/L)

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Annex B3
Romania: IFC Investment Operations Program

Commitments (US$m)
Gross**
Net***

2006

2007

2008

2009*

146.29
133.32

132.9
136.07

39.45
45.19

169.75
64.00

61
0
0
13
26
100

63
0
9
28
0
100

39
0
1
60
0
100

88
0
0
12
0
100

5
95
100

4
96
100

58
42
100

12
88
100

Net commitments by Sector (percent)
Finance
Global Manufacturing
Health & Education
Infrastructure
Oil, Gas, Mining & Chemicals
Net Commitments by Investment (percent)
Equity
Loan

* as of April 30, 2009
** IFC and Participants
*** IFC's account only

3

Annex B4

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Romania
As Of Date 06/08/2009

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS, PD

Recent completions
PEIR
PSD Policy Note
Rural Regional TA
Poverty Monitoring
Municipal Finance Policy Note
HD Sector Policy Notes
ROSC
EU Convergence
Poverty Monitoring 2
Public Pay and Employment
National Rural Development Plan TA
FSAP Update
Reform of Higher Education Financing

06
07
07
07
07
07
08
08
08
08
08
09
09

537
103
176
57
155
144
167
146
144
55
53
286
127

G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D
G,D,B
G,D,B

KG, PS, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD

Underway
IT Assessment at NBR TA
PEIR Update
Poverty Monitoring (III)
Pensions for Elderly Poor

10
10
10
10

60
62
84
118

G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D
G,D,B,P,D

KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD

Planned
PEIR Programatic (I)
Macro-Monitoring
DPL Education Reform TA
DPL Health Reform TA
DPL Civil Service - PFM TA
DPL Financial Sector TA
TAX Administration TA
Poverty Monitoring (IV)
Student Loans TA

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

100
150
100
100
100
100
100
75
100

PEIR Programatic (II)
Macro-Monitoring
DPL Education Reform TA (II)
DPL Civil Service - PFM TA
Poverty Monitoring (V)

11
11
11
11
11

100
100
100
100
75

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

4

Annex B5

Romania Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2001-07

Europe &
Central
Asia

22.7
0.5
49.6
2.3

22.7
-0.5
54.0
1.3

21.5
-0.4
54.1
1.3

445.1
0.0
63.6
1.6

822.9
0.7
75.2
2.0

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

25.4
20.4
27.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

..
..
0

1,470
8
11

6,150
259
184

6,051
159
..

6,987
152
..

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

..
..
..

28.2
8.9
37.2

31.5
8.2
40.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
3.5

3.9
3.5

4.1
4.6

3.6
4.7

..
..
..

81
81
81

93
93
93

91
92
90

94
94
94

..
..
..

80
95
62

88
99
76

95
99
88

95
98
83

88
95
..

93
98
..

95
97
4

97
95
..

94
96
..

70
67
73

69
66
73

72
69
76

69
64
74

70
67
74

26
32

21
26

16
18

23
26

22
26

228
114
..
..

270
119
..
99

205
87
24
98

299
123
44
95

258
137
97
94

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 10 September 2008.

5

Uppermiddleincome

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2
Romania - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

2003

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

Projected
2010
2011

2012

100
14

100
9

100
9

100
6

100
7

100
7

100
7

100
7

100
7

Industry

35

36

36

37

37

36

36

36

36

Services

51

55

55

57

55

57

57

57

57

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

85
22
3
19

87
24
4
20

86
26
5
21

83
30
6
25

81
33
5
28

78
32
6
25

76
31
7
24

74
31
7
24

73
32
0
0

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

36
45

33
43

32
44

30
44

31
44

28
36

28
34

27
33

27
32

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

15
15

13
15

14
16

17
18

19
19

22
22

25
24

26
25

27
26

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
75,795
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas metho 2,950

99,173 122,695 169,283 200,079 172,500 187,007 202,649 225,322
3,830

4,830

7,370

8,610

7.7
7.3

6.6
6.5

7.8
8.4

1.0
1.0

2.5
2.3

5.0
5.6

5.0
5.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 05 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
8.8
4.4
8.1
6.5
Total consumption
10.6
9.1
9.6
9.9
Private consumption
16.2
10.3
12.9
11.8

7.2
8.2
9.3

-3.6
-5.0
-3.7

0.4
-0.2
-0.4

2.7
2.1
2.3

4.1
3.4
3.6

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 05 prices)
Gross domestic product at
8.4
4.1
market prices
Gross Domestic Income
8.2
2.3

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
27,121 32,819 39,445 49,930 61,988 48,987 51,740 54,956 60,055
Merchandise FOB
23,515 27,711 32,434 40,445 49,165 39,188 41,378 43,909 48,043
Imports (GNFS)b
33,996 42,973 54,194 73,670 87,614 61,680 63,484 66,692 72,093
Merchandise FOB
30,126 37,431 47,189 64,837 76,025 53,539 55,125 57,717 62,247
Resource balance
-6,876 -10,154 -14,749 -23,740 -25,625 -12,695 -11,743 -11,737 -12,039
Net current transfers
3,691
4,474
6,079
6,597
8,774
7,461
7,668
7,871
8,624
Current account balance
-6,333
-8,577 -12,743 -22,826 -24,704 -12,961 -12,089 -12,841 -13,729
Net private foreign direct invest
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors &
Change in reservesd

5,020
2,894
473
2,421
4,258
-5,838

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
-9.1
Real annual growth rates ( YR05 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
..
Primary
..
Manufactures
..
Merchandise imports (CIF)
..

6,477
5,937
427
5,511
2,917
-6,754

8,600
9,000
141
8,859
-3,836
-1,021

9,834
15,318
225
10,093
3,840
-6,166

15,000
6,007
787
5,220
6,810
-3,113

7,000
7,652
10,000
-8,000
-4,191
2,500

8,000
6,746
8,000
-4,000
-610
-2,047

8,000
7,623
8,000
-377
-571
-2,211

8,000
12,553
6,000
6,553
-5,116
-1,707

-10.2

-12.0

-14.0

-12.8

-7.4

-6.3

-5.8

-5.3

..
..
..
..

12.2
8.0
13.5
8.9

14.4
13.7
14.9
15.3

17.5
18.0
17.4
12.0

-21.0
4.0
5.3
-29.6

5.6
3.1
3.8
3.0

6.2
3.6
4.3
4.7

9.3
4.6
5.2
7.8

(Continued)

6

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Romania - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2003

Actual
2005
2006

2004

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
28.5
30.0
Current expenditures
26.6
28.2
Current account surplus (+) or d
1.9
1.9
Capital expenditure
3.2
2.6
Foreign financing
..
..
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

Projected
2010
2011

2012

29.9
28.0
1.9
3.3
..

30.6
29.2
1.5
4.3
1.2

32.1
28.3
3.8
4.2
0.7

30.2
28.1
2.1
5.0
1.0

32.1
28.0
4.2
4.8
0.3

30.4
27.3
3.0
4.7
0.5

32.1
25.1
7.0
4.5
0.0

26.2
40.1
169.3

30.0
33.8
85.3

29.2
15.7
159.9

36.6
48.3
79.6

34.5
8.2
176.7

33.3
6.8
114.6

32.3
6.2
111.6

31.3
5.4
134.8

33.3
15.7
91.4

Price indices( YR05 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade inde
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

..
..
..
..

100.0
100.0
100.0
..

100.9
102.6
98.3
..

100.0
100.0
100.0
..

100.4
98.8
101.7
..

100.9
97.7
103.3
..

102.4
97.5
105.0
..

103.8
97.5
106.5
..

106.4
97.5
109.1
..

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% chang
GDP deflator (% change)

11.9
15.5

9.0
12.2

6.6
10.6

4.8
12.7

7.9
14.0

5.8
9.9

3.5
6.9

3.2
5.1

2.8
4.8

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

7

Annex B7
Romania - Key Exposure Indicators - Romania
As of Date 06/08/2009

Indicator

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008
2009

Projected
2010
2011
2012

29,573 38,861 54,001 88,374 82,470 74,698 67,785 60,057 47,409

Net disbursements (US$m)a

..

..

..

15,568 -5,875 -7,772 -6,912 -7,728 -12,649

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

..

..

..

11,721 11,248 10,517 11,342 9,668

9,582

104.9
39.3
..
2.2

135.2
44.4
..
2.1

143.0
47.1
19.0
..

117.6
41.1
16.0
1.9

93.1
33.4
13.1
2.5

75.8
27.3
12.7
3.0

62.1
22.0
10.0
3.5

44.9
15.9
9.1
4.4

9.8
34.3

11.5
29.5

13.2
37.5

15.1
35.2

12.1
32.2

16.9
47.4

13.5
35.2

20.7
50.0

15.6
38.5

0.8
2,522

0.8
2,448

0.8
2,481

0.6
2,634

0.6
2,625

0.6
3,450

0.5
3,915

0.5
3,729

0.5
3,541

2
..

2
..

2
..

2
0

3
0

3
0

3
0

3
0

3
0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

110.8
126.8

186.5
128.0

203.9
285.2

208.6
183.0

297.0
211.0

358.7
104.3

..
..

..
..

..
..

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

131.8

..

..

..

..

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
107.0
TDO/GDP
39.2
TDS/XGS
..
Concessional/TDO
1.7
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

84.8

..

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. “XGS” denotes exports of goods and services, including workers’ remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

8

..

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2
CAS Annex B8 - Romania
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 06/08/2009

Closed Projects

74

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

458.61
13.68
5,813.78
4,484.94
6,272.38
4,498.62

Total Undisbursed (Active)

1,136.73

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

1,136.73

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P100470
P100638
P086694
P067367
P075163
P081950
P078971
P099528
P093775
P043881
P090309
P088165
P087807
P086949
P088252
P073967
P093096
P083620
P093812
Overall Result

AVIAN FLU - RO
MU
CESAR
MS
ECSEE APL #1 (CRL)
S
FOREST DEVT
S
HAZ MITIG
MS
HAZARD MITIGATION (GE S
HEALTH SEC REF 2 (APL #MS
INT. NUTRIENT POLLUTIO S
INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTS
IRRIG REHAB
MS
JUDICIAL REFORM
U
KNOW ECON
S
MINE CLOSURE, ENV & SOMS
MOD AGR KNOWLEDGE & MS
Municipal Services Project S
RURAL EDUC
S
SOC INCL PROG (CRL)
MU
TRANSPORT RESTRUCTUU
TRANSPORT SECTOR SU MS

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

IBRD

U
MU
S
S
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
U
S
MS
MU
S
S
MU
MU
MS

2007
2008
2005
2003
2004
2004
2005
2008
2008
2004
2006
2006
2005
2005
2007
2003
2006
2005
2007

37.7
65
84.3
25
150

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev'd

9.8

26.4
62.0
53.1
2.7
94.1
3.3
47.7
5.0
65.9
46.2
140.7
36.0
89.7
39.9
96.8
6.8
59.4
167.6
101.7
1145.1

35.1
6.0
41.7
6.3
74.1
3.3
40.7
-0.3
11.6
30.1
125.8
22.8
69.7
25.8
14.1
6.8
24.7
167.6
121.7
827.8

28.7
0.6
20.1
2.3
72.4
3.0

3.7
7

80
5.5
68.1
80
130
60
120
50
131.7
60
58.5
225
180
1605.3

9

12.5

35.0
48.5

18.1
51.5

6.8

203.4

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2
Romania
Committed and Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of April 30, 2009
(in US$ millions)
Committed

Commitment

Institution

Disbursed and Outstanding

GT

ALL

ALL

Out IFC
7
0
0
0
0
5
0

QL +
QE
Out IFC
0
0
0
3
0
0
0

Out IFC
0
7
0
0
0
0
0

Out IFC
7
43
118
3
41
10
21

Out Part
0
36
0
0
0
0
16

LN

ET

QL + QE

GT

ALL

ALL

LN

ET

Cmtd IFC
7
0
0
0
0
5
0

Cmtd IFC
0
0
0
5
0
0
0

Cmtd IFC
0
7
0
0
0
0
0

Cmtd IFC
20
43
118
5
41
12
21

Cmtd Part
0
36
0
0
0
0
16

Out IFC
0
36
118
0
41
5
21

Fiscal Year

Short Name

2005/ 2008/ 2009
2007/ 2008
2003/ 2004/ 2006

ATE Romania
Arabesque SRL
Banca Comerciala
Banat Construct
Credit Europe Bk
MedLife SA
Petrotel-Lukoil

Cmtd IFC
13
36
118
0
41
7
21

ProCreditRomania

10

2

0

0

12

0

10

2

0

0

12

0

RGH
Ro-Fin
TTS SA
TTS Romania

0
3
13
0

48
0
0
7

0
0
0
13

0
0
0
0

48
3
13
20

0
0
0
0

0
3
13
0

36
0
0
0

0
0
0
13

0
0
0
0

36
3
13
13

0
0
0
0

2007
2007
2006
2002/ 2003/ 2004/
2007
2005
2004
2006
2008/ 2009
2004/ 2005/ 2007/
2009
Total Portfolio

Transilvaniabank

78

0

36

0

114

94

78

0

36

0

114

94

340

68

53

7

469

146

326

50

51

7

435

146

10

Annex C

R ESULTS F RAMEWORK

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES

INDICATIVE MILESTONES

WBG INSTRUMENTS

CAS PILLAR 1: PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM
GOALS: To improve the accountability and responsiveness of the public administration and to enhance predictability and efficiency in public resource management.
Issues and Obstacles: Pro-cyclical fiscal policies and weak fiscal management have led to serious macroeconomic vulnerabilities. The budget process lacks
predictability and transparency, as well as weak prioritization of public investment. Introduction of an MTEF will require capacity and support to both plan on a multiyear horizon and to link budget with outcomes. Public sector wages have more than doubled since 2005 contributing to pro-cyclical policies, but without adequately
rewarding performance or productivity. Governance is weak and monitored by the EU bi-annually. The court system has a large back-log of cases.
1.1 PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Objective: Reduce fiscal vulnerabilities by restoring
budget discipline, improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of public expenditures, and improved resource
mobilization.
Outcome 1: An effective Medium Term Expenditure
Framework operational by 2012
•
Indicator 1: Budget is executed consistent with the
aggregate and ministerial expenditure ceilings
approved by Parliament in the MTEF (2011-13).
Baseline: MTEF not approved by Parliament, no
binding ministry ceilings, spending exceeds original
budget amounts.
•

•
•
•

•

Fiscal Responsibility Law approved.
Independent Fiscal Council established.
MTEF approved by Parliament (prior to the annual
budget) with three-year ceilings for major spending
ministries and aggregate limit on personnel.
Wage bill for 2010 increases below the rate of
inflation.

Indicator 2: Summary of multi-year public investment
program annexed to budget and consistent with MTEF
projections
Target: Annex included in budget with multi-year
costing of projects vs. Baseline: Single year budget
allocations only and no historical data.

Outcome 2: Sustainable growth in public wage bill
Indicator: Annual expenditure for personnel is
consistent with limits approved in MTEF and do not
increase as a share of GDP above expected 2009 level.

•

11

Ongoing:
(a)
(b)

Policy Briefs 2009
PEIR Update 2009

New
(c) DPL series
(d) Programmatic series of PER updates
focusing on opportunities for fiscal
savings and efficiency gains in major
expenditure categories, starting with
education, health, transport, agriculture
(e) AAA on fiscal decentralization
(f) AAA on Public Financial Management
(g) AAA on tax administration

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES

INDICATIVE MILESTONES

WBG INSTRUMENTS

Target: no positive percentage variation against
MTEF ceiling, and personnel expenditures at or below
2009 ratio to GDP. Baseline: 7.5 percent in 2009 and
8.4 percent in 2008

1.2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM
Objective: improve the public pay system to enhance
transparency and predictability, motivate performance
among public sector employees, attract and retain critical
skills.
Outcome: Align public sector pay system to EU practice
(transparency, equity, ability to attract & retain critical
skills in public administration)
•
Indicator 1: Reduction in aggregate allowances and
bonuses and limit amount for any individual
Target: Maximum 30percent of the total public
compensation.
•
Indicator 2: Align pay structures more closely to
actual labor market conditions
Target: Pay adjustments are targeted toward key
positions reflecting salary survey results
1.3 GOVERNANCE
Objective: strengthen the efficiency and accountability of
the justice system
Outcome 1: Strengthened admin capacity of courts
•
Indicator 1: Introduction of new case mgmt techniques
Target: new case mgmt techniques used by 30 percent
of courts
•
Indicator 2: Trained economic managers
Target: 50 percent of economic managers are trained
and obtain satisfactory performance ratings

•

New salary legislation on public sector pay which
limits non wage expenditures approved

•

Functional reviews of the public administration
undertaken to identify budget resources that could be
released for better targeting pay.

•

A detailed pay reform plan is approved by
Government for implementing (a) a uniform job
grading framework for the public service and (b)
more closely aligning pay for selected benchmark
jobs to actual labor market conditions (through a
salary survey)

Ongoing
(a) Public Sector Pay Practices in Romania
2007 and 2008

New

•

Regulations drafted that enforces compliance with
merit based principles of employment and promotion

•

Improved capacity of the court system to adjudicate
disputes (in terms of fairness, speed, affordability,
ability to enforce decisions)

•

New internal working arrangements within courts,
whereby non-judicial tasks are transferred from
judges to court clerks

•

Improved public image of the judiciary according to
survey

Outcome 2: Enhanced competence, professionalism and

12

a) DPL series
b) AAA on civil service pay, public
administration and functional reviews

Ongoing:
a)

Judicial Reform Project

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES

INDICATIVE MILESTONES

WBG INSTRUMENTS

integrity of judges and court staff
•
Indicator: new qualification examination procedures
are successfully piloted by NIM
CAS PILLAR 2: GROWTH AND COMPETITIVENESS
GOALS: in the short-run, put in place crisis-management measures in the financial sector; and in the medium-term, establish the building blocks for sustainable
convergence to EU-average living standards through improved business environment, enhanced skills, better infrastructure and more efficient agriculture.
Issues and Obstacles: The crisis has revealed weaknesses in financial sector supervision across the region, new, best practices will need to be adopted to strengthen
the system. A recovery in growth will depend both on recovery in key trading partners and on the strength of Romania’s own reforms and policies. All countries are
seeking to emerge from the crisis in a strong position, so competition will be strong. Romania lags international competitors on education, business environment and
agriculture productivity indicators. Transport and energy need significant investment and reform to be able to meet demand.
2.1 FINANCIAL SECTOR
Objective: deepen and strengthen the resilience of the
financial sector
Outcome 1: Improved stability and resilience of the
financial system to economic shocks
•
Indicator 1: Stress tests conducted, and Strategic
Action Plan adopted and up-dated as needed
•
Indicator 2: Remove obstacles to out-of-court
insolvency proceedings, and mortgage and corporate
debt restructuring guidelines issued and applicable

•
•
•

•
•
•

Outcome 2: Improved governance of financial sector
supervision.
•
Indicator 1: Recommendations of the de La Rosiere
report adopted, notably with respect to independence
and autonomy of financial sector supervisors (CSA,
CNVM, CSSPP)
•
Indicator 2: Supervision standards, regulations and
practices strengthened (in line with Basel II)

•

NBR has undertaken banking sector stress tests to
serve as input into the Strategic Action Plan.
Amendments of the Insolvency Law are issued
A new draft Special Law on the Political
Independence and Financial Autonomy of the
Financial Sector Regulators and Supervisors is
approved by Government
Legal and regulatory framework for bank resolution,
mortgage and corporate debt restructuring improved
Internal governance structure for Basel II policy and
accreditation decisions to be established within NBR
Assessment and amendments of (i) the adequacy
definition of Fin. Conglomerates - Ordinance 99/06
and (ii) adequacy of supervision
Strengthen decision making and methods for Basel II
adoption

13

Ongoing
(a)
(b)

FSAP November 2008
Consumer Literacy and protection

(c) IFC financing to local financial institutions
New
(a) DPL series
(b) Analytical and advisory services on
financial sector

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES
2.2. BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
Objective: improve the business environment, including
institutional and policy framework for R&D and
innovation, and development of a knowledge-based
society and economy.

INDICATIVE MILESTONES
•
•

National Strategy for the New Economy and
Implementation of the Information Society. Develop
Local Community e-Networks (LCeNs) being used
as tools to be used for education, business, public
communication

Outcome 1: Participation of disadvantaged communities in
K-based society/economy
•
Indicator : Population in disadvantaged communities
using LCeNs as tool for education, business or public
admin (as percent of number of individuals with ICT
access)
Target 38 percent in 2011 vs. 17.5 percent in 2005

WBG INSTRUMENTS

Ongoing:
a) Knowledge Economy project
b) MAKIS project (R&D component)
New:
(a) Advisory work on tax administration

2.3 EDUCATION
Objective: support Government to improve access to and
quality of education in a fiscally sound manner

Ongoing:

Outcome 1: Improved efficiency in primary and secondary
education by providing more flexible financing, more
autonomy and enhanced accountability (focusing on
results) to local authorities and school principles
•
Indicator: Increase in average class size.
(Baseline: 19.6 in school year 2008/09. Target: 23 in
school year 2013/14).

•

Outcome 2: Provide financial support to tertiary students
in a more equitable manner and with better incentives built
into the support.
•
Indicator 1: Average duration of study of students
receiving student loan compared to an appropriately
selected “control group” of students (who will not
receive the student loan).
•
Indicator 2: Average number of months it takes to find
a job following graduation of students receiving
student loan compared to an appropriately selected
“control” group of students (who will not receive the
student loan)

•

•

Legislation adopted to enable per capita financing in
eight counties, starting with school year 2010/11
All schools in 8 counties are financed using per
capita finance, starting with school year 2010/11.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Knowledge Economy project
Rural Education project
Policy Briefs 2009
Education Policy Note in 2007
Discussion paper on Introducing a
Student loan Scheme in Romania
(f) PER update
New:

•

First disbursements from student loans scheme begin
starting with the school year 2011/12
First cohort of students receiving student loans
graduate from their programs in the summer of 2013.

14

(a) TA on decentralization of primary and
secondary education
(b) TA program for the introduction of a
Student Loans Scheme
(c) IFC financing in private education

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES

INDICATIVE MILESTONES

WBG INSTRUMENTS

Baseline and targets: to be determined as part of the
student loan design. However, students receiving
loans should graduate faster and find jobs quicker than
the appropriately selected control group of students
2.4 AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Objective: provide advisory, technical and financial
assistance to support the market-based restructuring and
competitiveness of Romanian agriculture.

•

Outcome 1: Increased capacity to provide advisory
services to farmers and agro-processors in the EU
accession environment
•
Indicator : Number of trained and graduated advisors
Target 300 in 2013 vs. 0 in 2008

•

Integrated agricultural offices being rolled out
nationwide

•

Piloting of socio-economic advisory services in X
judet

Outcome 2: Support for regional convergence and
territorial cohesion of Romania as defined in National
Rural Development Plan 2007-2013
•
Indicator: Handbook of Socio-Econ Guide based on
EU best practice available to farmers

•

Improved absorption rate of EU structural funds

•

Evidence of restructuring of the farming sector

Systematic registration of property title of land in
rural areas has begun

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

CESAR project
MAKIS project
Irrigation Rehab and Reform project
AAA on the EU Common Agriculture
Policy and national funds to maximize
the impact on competitiveness.

(e)

AAA to strengthen the capacity of
Government departments responsible for
agriculture and rural development to
enhance their strategic planning and
programming capacity as one of the key
expenditure categories in the budget

(f)

IFC direct lending to agribusiness projects and
support to local financial institutions which
provides MSMEs lending and agriculture
financing

Ongoing:

2.5 ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Objective: Support Romania in implementing its energy
strategy in line with EU Directives, including EU 20-20-20
targets, and implementing selected environmental
directives.
Outcome 1: Increase security of electricity supply through
integration of regional markets, attracting private sector in
the development of energy markets.
•
Indicator 1: Develop energy transmission services,
including availability of ancillary services for stronger
integration into regional markets, and absorption of
energy generated by renewable sources.

Ongoing

•

Romania and its electricity market and power system
operates with help of ancillary services from
Romania’s Lotru project

15

(a) Energy Community in SEE
(b) PRG Privatization of Banat and
Dobrogea electricity distribution
companies
(c) Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control
Project and GEF grant
(d) Municipal Services Project

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES
•

Indicator 2: Increased private sector participation in
investments in energy sector.

Outcome 2: Implementation of the EU Water and Nitrate
Directives
•
Indicator : Favorable EU assessment of Romania's
progress towards meeting EU Nitrates Directive

INDICATIVE MILESTONES
•
•

WBG INSTRUMENTS

At least 80 percent of targeted NVZ show 10 percent
reduction in nutrient discharge in water bodies
Percentage of population in targeted NVZ area
adopting preventive and remedial measures to reduce
nutrient discharge

New:

Corrective measures taken at road sections with high
traffic crash rates
Road traffic crash database established
Functionality of EMIS developed under Hazard Risk
project is tested, and design for extension finalized
Risk assessment of public buildings, dams and waste
deposits is undertaken, based on country regulations
to enable prioritization of investments
Short term investment and financing plans prepared
in accordance with risk assessment and
prioritization.

Ongoing

a)

b)

IFC support to local financial institutions
which provided energy efficiency lending.
IFC direct lending to power projects and to
renewable energy projects (wind and/or
biomass).

•

2.6 TRANSPORT , HAZARD MITIGATION
Objective: improve the efficiency of the roads and
railways sub-sectors, help reduce the overall costs of
transportation, improve road safety, and reduce the
negative impacts of traffic congestion and pollution in
selected cities.
Outcome 1: Improved road safety
•
Indicator: Fatalities per 10,000 vehicles
Target: 5 in 2009 vs. 6.7 in 2008

•
•
•
•

•

Outcome 2: Improved emergency preparedness and
response management
•

•

•

Indicator 1: The Emergency Management Information
System is extended to include all central and local
administration units
Indicator
2:
A
comprehensive
Emergency
Communication System is created to enable stable and
reliable communication among decision makers and
executive agencies during emergency.
Indicator 3:
Investment programs for seismic
retrofitting of public buildings, dam safety, and
environmental safety of waste deposits from mining
industry are prepared and funded.

16

(a) Transport Restructuring
(b) Transport Sector Support
(c) Hazards Risks Mitigation and Emergency
Preparedness Project
New
a) IFC support financing of private sector in
financing PPPs

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES

INDICATIVE MILESTONES

WBG INSTRUMENTS

CAS PILLAR 3: SOCIAL AND SPATIAL INCLUSION
GOALS: in the short-term, protect the vulnerable from the adverse effects of the crisis; in the medium-term, promote social inclusion and regional development.
Issues and Obstacles: The crisis will temporarily increase the number of poor people, especially those involved in service and manufacturing industries. The longterm poor in rural areas and among some population groups remain hard to reach. Some of the social assistance programs are not well targeted. The pension system
can be important for poverty reduction, but is currently running a deficit and does not reach all those who need it. Romania’s health indicators are lagging the average
of those in the EU in important areas.
3.1 SOCIAL INCLUSION
Objective: assist Romania to improve the social inclusion
•
Improvements in water and road infrastructure
Ongoing:
and living conditions of most disadvantaged and
evident in targeted Roma communities
(a) Social Inclusion Project
vulnerable people in the Romanian society
•
Roma in poor settlements report a closer link
(b) Rural Education project
(through annual consultations) with the local
(c) Mine Closure and Socio-Economic
Outcome 1:Improved social inclusion of Roma living in
authorities, for addressing community needs
Regeneration
poor settlements
•
Indicator: Gap in living condition index between
targeted settlements and neighboring communities
•
Number of children in disadvantaged groups
Target: Reduce by 20 percent in 2013 vs. 2007 level
participating in ECE increasing annually
(TBD)
Outcome 2: Increased inclusiveness of children in
disadvantaged groups in Early Childhood Education
services in targeted areas
•
Indicator: Number of children in disadvantaged
groups participating in ECE
Target: 5 percent in 2013 vs. None in 2007

17

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES

INDICATIVE MILESTONES

3.2. SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
Objective: improve the cost effectiveness and targeting of
social assistance programs to mitigate the impact of the
crisis on the vulnerable, and promote activation policies

•

Outcome 1: increase the coverage and adequacy of the
most efficient and well targeted social assistance program the Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI)
•
Indicator 1: Number of unpaid GMI entitled
beneficiaries
Target: 0 by 2011 vs. 25 percent in 2009
•
Indicator 2: Maintain level of benefit adequacy over
time (share of benefits in average household
consumption)
Target: 25 percent in 2008 is maintained

•

Outcome 2: Consolidate & rationalize SA programs to
better serve poor in most cost efficient manner
•
Indicator: Reduce the number of SA programs
Target: 35 programs in 2008, reduced by 25 percent
over the CPS period
3.3. SOCIAL INSURANCE
Objective: strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and
equity of the multi-pillar pension system.
Outcome 1: Improved fiscal sustainability of the public,
pillar 1 pension.
•
Indicator 1: Deficit of Pension Pillar 1 is reduced as a
result of parametric reforms (gradual move to
indexation to inflation of pension benefits.
Target: Reduced by 0.5 percent in 2015 as a result of
parametric reforms
•
Indicator 2: Retirement age equalized
Target: Increase retirement age for women to 65
beyond 2014
Output 2: Improved equity of pension system
•
Indicator: Introduction of a zero pillar to cover
elderly poor

•

•
•

•

WBG INSTRUMENTS

Legislation to improved design and funding of well
targeted social assistance programs (e.g., GMI) is
passed
More transparent and predictable GMI budget
allocations & benefits
Re-introduction of conditional cash transfer for CFB
beneficiaries)

New:

Pension legislation to introduces inflation indexation
Pension legislation introduces a move towards
equalization of retirement age between men and
women

Ongoing

Social insurance policy options for elderly poor,
notably in rural areas, identified and solution
initiated designing an appropriate social protection
for elderly poor who are not covered at present

a) DPL series
b) Programmatic poverty monitoring
program

(a) Policy Briefs 2009
(b) Poverty Assessment Series (Phases I and
II)
(c) Pension Sector Policy Note 2007
(d) Rapid Assessment of Impact of
Economic Crisis on Poverty
New:
(a) DPL series
(b) Analytical Work on Elderly Poor Pension
Scheme
(c) Analytical and advisory services on
financial sector, and pension system

18

Annex C

CPS RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES
3.4. HEALTH SECTOR
Objective: support the design and implementation of the
Government’s health sector reform program to (i) improve
efficiency and quality of health services, (ii) mobilize
additional resources for health and (iii) improve health
outcomes

INDICATIVE MILESTONES
•
•

Adoption of the updated Hospital Rationalization
Strategy through a Government Decision in/by 2010
Adoption of the Rural Primary Care Strategy in/by
2010

Outcome 1: Better efficiency and quality of health services
•

•

Indicator 1: Annual rate of admission to acute care
facilities
Target: Reduce annual admission rate to acute care
facilities from 229 per 1,000 people to below 200

•

Indicator 3: 24-hour death rate among patients treated
in ER and then admitted to hospital
Target: Decrease by 10 percent in 2013 vs. baseline
2007
•
•

Adoption of the legislation of the revised benefit
package, including (i) the introduction of
copayments and exemption mechanisms for the poor
and (ii) transparent mechanisms for inclusion of new
technology and new drugs in the benefits package
Adoption of legislation for revised provider payment
mechanisms
Adoption of legislation for voluntary health
insurance

Outcome 2: Additional resources for health mobilized in a
transparent and equitable manner
•
•
•

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Health Sector Reform APL2
Health Sector Policy Note 2007
Policy Briefs 2009
IFC advisory services and financing to
support private sector participation in the
health sector

(a) DPL series
(b) Analytical and advisory services on
health sector reform

Indicator 2: Annual growth rate of drug expenditures
kept below 10 percent

Indicator 4: Maternal Mortality Ratio
Target: decrease MMR by 20 percent in 2012 vs.
baseline in 2004

Ongoing

New

•

•

WBG INSTRUMENTS

Indicator 1: Amount of copayment raised. Baseline:
NA; target: TBD
Indicator 2: Coverage of copayment exemption among
eligible population. Baseline: NA; target: >70 percent
Indicator 3: percent of households with voluntary
insurance. Baseline: NA. Target: 10 percent

19

Annex D

FY06 – FY09 CPS COMPLETION REPORT
(prepared Fall 2008)

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) assesses the
effectiveness of the FY06-09 CPS for Romania 2. The CPSCR will i) assess the Bank’s
effectiveness in aligning its program with Romania’s strategic goals; ii) detail the results
achieved under the CPS; and iii) provide lessons for subsequent strategy design. The
CPSCR team has used reviews of portfolio implementation undertaken by the Country
Management Unit, the Quality Assurance Group and the Independent Evaluation Group.
An outside consultant’s assessments have also been used as input for this exercise, as
well as interviews with selected client counterparts and with team members. This
CPSCR is being prepared a few months ahead of the intended closure of the CPS so as to
inform preparation of a new Partnership Strategy, which will cover future Bank
involvement in ten new European Union (EU) Member States in Central Europe and the
Baltic Countries.
Country Development Context
2.
Romania’s transition from a centralized to a market economy was
challenging during the 1990’s but strong progress was made this decade. Romania
had among the worst economic and social starting conditions of the transition economies.
The 1990s were characterized by a precipitous fall in GDP per capita and an increase in
poverty. But the financial crisis and the opening of EU accession negotiations, both in
1999, provided a stimulus for reform. A program of macroeconomic stabilization began
to tackle the economic problems and elections in November 2000 brought a new
Government with a new policy agenda. These policy efforts were supported by a World
Bank financed adjustment operation and an IMF Stand By Arrangement. Between 1999
and 2006 (the start of the CPS), GDP per capita rose from $2,900 to $5,000 and the
poverty rate fell from 35.9 percent to 13.8 percent of the population. Growth, reform and
investor confidence were stimulated and sustained in large part by the prospect of EU
accession.
3.
The prospect of EU accession provided a critical stimulus for reform. The
EU Accession Treaty was signed in April 2005. Accession was tentatively scheduled for
January 1, 2007 but a safety clause allowed for a one year delay if Romania did not
comply with key requirements. At the time the CPS was presented to the Board in May
2006 - just seven months ahead of Romania’s anticipated EU entry date - activation of
the safety clause and delay of EU membership remained distinct possibilities. The CPS
noted the strong national consensus in favor of EU accession and the Government’s
policy and reform efforts focused intently on meeting the remaining accession
requirements.

20

Annex D
Alignment of the CPS with the Government’s Own Strategic Goals
4.
The CPS was built around Romania’s EU accession and convergence goals.
The Government Program 2005-08 and a National Strategic Reference Framework
coordinated by the Ministry of Public Finance were centered on the twin objectives of i)
joining the EU in 2007 and ii) thereafter converging towards average EU living
standards. The CPS was fully aligned with this agenda, and was also designed in two
distinct parts: the pre-EU accession period and the post-accession period, with a break
point for a joint review of the program intended shortly after accession occurred. The
CPS pillars were designed to span both the pre- and post-accession parts of the CPS
program.
5.
The CPS pillars linked to the Government of Romania’s priorities. The CPS
outlined three ways in which Romania expected to accelerate economic convergence:
enhancing competitiveness and the business environment; improving fiscal management;
and modernizing the public sector. The first two pillars of the CPS - accelerating
structural and institutional reforms for sustained growth; and addressing fiscal
vulnerabilities and modernizing the public sector - directly support these country goals.
In addition (and in line with the advice from an earlier review 3) a third pillar was
included that focused on targeting poverty reduction and promoting social inclusion.
6.
To arrive at the CPS priorities, the CPS team had undertaken extensive
consultation, including a conference in January 2005 attended by most of Romania’s
Ministers, the Prime Minister and a large part of the Bank’s Romania team. At that
conference, two distinct voices were heard: the line ministries proposed numerous
investment projects for which they would wish to have the Bank’s financial support
during the CPS period, running to a billion dollars a year or more; meanwhile, the Central
Bank Governor and an Adviser to the Prime Minister expressed reservations about the
need for any Bank (or other IFI) involvement in Romania, given the economic boost
provided by EU accession prospects, likely high inflows of foreign exchange, and
Romania’s borrowing needs and capacity. The Government divided its projects between
the European agencies and the Bank. The proposed Bank lending program was set at
approximately $450-550m a year – the figure that appears in the CPS – a 50 percent
increase over the envelopes set in previous CASs. The discomfort with continued IFI
engagement among some influential counterparts appears to have gone unheeded by the
Bank and is not mentioned in the CPS.
7.
The CPS was presented to the Board shortly before EU accession. Almost
two years passed between the expiry of the previous CPS and the Board presentation of
the FY06-09 CPS, by which time there was only seven months left to the anticipated EU
accession date and the first, pre-accession part of the CPS program was already well
underway 4. As some of the activities intended for this CPS were actually carried out in
the CPS preparation period, they will be reported under this Completion Report. The
3

QAG report 44570: Romania Country Lending Enhancement Review, August 2004, para 60
This delay in Board presentation was not acknowledged in the CPS, but explains why some results
targeted were achieved prior to the formal start of the CPS period.

4

21

Annex D
bulk of the program activities implemented during the formal CPS period were from the
post-accession part of the CPS.
Romania’s Progress Towards its Goals during the CPS period
8.
In many ways, the period under this CPS was very successful for Romania.
Romania achieved its primary goal of EU accession on 1 January 2007. The prospect and
then reality of EU accession and the effect of the pre-accession reforms gave the
economy a significant boost: over the CPS period growth remained steady and strong at
5-6 percent per annum, while market finance flowed in and credit expanded rapidly.
Employment increased from 57.6 percent to 58.8 percent between 2005 and 2007 due to
strong growth, a flourishing services sector and high levels of foreign direct investment.
9.
However, the fiscal and income policies pursued were largely pro-cyclical
leading to imbalances and vulnerabilities that are no longer sustainable, while little
progress was made on modernizing the public sector. During the CPS period, strong
growth and FDI flows masked the risks of lax fiscal policy, wage growth in excess of
productivity and a widening current account deficit (the latter grew from 8.5 percent in
2005 to 10.5 percent in 2006 and 14 percent in 2007, moderating only slightly in 2008).
As global economic conditions deteriorate and the external deficits keep growing,
inflation has risen rapidly and investor confidence has been eroded. In late 2008, this led
to depreciation of the currency and a sharp fall in national stock markets. The National
Bank of Romania raised interest rates through 2007-08 without managing to dampen
credit expansion until new prudential norms were introduced in the Fall 2008; it also
intervened to support the lei in late 2008, which helped to stabilize the currency in the
face of speculative attacks. Deep and rapid fiscal consolidation will be needed to avoid
the risk of a hard landing. Institutional reforms in the public sector will be needed to
support the restoration of growth and convergence of living standards with EU averages.
10.
Poverty declined during the period, largely due to strong growth, but may
increase as a result of the financial crisis. Extreme poverty declined from 4.6 percent
in 2005 to 2.4 percent in 2007. Unemployment declined through the CPS period, but
may well increase in the coming year as Romanians working overseas return home as
their jobs are affected by the economic contraction taking place across Europe. Social
inclusion has improved somewhat, with the increased provision of services for vulnerable
groups, while spatial disparities have narrowed only very slightly. Governance indicators
remained broadly unchanged through the CPS period, but the European Commission has
highlighted concerns in its twice-yearly Compliance and Verification monitoring reports.
CPS Results – the Bank’s Contribution to Romania’s Progress
11.
The Bank has played a significant role in supporting Romania’s transition up
to EU accession, both in terms of its financial and intellectual contribution to the reform
efforts, as well as by providing a stamp of approval which lent credibility to Romania’s
reform program. An Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) review 5 reports that
5

IEG Using knowledge to improve development effectiveness (2008).

22

Annex D
stakeholders in Romania rated the Bank’s ESW and TA (2000-2006) highly - 4.7 on a
scale of 1 (low) to 6 (high) – in terms of its influence on policy, citing particularly the
Bank’s core diagnostic work – a Public Expenditure Management review and a Public
Expenditure and Institutional Review - undertaken in the CPS preparation period. On the
lending side, the Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL) series was the main instrument
through which the Bank supported the Government in its pre-accession structural reform
agenda, in close collaboration with the EU and other partners. Overall, during the
preparation period and pre-accession part of the CPS, the Bank’s role in Romania was
highly valued and successful.
12.
The Bank’s influence declined considerably after EU accession. The
availability of market finance and EU grants rendered the Bank’s financial assistance less
necessary, while reform fatigue limited the Government’s interest in further policy
advice. Meanwhile, some line ministries continued to seek the Bank’s advice. At around
the time of accession, the governing coalition split leading to changes in policy direction.
While few new Bank-supported activities were introduced post-accession, the portfolio of
projects yielded some results. An overview is provided below under each of the three
CPS pillars, with more detail in a Results Table (Annex 1).
Pillar 1 – Accelerating Structural and Institutional Reforms for Sustained Growth
13.
Pillar 1 aimed to put in place the key building blocks for a strong economy
and sustained growth. The Bank envisaged support in the following sectors: public
finance, human development, environment, transport, energy, using the PAL as a crosscutting reform framework, supported by Sector Investment Loans in most of the sectors
mentioned above. AAA in public finance, private sector development, Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM), was intended to provide a diagnostic base for the design
of lending interventions or was undertaken at the request of the client.
14.
This pillar achieved partial results. Romania took significant strides in
reforming the financial sector, which was almost completely privatized and became a
regional leader in South East Europe in energy sector reform and restructuring. The
business environment improved, although taxes remain a problem for companies and
individuals alike. However, the transport sector remains inefficient and largely
unreformed. Agriculture continues in a bipolar form, with a few efficient agricultural
companies and a large hinterland of subsistence farming undertaken by family units. The
share of employment in agriculture as a proportion of total employment declined from 32
percent in 2004 to 27.5 percent in mid-2008.
15.
Many Bank operations performed well pre-accession but unraveled during
the post-accession part of the CPS. Four of the eight new investment loans proposed
under this pillar of the CPS (Knowledge Economy (FY06), Transport (FY07),
Agriculture (FY08) and Environmental Management (which became the Integrated
Nutrient Reduction FY08) were approved and launched. The three-part PAL program
underpinned many of the reforms associated with these investment loans. Even though
PAL 2 and 3 were not approved or disbursed (in part because the IMF’s program was

23

Annex D
declared off-track), many of the reforms envisaged in the PAL series were undertaken.
The first PAL was accompanied by a Private and Public Sector Institution Building loan
that provided significant Technical Assistance (TA) resources to support implementation
of PAL measures relating to public administration and was used for broader capacity
building when the PAL series was dropped. A grant from the Netherlands (of US$2.6m)
supported the PAL series through technical assistance to improve public and private
sector performance. On the private side, the grant supported reform in district heating;
corporate governance; mining and infrastructure reforms; capital markets development;
and regional development.
16.
The Bank Group played a major role in the transformation of the financial
sector. At the time of CPS preparation, this sector was characterized by low financial
intermediation and thin, short-term capital markets. The CEM helped in the creation of a
securities commission, while the PAL supported the privatization of the banking system.
Nearly 100 percent of the banking system is now privately owned. Over the CPS period
intermediation grew at a very fast rate, providing credit to a growing Romanian economy.
However, a substantial part of this growth relied on external funding, especially from
foreign mother banks, making Romania’s banking system highly dependant on, and
sensitive to, Western Europe’s financial markets. As the external macro-financial
environment facing Romania has deteriorated rapidly, substantial risks exist today that
could adversely impact the financial system and reverse some of the progress achieved.
In the financial sector, IFC supported the successful issuance of the first 7-year local
currency bond. IFC’s investment in BCR bank, following two failed privatization
attempts, was highly successful and generated significant profits. During the CPS period,
IFC provided over $250 million of its own fund and help mobilized $106 million to
support six local financial institutions to increase access to finance to MSMEs. Most
recently, IFC supported local currency term funding to a local bank to expand lending to
the agriculture sector. Additionally, IFC invested in several regional private equity funds
which provides scarce equity financing and managerial support to improve Romanian
companies’ competitiveness. CEC bank remains in majority public ownership.
17.
The Bank also played a significant role in the development of Romania’s
energy sector through the CPS period. The Government’s 2003 Energy Sector Road
Map and 2007 Energy Strategy supported by the PAL program encompassed
privatization so as to attract private investment, upgrade obsolete technology, increase
efficiency and reduce losses. The Road Map was annexed to the EU acquis chapter
dealing with energy. The strategies were implemented closely in the pre-accession
period. A satisfactory regulatory framework was put in place and bill collection issues
addressed, allowing Romania to privatize successfully some electricity and gas
distribution companies (with the support of the World Bank's partial risk guarantee for
the first transactions in electricity). Electricity markets (totaling about 9.5 million
consumers) were liberalized, but few households or companies exercise their right to
select an alternative energy provider resulting in a limited free market.
18.
During the post-accession part of the CPS, no new privatizations in the
energy sector were launched, despite strong market interest. The three distribution

24

Annex D
companies that remain in the public sector could have been privatized as market interest
was strong. Due to a halt in privatization of utilities, proposed IFC investments in the
power sector were not pursued. Two further energy projects (FY08 and FY09) and a
partial risk guarantee for generation privatization were envisaged during the CPS, but did
not materialize due to the Government’s opposition to further privatization in the energy
sector and Romanian Government proposals to develop a national energy champion.
After a slow start, the Bank also played a significant role in supporting the Romanian
Fund for Energy Efficiency through a GEF project, which demonstrated to the banking
community that investments in energy efficiency could be financially viable. Twenty
projects were financed and the scheme is now being considered for purchase by a
commercial bank.
19.
Romania’s business environment was a constraint to growth at the time of
CPS preparation. Several aspects of this agenda – regulatory policies, labor laws and
taxation, and transport costs - were targeted under the CPS through a combination of
development policy loans and investment lending accompanied by AAA. However, a
specific Business Environment loan envisaged for 2009 was not prepared. IFC invested
in small Romanian private equity firms undertaking regional programs across the region.
During the CPS period, the Romanian authorities implemented the recommendations of
the 2003 Accounting and Auditing Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
(A+A ROSC). Some of the implementation activities were financed by two Dutch grants
and the Public and Private Institution Building Loan (PPIBL). An update was carried out
in 2008, which sets out new reform challenges and recommendations, which will help
Romania to meet its corporate financial reporting obligations in the EU acquis
communautaire.
20.
With the support of the PAL program, Romania achieved significant
improvements in its business regulatory environment, which was perceived as a
particular problem (BEEPS 2005), including: simplification of administrative and
regulatory procedures to reduce transaction costs for business entry and operation;
improving the bankruptcy process; and improving transparency in the functioning of
firms. An IFC Competitiveness Study became a good resource for the Government in
determining which sectors would be competitive post-accession. However, progress was
concentrated in the pre-accession part of the CPS and fell away during the post-accession
part. The Bank’s Doing Business reports show substantial improvements in the ease of
doing business between 2005 and 2008 (Romania rose from 78th to 47th place, but
remained in the same position for DB 2009). Business entry, targeted by the CPS, was
substantially improved: it takes six procedures and 10 days to register a company, which
is lower than the OECD average. BEEPS 2008 data is not yet available to determine
whether the number of firms indicating uncertainty in regulatory policies has decreased
since 2005.
21.
Mixed progress was made in addressing the rigid labor laws and high labor
taxation that encouraged a thriving informal economy in Romania. Several
amendments to the Labor Code were enacted with the support of the PAL program, but
Romania’s relative rank in Doing Business’ Rigidity of Employment index worsened

25

Annex D
slightly between 2006 and 2008, returning to 2006 levels in Doing Business 2009 6.
However, reductions in labor taxation were achieved: contributions to pensions were
reduced by 3 percent; to unemployment by 2 percent; and to health by 3 percent. Overall,
labor taxation was reduced by 8-9 percent over the lifetime of the PAL program. In
addition, a flat income tax of 16 percent was introduced in 2005. Nevertheless, labor
taxation still remains one of the highest in Europe. Employment rates are increasing –
according to the 2007 Labor Force Survey – but at 58.8 percent remain short of the 60
percent CPS target and the 70 percent Lisbon Strategy target.
22.
The CPS envisaged reductions in transport costs, but these were not
achieved. Through a Bank loan for road maintenance based on a Sector-Wide Approach
loan and a Transport Reform project for institutional change, transport costs were
envisaged to decline. Both were delayed and suffered from inadequate counterpart
financing or Government commitment7. In roads, a program of road user charges was
introduced to establish a reliable source of funding for road rehabilitation and
maintenance and revenues from this source increased by more than 50 percent. In
railways, increased track utilization was envisaged through the closing of unsustainable
rail lines. However, instead of closing the lines, the Government tried to lease the lines
to private parties and track utilization has remained stable or even decreased slightly. In
waterways, IFC supported a fleet of barges on the Danube to improve transport logistics.
Due to delays in implementation of both transport projects, most of these objectives have
not been met. A Rural Development project, which closed during the CPS period,
rehabilitated over 800km of roads thus reducing travel time to schools, markets and
health centers by 10-20 percent and reduced the number of villages that were not
accessible year-round from 71 percent to 43 percent.
23.
The Bank provided timely support through projects and technical assistance
in agriculture to help Romania meet EU requirements. A QAG review (2004)
recommended Bank involvement in agriculture since the sector included 45 percent of the
rural population and 67 percent of the poor, while productivity was at most 50 percent of
corresponding levels amongst ‘old’ EU member states. Prior to EU accession, the Bank
provided technical assistance that helped Romania to close pre-accession negotiations in
agriculture. Post-accession, the Bank demonstrated high responsiveness through
innovative just-in-time technical assistance following an urgent request for assistance to
bring the Government’s National Rural Development Plan into compliance with EU
requirements. This technical assistance ultimately helped Romania to obtain European
Commission accreditation for $11.5 million in EU agricultural and rural development
funds.
24.
Support to the Government of Romania’s agricultural reform program by
means of a Development Policy Loan (DPL) was considered but ultimately rejected.
6

Romania, Rigidity of Employment Index: Doing Business 2006: 62; DB 2007: 62; DB 2008: 66; DB
2009: 62.
7
The QAG review referenced above recommended dropping the roads component, given the availability of
other sources of financing and the lack of interest on the part of the Government of Romania in sectoral
dialogue (para 48).

26

Annex D
The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and the Bank jointly considered an
investment loan the more appropriate lending instrument given the long term nature of
the targeted policy implementation challenges associated with the targeted reforms. A
broad agricultural loan (CESAR) facilitating market-based restructuring through
enhancing the ability of farmers, farm family members and farm workers to manage their
assets and income was approved during FY08. The loan would assist the Government of
Romania in initiating the national program of systematic property title registration of land
assets in rural areas to improve the security of land property rights and reduce transaction
costs on rural land markets. Equally important, it assists the Government of Romania in
improving the delivery of socio-economic guidance services to the rural population.
However, it has not yet been made effective mainly due to approval delays related to the
Government’s transition to the use of Treasury systems. The Modern Agriculture
Knowledge Information System project has piloted service delivery models to help
farmers access EU CAP funds and supports border inspection and food safety standards
for EU compliance. Other projects in this area, including irrigation and hazard risk were
initially delayed after the change in Government in 2005 but are now proceeding well.
Two GEF grants (of US$7m and US$5.5m) directly support investment projects (Hazard
Risk Mitigation and Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control) in the portfolio.
25.
In education, the Bank supported the Ministry of Education’s reform of
Higher Education financing plans with technical assistance. The Ministry of
Education and the Bank worked closely to develop a strategic document on student loans
and scholarships and to deepen existing instruments for measuring the relevance of
education to labor market demand. To improve the quality of education, national quality
assurance agencies were established and are now operational for schools and higher
education, however, Romanian students continue to under perform in international
evaluations.
Pillar 2 – Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Modernizing the Public Sector
26.
Pillar 2 aimed to reduce the fiscal deficit and modernize the public sector.
The Bank envisaged support in the following sectors:
the judiciary, revenue
administration, municipal development, human development and energy, using the PAL
as a cross-cutting reform framework, supported by Sector Investment Loans in most of
the sectors mentioned above. AAA in public and municipal finance, civil service pay, as
well as a Country Procurement Assessment Report, Country Financial Accountability
Assessment and CEM, Policy Notes and fiduciary monitoring were intended to provide a
diagnostic base for the design of lending interventions.
27.
Partial results were achieved under this pillar. As under pillar 1, many of the
gains made by Romania in the pre-accession were not extended or even unraveled during
the post-accession part of the CPS. The restructuring of the pension system was a
difficult, but successful reform, although the sustainability of this success is now under
threat by promises of unsustainable increases in pension payouts.

27

Annex D
28.
Some progress was made in privatization and reduction in the
manufacturing sector, but the pace slowed during the CPS period. By November
2007, the privatization company (Authority for State Assets Recovery, AVAS) had 1025
companies in its portfolio (down from 7676 in 1992) almost half of which are not
privatizable and in various stages of liquidation. The PAL 2 program aimed to complete
the divestiture of the state shareholdings by the end of 2006, but by this time only 86 of
153 companies in which AVAS held a majority ownership were privatized or liquidated,
with a further 13 in different stages of privatization and the residual stakes were sold in
only 23 of 421 companies in which AVAS held a minority position. Some of the
companies subsequently returned into the AVAS portfolio due to breaches of the
privatization contracts and the imposition of labor force conditions. Most of these
companies have subsequently been re-privatized or liquidated. The slowdown in the pace
of privatization is partially due to the lack of attractiveness of the remaining portfolio, but
also due to inflexibility on the method of privatization and changes in economic policy
29.
The burden of the mining sector on the state budget was partly reduced
during the CPS period, but the gains have to be reviewed in light of a newly-prepared
plan for restructuring the coal sector approved by the European Commission in 2007.
Between 2002 and 2006, the Government closed 235 mining units and cut the number of
employees in the lignite and hard coal sector from 45,700 to 28,500, while coal output
barely changed. State aid to the mining industry did not decline measurably, however, as
deeper restructuring was needed. The Romanian Government plans to spend EUR411
million in state aid over 2007-2010, while gradually reducing subsidies to the coal sector.
30.
Few public sector reforms took place, for example in civil service, judiciary
or public financial management. Lax fiscal policy contributed to widening fiscal
balances, while a fragmented and cumbersome tax system led to widespread
inefficiencies and evasion. (Doing Business 2009 places Romania last in terms of the
number of tax payments: it is estimated that around 10 percent of taxpayers - including
both firms and individuals - are evading taxes.) The fiscal deficits which were
manageable during a period of strong growth will now inhibit a rapid and effective
response to the international financial crisis.
31.
Just two (Judicial Reform and Municipal Services) of the eight new loans
proposed under this pillar of the CPS were taken forward. The anticipated followthrough with PAL 2 and 3, a Fiscal and Governance DPL and a Revenue Administration
project did not materialize. A grant from the Netherlands (of US$2.6m) supported the
PAL series through technical assistance for judicial reforms; policy formulation;
transparency, anti-corruption and governance reforms; public expenditure management,
including budget preparation, execution and control and intergovernmental fiscal
relations; and revenue administration.
32.
The CPS program helped the Government to reduce subsidies to state owned
enterprises, which were high (although declining) at the time of CPS preparation. A
privatization agenda was pursued with the support of the PAL program in the
manufacturing sector to reduce direct and indirect subsidies (see above). In the mining

28

Annex D
sector, the CPS targeted the closure of loss making and non-viable mines through the
PAL series and through continuation of a successful mine restructuring operation
resulting in the closure of 31 small mines. A follow-up Mine Closure II project is
tackling 20 more complex cases that potentially have environmental legacy issues.
33.
The pension system was substantially restructured and the public pension
deficit eliminated. Measures towards fiscal consolidation of the public pension system
were underway prior to CPS preparation, however the system remained vulnerable:
beneficiaries outnumbered contributors; the system provided low benefits; and was
subject to ad hoc political decisions. Some considerable success was achieved on this
ambitious and politically difficult agenda in the accession period of the CPS: the pension
system was restructured with the support of the PAL program and a multi-pillar pension
system launched in 2008, the retirement age was gradually increased and services
unrelated to pensions were externalized. As a result, the public pension system achieved
a surplus in 2006. This outcome however is threatened by a 50 percent increase in
pensions announced in October 2008, which may put the system back into a deficit.
34.
A project to support Romania’s efforts to reduce the health-related fiscal
deficit was not taken forward, but Romania has made progress in reducing this part
of the deficit. At this moment the arrears in payment of the National Health Insurance
Fund are small, pertaining only to some hospitals with high fixed costs and limited
turnover and some pharmacies which exceeded their contract ceiling. Likewise, a project
to improve tax compliance was not taken forward, but Romania’s revenue collection has
improved in recent years, probably as a result of the introduction of a flat tax in 2005.
IFC has helped the NHIF to outsource dialysis services of 8 hospitals to the main private
providers.
35.
Several projects aimed to help Romania to absorb the potential inflows of EU
funds to which it became eligible at accession. The CPS aimed to assist in improving
Romania’s capacity to absorb EU funds in a systemic way through the PAL program
(which was dropped mid-series), a Fiscal and Governance DPL (which was never
prepared) and through institutional capacity building under a second Rural and Regional
Development loan (which was never prepared). An IDF grant, which closed in 2008,
helped to increase the capacity of the Managing Authority for EU grants to prepare
detailed cost-benefit analysis for projects eligible for EU financing and so improved
Romania’s capacity to manage flows of EU funds.
36.
Further, improved absorptive capacity was attempted at the sectoral level
where sub-components of Bank-supported projects were introduced to help with the
identification and preparation of project pipelines to improve the absorption of EU funds.
The MAKIS project developed a Training and Information Center in Bucharest (and three
others are planned) to serve as a knowledge resource base, accreditation and training
center for extension agents, food safety specialists and researchers, which will increase
the capacity of researchers to develop proposals for EU funding and will prepare them to
benefit fully from the funds once they become available, as well as “Integrated
Agricultural Offices” or ‘one stop service centers’ which bring together agricultural

29

Annex D
advisory and administration services and serve as the main service point for filing
applications for CAP support schemes, provision of information and advice on support
programs, farm management and technical advice. Other projects, including the Social
Inclusion Project, Transport Sector Support, Municipal Services, Integrated Nutrient
Pollution and Complementing EU support for Agricultural Restructuring (CESAR) also
aimed to improve absorptive capacity, but most of these projects have been delayed or
are not yet effective. Absorptive capacity of EU funds remains low.
37.
Limited improvements were made in the civil service through Bank
interventions. The PAL series targeted a broad range of objectives for improving the
civil service in Romania, while a Fiscal and Governance DPL, intended to deepen the
PAL-supported reforms, was never taken forward. Given a lack of political support for
deep civil service reforms, the PAL focused on improving the civil service agency in
monitoring indicators. The indicators were monitored partially, irregularly and
infrequently and there is no evidence to suggest that the indicators were monitored after
the PAL series was dropped. The CPS also targeted a more meritocratic civil service.
Some legislative changes were made to the Civil Service and Conflict of Interest Laws
and the Law of Declaration of Assets as amended is now one of the strictest in the EU,
but not all have been fully implemented. A medium term Civil Service Pay and
Employment strategy was also drafted, but not implemented.
38.
Some progress was made in improving public financial management (PFM),
although more remains to be done. Improvements in PFM were targeted by the PAL
series. A Strategic Development Plan was drafted and some progress made in improving
internal and external audit and accounting standards, as well as in enhancing the quality
of the annual budget process. However, linkages between resources and performance
remain weak and the absence of a medium-term strategic framework undermines efforts
to improve the prioritization, efficiency, predictability and transparency of resource
allocation. As pressure grows on the Government’s budget and public spending comes
under strain, such weaknesses will inhibit the Government’s ability to respond to the
current financial crisis.
39.
In the judicial sector the Bank was responsive to an urgent request for
assistance with this important element in the EU accession agenda and approved a
Judicial Reform Loan. There was strong support for reform in this area under one
Minister in the pre-accession period, but interest waned rapidly when she left the post and
Romania joined the EU. To increase efficiency and reduce administrative costs, a study
on the rationalization of the court system was completed, but it was not implemented.
Pillar 3 – Targeting Poverty Reduction and Promoting Social Inclusion
40.
Pillar 3 aimed to reduce poverty and improve the livelihoods of those
marginalized in society. The Bank envisaged support in the following sectors: human
development, rural and regional development, using the PAL as a cross-cutting reform
framework, supported by Sector Investment Loans in most of the sectors mentioned
above. AAA, including on rural/regional development, poverty monitoring, a CEM and a

30

Annex D
series of policy notes in health, was intended to provide a diagnostic base for the design
of lending interventions or was undertaken at the request of the client.
41.
Few results have been achieved (so far) under this pillar. Poverty has been
reduced as a result of strong growth, but this is under threat as the economic situation
deteriorates. Social inclusion has improved as a result of increased services targeted
towards vulnerable groups. Regional disparities have narrowed, but only very slightly, in
most of Romania’s regions over the CPS period.
42.
Only one of eight potential new loans anticipated under this pillar of the CPS
were approved – the Social Inclusion Project. As most of the CPS monitoring
indicators relate to this project and it has been delayed, few results can be seen from this
pillar yet. The anticipated Rural and Regional project and the Human Development DPL
series, were not taken forward. It is the only pillar that did not directly relate to
Romania’s EU accession ambition and therefore did not benefit from the drive and
momentum behind the other pillars during the early years of the CPS.
43.
Poverty was reduced over the CPS period, largely due to economic growth,
but some groups were left behind. The CPS aimed to support Romania’s goal of
halving extreme poverty through improving coverage of the Minimum Income Guarantee
program and reforming eligibility rules. The extreme poverty rate has been reduced
dramatically (below the CPS target), as a result of strong and sustained economic growth.
At the same time, social assistance is becoming progressively less targeted, the Minimum
Income Guarantee program was partially reformed, but as GDP continues to rise, the
relative size of the guaranteed income is actually declining and coverage of the poor is
decreasing. A programmatic Poverty Monitoring AAA program was undertaken to work
with the Romanian authorities to build capacity to monitor poverty and social inclusion
trends, as well as to evaluate social programs aiming to reduce social exclusion. The
program was only partially successful, mainly due to understaffing in the relevant
Government departments, resulting in low levels of participation and knowledge transfer.
44.
The on-going Social Services Project helped to improve services for some
vulnerable groups. The development and provision of social assistance services and
employment services contributed to a certain extent to the social inclusion of persons
coming form various groups at risk. Out of 1520 persons with disabilities that were
enrolled on employment counseling services, 770 succeeded in getting full employment a 50.6 percent placement rate. The provision of multi-functional social assistance
services in 70 community based centers contributed to the social inclusion of children at
risk, victims of domestic violence, persons with disabilities and the elderly.
45.
An Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant and a Japanese Social
Development Fund Grant supported Romania’s Roma agenda. The National Roma
Agency and line ministries involved in the Decade for Roma Inclusion were direct
beneficiaries of the IDF grant, which supported the formulation of inclusive policies for
housing and education; training for regional and local authorities in the development of
inclusive development plans; and establishment of a monitoring and evaluation system to

31

Annex D
help the National Roma Agency oversee and evaluate the implementation of Roma
programs. A Japanese Social Development Fund (JSDF) grant also supported priority
programs for Roma inclusion and empowerment by working with local and regional
Roma NGOs and creating partnerships between Roma communities and the local public
administration. The grant is linked to a project that has only recently started, so it is too
early to assess results at this stage.
46.
Regional disparities between central and rural regions were high at the start
of the CPS period and remain so today, although in most regions they have
narrowed slightly. The Bank proposed engagement on Regional Development issues
through lending and technical assistance. A Regional Development Loan was planned,
which would have built on the recommendations of ESW undertaken earlier in the decade
and was intended as a complement to the Mine Closure project, to examine potential
areas of competitiveness and to bring social and economic regeneration measures to
poorer parts of western Romania. However, views within Government were mixed on
the approach and there was no single counterpart. Eventually, the Mine Closure II
project incorporated a socio-economic regeneration component.
47.
Technical assistance to the Government of Romania to formulate its regional
and rural development programs and assist in their implementation was successful.
A conference at the outset (2006) opened a substantive policy dialogue with the Ministry
of Development, Public Works and Housing and led to the adoption of many policy
recommendations in the Government’s regional program. However, the decision not to
pursue the Regional Development project limited the Bank’s involvement in
implementation.
48.
Information technology is helping to bridge spatial and knowledge
disparities. To reduce the disparities in knowledge between lagging and central regions,
a Knowledge Economy project has provided about 1.8 million people (or 44 percent of
the most knowledge-disadvantaged communities) with access to information
communication technology through the establishment of 255 Local Community
electronic Networks. The aim of the project is to see these networks evolve into a daily
tool for education, business and public communication with the Government, with
increasing private management and financial self-sustainability. The project was
championed by local governments and was recently awarded the European Commission’s
e-Inclusion Medal Award 2008.
49.
Another Bank-supported project aimed to reduce urban-rural divides by
improving access to good quality rural education. The gap between urban and rural
students who scored well at national examinations for grade 8 decreased from 16.5
percent in 2001/2 to 13.8 percent in 2006/7. Successful interventions under Bankfinanced projects are now being replicated by the Government at national level using EU
structural funds.
50.
A range of social disparities were targeted by the Social Investment Project.
The project supported a range of interventions to improve the living conditions for Roma,

32

Annex D
to increase attendance at Early Childhood Development Programs, to improve facilities
for persons with disabilities to EU standards and to improve multifunctional centers for
youth at risk to help them enter employment. The project suffered significant delays, but
has now picked up and is expected to deliver results in 2009.
51.
Health sector improvements were targeted under an on-going Health Sector
Reform project, in PAL 2 and a series of Human Development DPLs (the latter two
were not taken forward). The nature of potential reforms was assessed in a series of
Human Development policy notes, discussed with stakeholders in 2007.
The
recommendations pertained to continuing hospital reform for the purpose of increasing
efficiency and quality of care, redressing the bias towards inpatient care, improving
pharmaceutical pricing methodology and establishment of reimbursement list, improving
access to care in underserved areas, and addressing the HR issues (diminishing supply of
health professionals). The recommendations yielded limited improvements in
pharmaceutical pricing methodology and establishment of reimbursement list an increase
in payments for family doctors. The restructuring of health care services in underserved
areas to ensure access and quality was not taken forward due to a change in Romanian
legislation that treats primary health care practices as private ventures which can not
benefit from public money and regulation ambiguities regarding the privatization of
medical infrastructure. A micro-credit scheme was also dropped, at the request of the
Government. IFC, however, supported some operations in the health sector, namely the
expansion of private hospitals which will increase the supply of higher quality hospital
services in Romania and help relieve some of the burden currently placed on the public
health system, and allow public health resources to focus on lower income segments of
the population and emergency services.
Bank Performance
Strategic Relevance
52.
The CPS design was fully in line with and relevant to the Government of
Romania’s agenda: support for EU accession and for continued convergence thereafter.
Projects were designed with a strong EU focus helping Romania either to meet EU
accession requirements (for example, in judicial reform), membership obligations and EU
Directives (for example, the Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control) and/or to absorb EU
financing.
53.
The Bank’s analytical and advisory work also played a major role in
preparing Romania for EU accession. The Country Economic Memorandum (2004)
focused on the policy areas and challenges that underpinned Romania's integration into
the EU structures: trade, agriculture, enterprise restructuring, business environment,
energy, environment and the labor market. A Public Expenditure and Institutional
Review (PEIR, 2006) helped Romania be better prepared to improve the quality and
effectiveness of planning and public spending to meet the demands of the EU accession
and absorb EU funds, while maintaining prudent macroeconomic policies. A large
number of policy measures recommended by the two reports were included in the PAL
program, which constituted de facto the framework in which the EU accession reform

33

Annex D
program was pursued by the Romanian authorities. Romanian officials report that the
Bank helped with their dialogue with the EU and may have contributed to its successful
entry into the EU 8.
54.
The CPS program design was anchored by adjustment loans intended to deal
with systemic reform issues, complemented by a series of investment projects and
AAA products. In the first, pre-accession part of the CPS, the on-going PAL series
performed this anchor function effectively (as did the external anchor of EU accession).
Even though PAL 2 and PAL 3 did not materialize, many of the reforms identified for
these loans were undertaken. However, in the second, post-accession part of the
program, the PAL program was discontinued, the proposed Human Development DPL
series and the Fiscal and Governance DPLs were not prepared. At the same time as the
external anchor of EU accession disappeared, so too did the program anchor.
55.
The program moved from high-case to low-case through the CPS period.
Given the evident importance attached to the PAL series as a centerpiece for the program,
it is surprising that this DPL series was only forecast for a high-case scenario. Triggers
for this high case scenario were anyway those essential for continuing the PAL series
(appropriate macroeconomic conditions and progress on PAL triggers). Thus, the CPS
started in – and was built around - the high case scenario. When the DPLs were
abandoned mid-CPS 9, the program moved to the base case of investment loans (intended
to link to the PAL), heavy on procurement of equipment and light on policy, at just under
40 percent of the indicative amounts given in the CPS. When they too unraveled in the
absence of an anchor 10 the CPS slipped towards the low case scenario of AAA only.
(Annex 2 – Planned and Actual Lending).
56.
The Bank endeavored to adapt the portfolio to meet new needs: just-in-time
technical assistance was provided to help the Romanian Government with its National
Rural Development program and, at the Government’s request, an emergency Avian Flu
operation was prepared.
The Bank examined opportunities to use Romanian
environmental standards and fiduciary controls in project implementation. Furthermore,
the Bank has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Romanian Government in
preparation for adoption of the Romanian’s new public debt management system (due to
commence January 2009), which will use Romania’s treasury to pre-finance all
expenditures in Bank-supported projects and simply request reimbursement from the
Bank. However, concerns remain about the readiness of the authorities to implement the
system and the Government’s current financial capacity to pre-finance all project
expenditures: these concerns are being addressed by the Ministry of Public Finance,
which has requested a shift back to the advance system of disbursement in early 2009.

8

IEG Using knowledge to improve development effectiveness (2008).
The Romania Country Assistance Evaluation (OED, May 2005), finds that when government commitment
is clearly weak, it is important for the Bank to acknowledge this explicitly and refrain from continuing with
adjustment lending.
10
The same CAE noted that investment lending in a distorted policy environment is unlikely to achieve its
objectives.
9

34

Annex D
Major Factors that Affected CPS Implementation
57.
The CPS recognized the defining moment that EU accession would bring, yet
when it happened, the Bank did not rebalance its program rapidly enough.
Following accession and a change in the governing coalition, interest in borrowing from
the Bank waned rapidly. The Bank underestimated the rapid loss in its strategic
relevance as Romania rapidly adjusted its financing strategy towards increased use of
market finance, investment loans from the European Investment Bank and Structural and
Cohesion grants from the EU. The break-up of the governing coalition at around the
same time as accession also contributed to the change in approach towards the Bank. As
a result of the diminished dialogue, the intended joint review of the partnership strategy
did not take place and the portfolio was not adjusted towards a new partnership approach.
IFC was relatively less affected than the Bank by the change in Government financing
preferences and the shift towards EU institutions as preferred partners.
58.
The risks identified in the CPS materialized. Three risks were identified in the
CPS: i) failure to address weaknesses in the macroeconomic framework; ii) slippages in
the reform agenda (especially if the EU safety clause is invoked and accession is
delayed); and iii) lack of attention to strengthening institutional capacity. Each of these
risks played out, although the slippage in the reform agenda was more due to the
achievement EU accession, which led to some relaxation of the reform path, rather than
due to the feared delay in EU accession. The financial crisis that erupted in late 2008 will
severely test the economy while attention to institutional strengthening has been limited.
Quality of Bank Services
Portfolio
59.
As of September 2008, Romania’s active portfolio consists of 17 projects 11
with total commitments of US$ 1.62 billion, of which US$ 1.18 billion remains
undisbursed. During the CPS period, eight projects (or one third of the portfolio,
totaling US $731 million) were approved, corresponding to 38.5 percent of the indicative
FY06-09 lending program. The new loans were agreed in the early years of the CPS:
three projects in FY06; three in FY07; and two in FY08; none so far in FY09.
Investment operations now account for the entire portfolio, although a DPL operation
will be presented at the same time as the new CPS.
60.
At the start of this CPS, the Bank’s portfolio in Romania was third largest in
ECA and operations approved prior to this CPS generally exhibited strong quality.
IEG reviews of the eight projects that closed during FY06-09 12 show that 100 percent had
satisfactory outcomes and likely sustainability. For all eight projects the quality at entry,
quality of supervision and the Borrower performance were rated satisfactory or higher.
These outcomes confirm the highly relevant and valued Bank-Romania pre-accession
partnership.

11

17 SILs including 2 co-financing GEFs, which component the Hazard Mitigation and Integrated Nutrient
Pollution Control projects
12
10 projects closed FY06-08, of which 8 reviewed by IEG.

35

Annex D
61.
Romanian in-country stakeholders rated the Bank strongly (4.7 out of 6) in
terms of building capacity and strengthening institutions 13. They specifically noted
that the Bank’s comparative advantage is in accumulating practical knowledge and best
practice experience from many different countries which could help them avoid costly
mistakes.
62.
As Government interest in new loans declined, so too did portfolio quality.
Commitments at risk, a measure of the likelihood that projects will not meet their stated
development objectives on time, increased sharply from zero in FY05 to 36 percent in
mid-FY08. A portfolio-wide review held in early 2008 assessed the reasons for the
portfolio quality deterioration and factors affecting the disbursement performance. Key
factors include: (i) Government weakness in strategic planning and sectoral policy, which
triggers frequent changes in policy priorities and directions; (ii) absence of an effective
medium-term expenditure framework which results in uncertainty regarding funds
availability and imposition of spending ceilings; (iii) limited funding being made
available during the annual budget cycle leaving projects hopeful but not certain of
increased financing during periodic budget rectifications; and (iv) poor managerial
practices (insufficient decentralization of project implementation responsibilities,
frequent changes of project management teams, lack of coordination among key players
involved in project implementation and cumbersome approval process of budget financed
investments). The review helped stimulate improved portfolio performance, resulting in
a healthy disbursement ratio of 18.2 percent at the end of FY08, compared to just 10
percent a year earlier, while the number of projects at risk was reduced from six to three
and commitments at risk went down from 26.3 percent to 12.3 percent by end FY08.
63.
Financial Management performance was generally good while procurement
has been problematic. Financial management performance was generally satisfactory
and compliance with audit and reporting covenants good (with the exception of some
audit reports for the road and railway entities, although the previously long delays have
also been significantly reduced). The public procurement law aligned with EU directives
was adopted prior to Romania's EU accession, but procurement risks for eight projects 14
in the portfolio are considered to be high. In most instances this relates to weak capacity
of the implementing agencies to handle procurement related work. Two projects in the
portfolio are considered procurement problematic based on an assessment made by task
teams during supervision and slow implementation progress.
64.
IFC’s portfolio has performed well. During the CPS period IFC invested a total
of $383 million of its own fund and help mobilized $191 million in 15 projects. These
included 8 projects in the financial sector, a project to support the modernization of
refinery, a project to improve river transportation, a project to support the first private
hospital chain and a project in transportation and warehousing. Additionally IFC invested
in regional projects in private equity funds, which allowed investments in smaller
competitive companies as well as in oil and gas exploration, covering Turkey and
13

IEG Using knowledge to improve development effectiveness (2008).
Forest Development, Hazard Mitigation loan and associated GEF project, Health Sector Reforms, Social
Inclusion, Avian Flu, Transport Restructuring and Transport Sector Support Projects.
14

36

Annex D
Romania. IFC-Bank cooperation throughout the period was strong. The CPS envisaged
some links, for example with IFC supporting privatizations in infrastructure and energy
proposed through the PAL series, but these were stopped when the policy loan series was
dropped.
Analytical and Advisory Work
65.
The lending portfolio was complemented by a series of analytical and
advisory activities (AAA), which perform a variety of functions: due diligence for the
Bank; policy options and advice for the Government; and technical work to assist in the
preparation or implementation of loans.
66.
AAA from both the Bank and IFC was relatively light, given the size of the
program and declined, rather than increased, as the program moved into the low
case (Annex 3 – AAA Delivered). However, while the Ministry of Economy and
Finance showed no interest in Bank loans, the line Ministries continued to be receptive to
analytical advice, suggesting that AAA could have been scaled up effectively as the main
channel for policy guidance to line ministries, but instead as interest in loans declined, so
too did the budget allocated to Romania. Some IFC health sector work paved the way for
the out-sourcing of eight dialysis centers, while the IFC’s Competitiveness Study helped
the authorities analyze sector competitiveness compared to their EU counterparts.
67.
As mentioned above, AAA work that was particularly useful in the preaccession part of the CPS helped Romania to prepare for EU accession. Romanian
officials noted that they were interested in the Bank looking ahead and identifying the
next generation of policies and issues that would be important in the future, giving the
example of the Romanian Food and Agriculture in a European Perspective analytical
work and related technical assistance, which set out the impacts of the prospective reform
of the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2013 on Romania. On many of the
studies, the partnership between the line ministry and the Bank staff was close, while the
frequent participation of Romanian specialists in the AAA work helped enhance local
capacity and ownership and secure realism and best outcomes.
68.
Generally, dissemination of AAA work took place in country and in the local
language with the significant participation of Government officials from the Ministry
of Economy and Finance, line Ministries and agencies, representatives of professional
organizations, think tanks, researchers, academia and, when appropriate, the press. For
example, in June 2007 the Romania Country Office organized a series of workshops to
disseminate four policy notes on health and pharmaceuticals, pensions, poverty and social
assistance, and education to prepare for and underpin a series of proposed Human
Development DPLs (which were not ultimately prepared).
Delivery
69.
In line with the deterioration in portfolio quality and the reduction in
demand for new IBRD loans, so too lead times for those projects that were under
preparation increased significantly from 12 months in FY06 to 23 15 months in FY08.
15

Average lag from PCN to approval

37

Annex D
Likewise, the elapsed time between the benchmark spending of US$30,000 before a
concept note is prepared and Board approval has also increased from 14 months in FY06
to 22.35 months in FY08. Both indicators are now significantly higher than ECA and
Bank-wide averages.
70.
In FY06-07, the average 11-month preparation time for ESW products was
in line with the envisaged target of 12 months. However, to remain relevant and to
reposition the Bank as a knowledge-provider, this lead time will need to be shortened
further to provide shorter, more responsive analytical work, so long as this does not
undermine the technical quality of the work.
71.
Project management through the CPS period was significantly decentralized
to the country office. At the time of the CPS three projects were led by staff in the
country office; this has increased to ten during the CPS period, but currently stands at six.
Local team leaders are closer to the projects and to understanding the political economy
behind delays or obstacles. However, some were left with limited supervision and
support from their sector units.
Country dialogue
72.
Through the CPS implementation period, the divergence of views between
the Government’s wishes from the Bank and the Bank’s proposed program
increased. On the one hand, as accession became a certainty and then a reality, Romania
became eligible for structural and cohesion funds, reform fatigue set in while the fruits of
the earlier reforms were enjoyed, financial market access became easier, the anchor of the
pre-accession requirements was lost and Romania became even more determined to avoid
the perceived stigma of continued association with a development Bank. This latter may
be particularly pronounced given the perceived influence of the Bank over policy setting
(although the EU’s power in the same respect was not perceived negatively). There is
also some evidence of the Bank adjusting operations to meet HQ-requirements (for
example grouping multiple projects into one and manipulating delivery dates) but in
doing so losing the ownership of the counterparts. Furthermore, the Bank heard the
demand from line ministries for continued engagement but was not able to demonstrate
its value-added to a reluctant Ministry of Finance. In its apparent determination to press
ahead with loans for which there was no ownership in the Ministry of Finance, the Bank
only further alienated its main counterpart.
73.
The level of interest in Bank support for development programs in the
convergence part of the CPS dropped off sharply after accession with the change in
Government and improved access to external financing. Romania adjusted rapidly to
its new circumstances and the Bank was not able to adjust rapidly enough. One project
was dropped in FY06 (including the core programmatic adjustment loan (PAL) series),
two in FY07, three in FY08 and by FY09 there were no lending projects in the pipeline.
Significantly, all the proposed DPLs were dropped. Only two new investment loans were
agreed post-accession (but experienced lengthy approval and effectiveness delays).
Implementation of projects already underway worsened (the decline began around 2005)
and the dialogue between the Bank and the Government declined as the Government

38

Annex D
became more focused on market financing 16. During the post-accession part of the CPS,
the Bank’s role in Romania diminished considerably and in September 2007 the
Government expressed interest in graduation from Bank lending.
Monitoring and Evaluation
74.
CPS monitoring was linked to the PAL program. The CPS envisaged that
monitoring of the program would take place through the Project Implementation Unit for
the PAL program in the Chancellery of the Prime Minister’s office, which was staffed
with specialists covering the main areas of reform. This arrangement was intended to
sustain the impact of the PAL program under changing circumstances. Monthly and
quarterly progress reports were prepared on specific monitoring indicators linked to the
CPS monitoring framework. Quarterly Portfolio Reviews were held between the
Ministry of Finance and the Country Director. However, when the PAL was dropped in
2006, the regular monitoring and meetings stopped.
75.
Once the PAL had been dropped, joint portfolio monitoring continued, but
with greater frequency. Progress on individual projects was reported separately and
brought together on several occasions – in 2006 and 2008 – when joint Portfolio-wide
Reviews were undertaken at the Bank’s instigation with representatives of the Bank, the
Ministry of Economy and Finance, project management units, line ministries and
agencies, as well as throughout 2007 in quarterly portfolio reviews to redress
deteriorating portfolio quality. The reviews identified particular problems in projects and
resulted in agreement as to the proposed actions to resolve such issues.
Lessons Learned
• Identify the Bank’s comparative advantage vis-à-vis other external partners and
design the program around these areas. The Bank did not heed sufficiently the
need for a different approach towards a MIC client no longer dependent on Bank
financing. The program continued to emphasize large loans when other larger,
faster, cheaper financing sources were available and did not re-focus the Bank’s
role as a knowledge-provider or technical adviser. The dissonance between the
desire of line ministries to continue borrowing and the desire of the Ministry of
Economy and Finance to diversify its sources of financing was not resolved. The
lack of commitment and therefore budgetary resources from the Bank’s key
counterpart in the Ministry of Economy and Finance hindered successful
implementation of several projects. The Bank should focus on its areas
comparative advantage in some key reform areas (see Section B below).
• Allow flexibility in a CPS to manage changing circumstances and the prevailing
needs. Given the fact that the program spanned such an important historical
moment for Romania, the CPS program was somewhat over-determined with a
program of loans outlined for all four years of the CPS. The Bank appeared to
have a pre-set agenda and was unable to adjust with sufficient flexibility in line
with the Government’s revised priorities. While ILs and AAA can reinforce a
16

The QAG review referenced above already foreshadowed that ‘after accession the Bank may be
perceived as less important and Romanians may have a reduced interest in the relationship’.

39

Annex D
DPL series, they should not be so inextricably linked as to create an ‘all-ornothing’ program. Likewise, investment projects should not be overly complex
(in technical and financing terms), which results in implementation delays and
the need for restructuring or capacity building during implementation. The
program should be designed so it can be scaled up or down according to the
Government’s demand. As the lack of interest in lending manifested itself, the
Bank could have stepped-up its AAA program to demonstrate its value-added
and develop a new knowledge partnership, but instead AAA declined in line with
the lending program.
• Anticipate and manage political transitions. The CPS acknowledged that much of
the commitment to reforms had been due to EU accession aspirations, but
anticipated this reform commitment would continue to achieve convergence. In
doing so, it underestimated an understandable reform fatigue after years of
reforms in preparation for accession. At times, the Bank heard only the voices it
chose to or sought agreement to its plans from other parts of Romania’s
governance structure. Such dialogue was counter-productive. The Bank should
maintain dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders across the political
spectrum, at all levels of the civil service and with a wide range of public
stakeholders, including businesses, special interest groups and other nongovernmental organizations.

Conclusion
76.
The Bank was an important partner in Romania’s development prior to accession.
However, a change in Government, EU accession and the Bank’s narrow focus on
lending limited the effectiveness of Bank support during the post-accession period. With
a new approach, focused on the Bank’s value-added in reform-oriented and knowledge
products, a successful new partnership could be forged again.

40

Pillar 1 Accelerating Structural and Institutional Reforms for Sustained Growth
At CPS entry
Incomplete privatization
agenda in banking sector.
62.5% of banking assets
state-owned. In 2003, 3 of
the 39 credit institutions
were state owned.
Incomplete privatization
agenda in enterprise sector.
Weight of private sector in
GDP was 67.7% in 2003

CAS Outcomes
Increase in private sector
share of banking assets to
100%

Slow farm restructuring
process farmers unable to
employ EU CAP funds for
competitiveness
enhancement
High cost of doing business

Decrease in share of
employment in agriculture
to total from 32% in 2004 to
28% I 2009

Milestones
Completion of
privatization of BCR
and CEC banks

Results at CPS completion
Substantially Achieved. 98% of banking assets privatized.
BCR privatized in Dec 2005 through an open, international
and competitive tender in the largest privatization deal to
date in Romania. CEC not privatized. In 2007, 2 of the 42
credit institutions are state owned (CEC and Eximbank).

Completion of divestiture of Completion of
Partially achieved. 86 of 153 companies in which AVAS
manufacturing SOEs
privatization of SOEs held a majority ownership were privatized or liquidated,
held by AVAS
with a further 13 in different stages of privatization, while
the residual stakes were sold in only 23 of 421 companies
in which AVAS held a minority position. The weight of the
private sector in GDP was 71.8% in 2006
Rigidities in the labor market Reduction of rigidities in
Amendments of the Partially Achieved. Amends to the Labor Code were
due to employment
hiring and firing asa
Labor Code to
enacted under PAL 2 preparation. DB shows that labor
protection legislation
measured by Cost of Doing improve flexibility
market flexibility has improved a little (149 to 143), but still
Business indices
remains rather rigid.
Employment rate among 15- Increase in employment
Partially Achieved. Employment rates 58.8% in 2007
64 years olds 58% in 2004 rate of population aged 15(Labour Force Survey). Labor codes were amended and
64 from 58% I 2004 to 60%
may have had a positive effect on employment, but
in 2009
attribution of the increase in employment to this alone is
unrealistic.
Rigidities in land markets.
Increased activity in
Successful
Not achieved. Project not effective yet due to delays in
Incomplete land
agriculture land markets as introduction of land Government transition to Treasury systems.No systematic
restitution/demarcation
measured by the number of restitution and
registration process underway at this time but expected to
process.
land registrations and lease demarcation reform be initatiated in early 2009. ANCPI (National Cadastre
contracts
program in 2-4 judets Agency) has completed one pilot.
Implementation of
service delivery
models pilots in 2
judets

Percentage of firms
Implementation of
indicating uncertainty about Silent Approval Law
regulatory policies as a
problem declines relative to
2005 in the next BEEPS

41

Achieved. New service delivery model being implemented
under MAKIS project. Integrated Agricultural Offices
(integrated service centres) provide "one-stop-shop"
service points for agricultural and EU funding advice to
farmers.
Not achieved. The Government drafted an Ordinance that
cover 455 areas subject of the silent approval law.
However, the Ordinance is being reviewed by the line
Ministries and has not yet been approved by Parliament

Pillar 1 Accelerating Structural and Institutional Reforms for Sustained Growth (Cont'd)
At CPS entry
CAS Outcomes
High cost of doing business

Milestones
Amendment of the
Company Law

High cost of doing business

Alignment of
business entry
requirements with EU
Countries

High labor taxation

Reduction in labor taxation
in a sustainable way by 2%

High transport costs. 67% of Increase in percentage of
national road in good or fair national road in good or fair
condition
condition from 67% in 2005
to 75% in 2009

High transport costs.
Railway track utilization
2,223 (in thousand traffic
units per route km) in 2005

Increasing railway track
utilization (in thousand
traffic units per route km)
from 2,223 in 2005 to 3000
in 2009

Incomplete reform in energy 100% electricity market
sector to improve efficiency liberalization as measured
and meet EU requirements by number of customers
eligible to choose supplier
and free to enter bilateral
contracts with supplier

Results at CPS completion
Achieved. The company law was amended substantially by
introducing the OECD conrporate governance principles
and aligning it with five EU directives

Achieved. The Doing Business 2009 report places
Romania as one of the best performers (26 place out of the
181economies) in terms of easiness of starting a busines;
it takes six procedures, 10 days to register a company.
Less than OECD countries' average.
Introduction of the
Achieved. Multi-pillar pension system created and
multi-pillar pension
operational. Final legislation for second mandatory private
system by 2008
pillar prepared under the PAL 1 and 2, and launched in
2008. Contributions to: Pensions down by 3%,
Unemployment by 2%, Health by 3%.
Establishment of a
Partially achieved. The design of the Road Data Register
reliable funding for
has been completed under TRP and implementation is
road rehabilitation
ongoing. Revenues from road user charges (Rovignette)
and maintenance by increased by more than 50%. However, the percentage of
introducing Road
national road in good or fair condition is estimated to have
User Charge and
deteriorated to 63%.
Road Data Register
In the railway sector, Not achieved. Track utilization has remained stable or
elimination of 40
decreased slightly. Rail lines have not been closed, but
hazardous locations instead leased to private parties (with limited success).
and decrease lines
Elimination of hazardous locations not yet achieved, but on
with speed
track.
restrictions by
180kms
Satisfactory
Achieved. Electricity market liberalization achieved in
implementation of
2007. Approximately 9,500, 000 customers, including
power sector road
households, could exercise their right to select an electricity
map under PAL
supplier/negotiate bilateral contracts in the free market, but
program
few do so. Only 50% of the energy consumed by industry is
traded on the free market. The power sector road map
was implemented well until 2006. Since then
implementation has continued with the exception of the
privatization program.

42

Pillar 1 Accelerating Structural and Institutional Reforms for Sustained Growth (Cont'd)
At CPS entry
Insufficient alignment of
education relevance to the
labor market.

CAS Outcomes
Improvement in education
quality by 2.5 to 5% based
on various assessments
and examination results

Insufficient alignment of
education relevance to the
labor market.

Reduction in secondary
education drop-out rate
from 1.7% in 2004 to 1.2%
in 2009
20% improved soil and
Development of
water quality in the areas
testing of subcovered by the Bank project legislation in line with
EU Directives
Implementation of
integrated action
plans for remedial
interventions at the
water basin level

Poor regulatory framework
and institutional capacity to
implement the EU Nitrates
Directive
Poor regulatory framework
and institutional capacity to
implement the EU Nitrates
Directive

Milestones
Implementation of
program for
improving quality
assurance and
accountability in
primary and
secondary schools
and higher education

Results at CPS completion
Partially achieved. National quality assurance agencies
were set up for primary and secondary schools and higher
education and they are operational. However, at national
level, Romanian student performance in PISA 2006 was
below OECD and EU average scores. In PIRLS 2006
Romanian student scores were 36 of 45 participating
countries and Romania scores declined between 2001 and
2006
Not achieved. Drop-out rates have actually increased to
2.1% in 2006

Not achieved. The project start has been delayed by
almost 2 years.

Not achieved. The project start was delayed by almost 2
years due to a combination of Government transition to use
of Treasury systems (which delayed Negotiations by 7
months) and a lengthy period to effectiveness (approaching
1 year).

Pillar 2 Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Modernizing the Public Sector
At CPS entry
High total subsidies to the
enterprise sector including
selected state enterprises

CAS Outcomes
Reduction in enterprise
subsidies as percent of
GDP from 2.2 in 2002 to
less than 1.5 in 2009

Milestones
Closure of loss
making and nonviable mines

43

At CPS completion
Achieved. Under the 2004 Government strategy for
restructuring the mining sector, the Government closed 235
mining units and cut the number of total employees in the
lignite and hard coal sector from 45,700 in 2002 to 28,500
in 2006 without affecting output. Three of the more difficult
mines have been closed under the Bank-supported project.
Enterprise subsidies being phased out by 2010.

Pillar 2 Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Modernizing the Public Sector (Cont'd)
At CPS entry
CAS Outcomes
Fiscal vulnerability from
Reduction of quasi-fiscal
quasi fiscal energy subsidies energy subsidies as % of
GDP from 1.7 in 2004 to
less than 1 in 2009
including clean-up of past
arrears

Milestones
Privatization of three
electricity distribution
companies

At CPS completion
Substantially Achieved. Although there is no information
available on the level of arrears in the energy sector on an
aggregate basis, the team believes that they declined
considerably after 2004, very likely below 1% of GDP.
Termoelectrica and some local producers are likely to be
the only companies still in arrears, although this could
change in the current financial crisis. The first two of eight
distribution companies were sold in 2005 and three more in
2006. Privatization of the remaining three was stopped in
2007.
Increase in electricity Achieved. Energy sector regulator has adjusted electricity
and gas tariffs
and gas prices.

Fiscal vulnerability from
Reduction of quasi-fiscal
quasi fiscal energy subsidies energy subsidies as % of
GDP from 1.7 in 2004 to
less than 1 in 2009
including clean-up of past
arrears
Fiscal vulnerability from high Maintenance of public
Increase in
pension liabilities
pensions deficit at less than retirement age
1% of GDP or identification
of funding sources if deficit
temporarily widens as a
result of appropriate
policies

Achieved. The public pension system has been in surplus
in recent years, following a comprehensive restructuring,
including by: gradually increasing the retirement age,
externalizing services unrelated to pensions contributions,
transferring the pensions of agricultural workers to the state
budget, improving revenue collection and indexing benefits
to inflation.

Unsustainable health
financing

Partially achieved. Arrears to suppliers fluctuate, but have
at times been eliminated altogether, only to increase again.

Unsustainable health
financing

Reduction in amount of
arrears by health care
providers to suppliers by
more than 50% between
2005 and 2009
Reduction in amount of
arrears by health care
providers to suppliers by
more than 50% between
2005 and 2009

Implementation of
health reform
package in PAL and
strengthened by HD
DPL series
Implementation of
health reform
package in PAL and
strengthened by HD
DPL series

44

Achieved due to increased Health Insurance Fund
revenues (higher salaries). Arrears to suppliers are minimal
but the sustainability of this situation is doubtful because of
the projected reduction of employers contribution to the
Health Insurance Fund.

Pillar 2 Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Modernizing the Public Sector (Cont'd)
At CPS entry
Unsustainable health
financing

CAS Outcomes
Incidence of informal
payments in the health
sector reduced from 10% of
total health sector
expenditure in 2005 to 5%
in 2008 based on info from
surveys
Limited capacity to absorb
More than 75% absorption
EU pre- and post-accession of EU funds in the water
funds.
and wastewater sectors in
counties supported by Bank
project

Milestones
Adoption of informal
payments reduction
measures

At CPS completion
Unknown. No formal measures were taken in this regard.
There is no officially published data that allows an
assessment of whether the level of informal payments has
decreased.

Eu grants committed
to 11 counties for
water and wastewater
projects amounting to
about $500 million

Partially Achieved. Activities are on-going in 10 counties,
the EU is financing the 11th. The indicator is on track to be
exceeded well before the closing date of the project as
applications corresponding to EUR 850 million of EU grants
should be submitted by June 2009.

Inefficient public
administration. Perceived
high levels of corruption in
administration

Adoption and
Not achieved. The Strategy was drafted, but not
implementation of a implemented due to the lack of political will.
medium term Civil
Service Pay and
Employment Strategy

Inefficient public
administration. Perceived
high levels of corruption in
administration
Perceived high levels of
corruption in administration

Perceived high levels of
corruption in administration

More meritocratic civil
service as indicated by:
incidence of formal
evaluations for civil
servants exceeding 95%
each year during the CPS
period; and increase in the
% of civil servants with
university degrees to 77%
for central administration
and 50% for local
administration

Enactment of new
Civil Service Law

Achieved. Amendments to the Civil Service Law were
adopted

Amendments to
strengthen the
Conflict of Interest
Law
Publication of
declarations as
required in the Law of
Declaration of Assets

Partially achieved. The Conflict of Interest law was
amended, but it is not clear that it is being implemented.

45

Achieved. Amendments to the law of Declaration of Assets
adopted in 2004 were substantial and resulted in a marked
improvement of the process and quality of public
declaration of assets. The declaration is one of the strictest
in the EU.

Pillar 2 Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Modernizing the Public Sector (Cont'd)
At CPS entry
Inefficient public
administration.

Inefficient judicial system

CAS Outcomes

Milestones
Implementation of
the Strategic
Development Plan
for Public Financial
Management in the
PAL program
Reduction of time spent by Implementation of
courts on administrative
the program for
matters by 30%
rationalization of the
court system

At CPS completion
Partially achieved. The SDP was drafted. Some progress
in improving internal and external audit and accounting
standards, as well as in enhancing the quality of the annual
budget process, has been achieved. However, linkages
between performance and resources allocated in the public
sector remain weak.
Not achieved. The proposed program for court
rationalization has not been taken forward.

Pillar 3 Targeting Poverty Reduction and Promoting Social Inclusion
At CPS entry
CAS Outcomes
Limited effectiveness of the Halving of the extreme
social assistance system
poverty rate of 11% in 2003
by 2009

Social and economic
exclusion of disadvantaged
groups

Social and economic
exclusion of disadvantaged
groups

Social and economic
exclusion of disadvantaged
groups

Milestones
Improved coverage
of the MIG scheme
by reforming
eligibility rules

20% reduction of gaps
between selected
depressed areas and
neighbouring communities
as measured by the living
conditions index
70% of Roma in targeted
settlements acknowledging
an improvement in basic
living conditions

Implementation of
the Priority
Interventions
Program through the
Social Development
Funds
Implementation of
the Priority
Interventions
Program through the
Social Development
Funds
5% increase in children
Enactment and
from targeted communities implementation of a
participating in Early
coherent Early
Childhood Education
Childhood Education
program
legislation to promote
access

46

At CPS completion
Partially achieved. Extreme poverty rates are below the
target rate at 2.4% in 2007 but this was mainly due to
economic growth. The MIG scheme was reformed
(partially), but its funding is now decreasing relative to GDP
and coverage is decreasing
Not (yet) achieved. Works for small infrastructure
rehabilitation has started in 25 selected localities but have
not yet been completed.

Not (yet) achieved. Works for small infrastructure
rehabilitation has started in 25 selected localities but have
not yet been completed.

Not achieved. Kindergartens will be rehabilitated to
support this objective, but the works have not yet started.

Pillar 3 Targeting Poverty Reduction and Promoting Social Inclusion (Cont'd)
At CPS entry
Social and economic
exclusion of disadvantaged
groups

CAS Outcomes
25% of services for Persons
with Disabilites scoring at
least 80% on the standards
compliance index for each
main category of quality
standards

Milestones
Rehabilitation of
existing facilities
aligned to EU
standards for
Persons with
Disabilities

At CPS completion
Not (yet) achieved. Works for the rehabilitation and
construction of long-term care institutions for persons with
disabilities will start in 2009.

Social and economic
exclusion of disadvantaged
groups

40% increase in the rate of
employment of youth 18+
benefiting from
multifunctional centres
Reduction by 10% of
people who forego medical
care for financial reasons

Increased financing
for multi-functional
centres catering to
youth at risk
Restructuring of
health care services
in underserved areas
to ensure access and
quality.

Not (yet) achieved. Works for the construction of social
assistance multi-functional cetners will start in 2009.

Poor access to markets by
households in rural areas

Increased availability and
condition of infrastructure in
rural and economically
depressed areas

Improved capacity at Not achieved. Regional Development Project dropped.
the local level to plan Mining Rehabilitation II project is promoting socioand implement small economic regeneration in rural mining areas.
infrastructure projects

Poor access to markets by
households in rural areas

Increased availability and
condition of infrastructure in
rural and economically
depressed areas

Adoption and
implementation of
the Regional
Development
Strategy for
economically
depressed areas in
line with EU
requirements

Poor health outcomes and
access by certain groups

47

Not achieved. The Primary Health Care part of the project
dropped as Govt could not accept public money for primary
health care institutions which are technically private and
due to a lack of a primary care strategy. However aside
from geographically impaired access and the supply failure
in some areas, certain poor groups forego available
medical care services for financial reasons (specialized
ambulatory, dental, optical care, and services deemed to
require high informal payments, like surgery).

Not achieved. It did happen, driven by the need to access
EU funds, but not under a Bank project and not with the
same comprehensiveness.

Annex 2: Original and Actual CPS Lending Program
Fiscal
Year
2006

Project ID

Planned
US$ M
130
60
58.5
70

Actuals
US$ M
130
60
58.5
0

447.0 17

248.5

PAL 2
Municipal Services (from 2006)
Transport Sector Support
Avian Flu
Human Development DPL 1
Sub-Total

150
128.5
150
35
100
550.0 18

0
131.7
180
37.7
0
349.4

Complementing EU Support for
Agricultural Restructuring
(from 2007)
Integrated Nutrient Pollution
Control (was Enviro Mgt
project from 2007)
Rural and Regional
Development
PAL 3
Human Development DPL 2
Sub-Total

65

65

50

68.1

50

0

150
100
450 19

0
0
133.1

Dropped
Dropped

150

0

Dropped

50 20

0

Not started

Judicial Reform
Knowledge Economy
Social Inclusion
Revenue Administration
Reform
Sub-Total

Status
Approved and active
Approved and active
Approved and active
Negotiated

2007
Dropped
Approved and active
Approved and active
Approved and active
Dropped

2008
Approved but not yet effective

Effective December 8, 2008

Preparation on hold

2009
Hidroelectrica/Tarnita (from
2008)
Electricity- Privatization
Guarantee
Business Environment
Fiscal & Governance DPL
Human Development DPL 3
Sub-Total
TOTAL

17

50
150
100
450 21
1897.0

Not started
Not started
Not started
0
731.0

CPS lending for FY2006 included the Municipal Services loan (US$ 128.5 mil.) moved to FY2007.

18

CPS lending for FY2007 included an Agriculture loan of US$ 65 mil. (now CESAR) and an Environment Management loan of US$ 50 mil. (now
Integrated Nutrient Pollution) moved to FY 2008.
19 CPS lending for FY2008 included an Energy loan of US$ 150 mil (now Hidroelectrica/Tarnita project) moved to FY 2009.
4. CPS mentioned two possible operations: two partial risk guarantees (PRGs) of about US$ 50 mil. each for FY08-09.
21

CPS lending for FY2009 included an Energy2 or Transport 2 loan with a value of US$ 150 mil. In addition there are two possible Partial Risk
Guarantees operations, one in FY08 and another in FY09, initially estimated at US$ 50 mil. each

48

Annex 3: Analytical and Advisory Program
Activity

Type of
product

Status

FY 07 Implementation of Regional Development
and Integration with other EU Operational
Programs (TA)
FY07 Private Sector Development Strategy in
Romania after EU Accession:
Policy Priorities and Implications
FY07 Poverty Monitoring Analytical and
Advisory Assistance Program
FY07 Municipal Finance Policy Note

TA

Delivered June 2008

ESW

Delivered May 2007

ESW

Delivered June 2007

Policy Note

Delivered June 2007

FY07 Public , HD, PSD Policy Notes
FY08 Analytical guidance in revising the
National Rural Development Program

ESW
TA

Delivered June 2007
Delivered Dec 2007

FY08 ROSC (Reports on Observance of
Accounting and Auditing Standard and Codes) Follow-up TA
FY08 Poverty Monitoring Analytical and
Advisory Assistance Program – II
• Labor Markets
• Social Protection
FY08 Public Pay and Employment
Surveys on the public sector pay practices and
employment policies.
FY08 Visioning EU Convergence
Challenges in achieving convergence of real
incomes towards the EU levels.
FY09 Reform of Higher Education Financing
• Changes in higher education financing
• TA on students loans and scholarships
• Instruments for measuring the relevance of
education to labor market
FY09 FSAP Update

TA

Delivered June 2008

ESW

Delivered June 2008

ESW

Delivered June 2008

ESW

Dissemination Conference
held April 2008

TA

Delivered January 2009

ESW

Delivered January 2009

FY09 Green Investment Scheme Implementation

TA

Draft. Review Scheduled
for Spring 2009

FY09 Public Expenditures and Institutional
Review Update

ESW

Moved to FY10

FY09 Review Financial Oversight &
Procurement in State Owned Enterprises

ESW

Moved to FY10

49

Annex E
Annex E

FY10-13 Romania CPS Stakeholder Consultations

1. Process. Stakeholder consultations were held in May 2009 with representatives of
the trade unions, non-governmental organizations, academia, youth organizations, the
Parliament, and IFI’s. The CPS tight processing schedule and competing claims on
stakeholders' availability (e.g. Parliament's heavy agenda, electoral campaign for the
European Parliament) influenced the extent of consultations – but outreach and
consultations will continue through CPS implementation to allow the Bank to be
responsive to new demands and to adjust its program appropriately. The consultations
thus far sought to validate the CPS findings, proposed strategy and Bank program,
and to discuss the perception of stakeholders concerning risks and opportunities in the
current context of Romania. Further consultations are envisaged with national and
local governments, the business community/private sector, and other stakeholders.
The consultations for the 2009- 2013 Country Partnership Strategy are held directly
with the groups identified above, and through the local website of the Bank with a
wider audience.
2. Topics for discussion. The consultations provided a venue for a meaningful
exchange of views with Government and various stakeholders on the critical
challenges of current economic crisis affecting Romania and long-term prospects as
well as policy options and programs that would address these challenges. The main
topics included:
•
•
•
•

Lessons learned from past and ongoing work of the Bank in Romania
Political and economic context, risks and opportunities
Scope for resuming reform
Consistency of proposed Bank program with needs and expectations

3. Results. The discussions tapped a large array of sensitive issues and provided a
reality check against World Bank’s existing assessments and perceptions. The issues
of governance at national and local level, surfaced throughout all consultations.
Participants were in agreement about the main issues that need immediate attention:
social protection in response to ongoing economic crisis, education, health,
infrastructure, EU convergence.

4. Key messages. The following is a summary of the key messages received from
stakeholders.

4.1. General Messages
• General concern about the commitment and capacity of the political
leadership to design and implement needed reforms
• High risk of coalition politics for both reform and project implementation
• Virtual consensus that the culture of corruption has not been reversed or
diminished.

50

Annex E
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Need to scale up and communicate successful experiences, including reforms
piloted by Bank-financed projects and the result of analytical work
Concern with implementation capacities in both central and local
administrations
Reservations about the extent to which current cooperation of the Government
with IFIs goes beyond financial needs and is driven by genuine acceptance of
the need for reform
Advice extended to the Bank on balancing flexibility (to promote ownership)
with the need for firmness, especially concerning agreed reform objectives
and specific project outcomes.
The Bank program should consider sectoral strategies and not only 3 main
national programmatic documents (NRP 2007, GP 2009, Lisbon Agenda)
Need for donors/lenders better coordination
Need for better inter-ministerial coordination and at local level

4.2. Sector messages
•
•
•
•
•
•

Education
Identified as the neediest area for reform. Repeated failed attempts to reform the
sector did more harm than good
Society as a whole is reform adverse because education (curricula) is still very
much un-reformed
Teachers’ pay must be linked to broader reform objectives and outcomes
Public Sector
Public Administration suffering from weak professionalism and management
skills of political leaders and public servants
Perceived inefficiency of the bureaucracy, lacking communication and
coordination, hampering delivery of public services
Public sector pay and numbers were inflated by the demilitarization of army,
police, and other institutions

5. Overall Conclusions
• Bank has been a respected partner for Romania and still has a role to play due to
its expertise, analytical work, and independence.
• Main priorities for further Bank work in Romania should address the areas in
which structural reforms lacked, failed or lagged during pre- and post-EU
accession period.
• Key areas for development in partnership with the Bank are education, health,
capacity building in public administration for better absorption of EU-funds.

51

52

