Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 32118-KH

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

April 18, 2005

Southeast Asia Country Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(as of April 8,2005)
Currency Unit = Cambodian Riel (CR)
US$1= CR4,018
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
M e t r i c System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AFTA
AML
APR
ASEAN
CAE
CAP
CAR
CAS
CCA
CCR
CDC
CED
CG
CGA
CMDG
CPPR

cs

CISC
CSD
CSES
CSP
DFID
DHS
EPSCBP
ESW
EU
FCCPP
FDI
GDCC
GDP
GMS
GSCSD
HRMIS
IDA
IDF
IFAPER
IMF
IMR
JSA
JSDF
LASED
LMAP
LJR
MAFF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
ASEAN Free Trade Area
Anti-Money Laundering
Annual Progress Report
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Program (DFID)
Council for Administrative Reform
Country Assistance Strategy (World Bank)
Common Country Assessment
CAS Completion Report
Council for the Development of Cambodia
Customs and Excise Department
Consultative Group
Cambodia Gender Assessment
Cambodian Millennium Development Goal
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Strategy (generic)
Commune / Sangkat Council
Council for Social Development
Cambodian Socio-Economic Survey
Country Strategy and Program (ADB)
Department for InternationalDevelopment (UK)
Demographic and Health Survey
Economic and Public Sector Capacity Building Project
Economic and Sector Work
EuropeanUnion
Forest Concessionand Control Pilot Project
ForeignDirect Investment
Government Donor CoordinationCommittee
Gross Domestic Product
Greater Mekong Subregion
General Secretariat of the CSD
Human Resources MIS
InternationalDevelopment Association
InstitutionalDevelopment Fund
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment and Public
Expenditure Review
International Monetary Fund
Infant Mortality Rate
Joint Staff Assessment
Japan Social Development Fund
Land Allocation for Social and Economic
Development
Land Management and Administration Project
Legal and Judicial Reform
Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries

Millennium Development Goal
MDG
Ministry of Economy and Finance
MEF
Maternal Mortality Rate
MMR
Multifibre Arrangement
MFA
Ministry of Health
MoH
Ministry of Planning
MOP
MoWVA Ministry of Women’s and Veterans Affairs
Mekong Private Sector Development Facility
MPDF
Ministry of Public Works and Transport
MPWT
Mekong River Commission
MRC
Ministry of Rural Development
MRD
Medium-TermExpenditure Framework
MTEF
NationalAssembly
NA
Non-Governmental Organization
NGO
NIS
National Instituteof Statistics
National Poverty Reduction Strategy
NPRS
National Strategic Development Plan
NSDP
Official Development Assistance
ODA
Operations EvaluationDepartment
OED
Public Administration Reform
PAR
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
PETS
Public Financial Management
PFM
PHRD
Poverty and Human Resources Development Fund
PMATU Poverty Monitoring and Analysis Technical Unit
Priority Mission Group
PMG
Private Participationin Infrastructure
PPI
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
PRGF
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
PRSC
Private Sector Development
PSD
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
PSIA
Royal Government of Cambodia
RGC
Rural Investment and Local Governance Project
RILGP
Rectangular Strategy
RS
Single Administration Document
SAD
Socio-Economic Development Plan
SEDP
Small and Medium Enterprises
SME
Supreme National Economic Council
SNEC
Sector-Wide Approach
SWAP
Technical Assistance
TA
Technical Cooperation Assistance Program
TCAP
Tonle Sap Basin
TSB
Technical Working Group
TWG
UN
United Nations
UNDAF
UN Development Assistance Framework
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNIFEM United Nations Development Fund for
Women
World Trade Organization
WTO

International Development Association
Regional Vice President: Jemal-ud-din Kassum
Country Director:
Ian C. Porter
Task Team:
Nisha Agrawal, Tim Conway,
Steven Schonberger, Lynne Sherburne-Benz

International Finance Corporation
Regional Director: Javed Hamid
Country Manager:
Deepak Khanna
Task Team Leader:
Stoyan Tenev

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLEOF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................

i

I
.

INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................................

I1.

COUNTRY CONTEXT: JOINT ANALYSIS BY THE ADB. DFID. THE UN SYSTEM AND
THE WORLD BANK GROUP........................................................................................................
2

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I
.
J.
K.
I11.

A.
B.
C.
D.

Development Context .........................................................................................................
Economic Growth ...............................................................................................................
Poverty ................................................................................................................................
Political Environment .........................................................................................................
Governance And Institutional Capacity ..............................................................................
Gender Assessment .............................................................................................................
Private Sector .........................................................................................
Environment ..........................................................................................
Regional Cooperation .......................................................................................................
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Outlook ..........................................................................
Debt And Creditworthiness ...............................................................................................

2
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
10
12

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS: JOINT DISCUSSION OF THE
ADB. DFID. THE UN SYSTEM AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP ...................................... 13

Development Goals And Strategy ....................................................................................
Resource Mobilization And Investment ...........................................................................
The Role O f External Assistance ......................................................................................
Assessment O f The Government’s Development Strategy ...............................................

Iv.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP INCAMBODIA-BUILDING

V.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ...............................................................................

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

1

13
14
14
15

ON EXPERIENCE ..................15

The Governance Challenge. The CMDGs And Selectivity Criteria .................................
Bank Group Activities And Partnerships..........................................................................
Partnerships And Aid Effectiveness .................................................................................
Bank Group Program ........................................................................................................
Lending Scenarios And Performance Monitoring Indicators ...........................................
Monitoring And Evaluation ..............................................................................................
Portfolio Management ......................................................................................................

V I.

RISKS ............................................................................................................................................

VI1.

CONCLUDING REMARKS...........................................................................................................

A . Risks Facing The Development Goals O f The Government O f Cambodia ......................
B. Risks Facing The Implementation O f The Bank Group CAS ..........................................

21

21
24
37
40
44
45
46

49

49
50
51

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without World Bank authorization

.

.

Text Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:
Table 7:

Table 8:
Table 9:
Table 10:
Table 11:
Table 12:
Text Figures
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Text Boxes
B o x 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:

- 11 Medium Term Outlook: K e y Indicators
Key Debt Sustainability Analysis Indicators, 2005-2008
Address the Govemance Impediments to PSD
Improve Accountability and Transparency in NRM
Improve Public Financial Management
Support Decentralization and Promote Citizens' Partnerships for Better Govemance
Support the Formulation and Implementation o f a Government-led Strategy and
Investment Program for Attaining the CMDGs
Support With Analytical and Investment Services Areas Critical to Achieving the CMDGs
Agreed Division o f Labor between the ADB and the World Bank for Support to
Govemment for Development o f a SWAP
Planned World Bank-Financed Projects (FYO5-08)
Indicative Bank Lending Scenarios for Cambodia (FYO5-08)
Working with Other Donors in the Development o f Sector Results Management
Frameworks: The Role o f the TWGs
Cambodia's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) Scores
Overall Results Framework for the Bank Group CAS
Cambodia's MDGs and Other Indicators in Regional Context

Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:
Box 8:
Box 9:

Cambodia's Rectangular Strategy (RS) 2004-2008
The Joint ADB-DFID-UN-World Bank Group Country Strategy (CS) Preparation Process
Conclusions from the 2000 Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE)
L a m i n g from the World Banks Experience with L o w Income Countries
Under Stress
C G Meeting 2004 Monitoring Indicators for Legal and Judicial Reform
The Evolution o f the Aid Harmonization and Alignment Agenda in Cambodia
Guiding Principles on Partnership
Potential Core PRSC-I Actions
Indicative Program o f AAA Work (EyO5-08)

Attachments
Attachment 1:
Attachment 2:
Attachment 3:
Attachment 4:
Attachment 5:
Attachment 6:
Attachment 7:
Attachment 8:
Attachment 9:
Attachment 10:

2005 CAS Completion Report
CAS Results Matrix
2004 C G Priority Monitoring Indicators
CAS Response to Gender Assessment Findings
Environmental Sustainability in Cambodia
RGC's Action Plan for Harmonization and Alignment: 2004-2008
Declaration by RGC and Development Partners on Harmonization and Alignment
World Bank Group Joint Private Sector Development Strategy for Cambodia
Country Financing Parameters
Debt Sustainability

Standard CAS Annexes
Annex A l :
Cambodia at a Glance
Annex B2:
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3:
IDA Program Summary
Annex B3:
IFC and MIGA Program
Annex B4:
Summary o f Nonlending Services
Annex B5:
Social Indicators
Annex B6:
Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7:
Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8:
Operations Portfolio (BRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex B8:
Statement of IFC's H e l d and Disbursed Portfolio

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Achievements, Challenges and World Bank Group Role

i.
Cambodia has made some significant achievements since the United Nations (UN)-supervised
peace process of 1991-93. However, after decades of war and authoritarian government, Cambodia is
in many ways still a post-conflict society and political system. The country i s at peace, increasingly
integrated with the region and the world, and has enjoyed a decade o f largely unbroken macroeconomic
stability and growth. However, the three-fold transition that began in the late 1980s-from civil war to
peace, from one-party rule to multi-party democracy, and from economic isolation to integration-has
given rise to complex and often negative forms o f state-society relationship and weak accountability for
the management of public resources. This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), which covers FY05 to
FY08, accordingly identifies governance issues as the primary obstacle to sustainable poverty reduction
in Cambodia.
ii.

Strong economic growth between 1994 and 2003 has been narrowly based in a few sectors and
to date appears to have had little impact on poverty. The benefits o f growth have been very unequally
distributed, with selected geographical areas and a small proportion o f the population gaining far more
than others. Growth in agriculture (on which the majority o f the population, especially the poor,
depends) varies greatly from one year to the next but has averaged far below the growth rate of the
economy as a whole. Overall growth i s now likely to slow as the rapid quota-based expansion of the
garment sector in recent years may well reverse in the face o f increased competition from lower-cost
producers following the expiry o f the Multifibre Arrangement (MFA). Further growth and stronger
linkages to poverty reduction w i l l require urgent action to improve competitiveness and diversify the
sources o f growth, particularly in regard to smallholder agriculture and other rural economic activities.

iii.
The Government's development strategy has evolved through a number of documents. The most
recent-the Rectangular Strategy (RS)-was announced b y the new Government that formed in July
2004 after a year-long post-election impasse. This CAS i s intended to help implement the RS, which
provides a sound diagnosis o f Cambodia's development challenges-particularly the central importance
o f good governance-and a comprehensive l i s t o f actions to tackle these problems, but which, like other
government strategies before it, s t i l l needs to be translated into priorities and implementation. The
World Bank, in partnership with other donors, w i l l support the formulation o f the Government's new
five-year plan for the period 2006-2010.
Over the last decade, uncoordinated and donor-led aid has often slowed or even undermined
iv.
the evolution of good governance. Increasing recognition o f this problem led in 2004 to a Govemment-

donor consensus on an agenda for harmonization and alignment, to which the World Bank Group has
contributed actively. I t i s a central principle o f t h i s CAS to work through strategic partnerships to
reduce transaction costs, improve accountability, and support the development o f core state capacities.
The f i r s t two sections o f this CAS document are shared with the new country strategies o f the Asian
Development Bank (ADB), UK Department for International Development (DFID), and the UN
Development System (UNDS), with whom the World Bank has collaborated closely. The ADB, Japan
and the World Bank have also worked over the last year to improve synergies among their programs.
Lessons Learned

v.

Drawing on reviews and extensive consultations, the CAS reflects three main lessons learned:

- 11 0

The need to focus on governance throughout the country program. Poor governance has been the
primary constraint on the impact o f the World Bank Group and o f development policies generally.
The need to improve donor coordination and partnerships. Poor governance and poor donor
behavior have been closely related. Poor governance has encouraged donors to adopt short-term
approaches to development effectiveness and helped rationalize uncoordinated aid; insufficient
donor coordination or outreach to civil society has accentuated the problems o f weak governance.

0

The need for a clear focus on results. This requires greater criteria-based selectivity and a clear
definition o f the expected relationship between inputs, activities, progress indicators and outcomes.

CAS Objectives and Results
The activities described in the CAS are intended to contribute to six objectives, which are
vi.
clustered under two over-arching pillars.
'

Activities under Pillar I are intended to help implement improvements in govemance that are
vii.
needed if Cambodia is to meet the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs). T o t h i s end,
the CAS establishes four objectives. First, i t w i l l tackle aspects o f economic governance that raise the

cost o f doing business, deter investment and trade, and hold back strong, broad-based private sector
development (PSD). Second, i t w i l l seek to support policy and institutional reforms that help the rural
poor achieve more say in and receive more benefits from sustainable natural resources management, b y
improving transparency and accountability in the governance o f natural resources and land in particular.
Third, i t w i l l address core issues o f public financial management (PFM) as a fundamental backbone for
improved service delivery. I t w i l l do so b y supporting the Government's comprehensive timetable for
P F M reform and the formulation o f strategies for reform o f pay and human resource management.
Fourth, i t w i l l promote accountability-between elected officials and those responsible for delivering
services; between citizens and the state; and between those who deliver services and the citizens who
receive them-by
supporting decentralization and promoting citizens' partnerships for better
governance.
Pillar 2 of the CAS allocates World Bank activities and resources to supporting the strategy
development and investments needed to attain the CMDGs. T o these ends, the World Bank Group f i r s t

viii.

w i l l encourage the emergence o f holistic, poverty-focused approaches to the formulation and
implementation o f public policy by supporting the preparation o f the new National Strategic
Development Plan (NSDP 2006-2010). Second, where there are clear gaps in critical infrastructure and
human development sub-sectors, the World Bank Group w i l l support the emergence o f a nationallyowned vision and strategy through the provision o f analytical and investment services.

If focusing on key governance issues and supporting efforts to attain the CMDGs defines what
ix.
the World Bank Group w i l l do in the next CAS period, working through strategic partnerships and
promoting the development o f national ownership defines how results w i l l be achieved. The World
Bank Group w i l l undertake more active communication o f goals and activities and more systematic
engagement with c i v i l society and the private sector stakeholders within Cambodia; and w i l l contribute
to improving Government-led coordination o f external assistance, either working through or helping to
promote the evolution o f coordination structures such as sector-wide approaches (SWAPS).
World Bank Group Assistance
x.
A m i x o f loans, grants and analytical services w i l l be used in pursuit o f these goals. Annual,
single-tranche Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) w i l l be introduced to support priority

- 111 reforms in PFM, PSD and land management. Increasing attention w i l l be given to portfolio quality,
with annual reviews of performance contributing to improved fiduciary controls. Analytical and
advisory activities (AAA) w i l l support the focus on addressing governance impediments to poverty
reduction and on meeting strategy and investment needs in sectors critical to attaining the CMDGs.
Wherever possible, analytical work w i l l be approached in partnership with the Government, other
donors and/or c i v i l society stakeholders in order to facilitate consensus-building, donor coordination,
and government ownership o f policy recommendations. The World Bank w i l l seek to ensure that
analysis i s commissioned and managed in such a way that i t contributes to the long-term accumulation
o f national capacity for policy-oriented economic and social analysis.
xi.
Poor governance indicator scores in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA)
has reduced the World Bank base case lending envelope from US$70 million per annum in 2002 to
US$45 million per annum in 2004. Allocation o f Bank resources for Cambodia could increase
significantly over this CAS period, if key governance indicators are improved. I t could also decrease if
progress i s not made and there i s a worsening o f governance indicators. The CAS i s intended to support
government .efforts to improve i t s CPIA ratings and thus gain access to a significantly higher volume o f
IDA resources.

Agenda for Board Consideration
xii.
Given this assessment and proposal, Board members may wish to discuss, among others, the
following aspects o f t h i s CAS:

.

I s the focus on governance issues appropriate and adequately followed through?

=

H o w does the Bank actively manage potential risks to the'effectiveness o f i t s investments and to i t s
reputation?

I s the mix o f instruments and activities consistent with this governance focus?

CAMBODIA -- COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Cambodia's last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) (Report No. 2077-KH), presented to
the Bank's Board of Directors in February 2000, covered FYOO-03. During this CAS period the
Government of Cambodia completed the National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS), which
serves for the World Bank and the IMF as the country's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
That document was presented to the Board of Directors in January 2003. This current CAS will
cover the period from FYO5-08.
2.
I n the early stages of preparation for this CAS, it was noted that the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) and the UK Department for International Development (DFID) were also preparing
their next medium-term country strategies along timeframes that were similar to that of the Bank
Group. As a concrete step towards donor harmonization, these three donors agreed to follow a
joint country strategy formulation process. As a result, Sections I1 and I11 o f this document are
also to be found in the ADB Country Strategy and Program (CSP) and the DFID Country
Assistance Plan (CAP), as i s the first part o f Section VI'. The CAS i s also substantially aligned

with the Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) of the UN, which joined the ADB-DFIDWorld Bank partnership in mid-2004.

3.
As part of this strategy preparation process, ADB, D F I D and the World Bank organized
joint consultation workshops with partners and stakeholders-the Govemment, other donors,
NGOs and civil society, and the private sector-in October 2003. These were used to inform those

present o f the process, and to seek their thoughts on what lessons the partners should have learned,
what they should realistically aim for over five years, and how they might go about achieving this.
The three-and later four- partners met regularly throughout 2004 to agree upon the common text
in sections Iand 11; to update each other on developments in their plans for lending and analytical
work; and to agree upon an evolving division o f labor and allocation o f "lead donor"
responsibilities within the group, whereby if one of the partners took the lead on policy dialogue
for a given sector or sub-sector, the other partners agreed to align their assistance behind this lead.
With their strategies largely in place and aligned, the four donors held another round o f workshops
in October 2004, feeding back to the Government, donors, NGO and private sector actors how they
had attempted to act on the discussions o f the previous year.

4.
There have been a number of benefits of this process. There i s less duplication and fewer
gaps in terms of the sectoral coverage o f the four partners' programs vis-&vis Cambodia's needs
and priorities. The partnership process has reduced the transaction costs for government partners,
who have been able to engage in a more rounded debate in multilateral discussion with the four
donors than would have been possible in four separate sets of bilateral discussions: i t has also
helped to ensure greater coherence and consistency in the messages that the four donors (and by
extension, the donor community) send the Government - and other Cambodian stakeholders about their objectives and requirements. With other partners in the private sector, civil society and
the donor community, this approach has either similarly helped to reduce the time and effort
required to achieve input to the country strategy (CS) preparation process, and/or created
opportunities for consultation where they simply might not otherwise have been present
previously. I t can also reasonably be argued to have had an important demonstration effect, as an
early manifestation of donors' professed intention to align and harmonize their assistance.

'

The only difference i s that sections J (Medium-Term Economic Outlook) and K (Debt and Creditworthiness) have
been added to Chapter I,and section B to the discussion of risks in Chapter VI, as these sections are required in a
Bank Group CAS.

-2-

5.
Against this it must be acknowledged that the transaction costs for the four partners
themselves have in all likelihood been the same or greater than would have been the case i f they

had prepared their own stand-alone country strategies. The process has probably added to the staff
time costs and overall length o f the process. However, all four partners consider this an acceptable
price to pay for the gains made.

11. COUNTRY CONTEXT: JOINT ANALYSIS BY THE ADB, DFID, THE UN
SYSTEM AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP
A.

DEVELOPMENT
CONTEXT

6.

Cambodia i s at a crossroads in i t s development as i t moves away from a post-conflict
situation and towards a more normal development paradigm. Over two decades o f isolation and
conflict, which ended only in 1991 with the signing of the Paris Peace Agreements, devastated
much o f the country's physical, social and human capital, forcing the nation to start from scratch in
rebuilding i t s infrastructure and institutions.

7.
Much has been achieved in recent years. Cambodia has made important progress in
ensuring peace and security, rebuilding institutions, establishing a stable macroeconomic
environment, and a liberal investment regime. Notwithstanding these achievements, the
development agenda remains daunting. Poverty rates remain very high-with around 3 5 4 0
percent o f the population remaining below the poverty line, and 15-20 percent in extreme
poverty-and inequality appears to be increasing. Recent economic growth has been narrowly
based, and has not led to a significant reduction in poverty. Achieving many o f the Cambodia
Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs) will be difficult.
8.
With peace and macroeconomic stability now more firmly entrenched, the country has the
opportunity to make far reaching economic reforms to achieve sustained socio-economic
development. Within this context, it augurs well that the Government has developed a
comprehensive reform agenda as set out in the Second Socio-Economic Development Plan, (SEDP
11) 2001-2005, NPRS 2003-2005, and the Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment Equity
and Efficiency (RS) to meet the CMDGs.
B.

ECONOMIC
GROWTH

9.
Reflecting prudent macroeconomic policies and favorable external developments as
indicated by significant aid inflows and the signing in 1996 o f a bilateral trade agreement with the
US, Cambodia's gross domestic product (GDP) grew by an average 6.8 percent from 1999 to
2002, compared to 5.6 percent from 1995 to 1998. Having peaked at 10.8 percent in 1999, GDP
growth declined consistently, falling to 5.3 percent in 2003. Growth in 2003 was held back by the
SARS outbreak and anti-Thai riots, which adversely affected tourism. The fact that it took one
year to form a new government after elections in July 2003 also dampened the business
environment. On the positive side, agricultural production staged a strong recovery from a
drought-induced decline in 2002, and the export-oriented garment industry expanded strongly.
Over the past decade, the industrial sector was the main engine of growth, with industry's share of
GDP increasing from 13 percent in 1992 to 26 percent in 2002, and that o f agriculture falling from
48 percent to 33 percent during this period. The manufacturing subsector was the largest
contributor to incremental GDP, with garments being the key driver o f such growth. Tourism also
contributed significantly to growth, while agriculture has grown modestly, lagging behind
population growth. Growth recovered to an estimated 6 percent in 2004, owing to a strong
performance by the tourism and construction sectors, and despite the slowdown in agriculture.
There are fears of a sharp slowdown in 2005 with the phasing out o f the Multifibre Arrangement
(MFA) at the end of 2004. The 2005 growth rate i s expected to drop to about 2.7 percent with a

reduction in exports. Growth in services and construction are also expected to slow, but the impact
will be somewhat offset by strong growth in tourism.

10.
With Cambodia’s economy remaining highly dollarized, the authorities have had limited
scope to employ traditional tools for monetary management. As a result, prudent fiscal policy has
been the key to ensuring price stability, and Cambodia has achieved rates of inflation well below 4
percent since 1999, aside from an exogenously induced increase in 2004. However, with demand
for riel continuing to increase with economic growth, the authorities have of late also been
intervening in foreign exchange markets to stabilize the exchange rate. As a result, the exchange
rate remained broadly stable at around 4,000 riels per US dollar in 2003, with inflation averaging
only 0.5 percent. However, the Government’s revenue performance in 2003 deteriorated due to a
drop in trade and excise taxes despite recent efforts at improving tax administration and collection.
The fall in revenues widened the overall fiscal deficit to 7 percent of GDP in 2003 from 6.7
percent in 2002, and reduced spending in the priority sectors o f health, education, rural
development and agriculture. The fiscal deficit declined, however, in 2004 to 6.9 percent of GDP,
reflecting a projected improvement in the revenue-to-GDP ratio from 10.4 percent in 2003 to 10.9
percent in 2004. As in recent years, large aid inflows helped finance the deficit. Despite a modest
decrease in the trade deficit, the current account deficit (excluding official transfers) widened to
10.2 percent o f GDP in 2003 from 9 percent in 2002, owing to a narrower services surplus as
receipts from tourism moderated, before declining slightly to 10 percent in 2004. The deficit was
financed through private and official transfers and capital inflows. Gross foreign exchange
reserves at US$737 million at the end o f 2003 were sufficient to cover almost three months o f
imports.
11.
Cambodia must resolve several structural constraints to economic growth. The existing
sources o f growth are narrowly based on garments and tourism. Prospects for garments are,
however, uncertain with the phasing out of the MFA. New sources o f growth must be tapped to
achieve the 6-7 percent growth target in the RS and find employment for the estimated 250,000
persons entering the labor market each year. With 90 percent of the poor living in rural areas,
promoting agriculture i s considered to be the best strategy to accelerate growth, absorb a large part
o f the growing labor force, and address poverty more directly. Agricultural production, however,
remains far below potential due to low productivity and constrained access to arable land and
markets. Achieving new, or diversified, sources of growth would require significantly higher rates
o f productivity and investment. However, prospects for a significant increase in public investment
are limited owing to a very low govemment revenue base. On the other hand, private investment i s
hampered b y infrastructure bottlenecks (particularly in power and transportation), a weak and
shallow financial system, a lack o f skilled labor, and weaknesses in governance ranging from an
ineffectual policy and regulatory environment and poor service delivery, to bureaucratic
inefficiency and endemic corruption. All o f these serve to significantly increase transaction costs,
weaken business confidence, productivity, and competitiveness of the economy. While gains have
been made in structural reforms over the last decade - particularly those relating to trade, price
and exchange rate liberalization, tax and financial sector reforms, and privatization and leasing o f
state enterprises - the policy and institutional setting in almost all sectors o f the economy merits
substantial reform. Progress has been particularly slow in legal and judicial reforms, forcing the
private sector to operate under uncertain market rules. A strengthened revenue mobilization effort
will also be crucial for the Government to increase social spending and improve the quality o f
public services. The new Government has moved quickly to address some of these issues,
particularly reducing the cost and time associated with import and export procedures and company
registration, and in ratifying Cambodia’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO).
While benefits from the latter are expected to be wide ranging - with more than 40 pieces of
legislation relating to commercial transactions to be adopted over the coming years - strong effort
needs to be placed on proper implementation of the legislation if the benefits are to materialize.

-4-

C.

POVERTY'

12.
Despite data limitations, there i s consensus on the principal characteristics o f poverty in
Cambodia. Around 35-40 percent of the population has expenditure levels below the national
expenditure poverty line, with 15-20 percent in extreme (or food) poverty. Poverty in Cambodia i s
overwhelmingly rural, with poverty headcounts ranging from a low of 10-15 percent in Phnom
Penh to 40-45 percent in the rural areas, reaching 70-80 percent in some areas around the Tonle
Sap Basin. Despite relatively robust growth over the past decade, official figures suggest that the
incidence o f poverty declined only modestly from 39 percent in 1994 to 36 percent in 1999. This
i s due to a range of factors including the narrowness of the existing sources o f growth, with few if
any backward linkages to the domestic economy; a lack of integration of the poor to the
mainstream economy; poor quality o f and lack of access to social services; lack of access to credit;
a lack of equitable access to land, forestry and fisheries resources; and a lack of effective voice for
the poor (particularly minority groups and women) in the decisions that shape their lives.
13.
Progress in reducing human or non-monetary dimensions to poverty has been mixed.
There has been considerable movement toward attainment of universal primary enrolment, with
the net primary school enrolment rate increasing to 89 percent (from 76 percent in 1997); but, due
to a combination of children who enroll but drop out and those who never enroll, Cambodia
remains off-track regarding the C M D G for universal primary completion. The quality and
affordability of education have improved, but further progress i s needed. There remains
significant gender inequality in education, with girls currently accounting for only 39 percent of
lower secondary school enrolment and suffering higher drop-out rates. The population's health
status i s low, with child mortality estimated to be 118 per 1,000 live births. Data as o f the mid1990s show a high maternal mortality rate o f 437 per 100,000 live births. Around 85 percent of
deliveries take place at home and skilled personnel attend to less than half o f all deliveries. There
i s also an unmet demand for family planning services that has led to a population growth rate of
about 2.4 percent per year, aggravating poverty and increasing the pressure on natural resources.
Although Cambodia has the highest HIV/AIDS infection rate in Asia, i t has made substantial
progress, with the adult prevalence rate declining from 3.3 percent in 1997 to 2.6 percent in 2002.
14.
Poverty profiles suggest that income inequality has increased, especially in rural areas.
Slow agricultural growth has exacerbated income inequality. Despite government commitments,
inequalities are also pervasive in the status o f minority groups, hill communities, those displaced
by conflict, and women. Various poverty assessments indicate that poverty increases with
household size and number o f children; b y occupation, the poverty headcount i s highest where the
household head i s engaged in agriculture. While households headed by a single woman are not
significantly poorer than others (at least in terms o f income or consumption recorded in the sample
surveys), they are often more vulnerable, having less land and labor resources and thus more need
to rely more on coping strategies that are risky or that reduce their odds of escaping poverty over
the long term (such as selling assets, or pulling children out of school and sending them to work).
Education plays an important role in poverty. Poverty rates are similar when the household head
has no schooling or primary schooling only, and are significantly lower when the household head
has secondary, technical, or higher education.
15.
A significant number of people are also chronically vulnerable, moving into and
marginally out of poverty over the course o f their lives. The poor also experience a high degree o f
food insecurity, even in provinces which enjoy a rice surplus. The ADB-sponsored participatory
The most current multi-partner poverty assessment i s summarized in the National Poverty Reduction Strategy
(NPRS), which i s the Government's poverty reduction strategy. Much of t h i s analysis i s in turn based on the World
Bank Poverty Assessment of 1999. As an input to the preparation of their CSP, ADB prepared a review of the state o f
knowledge of poverty in Cambodia to summarize the findings in NPRS and from other sources. T h i s review w i l l be
an input in the next joint poverty assessment, expected in 2005, which will update poverty line estimates (and put
them on a much more robust footing) from mid-2005, based on analysis of Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey
(CSES) 2004 data.

-5poverty assessment of 2001 indicated that the poor feel disempowered and lack confidence in local
and provincial administration. Limited access to land and natural resources, physical infrastructure,
and basic social services were highlighted.3 Many also identified the erpsion o f family and
community relationships as a major concern. Health shocks due to accidents and illness are
repeatedly mentioned as a leading cause of vulnerability and poverty. Households spend a large
proportion of their income on health care and a single health shock can be financially deva~tating.~
Progress in Achieving the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals. While Cambodia
16.
has made some progress towards achieving some of the CMDGs, attaining many of the targets will
be difficult. Cambodia i s likely to meet the CMDG target for universal primary enrolment, but not
of completion. However, meeting the targets for secondary education (including female secondary
school enrolment) seems unlikely. There has also been some progress towards achieving healthrelated goals, but at current rates, the increases are probably not sufficient to meet the CMDGs.
The country is, however, likely to meet i t s CMDG target of reducing HIV prevalence rates by
2015. However, HIV transmission patterns are shifting, with most new infections occurring
among married women and their children, a difficult group to target. Continued focus i s needed to
ensure that the infection rate continues to decline. Meeting the C M D G target of halving the
population below the national poverty line by 2015 would require considerably faster economic
growth and a more pro-poor orientation to that growth.

D.

POLITICAL ENVIRONMENT

17.
The Paris Peace Agreement o f October 1991 initiated the process of recovery and nation
building in Cambodia. With UN involvement, the first multi-party elections were held in July
1993. In September 1993, a new Constitution was adopted, w h c h established the Government o f
Cambodia as a multiparty liberal democracy under a constitutional monarchy. Cambodia i s a
signatory to the Millennium Declaration and i s a party to the six main international human rights
instruments.
18.
Three main political parties have dominated Cambodian politics over the last decade: the
Cambodian People’s Party (CPP), the United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and
Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC) and, more recently, the Sam Rainsy Party (SRP). Since the
first mandate of the Government, three other nation-wide elections have been organized, including
the first commune elections in February 2002.
19.
Although the CPP dominated the elections held on July 27, 2003, i t did not win the twothird majority required under the constitution to form a government on i t s own. A new
government was formed on July 15, 2004 after protracted negotiations between the CPP and
FUNCINPEC (which at one time also represented the interest of the SRP) on forming a coalition
government. During this period, the National Assembly did not meet, and no legislative business
was transacted. Apart from the general climate o f uncertainty created by the prolonged hiatus, a
number o f problems affected the activities of all development partners, including: (i)
the absence
of an authorized budget, which limited the capacity to borrow from donors, as well as meet some
policy measures; and (ii)
the inability to pass legislation required to meet tranche conditionality
under program loans.
20.
The formation o f a new Government on July 15, 2004 nevertheless represented a major
step forward in the political development o f Cambodia. While government formation has taken a
~

See the ADB Cambodia Participatory Poverty Assessment 2001. The ADB i s conducting a new participatory
poverty assessment in the provinces surrounding the Tonle Sap lake; and the World Bank has commissioned and i s
working with the Cambodia Development Research Institute on mixed-methods research into household poverty
dynamics, bringing together household panel data analysis with participatory and qualitative research.

The Health Sector Support Strategy 2002-2007 estimates that households spend on average, 12 percent of their
income for health care.

-6very long time, i t has taken place through a process of dialogue, where all outstanding differences
between the political parties were apparently resolved, and without recourse to the violence that
characterized the previous election outcomes. The new political environment has also been
underpinned by the recent abdication o f King Sihanouk and the peaceful coronation of his son,
Prince Sihamoni. Democratic developments are also gaining ground in other areas. The commune
elections of 2002 represent an important step in a comprehensive program of political,
administrative and financial decentralization. There i s also increased participation o f civil society
and N G O groups in various areas of public concern and a relatively underdeveloped media i s
beginning to exercise i t s newly won freedom. However, civil society organizations face
significant challenges in accessing information, dialogue and in participatory processes. The
Government's capacity to engage in policy dialogue with civil society i s growing, but participatory
mechanisms have yet to be mainstreamed into public planning or monitoring processes.

E.

GOVERNANCE
AND INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY'

21.
Most institutions in Cambodia were barely functioning when the Government began its
first mandate in 1993. Although Cambodia has made important progress in rebuilding institutions,
the country continues to operate far below i t s economic and social potential due to weak

governance. Key areas of governance requiring reforms include: addressing corruption, the legal
and judicial system, public financial management, public administration, and local governance.
The Government i s well aware of these challenges and has proposed reforms in key policy
documents including the Governance Action Plan (GAP), SEDP 11, NPRS and RS. Despite much
effort being devoted to policy formulation, the implementation of reforms has been slow. There i s
also need for enhanced participation of ordinary citizens in public-decision making so as to
improve accountability and reduce corruption.

22.
Legal and Judicial Reform (LJR). Strengthening theTustice system and the integrity o f the
courts i s key to ensuring effective rule of law. The rule o f law plays an important role in
empowering the poor, providing effective guarantees to private investors and ensuring impartial
dispute resolution. Although the Council of LJR has prepared an Action Plan for reform, the
failure to enforce existing laws undermines attempts at reform. Legal reform issues also include
inconsistencies in legislation, limited transparency in legislative processes, weak capacity to draft
laws, and lack of participation of stakeholders. Judicial reform issues include weak governance
and corruption in the judiciary, the need for reform o f the Supreme Council of Magistracy, the
small number of trained judges and lawyers, and the low salaries of judges and prosecutors.

23.

Public Financial Management (PFM). Weaknesses in public expenditure management
have resulted in inefficient allocation of limited public resources, reducing their development
impact. Public expenditures at 17.4 percent of GDP in 2003 i s low by international standards and
the revenue-to-GDP ratio o f 10.4 percent, with tax revenues accounting for only 3.3 percent of
GDP, i s among the lowest in the world. The chronic imbalance between government
responsibilities and domestic revenues i s an important contributor to weak governance and
corruption, manifested in low public sector salaries, under-provision of and informal payments for
essential services, under-funding of O&M, and the centralization of authority over the limited
revenues.

24.

The Government i s committed to comprehensive reform of P F M and with donor support
aims to: (i)improve budget formulation by strengthening the linkage between policies and
There have been numerous assessments of Cambodia's govemance challenge. ADB prepared a Country Governance
Assessment in 2000, Enhancing Governance for Sustainable Development. The Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
and Public Expenditure Review, prepared by the World Bank and ADB in 2003, provides a detailed assessment of
economic govemance issues in Cambodia. ADB also prepared a review of governance at the sector level for the
CSP and to supplement the govemance assessment, Assessment of Implementation of Selected Sectoral Policy and
Reforms in Cambodia, 2003. Finally, the World Bank report to the December 2004 Consultative Group (CG)
meeting, Cambodia at the Crossroads, took governance as i t s central theme.

-7budgets, and introducing a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), and (ii)improve
budget execution by strengthening cash management and overhauling treasury operations. A
public expenditure tracking survey (PETS) i s being initiated for both the education and health
sectors to identify bottlenecks and leakages in public finances at the national and local levels. I t i s
also important for the Government to strengthen the systems of accountability to reduce the
fiduciary risks to public funds.

25.

Public Administration Reform (PAR). Given the serious problems afflicting the civil
service-low pay, absence of clear hiring and promotion policies, and low slulls leading to low
capacity-comprehensive civil service reform i s an important priority for improving service
delivery. There i s an urgent need to rationalize the civil service, introduce effective performance
management, and upgrade salaries o f the remaining staff to a living wage. There i s also a need to
improve the sectoral and geographic deployment o f civil servants, as well as coordination across
ministries.

26.
Corruption. Weak institutions and limited mechanisms of accountability, which are
legacies o f Cambodia's recent history, contribute to high levels o f corruption. Although difficult
to quantify, the evidence suggests that corruption seriously constrains economic growth, private
sector development (PSD), and poverty reduction. A recent study of the country's competitiveness
identified the cost of corruption as the single most important constraint faced by the private sector
in doing business in Cambodia! Other surveys also indicate corruption to be a key concern of
households, firms, public officials, NGOs and academic^.^
27.
Gaps in the legal framework and weak implementation and enforcement of existing
regulations and laws have hampered anti-corruption efforts. Although some progress has been
made in establishing a National Audit Authority and in introducing procurement procedures in
most ministries, the existing draft law on anti-comption needs to be brought into compliance with
international best practice (such as reflected in the United Nations Convention Against Corruption)
and enacted.
28.

Decentralization.' The Government sees decentralization as crucial to the strengthening
o f local voice in the Government and improving public service delivery. While the holding o f
commune elections was an important first step, further effort i s needed to expand opportunities for
citizens to influence and participate in governance. Currently the commune councils control very
limited resources resulting in low levels of implementation of services and investment. They s t i l l
lack the authority, administrative capacity, and financial resources to accelerate development at
their level, and have limited means for dispute resolution. Government policy on deconcentration
has not yet been clearly articulated and there i s a need for stronger harmonization between
decentralization and deconcentration policies. An effort i s currently being made to arrive at a
comprehensive perspective for decentralization and deconcentration.

F.

GENDERASSESSMENT9

29.
Cambodia has among the lowest levels of gender equity in Asia as measured by the
gender-related development index (0.557) and the gender empowerment index (0.364)". Social
attitudes and tradition deem women to be of lower status. The consequences of these traditional
attitudes are clearly manifest in the significant gender inequities in educational attainment and
World Bank Cambodia: Seizing the Global Opportunity: Investment Climate Assessment and Reform Strategy 2004.
World Bank Client Survey, June 2003; Asia Foundation Survey 2003.
In Cambodia, decentralization refers to the transfer of governmental powers, mandates and resources from central
government to sub-national authorities; while deconcentration refers to assignment of central administration to a
lower level of administration.
A Fair Share for Women: Cambodia Gender Assessment, ADB, DFID, UNIFEM, UNDP and World Bank, 2004.
Human Development Report, United Nations Development Programme, 2003.

-8levels o f literacy, higher rates of child labor, gender inequities in access to public services, and low
representation in decision-malung positions. Human poverty i s also greater among Cambodian
women than men across all economic groups."

30.
Women make significant contributions to the national economy and the incomes and wellbeing o f their households. Women comprise 54 percent of the agriculture and fisheries workers
and their incomes provide more than half of household expenditures. Within the context of a shift
to a market economy and PSD, women have made significant gains in securing paid employment
in recent years. These gains have, however, been limited to the garments industry whose
immediate future i s uncertain. The garment sector employs relatively better-educated young
women and a substantial number o f rural households receive regular income transfers from their
daughters. Outside o f agriculture and garments, women are primarily self-employed in small,
informal enterprises and comprise 49 percent o f self-employed retail traders. In addition to
culturally prescribed notions of "male" and "female" occupations, the lower levels of literacy and
education of women make i t difficult for them to compete. Lack o f access to, or control over,
productive resources and services including credit, land and land titles, agricultural inputs and
extension services are critical gender issues.
31.
Although progress i s being made in responding to gender inequities in the social sectors,
serious gaps remain. In education, while there i s increasing gender equity at the primary school
level, severe disparities persist at higher levels of schooling, and the female child labor rate of 50
percent in the 14-17 age group i s considerably higher than the male child labor rate o f 36 percent.
In health, although progress i s being made in rebuilding clinical health services, Cambodia's
maternal mortality rate remains one on the highest in the region at 437 per 100,000 live births,
suggesting the need for increased attention to reproductive health and improved access to health
information and services.

32.
Women are under-represented in both elected and appointed positions as well as in mid to
high levels of the civil service. Only 8.5 percent o f the commune councilors and 12.2 percent o f
National Assembly members are women. This under-representation of women i s directly related
to the low number of women candidates in party lists. Cambodia's nascent legal framework
affords many rights to women yet most are unaware of such rights. General weaknesses in the
judicial system together with their low social status leave women with little legal protection. As a
result women are highly vulnerable to trafficking, domestic violence and rape. The legal standing
o f women in property disputes i s also a concern. While some progress in formulating policies
promoting gender equality has been achieved, mainstreaming gender continues to be a serious
challenge, and the political w i l l to implement such policies remains weak.
G.

PRIVATESECTOR'^

33.
The private sector in Cambodia i s dominated by the informal sector, w h c h accounts for
over 80 percent o f non-public sector GDP and close to 90 percent of employment. Much o f
informal sector activity i s concentrated in agriculture. The informal industrial sector accounts for
almost half of total industrial output and supplies mainly the domestic market. I t has been
estimated that more than 90 percent of enterprises in Cambodia are small (less than 100
employees) operating entirely in the informal sector. Some 7,000 private enterprises registered
with the Ministry o f Commerce constitute the formal private sector. The formal private sector has
been narrowly focused on garments and tourism. Foreign direct investment (FDI) has played an
important role in developing the formal private sector and i s the main source o f exports. However,
since the late 1990s, FDI has been on a declining trend. The private sector i s constrained in i t s
ability to promote growth and employment by: (i)weak governance including an underdeveloped
"

Cambodia Human Development Report (CHDR). UNDP, 2000.

12

See ADB Private Sector Assessmentfor the Kingdom of Cambodia 2004, and the World Bank Cambodia: Seizing the
Global Opportunity: Investment Climate Assessment and Reform Strategy 2004.

-9legal framework and an ineffective regulatory regime, excessive red tape, and widespread
corruption; (ii)
a lack of access to, and the high cost of, institutional finance; (iii)
high costs and a
lack of infrastructure services such as transport and energy; (iv) limited human technical and
managerial s k i l l s and; (v) limited access to land, information and competitive markets.
34.
Firm-level surveys reveal that complex registration and licensing procedures and
associated formal and informal charges are significant burdens. Because of the high costs,
enterprises have an incentive to remain informal to avoid these costs. Exporters complain that red
tape associated with export processing causes significant delays. Registered enterprises also face
an increased tax burden owing to the country’s limited tax base, while smuggling from
neighboring countries negatively impacts on domestic manufacturers. Poor transport infrastructure
and unofficial tolls, and the high cost of electricity due to a lack o f generating capacity also
increases the cost of doing business in Cambodia. Land tenure issues, due to the low level of land
titling, dissuades investment in agriculture, while a lack o f access to credit, especially for Small
and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), constrains private sector growth. SMEs are also constrained by
a lack o f a development strategy for the sector, weak entrepreneurial skills and accounting
standards, and limited access to market information and technology.
35.
The RS reiterates the role o f the private sector as the main engine of growth, employment
generation and poverty reduction, and commits the Government to addressing the above
deficiencies. PSD has taken on an added sense o f urgency in the context of the phasing out o f the
MFA quota system, the need to raise competitiveness in light of WTO accession, and the high
rates of unemployment among the new entrants to the labor market. In response, the Government
has launched a comprehensive PSD program with a focus on trade facilitation, SME development
and enhancing private participation in infrastructure (PPI) provision. A number o f reforms have
already been introduced to reduce the cost and time o f export and import transactions, remove
disincentives for SME formalization, and transparency in managing PPI. A major challenge w i l l
be to ensure that key reform measures are actually implemented on a sustainable basis.

H.

ENVIRONMENT’3

36.
Environmental Management. Cambodia’s economy depends heavily on agriculture,
fisheries, and natural resources and i t s unique eco-system centered on the Tonle Sap Basin. Yet
environmental management in Cambodia i s weak and the legal framework for environmental
management does not meet the country’s needs. Information and sector guidelines are laclung on
crucial aspects such as allowable forestry cut, fish yields, and groundwater resources. Poor
stakeholder participation also weakens community-based management. The roles and
responsibilities o f the environmental agencies at various levels need to be clarified, given that up
to 14 agencies are involved in the management o f the Tonle Sap Basin. Management capacities are
particularly weak at provincial level, forcing crucial environmental management decisions to be
made at the national level. The Government’s listing o f key environmental challenges include: (i)
decreasing forest cover, which reduces biodiversity, increases erosion, accelerates river siltation,
and worsens flooding; (ii)
untreated wastewater; (iii)
unsustainable irrigation; (iv) inland fisheries
and coastal resources degradation; and (v) poor protection of biodiversity and protected areas.
37.
Over 20 percent of incomes of poor households are sourced from the commons, mainly
fisheries and forestry, and serve as a “safety net” when other sources fail. Efforts to formalize
community access rights to fisheries and forests are in their infancy with limited capacity to
support community management or ensure adequate enforcement to exclude large-scale
commercial interests. Although privately run forest concessions that were environmentally
unsound or economically unviable have been cancelled, illegal logging i s s t i l l prevalent. The
Government has also released many previously private fishing concessions in the Tonle Sap to
ADB Environmental Assessment for Cambodia 2004; the World Bank Cambodia Environment Monitor, 2003;
and Attachment 5 to this CAS.

l3See

- 10community groups for management. While this i s an important step in enhancing the access of the
poor to fisheries resources, further strengthening of the regulatory framework and local capacity i s
required to ensure that communities enjoy the benefits of sustainable fisheries management.

38.
The Tonle Sap Basin (TSB) and the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). Around the Tonle
Sap alone some 1.7 million people depend on fishery-based livelihoods. In the dry season the
Tonle Sap River drains into the Mekong and Bassac rivers near Phnom Penh, both o f which flow
to Vietnam’s Mekong Delta. When the Mekong rises with the monsoon rains, the Tonle Sap’s flow
reverses to the northwest into the Tonle Sap Lake, raising i t s level by up to 10 meters and
increasing i t s area from 3,000 square kilometers up to 16,000 square kilometers. This unique
hydrological cycle generates vast areas o f seasonally flooded forests characterized by intense
biodiversity, and providing the people of Cambodia with 40-70 percent o f their protein intake.
Despite the natural and ecological wealth of the TSB, it i s one of the poorest regions of Cambodia.
The population growth rate i s rapid and the population i s young and social indicators are low. The
competing pressures on natural resources have put the entire Basin at risk of overexploitation.
I.

REGIONALCOOPERATION

39.

The Government sees regional and international integration as one o f the key pillars of i t s
development agenda since it will provide Cambodia with the economies of scale and opportunities
to attract investment, create employment, generate incomes and reduce poverty. Key to
Cambodia’s commitment to enhance regional links has been i t s active role in the GMS and i t s
membership in the Association o f Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Cambodia i s also pursuing
other efforts to harmonize trade and investment policies in the context of ASEAN and the ASEAN
Free Trade Area (AFTA). Finally, with the Mekong River prominently defining the region’s water
resources, and linking the countries’ fates to each other, Cambodia i s an active partner in the
regional Mekong River Commission (MRC) that i s making progress in setting the procedures for
sustainable and mutually beneficial development o f the basin.

J.

MEDIUM-TERMMACROECONOMOUTLOOK
IC

40.

The medium-term growth projections in the NPRS Annual Progress Report are realistic
only assuming deep and consistent implementation of the structural reform agenda. Even taking
implementation of the reform agenda as the base scenario, annual GDP growth i s not expected to
reach 6 percent until 2008, and the annual average growth rate over the 2005-2008 period will be
on the order of 4.6 percent. This i s in sharp contrast with the 1999-2002 period, in which annual
GDP growth averaged 6.8 percent. At the same time, as a small economy vulnerable to exogenous
risk as well as opportunity, the medium term macroeconomic outlook i s subject to considerable

uncertainty.

41.
The Cambodian economy entered a new phase in 2005 with the decline of the garment
sector, which had accounted for more than three-quarters of exports over the past several years,
due to the termination of the quota system. The slowdown i s expected to dampen growth in
services, and possibly construction, but the impact will be somewhat offset by the tourism sector,
which i s expected to continue to expand by more than 20 percent per annum from 2005-2008. The
performance of the agricultural sector, acknowledged to be Cambodia’s comparative advantage, i s

likely to improve modestly over the next four years, given a robust reform program. However, the
variance of growth at the sub-sectoral level has been high, and concerns about low productivity in
crops and depletion of resources in fisheries are likely to dominate the prospects for the medium
term. Thus, even with the revival of reform, per capita gross national income i s expected to
improve only modestly from US$320 in 2005 to US$340 in 2008 (Table 1).

- 11 Table 1: Medium Term Outlook: Key Indicators
2002

2003 2004

2005

2006

2007 2008

290
5.5

300
5.3

320
6.0

320
2.1

330
4.3

340
5.5

340
6.0

Exports (percent of GDP)
Imports (percent of GDP)

59
61

62
12

66
I1

51
12

59
13

62
15

66
I1

Gross domestic fixed investment (percent of GDP)
Inflation rate (percent, end of Period)

23
3.1

22
0.5

21
5.6

21
3.2

22
3.0

23
3.0

25
3.0

11.1
10.1
1.1
7.0

10.4
10.6
-0.2
6.0

10.9
10.1
0.8
5.9

12.0
10.1
1.3
5.8

12.5
11.2
1.3
5.9

GNI per capita (US$)
Real GDP growth (percent)

Current revenues (percent of GDP)
Current expenditure (percent of GDP)
Current fiscal balance (percent of GDP)
Foreign financing (percent of GDP)

12.9 13.1
11.5 12.3
1.4 0.8
5.5
5.2

Source: Bank staff estimates

42.

The slowdown in growth, however, is not expected to cause either a balance of payments
or a fiscal crisis. The current account balance (including official transfers) i s expected to improve
over the medium term as the slight deterioration in the trade balance (as imports of garment-related
production materials will slow with the decline in the demand for garment exports) i s more than
offset by growth in tourism and some growth in private and official transfers. Domestic investment
i s expected to recover over the period while inflation i s likely to remain low and steady. On the
fiscal side, the Government has committed to a reform program that promises to increase the
revenue-to-GDP ratio modestly from 12 percent in 2005 to 13.1 percent in 2008. With a steady

expendture-to-GDP ratio, the overall fiscal deficit (including grants) will improve from 3.8
percent in 2005 to 2.9 percent in 2008.

43.
However, strengthening revenue mobilization in the context of an improved public
financial management system is critical to enable debt servicing as well as implementation of the
Government’s national development strategy. Steady improvements in revenue policy and
administration are necessary to maintain debt sustainability. Strengthened tax and customs
administration, coupled with more competitive procurement and greater oversight over
government contracts, will improve revenue productivity and expenditure efficiency, both of
which are needed to enable the Government to fund i t s poverty reduction program.

44.

A strong program of structural reform-as articulated in the Govemment’s RS-is needed
to boost growth rates over the coming several years and beyond, given the unfavorable private
sector environment. The Government has launched a comprehensive PSD program, focusing on

attracting investment, generating employment, trade facilitation, SME promotion, and financial
sector development. The Government i s also committed to a more dynamic rural sector by
developing an agricultural program that improves access to land; improves water management;
strengthens linkages to markets; reduces costs through greater infrastructure investments; and
develops a better framework for the delivery o f demand-driven services to enable farmers to
respond to market opportunities. Implementation o f these measures would broaden the growth
base and have direct impacts on poverty reduction. Assuming rapid implementation of these key
structural and sectoral reforms, and development o f programs to implement others, including legal
and judicial, public financial management, and civil service reform, real GDP growth i s expected
to recover gradually over the medium term.

45.

The downside risks inherent in a non-reform scenario are considerable. Failure to revive
the reform program could see growth stagnating at 3 to 3.5 percent over the medium term. At the
same time, debt dynamics are sensitive to growth rates over the medium term. The lack o f
structural reform would undermine the growth rates needed to underpin sustainable debt servicing.
A failure to improve revenues would further undermine sustainable debt servicing and would limit

- 12the Government’s ability to fund pro-poor spending. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) i s
anticipating a new Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement to be in place by late
2005, but a lack of progress on revenue management in a non-reform scenario would also
jeopardize the PRGF.

DEBTAND CREDITWORTHINESS

K.

46.

The most recent debt sustainability analysis concludes that in the medium-term
Cambodia’s debt stock and flow burden is sustainable, provided reforms, especially on the fiscal
front, are im~1emented.l~
Sensitivity analysis shows that given concessional rescheduling and a
baseline reform scenario, total public sector debt-to-GDP (in net present value or NPV terms)
would decline to about 31.7 percent in 2008 and 26 percent in 2013. Under a non-reform scenario
in which long term GDP growth i s considerably below the baseline scenario, the NPV of public
debt to GDP would only deteriorate to about 37 percent in 2008 and 34 percent in 2013.15

47.

Cambodia’spublic extemal debt of ~ $ 3 . billion
1
in 2004 has an estimated nominal value
of 67.9 percent of GDP (56.8 percent in NPV terms). Domestic public debt, all denominated in

riel, represented less than 5 percent of GDP. Nearly two-thirds of total external public debt i s owed
to the United States and the Russian Federation. As other external debt i s highly concessional, debt
sustainability i s a function of the ultimate terms of the ongoing restructuring talks with both
countries. I t i s possible that bilateral agreement could be reached in 2005. If a concessional
rescheduling takes place (with both countries in 2005), comparable to 1995 Paris Club terms (Le.,
Naples terms flow rescheduling), and an initial upfront discount of 70 percent on debt owed to the
Russian Federation, Cambodia’s public external debt would decline (Table 2 and Attachment 10).
Table 2: Key Debt Sustainability Analysis Indicators, 2005-2008”
Indicator (% of GDP unless otherwise noted)

2005

2006

2007

2008

NPV of Public External Debt

30

31

32

32

NPV o f Public Debt to Revenue Ratio

234

23 1

228

216

Public Debt Service to Revenue Ratio

8

8

9

9

NPV o f Public External Debt to Exports Ratio

76

80

81

78

Public External Debt Service to Exports Ratio

3

3

3

4

Source: Government data and I M F staff projections and simulations.
a
Assumes concessional rescheduling takes place with the US and Russian Federation in 2005; and
based on baseline reform scenario.

48.

Reflecting low revenue ratios, the NPV o f public debt would s t i l l represent more than 230
percent of total revenue, even after the concessional rescheduling. Debt service payments are
projected to increase from US$27.2 million in 2004 to US$52 million in 2005 (on a cash basis).
The debt service to revenue ratio would range between 8 to 9 percent over the CAS period. Under
a non-reform scenario in which long term GDP growth i s considerably below the baseline
scenario, the NPV of debt to revenue ratio would decline from about 240 percent in 2005 to only
235 percent in 2008. The debt service to revenue ratio would range between 9 and 10 percent over
the CAS period under the non-reform scenario.

l4

Cambodia: 2004 Article ZV ConsuZfationSta~ReportIMF, October 2004. See Attachment 10. Note that in some
cases more recent data i s available from the I M F ’ s December 2004 mission. As the more recent data i s used where
available, there are some differences between Attachment 10 and the data reported elsewhere.

l5

The baseline reform scenario assumes a real GDP growth rate of 4.7 percent from 2005-2009 and 6 percent in the
long term. The non-reform scenario assumes long-run real GDP growth at two standard deviations less that o f the
baseline scenario.

- 13 49.

Given concessional rescheduling, Cambodia’s external debt would be well below standard
debt-to-export sustainability thresholds. The NPV of debt-to-exports ratio would decline after a
concessional rescheduling to about 76 percent in 2005, as compared to the threshold o f 100. The
debt service to exports ratio i s expected to reach 3.1 percent in 2005, as compared to the threshold
o f 15. In terms of NPV o f debt to GDP, Cambodia i s just above the threshold o f 30 percent over
the CAS period (Table 2).

111. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS: JOINT DISCUSSION
OF THE ADB, DFID, THE UN SYSTEM AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP

A.

DEVELOPMENT
GOALS
AND STRATEGY

50.

The Government’s development strategy, as reflected in the RS (Box l),
draws on the
SEDP I1 and the NPRS and i s a synthesis of priorities of these documents.16 The SEDP I1 i s a
comprehensive development program focusing on promoting growth, regional integration, and
reducing poverty. I t serves as the Government’s principal planning document. NPRS i s closely
based on SEDP I1and elaborates the poverty reduction agenda, providing a framework for support
b y intemational development partners and a comprehensive set of monitoring indicators towards
achieving the CMDGs. The NPRS identifies eight priority poverty reduction outcomes, each with
detailed actions: (i)maintaining macroeconomic stability; (ii)improving rural livelihoods; (iii)
expanding job opportunities; (iv) improving capabilities; (v) strengthening institutions and
improving governance; (vi) reducing vulnerability and strengthening social inclusion; (vii)
promoting gender equality; and (viii) focusing on population through maternal health, increased
access to education, and rural opportunities.

5 1.
Following the formation of the new government in July 2004, the Prime Minister launched
the RS, which i s intended to guide the implementation o f the economic policy agenda o f the
Government during i t s remaining term in office. The RS, which can be visualized as a series of
l6

The National Poverty Reduction Strategy serves as the country’s PRSP.

- 14interlocking rectangles, has good governance at i t s core. The other rectangles focus on the desired
environment to implement the strategy, and on promoting economic growth through agriculture
development, rehabilitation and construction of physical infrastructure, PSD, and capacity building
and human resource development. While, conceptually sound, the RS currently lacks an action
plan, and i s in need o f prioritization and costing. To implement the development vision set out in
the RS, the Government and development partners have agreed to prepare a single planning
document, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP), for the period 2006-2010.

RESOURCE
MOBILIZATION
AND INVESTMENT

B.

52.
The NPRS and RS are predicated on an average annual real GDP growth rate of 6-7
percent. This would require a substantial increase in the productivity and volume of investment,
from a projected 20 percent of GDP in 2004. Moreover, the actions and investments enumerated
in the NPRS call for financing in excess of US$1.5 billion over 2003-2005. In the face of
increased competition for concessionary aid, there i s then a need to redouble efforts to mobilize
domestic revenues to finance growth and poverty reduction. As indicated in the RS, this would
require a significant effort to improve the collection of tax and non-tax revenues, by reducing
corruption and tax evasion, dismantling the structure o f tax exemptions, broadening the tax base
and strengthening tax and customs administration. A complementary priority i s to improve the
effectiveness of spending b y linking expenditures more tightly with priority outcomes. There i s
also a related need to improve the investment climate and reduce the costs o f doing business for
the private sector.

THE ROLEOF EXTERNAL
ASSISTANCE

C.

53.
External assistance has contributed to the implementation of all major public sector
development projects in Cambodia. From 1992 to 2003, O D A disbursements to the country
reached US$5.2 billion, with 28 percent from multilateral sources, 64 percent from bilateral
sources, and 8 percent from NGOs. Grants account for 80 percent of ODA. In 2003, about
US$546 million in ODA was disbursed, equivalent to nearly 8 percent of GDP. Pledges made
during the annual Consultative Group (CG) meetings have increased from US$471 million in 1999
to US$548 million in 2000 and US$635 million in 2002. Based on a revised definition of ODA,
donors pledged US$504 million in 2004.” On a per capita basis, Cambodia has received
significantly more O D A than other low-income countries during the past decade. Aid inflows
were mainly used to improve health and education, rebuild physical infrastructure, and for
institutional capacity building. Given Cambodia’s substantial financial needs, i t s limited capacity
to mobilize domestic revenues, and the narrow private sector base, it will continue to depend
heavily on O D A in the medium term. However, measures to boost external resources need to be
matched by improvements in the efficiency, integrity and effectiveness with which these resources
are used.
54.
A key priority i s strengthening the capacity and effectiveness of the Government in aid
management linked to the CMDGs, so as to achieve greater ownership and development impact.
While aid coordination i s the mandate o f the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC),
there i s need to strengthen links and harmonize procedures with other key agencies concerned with
ODA, such as the Ministry o f Economy and Finance, and the Ministry of Planning (MOP). Given
existing weaknesses, significant portions o f O D A are handled off-budget and are therefore difficult
to account for. There i s also a need for improved donor aid coordination to enhance development
effectiveness - over 50 percent o f all development assistance has gone towards capacity building,
while ad hoc project based salary supplementation schemes are common. The large number of
development partners providing assistance without an effective strategic or coordinated framework
l7 The

revised definition takes account of changes in methodology and coverage effected recently in order to comply
with the official DAC/OECD definition of ODA. Based on this revised definition, the comparable figure in 2002
was US$514 million.

- 15 has fragmented assistance and limited i t s impact. The multiplicity of implementation and financing
structures has undermined the development o f government systems and has increased the costs of
providing assistance to Cambodia. Furthermore, differing policy prescriptions by development
partners have sometimes undermined the achievement of sustainable and unified development
policies.
55.
A number of initiatives are, however, currently underway to promote better development
partnerships. These include measures to implement the Rome Declaration on Harmonization; the
restructuring of the existing Government-donor Technical Working Groups (TWGs) at the sector
and thematic level; the harmonization o f country strategies by ADB, DFID, the UN and the World
Bank and the coordination o f their programs based on comparative advantage; and a greater
reliance on sector wide development programs. ADB, Japan and the World Bank have worked
closely to strengthen the synergies among their programs at the operational level. The
Government has also collaborated with the ADB and the World Bank in preparing a report on
Standard Operating Procedures for improved implementation of donor projects. The preparation
o f the NSDP 2006-2010 also provides an opportunity for ensuring greater development impact b y
increasing government and donor harmonization around a unified development framework to
achieve the CMDGs.

D.

ASSESSMENTOF THEGOVERNMENT'S
DEVELOPMENT
STRATEGY

56.
The SEDP I1 and NPRS processes introduced new approaches and themes to development
planning in Cambodia, including: (i)open and extensive participation o f stakeholders; (ii)
engagement o f virtually all line agencies in the process; (iii)
greater focus on key crosscutting
themes, including governance, public sector performance, and PSD; and (iv) use of agreed
indicators linked to the CMDGs to monitor progress in poverty reduction.
57.
During the first quarter of 2004, a process to assess the first year of NPRS implementation
was jointly undertaken by the Government and key donors. Principal observations on the SEDP I1
and NPRS processes included: (i)weaknesses in costing and prioritization, (ii)
lack o f adequate
linkages between strategies and budgets and thus the need for a MTEF; (iii)need to broaden
government responsibility, ownershp and coordination; (iv) need to build national capacity for
poverty monitoring as well as evaluation of key programs and policies; and (v) further elaboration
of pro-poor rural and infrastructure development strategies. Development partners often took the
lead in developing the strategies, reducing government input and prioritization.
58.
The RS represents a serious attempt b y the Government to demonstrate ownership of the
development process. I t builds on a sound diagnosis of the causes of poverty and identifies
governance as the most important pre-condition to economic development. The RS, however,
appears ambitious in i t s growth targets given the likely significant negative impact o f the phasing
out of the MFA on growth-with the latter projected to slow down to 2.3 percent in 2005-and the
lack of any immediate alternative to garments as a driver o f growth.

IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN CAMBODIA-BUILDING

ON EXPERIENCE

The present CAS reflects lessons learned since the last CAS was prepared in 2000. In
59.
doing so, i t has benefited from the findings o f a Client Survey in 2003 and a July 2004 OED
review o f the process leading to the production o f the NPRS (Cambodia's first PRSP). I t has also
drawn on a Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR); a 2000 Country Assistance Evaluation
(CAE); project-specific reports; and a CAS Completion Report (CCR) that reviews progress
against the last CAS (Attachment 1).

- 1660.
The final source of lessons was from extensive consultations on strengths and weaknesses
observed to date and new country strategy priorities, held with the Government, other donors, civil
society and the private sector and conducted in partnership with ADB, DFID, and the UN system
over the course of 2003-2004 (Box 2). These assessments paint a reasonably consistent picture of
the strengths and weaknesses of the strategy o f the World Bank Group since 2000. The result i s a
relatively high degree of confidence in the lessons learned and the priorities for future
development cooperation between the Bank Group and Cambodia.
61.
By and large, the Bank was able to accomplish most of the individual tasks set out in the
2000 CAS, although with some delays and slippages. These included helping the Government to
prepare key policies (e.g., the Health Sector Strategy, the NPRS, and a policy and legal framework
for land management); and improving sectoral indicators (e.g., increased percentage o f passable
roads; expanded access to water and sanitation). In addition, the World Bank Group was also able
to achieve some goals that were not anticipated at the time the CAS was written (for example,
responding rapidly and effectively to a request for assistance in the aftermath of the devastating
floods of 2000).

62.

However, these achievements did not appear to add up to a signijcant impact on broader
development outcomes. The review by the World Bank concluded that while the foundations of

the last CAS-governance, service delivery and investment climate-were appropriate and remain
so today, good delivery o f the program did not lead to the broader change in outcomes that were
anticipated at the outset. The incidence of poverty does not seem to have declined; the base for
economic growth continues to be highly concentrated and fragile; corruption remains widespread
and systemic; and, with a few exceptions, social development indicators have shown little sign of
improvement. The program of analytical and advisory activities (AAA), like the lending portfolio,
could have benefited from more focus and selectivity (a problem now addressed by the move to
the AAA cycle approach, whereby studies are chosen as part of a process leading into advisory
work and lending operations). The CCR also concluded that the primary analytical gap recognized
by the country team in retrospect was better analysis of how governance problems manifest
themselves in policy development and implementation.

- 17 63.
In terms o f how the World Bank approached implementation of the strategy, the
commitment in the CAS to work through strategic partnerships only began to materialize late in
the CAS period, in part because the planned expansion o f the World Bank's field presence did not
begin until FY02. This impression was confirmed in the Client Survey, in which the Government,
other donors, the private sector and NGOs reported perceiving the World Bank as overstretched
and lacking the focus needed to be fully effective. Overall, the conclusions o f the CCR are quite
s i m i l a r to those drawn previously in the 2000 C A E (Box 3), pointing to the high level of
intractability of many of these country-contextual barriers to aid effectiveness.

64.
Projects implemented by the World Bank faced particular problems in three sectors
(namely forestry, demobilization, and economic management capacity building). In each case, the

root cause of the problems has been poor governance. Implementation has suffered either because
Bank preparation and implementation have proceeded without evidence of any government
champions for reform, or indeed because the incentives for resisting reform were extremely strong.

65.
As the forestry reform agenda-agreed by Govemment and donors in 1997/98--faced
problems in implementation, prompting donors to exit the sector, the World Bank's support for
rationalization of the concession system became a focal point for debates regarding forest
management. In the absence of a common understanding o f the reform agenda and the role of the

World Bank-supported project, the dialogue between the World Bank and the Government on one
hand, and the World Bank and NGOs on the other, became increasingly contentious. Experience in
forestry suggests that the World Bank needs to ensure that i t s support to reform i s part o f a well
defined, strategic approach based on consensus among development partners. In the case of
particularly challenging reforms, maintaining consensus requires that the strategic approach be
revisited frequently, and adjusted as necessary, to integrate increased understanding of the
obstacles to and opportunities for reform.

66.
I n other unsatisfactory projects-notably the Demobilization and Reintegration Projectthe main lesson is that, under conditions of weak govemance, n o m 1 supervision systems need to
be beefed up ifthe Bank is not to face an unacceptably high level offiduciary risk. In the case o f
demobilization, in which the World Bank led a donor group financing the costs of demobilization

and reintegration o f veterans, intensified supervision led to a declaration of misprocurement and
the program stalled. With very limited transparency and weak accountability widespread in
Cambodia, the World Bank cannot leave i t to government systems, many o f which are very young,
to carry the burden of protecting investments against leakages. As such, the World Bank has
initiated a detailed fiduciary review o f i t s operations, which will inform the design o f much more
extensive and careful monitoring systems.

67.

Finally the experience of the Economic and Public Sector Capacity-Building Project
implies that projects should only be introduced when there is a consensus shared with the
Govemment, regarding the necessity of prior reforms. In this project, implementation was delayed
because there was no progress on the reforms which had been established as preconditions for the
project. Before designing a program, there i s a need to make a realistic appraisal o f the degree of

- 18high-level commitment to the reforms that are agreed. When such an assessment of government
ownership i s missing, the World Bank i s better advised to seek to develop i t through partnerships,
AAA work and Technical Assistance (TA) for capacity and consensus building before planning
significant lending projects.
These jndings are broadly in line with those found in reviews of development processes,
68.
and the effectiveness of development assistance, in Low Income Countries Under Stress (LICUS)
(Box 4). Cambodia has had a difficult past, returning to the international community only slightly
over a decade ago. The World Bank Group will thus need to be committed to and engaged in

consistent, long-term dialogue with the Government i f difficult governance issues are to be
tackled. I t will be important to develop a clear understanding of the social and political dynamics
o f governance and reform in the Cambodian context and to adopt a realistic and pragmatic
approach in addressing these issues.

Reflecting on the successes and failures of the period since the last CAS was written, the
69.
World Bank Group has drawn a number of key lessons for the next CAS period:
0

The need to focus on govemance throughout the country program. This reflects the
observation that a poor governance environment (weak capacity, the strong blocking influence
o f vested interests operating through a system based on patronage, weak legal protection for
the poor, and a private sector impeded b y high levels of bureaucratic intervention and
unofficial charges) has been the primary impediment to greater impact, both of the program o f
the World Bank Group and o f development policies more generally. The need to focus on
governance i s reinforced by the Government's own analysis and statements; governance is, for
example, at the core of the RS. In Cambodia's case, i t also brings the country strategy into
alignment with the internal institutional procedures for performance monitoring and
performance-based resource allocation within the World Bank Group. Cambodia's scores for
three of the five governance indicators remained largely the same or declined between 1999
and 2003, with slight increases in only two dimensions (the top left quadrant in Figure 1). In
comparison with other IDA countries, Cambodia in 2003 did as well on macro, structural and
social equity issues, but scored less well than the average for IDA recipients in all five

- 19 governance criteria. As a result, the World Bank's overall IDA allocation for assistance to
Cambodia has been reduced. In comparison to 2002 when the World Bank pledged US$70
million, at the 2004 CG Meeting it was able to pledge only US$45 million per year. The CAS
i s designed to help the Government improve i t s governance indicators in the CPIA ratings so
that in the future, as Cambodia implements the program laid out in the RS, i t will be able to
access a significantly higher volume of IDA resources.
0

"Demand side" approaches to good governance (building broad constituencies for reform
through outreach to civil society and the private sector, e.g., through the provision of
information and organizational tools) are an essential complement to more common "supply
side" approaches to good governance, but one that the World Bank (like most donors) has
largely neglected to date. In the next CAS period, the Bank w i l l strive to establish the
principle that the intended beneficiaries of World Bank assistance have the right to know what
i s provided to their government and how it i s used. The goal i s to close the accountability
loop, ensuring that the Cambodian people are able to hold the Government-and the World
Bank-accountable for the assistance provided; and that the Government, for i t s part, comes to
see itself as accountable to i t s citizens, and not just to external donors.

Figure 1: Cambodia's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) Scores:
(A) 1999 and 2003
1 Macro Balance

3 External Debt
4 Development Program

7 Budget Management
13 Property Rights 8, Governance

6 Financial Stability

15 PovertyAnalysis

7 Banking Efficiency
0 Private Sector Environment

11 Gender
-Cambodia1999

-Cambodia2003

- M a l m

(B) Cambodia compared to other countries receiving I D A funds, 2003
1 MacroBaianoe

20 Tranqarsney a Acoount

3. External Debt

19 Public Adminidrat
18 RsvenusMobiiizati

eveiopment Program

17 Budget Management

5 Trade& FX

16 P r o ~ ety
r Righta&Governanoe

15 Poverty A

n

6 Financial Stabiiity
a

l

y

a

14. SooiaiProteotion
I'

s

7. BankingElicienoy

~

6 PrivateSector Environment

T

13 BuildingHR
12 Equityot ResurceUse

I1 Gender

-Cambodia2003

-Average

IDA 2003

-M

aimurn

- 20 The need to improve donor coordination and partnerships. Poor governance and poor donor
behavior have been closely related. Poor governance has encouraged donors to adopt shortterm approaches to development effectiveness (e.g., stand-alone projects often managed by
foreign consultants) and enabled them to get away with uncoordinated aid. Conversely, poor
donor coordination and inadequate outreach to civil society have accentuated the problems of
weak governance (by imposing high transaction costs for all stakeholders; providing
conflicting messages to the Government and undermining the evolution of a governmentowned vision of development; and closing off opportunities for learning, scaling up or
building effective constituencies to tackle the most challenging reforms). The CAE, and to an
extent also the OED evaluation o f the NPRS process, highlight the need for TA to be carefully
designed so as to reflect and contribute to existing institutional arrangements. The limitations
of project implementation units are now recognized: moving beyond this insight i s however
difficult and calls for tailored approaches. While much progress has been made, sector
coordination arrangements are s t i l l at a fairly early stage in Cambodia. (The term "sector-wide
approach" or SWAP i s used in this CAS as it i s understood in Cambodia, namely to imply that
there i s a Government-owned sector strategy and program around which the majority o f donor
support i s planned. I t does not, as in some other countries, necessarily imply reliance on
country systems.) The World Bank began to adopt a partnership approach in 2002; this
evolved rapidly in 2003 and continues to develop, but more i s needed. T h i s has been and will
continue to be facilitated by the much-enlarged field presence. The World Bank Country
Office has expanded from 9 to 28 staff members (including a significant intake of national
professionals) over the last two years.
0

The need for a clear focus on results. This requires a number of interrelated changes,
beginning with greater selectivity. To be effective, the World Bank needs to establish, and
stick to, thought-through criteria for choosing what it will and will not take on with the
resources available. If the CAS document i s to be used as a tool for monitoring results, there
i s also a need to build stronger, results-focused cross-sectoral teams. The numerous sectoral
indicators and outcome areas in the previous CAS discouraged cross-sectoral approaches in
implementation. Finally, results-based performance necessitates a clear definition in the CAS
o f the expected relationship between the World Bank inputs and activities, intermediate
progress indicators, and outcomes (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Overall Results Framework for the Bank Group CAS

.
1

1
1
1
1

CAS RESULTS

RESOURCES

Current lending
NewIDA
lending and
grants in CAS
period
IFC, MPDF
support
TAgrants
AAA
WBI programs
Stafftime

OUTPUTS

1
1
1

9

1

Projectfinanced
infrastructure,
goods, capacity
enhancement,
technical s k i l l s
Strategies
Legislation
Private
investments
Training
programs
Policy and
program
actions

RGC
MEDIUM.TERM
DEVELOPMENT
OUTCOMES

Pillar I : Remove the

[

governance constraints to
attaining the CMDGs
Improved environment
for private sector
development
* Improved institutions and
policies for NRM
1
Improved service
deliverv through
transparent and effective
PFM
Strengthened local
govemance and
increased social
accountability

.

I

1

-

Pillar 2: Support to the

strategy and investments
needed to attain the
CMDGs
1
Increased quality and
ownership of national
poverty reduction
strategy
Strategy development
and increased investment
in key sectors and subsectors

.

(SEDPII, NF'RS, RS,
NEW 5-YEAR
STRATEGY)

.
1

1

1

9

Macro-economic
stability
Improved rural
livelihoods
(agricultural
productivity,
diversification and
competitiveness)
Expandedjob
oppomnities
Improved
capacities
Strengthened
institutions and
governance
Reduced
vulnerability and
strengthened
social inclusion
Gender equity

DEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES

CMDG targets
met

- 21 -

70.
These three themes-potential impact on governance as the unifyingcriterion for selecting
activities, working through strategic partnerships as the approach, and a focus on results-will be
used to explain the content o f the program. The following chapter elaborates on the sectors,
issues, mix of instruments, and M&E arrangements in reference to these three over-arching
themes. Attachment 2 presents the program and the expected results of t h s CAS.

V. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A.

THEGOVERNANCE
CHALLENGE,THECMDGs AND SELECTIVITY

CR
TIER
A
I

71.

In designing the new CAS, a strong set of selectivity criteria has been rigorously applied
to the choice of new activities. O f the various criteria that have influenced the selection of
activities, including the requirement that activities are firmly embedded in the Government’s
Rectangular Strategy and are in areas of World Bank comparative advantage, an important criteria
i s that the CAS should display a thematic focus and structural coherence. If the various activities
are to add up to more than the sum of their parts, then they need to reflect a unifying, underlying

structural logic.

72.

Central to this CAS is the fact that poor govemance is the fundamental brake on Bank
Group effectiveness and the achievement of development outcomes in Cambodia. The focus on
governance i s thus the primary filter to guide the selection of issues and instruments. There are

two parts to this governance focus:
0

0

First, the Bank should choose to work in those sectors in which govemance constraints are the
critical limiting factor, and in which these governance constraints have significant strategic
importance for the overall national agenda (as defined, for example, by their importance in
retarding progress towards the CMDGs).
Second, the Bank should differentiate between sectors (in terms of the level and form o f
resources allocated), based on an assessment of the strength of government commitment to
reform Where commitment i s apparent, the Bank will support a defined reform agenda and
identified champions for reform with significant loan and grant resources, including fastdisbursing PRSCs. Where such commitment has yet to develop, the Bank will seek to foster a
momentum for reform primarily through the deployment of analytical and advisory services,
donor coordination, and well-designed TA. Choosing to focus on sectors in which there
appears to be evidence o f government commitment clearly makes good sense in terms o f a
results-based CAS; those sectors with domestic champions are more likely to move ahead, and
to deliver on CAS outcomes, than those without champions.

73.
On the basis of these first two governance-related criteria, the Bank Group w i l l focus on
the following four areas o f governance reforms in t h s CAS:
0

Seek to improve the environment for PSD, on the grounds that the private sector w i l l need to
play the central role in achieving poverty-reducing growth and because i t i s clear that
governance constraints (cumbersome, non-transparent and corruption-prone legal and
regulatory frameworks which impose unnecessary costs on firms) are currently the primary
obstacle to competitiveness, investment, employment and profit in Cambodia. Particularly in a
post-MFA world in which garment-led growth i s likely to slow or reverse, at least initially
Cambodia cannot afford to continue to put obstacles in the way of economic diversification
and expansion.

- 22 Continue to engage in natural resource management (NRM) on the grounds that secure
access to land and transparent management of national resources in the public interest are of
vital direct importance to Cambodia's rural majority; and because the major constraints upon
the sustainable and pro-poor management of such resources are rooted in weak transparency of
state processes and a lack of accountability on the part of state actors.
Support PFM reform because fundamental weaknesses in PFM constitute the primary
bottleneck to improved delivery of basic services to the poor. I t i s clear that poor governance
-- as well as a lack o f transparency and accountability in the collection and allocation of public
finances, the institutionalization of rent-seelung in service delivery as a consequence of the
system-wide inadequacy o f public sector salaries -- i s central to the problems in the delivery of
those services needed to meet basic needs and accumulate human capital.
Continue to support decentralization, and complement this with additional interventions
designed to promote cittzens' partnerships for better governance. Decentralization has the
potential to improve governance across a broad range o f state functions, by bringing decisions
about planning and budgeting closer to those affected, and shortening the l i n k s in the chain of
accountability. However, realizing this potential requires sustained support to the institutions
and processes of local governance. Increasingly, the Bank will seek to complement support to
the "supply side" of governance with complementary interventions which build up (with
information and institutional development) the capacity o f citizens, individually and in civil

society organizations, to hold politicians and government officials accountable for probity and
effectiveness in the performance of their duties.

74.
Thus, drawing on lessonsffom experience in Cambodia and in other LICUS, the Bank will
approach the design and delivery of AAA services with the primary goals of constructing shared
understanding of and commitment to a reform program. In recent years, this approach has been
used successfully in Cambodia with respect to PSD (in which an investment climate report has led
into the definition o f a PSD reform agenda); and public financial management (in which the
IFAPER generated findings which provided the basis for an agreed PFM reform program,
launched by the Prime Minister in December 2004). Cambodia i s at an earlier stage on this

continuum with regard to land management (a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) on
social land concessions and other AAA work on land issues are being used in an effort to develop
government commitment to well-managed and transparent land titling and land redistribution
programs); and decentralization (in which a consortium of donors are supporting the development
o f a government-led vision and strategy for sub-national government).

75.

These areas of govemance-the creation of an enabling environment for private sector
investment and employment, improved management of natural resources, increased transparency,
eficiency and pro-poor bias in public financial management, and decentralization and
accountability-are all firmly embedded in the RS. The choice of these areas i s not intended to

suggest that other aspects o f governance (for example, strengthening the National Assembly) are
any less important. Nor does the choice of activities in this CAS imply that governance i s the only
development challenge in Cambodia. However, as i s increasingly clear from popular political
debate in Cambodia and from numerous pieces of analysis (conducted both by the Bank Group and
by others), good governance i s an important precondition to growth and sustainable poverty
reduction, without which little progress can be expected. Reflecting the conclusions of the CAE,
CCR and other reviews, the World Bank Group i s thus attempting to bring a much more rigorous
assessment o f the political dynamics for and against policy change to bear on i t s decisions
regarding which sectors to support and how.

76.

The focus on govemance in this CAS also provides some guidance to what will not be
included in the Bank Group's program, and how it will approach certain problems. The basic
premise underlying the choice of sectors i s that they are important for poverty reduction; that
governance issues are critical to improvements in sectoral performance; and that the World Bank

- 23 Group thinks i t i s in a position to help address these governance issues. The Bank will engage in
those sectors in w h c h there are credible signs o f a domestic leadership for reform. Where there i s
no such indication of ownership, the Bank w i l l not commit significant lending resources, but will
instead adopt an intermediate approach: i t will either: (i)
await evidence of positive change, and/or
(ii)
deploy AAA in an effort to build the information base and partnerships necessary to initiate
reform, and/or (iii)
support the development o f demand-side pressures for reform by building the
capacity o f citizens and civil society organizations to press claims for social accountability (in part,
b y putting in place mechanisms to provide intended beneficiaries of World Bank-financed projects
with the information that will enable them to hold the Govemment, and the World Bank,
accountable for management and results).

77.
With respect to WR for example, the World Bank w i l l follow a three-pronged strategy.
First, it will address LJR issues under each of the other four governance objectives (such as PSD
and land) if such issues become significant constraints for attaining those objectives. Second, i t
will understand better the needs of the poor for justice and how they are currently being served, for
example by alternative forms of dispute resolution systems, and aim to strengthen those systems.
And finally, if the World Bank sees some signs of commitment and ownership on the
Govemment’s side to tackle the system-wide reform o f state institutions, then it would be open to
providing support to that reform process. At the December 2004 CG Meeting, the Government
agreed to pass some basic laws necessary for developing a sound legal and judlcial system and for
fighting corruption (Box 5). Many of these laws have been under preparation for a long time with
support from many donors, including Japan and France. The preparation o f these laws i s being
monitored closely by the Govemment and donors and progress appears to be on track for the laws
being passed during 2005.

78.
In addition to the above governance theme, a second set of criteria has been applied to
ensure that the Bank will support areas critical to meeting the country’s MDGs. In these areas,
World Bank support will also be integrated into the Rectangular Strategy and will be in areas of
World Bank comparative advantage. It will also fill critical gaps in either strategy formulation or
financing in those sectors or sub-sectors in which due to lack of the required financing and/or
strategy, Cambodia i s unlikely to meet the relevant CMDG(s) for that sector.
79.

The CAS program i s thus designed in support of two pillars:
Pillar 1: Removing the governance constraints to attaining the CMDGs
0

Objective 1: PrOmote private sector development for poverty reduction;

0

Objective 3: Improve public financial management; and

Objective 2: Improve natural resource management;
Objective 4: Support decentralization and promote citizens’ partnerships for better
governance.

- 24 Pillar 2: Supporting the strategy and investments needed to attain the CMDGs

Objective 5: Support the formulation and implementation o f a government-led strategy
and corresponding investment program for reducing poverty and achieving the
CMDGs (as defined first and foremost by the NSDP (the preparation of which began
on February 28,2005); and
Objective 6: Support with analytical and investment services those under-funded
sectors and sub-sectors critical to achieving the CMDGs.
B.

BANK GROUPACTIVITIES

AND PARTNERSHIPS

Pillar 1: Removing the Governance Constraints to Attaining the CMDGs

80.
The first pillar of the CAS will direct Bank Group activities to tackling the govemance
constraints that hold back inclusive, sustainable growth and pro-poor sewice delivery. I t will

attempt this through support to PSD, NRM, PFM and the extension of decentralization reforms,
coupled with new mechanisms for establishing social accountability.

81.
To date, Cambodia’s economic growth has been relatively rapid but highly concentrated,
with limited gains in terms o f employment or incomes for the poor. Following the end of MFA at
the end of 2004, growth i s likely to slow. The challenge i s thus to cushion the fall and then
accelerate the recovery in growth rates, while diversifying the sources o f growth so as to make it
more sustainable and inclusive. W h i l e there are a number of barriers that must be overcome to
achieve this goal (including poor infrastructure, a generally low level o f s k i l l s in the workforce,
etc.), issues of economic governance - inadequate legal and inappropriate regulatory frameworks,
lack o f transparency and access to information, and above all corruption - are clearly critically
important in deterring private investment and reducing Cambodia’s competitiveness. In particular,
the management o f Cambodia’s abundant natural resources currently suffers from a pronounced
lack of transparency and accountability. As a result, Cambodia has benefited less than i t should
from the exploitation o f these resources, and few of these benefits have reached the poor. The
Bank Group will address both (i)the governance constraints to private sector-led economic
growth; and (ii)
the specific issues of governance in NRM, with a focus in the latter case on state
land management and achieving security of access to resources for poor rural households.
82.
At present, low levels of transparency and accountability in the public sector, combined
with lack of resources and capacity, result in very low standards of state service delivery. At the
same time, the state’s failure to provide an adequate legal and regulatory environment prevents the
private sector from fulfilling i t s potential to play a role in the provision of accessible, high-quality
social and economic services. The CAS will tackle the fundamental governance issues
underpinning low coverage and quality of basic services by: (i)
helping to establish the basic
institutions and policies needed for transparent and effective management of public finances and
public-private partnerships; and (ii)
supporting the emergence of accountability for planning and
resource management at the local level.
83.
In approaching the following four governance objectives, i t i s important to differentiate
between those two objectives-namely,
private sector development and public financial
management-in which there are reasonably well-developed sector strategies and programs in
place, and which are ready to move into the implementation phase; and the remaining two
objectives-natural resource management and local governance and accountability frameworksin which strategies and programs are at much earlier stages of development. In the case of the
latter, much of the activities under the Bank CAS w i l l be oriented towards first establishing a
consensus and basic framework for the strategy and programs. The results matrix in Attachment 2
makes clear that during this CAS period, more rapid progress towards development outcomes i s
expected in respect to PSD and PFM than i s expected in respect to NRM and social accountability.

- 25 CAS Objective 1: Promote Private Sector Developmentfor Poverty Reduction

84.
The first CAS objective is to support the Govemment’s strategy to reduce poverty through
export-led growth of 6-7 percent per annum - a commitment that has been laid out in successive
policy statements, including the NPRS and the RS. Cambodia i s takmg important steps towards
this goal, notably b y joining the WTO. However, to convert market access opportunities into
employment at levels and wages that reduce poverty requires substantial improvement in the
domestic investment climate. To date, a weak investment climate has resulted in very narrow
growth, high levels of informality, and a drop in FDI. Malung gains will require: (i)
removing
governance-related constraints (particularly corruption) that limit firms’ productivity; (ii)
building
institutions to enable export diversification; and (iii)
strengthening the private sector role in public
service delivery by improving transparency and competition (Table 3).

Table 3: Address the Governance Impediments to Private Sector Development

85.
These reforms have become particularly urgent in the post-MFA world, in which the loss
of garment quotas could result in a collapse in Cambodia’s growth rate. The World Bank Group
will help the Government to establish a policy and regulatory environment which w i l l sustain and
build on Cambodia’s current comparative advantage in corporate social responsibility. This will
involve both (i)
maintaining Cambodia’s position in what i s in effect a niche market for garments
produced in compliance with core labor standards;18 and (ii)
increasing the competitiveness of
Cambodian products in international markets b y reducing the costs o f doing business in Cambodia.
These reforms will be supported by a series o f Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs)
proposed for FYO6-FYO8 (see Section V.D and Box 8).
18

The Government has ratified all of the core labor conventions except No. 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor,
which it does not plan to ratify until it i s able to implement the convention on Minimum Age. The Government i s
seeking L O assistance in implementing the conventions. Although labor market regulations provide limited
protection to a small segment of the workforce, progress has been made in the enforcement of labor standards,
particularly in the garment sector.

- 26 86.
Improvements in govemance, therefore, must be at the heart of Cambodia’s PSD strategy.
The Government appears committed to this path. Similar commitments in the past, however, have
not been realized and stakeholders must now focus on results to retain credibility. The Bank will
help by using the full range of private sector institutions within the Bank Group (including, for
example, IDA, IFC, and MPDF), and b y helping align donors and the private sector, working
within the PSD TWG (for which the Bank Group and ADB serve as the lead donor facilitators). A
detailed description of the World Bank Group’s strategy for private sector development in
Cambodia i s provided in Attachment 8.
81.
The Bank Group will help the Govemment convert WTO and AFTA opportunities into
private sector growth. T o do so i t will support a grant-based operation (the Trade Facilitation and

Competitiveness Project) which aims to reduce the time and cost o f administering exports and
imports, delivering both a strategy to extend Cambodia’s gains in corporate social responsibility in
a free-trade environment, and tools to better manage Cambodia’s duty exemptions granted to
foreign investors.

88.
Diversifying the sources of growth is perhaps the most difficult challenge. Attracting new
investment and building institutions that integrate rural, informal and new sectors into Cambodia’s
export-oriented economy will require substantial progress in legal and judicial reform. This in turn
w i l l require building private sector awareness and voice. The Bank Group will: (i)
help the CDC
create a viable Investment Promotion Agency; (ii)work on trade-supporting networks to help
Cambodian producers meet the needs o f foreign niche markets; (iii)
build the voice of the private
sector by strengthening business associations and building supply chain linkages; and (iv) assist in
diversification through IFC investments.
89.
Acute needs for better infrastructure and public services can be met most eficiently
through a public-private response based on transparent, competitive, well-designed partnerships.

Serious governance problems have prevented Cambodia from fully benefiting from PPI to date.
The Bank Group will support implementation of a new policy toward PPI and supporting legal and
regulatory changes.
90.
Improvements in govemance require carefil and open monitoring if they are to succeed.
The Bank Group will help through a second Investment Climate Survey (assessing changes in the
perceptions of the private sector) and continued IFC support to the Private Sector Forum (which
supports dialogue between the private sector and the Government). The MPDF w i l l help develop
codes o f ethics in the private sector and attempt to catalyze a broad discussion o f private sector
governance.
91.
While the Bank is not actively engaged or intending to become actively engaged in
financial sector reform-where
the leading donors are the ADB and IMF-it is monitoring
progress towards strengthening anti-money laundering (AML) systems within Cambodia. The

Government has given high priority to the drafting o f the AML Law, with technical assistance
from the IMF. The draft law, based on the UN Model Legislation for civil law jurisdictions and
the eight Special Recommendations against the financing of terrorism, i s currently under revision
by an inter-ministerial working group. The draft, which i s likely to be submitted to the National
Assembly during 2005, addresses Anti-Money LaunderindCombating Financial Terrorism
(AMLKFT) preventive obligations related to customer due diligence, record-keeping, internal
controls, reporting o f suspicious transactions, and the setting up of an independent financial
intelligence unit. Even if Cambodia i s on the right track, however, precaution i s recommended
since the implementation of the law, if approved, can be complex. Furthermore, the Government
has not yet ratified the UN Vienna Convention 1988 on this matter, nor has it yet established a
Financial Intelligence Unit.
92.

The World Bank Group will integrate programs from different agencies within the Bank
Group to address private sector issues. The activities of the various agencies o f the Bank Group

- 27 have as far as possible been coordinated and mainstreamed in the design of this CAS so as to
maximize internal complementarities and minimize gaps in the overall program. Thus IFC
remains fully engaged to build on the momentum i t s program has developed to support Cambodia’s
growing private sector through a mix o f investments and advisory activities. T h i s will involve: (i)
continuing to work to improve the investment climate through the Private Sector Forum; and (ii)
continuing to support the critical work of MPDF-an IFC-initiated, managed and funded PSD
facility-in building the capacity of Cambodian entrepreneurs and SMEs. Finally, IFC i s expected
to continue making investments in a range of sectors-including in the financial sector, general
manufacturing, tourism, infrastructure and other sectors-to demonstrate that there are viable
business opportunities in the country.

93.
MPDF, a multi-donor funded initiative of the IFC, specializes in promoting the
development of SMEs. MPDF has been supporting the SME sector in Cambodia, Lao PDR and
Vietnam since 1997 through a broad range of programs. These programs work synergistically at
three levels. At the micro level, the facility helps companies in key sub-sectors to improve their
operations and access financing. At the meso level, the facility helps small and medium
entrepreneurs by improving the capacity o f those who provide services to them - banks,
microfinance institutions, business consultants, business associations and management trainers. At
the macro level, MPDF collaborates with government, the private sector, donors and civil society
to improve the business climate. MPDF’s donors are the ADB, Australia, Canada, Finland, IFC,
Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
CAS Objective 2: Improve Natural Resource Management

94.
Improved economic growth, particularly broad-based rural growth, will depend critically
on increased agricultural production through, inter alia, enhanced management of natural
resources. Over the past decade, Cambodia has achieved overall food self-sufficiency, However,

several areas o f Cambodia remain food insecure, and agricultural growth has been substantially
higher in neighboring countries. The Government has indicated that agricultural growth rates of 56 percent per annum w i l l be required to support i t s overall economic growth and poverty reduction
objectives through an increasing shift from subsistence to market-oriented agriculture. The RS
focuses on improvements in agricultural productivity and diversification through improvements in
the overall investment climate for agribusiness (see Objective 1); more equitable access to, and
management o f natural resources, including land; and increased use o f improved agricultural
inputs and technology.

95.

In this context, the second CAS objective is to support improvements in the management of
Cambodia’s abundant natural resources to better contribute to sustainable rural growth and
poverty reduction. Working with our partners in Government, civil society and other donors, the
World Bank will help reorient policy and practice towards greater sharing o f the responsibilities

and benefits associated with NRM with local stakeholders. The Bank’s program w i l l focus on
improving the security o f access o f the poor to land and forests, resources which are crucial to
rural livelihoods, through mechanisms which increase transparency and participation in NRM
(Table 4). This w i l l complement ADB’s focus on investment support to irrigation and UK DFID’s
focus on fisheries and general rural livelihoods, and will facilitate closer collaboration with F A 0
in supporting rural strategy and policy development.

96.
The Bank will actively support the agricultural TWGs as the basis for developing sector
programs and identifying major policy issues for Govemment-donor dialogue. The Bank’s

analytical and financial support for land, forestry and biodiversity management w i l l be developed
with the TWGs for Land (Germany and World Bank as lead donor facilitators) and Forestry and
Environment (Denmark as lead donor facilitator). The Bank w i l l also be an active participant in
the TWG for agriculture and irrigation (Australia and France as lead donor facilitators). I t i s
expected that some NRM issues identified by the TWGs w i l l form part o f the Government’s policy
agenda to be supported through the PRSCs (Section D below). The World Bank will also

- 28 emphasize partnerships with civil society groups working in NRM so as to both benefit from their
field experience as well as strengthen their capacity to support rural communities.
Table 4: Improve Accountability and Transparency in NRM

97.
The Bank will join the work of other donors in assisting the Govemment to strengthen the
overall framework for management of land resources. The basic requirements for effective land
use management are s t i l l under development in Cambodia. Up to 80 percent of Cambodia’s land
area i s technically under state management, however there are no current land use, land capability
or land classification maps available to guide land use and allocation decisions. Working in

conjunction with Canada, Finland, Germany and Australia, the Bank will support development o f
both the information base, as well as the decentralization and deconcentration of land use planning
and allocation to communes, districts and provinces through support under the existing and second
phase o f the Land Management and Administration Project (LMAP) as well as the planned Land
Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project (LASED).
98.
Ensuring security of tenure is important to protect livelihoods of the poor and to
encourage investment in productivity improvements and diversijcation. LMAP, co-financed with
Canada, ’ Germany and Finland, will continue to support land registration in line with the
Government’s goal to complete this process for the entire country b y 2015. A series of studies

under LMAP w i l l identify constraints to the operation o f land markets, including issues o f taxation
and urban and peri-urban planning. LMAP 11, starting in 2008, will further strengthen private
property rights (particularly among vulnerable groups) and improve land use planning. In order to
reinforce the ability of the poor to defend their property rights, the Bank w i l l continue to support
administrative dispute resolution through Cadastral Commissions under LMAP, while
implementing a Justice for the Poor study to better understand how the rights o f the poor can be
better represented in the judicial system.
99.
The Bank will support development of land allocation mechanisms which promote
smallholder based agricultural growth. About 12 to 15 percent of Cambodians are estimated to be

landless and a larger proportion has insufficient land holdings to support their households. At the

- 29 same time, the Government i s faced with decisions regarding the allocation o f the large areas of
state lands consistent with poverty reduction, economic growth and environmental sustainability
objectives. There i s little information on the trade-offs between various priorities of land use, so
several studies will be carried out with the Land TWG in 2005 to assess the role of land allocation
to smallholders in the context o f an increasingly trade-oriented rural economy. Building on the
results of these studies, LASED, starting in 2006, will assist the Government to develop
transparent, community-based mechanisms to implement its policy for allocation of land to the
poor through Social Concessions.
100. Management of Cambodia’s considerable forest areas for the benefit of local
communities, state revenues, and biodiversity conservation represent a major challenge. Forest
management i s a particularly contentious issue in Cambodia and there i s general recognition of the

’

need to build on the recent Independent Forest Sector Review to develop a common, strategic
agenda to ensure both sustainability and broader sharing of benefits in forest management. The
Bank will support the Forestry TWG in carrying out studies and proposals to build consensus
around a program to improve governance o f forestry resources. A Poverty and Environmental
Nexus Study will provide more information on the relationship o f local communities to common
property resources, such as non-timber forest products and fish. Based on the resource planning
and transparency elements introduced under the Forest Concession Management Project, the Bank
w i l l focus i t s support on broader stakeholder engagement in all aspects of forestry management,
including monitoring and enforcement activities. The entry point for additional Bank support will
be through grant funding from JSDF and other sources to directly support the Government and
NGOs to develop approaches which strengthen the role of communities in management of forest
resources. Additional areas of support will depend on progress in defining with the Government a
common, strategic agenda which attracts support from a number o f donor and, potentially, NGO
partners.

101. The Bank will also support the Govemment’s capacity to work with other partners to
strengthen biodiversity protection. Cambodia has benefited from substantial assistance from
international conservation NGOs; however, i t s extensive protected areas and protected forests st ill

represent a major management challenge. The ongoing Biodiversity and Protected Areas
Management Learning and Innovation Project i s building the Government’s capacity to develop a
National Protected Areas System through an initial focus on management planning and
demarcation in Virachey National Park. Future assistance will help the Government to build on
this experience, and that of i t s international partners, to develop a more sustainable basis for
biodiversity conservation. A detailed description o f the World Bank’s strategy for environmental
sustainability in Cambodia i s provided in Attachment 5.

CAS Objective 3: Improve Public Financial Management for Pro-poor Service Delivery
102. The third CAS objective is to support core elements of the Govemment’s reform agenda by
strengthening the public sector’sfinancial management capacity, which is a critical foundation for
better pro-poor service delivery and reducing corruption. The Bank, jointly with other
development partners, will support reforms that aim to reconstruct the institutional underpinnings
necessary for a more effective and accountable public administration. These efforts w i l l focus on
strengthening PFM, moving toward the establishment o f a meritocratic civil service, and
increasing accountability to Cambodian citizens (Table 5). The Bank will also support increased
transparency and accountability in P F M by joining with other development partners in building the
capacity of the Government’s national audit authority.

103. The Bank will continue to support strong partnerships in P F M through the SWAP
established in 2004. Ten development partners have worked closely with the Ministry o f
Economy and Finance to develop a reform program and have agreed to work jointly in a SWAP to
coordinate their support for the program. Partners will jointly monitor performance against an

- 30 agreed framework through the PFM TWG (co-facilitated by IMF and ADB). The Bank will also
manage a multi-partner PFM Trust Fund financed by Australia, the UK, EU and Sweden.
Table 5: Improve Public Financial Management

104.
The Bank’s support to the Govemment on PFM reform will focus on building a credible
budget and improving intemal control and fiduciary accountability. The cornerstone of the
program i s the Government’s PFM Reform Program (PFMRP), launched by the Prime Minister in

December 2004. This presents a detailed, prioritized and sequenced action plan, incorporating the
recommendations of the joint ADB-World Bank Zntegrated Fiduciary Assessment and Public
Expenditure Review 2003 (IFAPER). Stage 1 of the PFMRP attempts to make the budget a
credible instrument for the strategic and operational management o f public resources by ensuring
that i t delivers resources predictably and reliably to line ministry managers. Stage 2 aims to
improve internal control (holding resource managers accountable). Stage 3, building on better
budget management, would strengthen the linkages that make the budget a reliable instrument of
pro-poor policy implementation. I t i s expected that Stages 1 and 2 (and part of Stage 3) would
correspond to this CAS period.

105. The Bank will use a combination of instruments to assist the Govemment to implement its
PFMRP. Three Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) over FYO6-08 will be deployed to
support, inter alia, high level PFM policy reforms, corresponding with the first three stages of the
PFMRP. The Bank will also support Stages 1-3 via a Public Financial Management and
Accountability Project (PFMAP). A grant from a multi-donor Trust Fund will assist strengthening
of the capacity o f the National Assembly and Senate to exercise oversight of public finances.
Further analytical and advisory services-in the form of health and education PETS and a followup IFAPER-will support the reform program.

106. The Bank will support civil service reform with a focus on introducing the principles and
practices of a meritocratic civil service, using a two-pronged approach. At the ministry level, the
Bank would support rationalizing currently ad hoc and non-transparent salary supplementation

practices and implementation o f merit-based pay and employment pilots that have the potential to
serve as models for wider civil service reforms. This will be introduced selectively in key
ministries starting with pilots in the Ministry of Finance, and two or three other ministries and will
be gradually phased in the other ministries over time. In parallel, at the whole of Govemment
level, the Bank i s also helping to develop a strategic civil service pay and employment reform
policy that would pay more to priority staff, redeploy civil servants to high priority activities, limit

- 31 the overall size o f the civil service, and strengthen civil service management by improving
establishment control and enforcing merit-based recruitment and promotion.

107. I n civil service reform, the Bank will focus on analytical and advisory services until the
reform plan is in place. Working jointly with other development partners, the Bank will provide

coordinated technical assistance for civil service reform, especially on the issues that intersect
PFM and civil service reform. Analytical and advisory services will focus on service delivery
surveys (citizen scorecards for key sectors), improving transparency and strengthening the voice of
citizens.
CAS Objective 4: Support Decentralization and Promote Citizens’ Partnershipsfor Better
Governance

108. The Constitution provides for a partnership with citizens to strengthen accountability.
Cambodia’s framework of accountability, derived from the Constitution, i s based on three key
relationships of accountability: (i)
between elected officials and those responsible for delivering
essential services to citizens; (ii)
between citizens and the state; and (iii)
between those who
deliver services and the citizens who receive these services. The work under this objective i s
concerned with all three of these relationships (Table 6). The primary investment vehicle will be
projects at the commune level-the lowest level at which citizens interact with the state, elected
representatives, and service providers. The World Bank will also invest through a project to
improve social justice and access to information. Analytical work and partnerships will support
the evolving vision for deconcentration and decentralization and will contribute to establishing an
enabling environment for civic engagement. The World Bank will work with other donors to
agree on a platform approach to supporting accountability through piloting tools for informed,
constructive, and peaceful engagement in the three relationships of accountability.
Table 6: Support Decentralization and Promote Citizens’ Partnershipsfor Better Governance

- 32 109. A conducive policy and legal framework is essential for clarifying the future
deconcentration and decentralization strategy and the enabling environment for citizens’
partnerships. The Government’s evolving deconcentration and decentralization strategy and

corresponding legal frameworks will need to clarify future roles and responsibilities of the state,
service providers, and elected stakeholders at all levels down to the village, and the steps needed to
translate the vision to reality. Coordination of the donor support for this process i s through the
Deconcentration and Decentralization TWG in which the Bank will participate actively and
contribute analytical work. The Bank’s work with civil society and on social accountability will
also evolve along with the agenda. Analytical work on the enabling environment for civic
engagement will identify the constraints, priorities and critical elements needed to foster
constructive, free, and peaceful engagement. The Bank w i l l work with the wider donor
community to encourage swift passage of a Freedom of Information Act and Anti-Corruption Law.
In the drafting in FY05 of a new NGO law, the Bank w i l l encourage an intensive consultative
process and will offer technical assistance and advice to both the Government and NGO
community to ensure that such a law, if passed, follows global best practice in providing an
enabling environment for citizen participation.

110. The Bank’s primary investment support to decentralization is through the ongoing Rural
Investment and Local Governance Project (RILGP, FY03-FY06), and a future planned RILGP II.
RILGP supports improved local govemance as a foundation for sustainable development and
poverty reduction by strengthening the newly decentralized development process at the commune
level and providing grants for priority rural infrastructure and related public goods identified
through this local planning process. More specifically, RILGP aims to support improved local
governance through: (i)
enhancing the inclusiveness, transparency and accountability of the newly
decentralized local government institutional structures and processes at the commune and province
levels; and (ii)
strategic policy studies to inform the ongoing dialogue on deconcentration reforms.
A follow-on project ( R L G P I1 FY07) will be the Bank’s main lending support to the new
decentralized mechanisms once they are clarified. This project will build on lessons being learned
from other decentralized projects in Cambodia and elsewhere on how to strengthen the voice of
communities through building and supporting community-based organizations so that they can
influence even more how the funds are used to better address their needs and priorities.

111. The rights of ordinary citizens must be better protected, and conjidence needs to be built
in the justice and dispute resolution systems, so that people are able to participate in partnerships
for accountability. The Justice for the Poor Project (FY07) will increase the access of poor people
and communities to justice. This will explore opportunities both to increase citizens’ access to the

formal judicial system-through legal rights awareness, increased access to information, and other
approaches-and w i l l enhance the capacity for informal or alternative dispute resolution. The
project design will draw on the analytical work already initiated (FYO5-06), and coordination with
the Government and other donors through the Legal and Judicial Reform TWG.

112. The Bank will help enhance the eflectiveness of accountability processes at national and
sub-national levels by involving citizens more strategically. Technical advice and resources to

design and pilot tools to help citizens and civil society organizations contribute constructively and
effectively to improving accountability will be integrated into, or alongside, Bank-funded projects.
The new education project, for example, includes piloting and expanding community scorecards to
measure quality o f service delivery at the commune level. Also, the work on PFM w i l l include
activities to help national-level elected representatives understand and interpret public budgets. A
proposed operational platform supported by DFID and other donors will provide assistance to the
Government or donor staff designing projects, and to civil society groups who wish to pilot new
tools, scale up successes, and to disseminate lessons of good practice including global experience.
I t may also, with DFID funding, open a Centre which would act as the operational hub for Citizen
Partnership in Better Governance activities and be a resource center for civil society.

- 33 113. Access to information is a prerequisite forfunctioning accountability mechanisms and for
enabling citizens to exact accountability. The Bank w i l l promote access to information in four
ways: (i)through analytical work on grass roots media, channels o f communication, and
constraints on access to accurate and balanced information through the proposed Justice for the
Poor and Community Empowerment grant; (ii)
the Bank i s exploring the opportunities for a grantfunded pilot project to support the development o f local or community radios; (iii)
the legal and
policy aspects of access to information will be explored, analyzing laws on, for example, freedom
o f information, broadcasting, NGO laws, and the interface between citizens and the state in the
decentralization and deconcentration strategy; and (iv) by reviewing how the proposed joint
resource centers mentioned above could be used to promote better access to information.
Pillar 2: Supporting the Strategy and Investments Needed to Attain the CMDGs
114. The Government intends to use the NSDP (2006-2010) to implement the vision laid out in
the RS and to attain Cambodia’s MDGs. As discussed earlier, while Cambodia has made some
progress towards achieving some of the CMDGs, attaining a number of the targets will be difficult
and will need a more concerted effort by all. Cambodia i s likely to meet the target for universal
primary school enrolment; however, meeting the targets for secondary education (including female
secondary school enrolment) seems unlikely. While some progress has been made toward
achieving health-related goals, at current rates, the increases are not sufficient to meet the CMDGs.
The C M D G target of reducing HIV prevalence rates b y 2015 should be achieved although HIV
transmission patterns are shifting, with most new infections occurring among married women and
their children. Furthermore, increasing youth risk behavior, and illicit drug use among youth could
act as a new potential driver o f HN transmission.

115. Meeting the C M D G target of halving the population in poverty by 2015 will require
considerably faster economic growth and a more pro-poor orientation to that growth. In addition
to the governance reforms needed to create an enabling environment o f shared growth and poverty
reduction, Cambodia will also need to continue to make massive investments in infrastructure
provision and management to improve access and reduce costs since it lags behind most other
countries in the Region in the quantity and quality of infrastructure services (Figure 3). Without
this, it will be difficult for Cambodia to fully integrate with regional and global markets and to
reduce the costs of doing business and increase i t s competitiveness.
Figure 3: Cambodia’s MDGs and Other Indicators in Regional Context
(various comparators)

~--

Access to Electricity in 2000 (% of pop.)

Infant Mortality Rate in 2001 (per 1,000)
120 1

80

100

60

80

I

60

40

40

20

20

n

Cambodia

Vietnam

Indonesia

n

Mongolia

Cambodia

Access to Improved Water Source in 2000 (% of pop.)
80

Vietnam

indonesia

Mongolia

Secondary Enrolment in 2000 (5% net)
I

T

I

60

60

40

40

20

20
n

Lao PDR

Cambodia

Lao PDR

Vietnam

Indonesia

Mongolia

n

Cambodia

Lao PDR

Vietnam

Indonesia

Mongolia

- 34 CAS Objective 5: Support the Formulation and Implementation of a Government-led Strategy
and investment Program for Achieving the CMDGs

116. The Bank will support the shiji towards govemment ownership of the development agenda
by facilitating the preparation and implementation of the next five-year national strategy for
growth and poverty reduction. Cambodia has found i t hard to identify and assert i t s own
development strategy. This i s in part due to decades o f war and authoritarianism which have left

Cambodia with weak formal institutions o f the state and a loosely structured civil society.
However, it i s due also in part to high levels o f aid dependence and donor approaches which have
limited and at times undermined the development o f core government capacities for setting and
implementing strategy in the face of numerous, sometimes incompatible donor-led interventions.
The Bank will seek to foster deeper and broader government ownership of the NSDP, and will
support greater inclusion of civil society perspectives in these processes (Table 7).
Table 7: Support the Formulation and Implementation of a Government-led Strategy and
Investment Program for Attaining the CMDGs

117.
The Government and donors have agreed that from 2005 there will be just one, povertyfocused, five-year NSDP (2006-2010) which will replace SEDP I1 and NPRS and operationalize
the Government’s RS, using the CMDGs to frame definition of a medium-term M&E framework.
Specifically, the Bank will:
Support the preparation and subsequent implementation of the new NSDP in ways that
promote greater government ownership, and that contribute to more systematic and sustainable
capacity development. Working in partnership with others through a new TWG, Bank support
w i l l focus on refining the links between the new national strategy, M&E, the public financial
and public administration reform agendas, and sectoral strategy and capacity building.
Promote more meaningful engagement o f new actors (civil society, the private sector and subnational government) in the formulation o f the NSDP and in subsequently monitoring and
evaluating implementation and outcomes. This will require both creating specific opportunities
for consultation, and more long-term efforts to build the capacity o f civil society to engage on

- 35 policy issues. As part o f this effort, the Bank will work with others to mainstream gender
considerations in the planning, implementation and monitoring of national development
strategies, working through the Gender TWG and using an IDF grant to support studies,
budget analysis and monitoring (Attachment 7).
Build greater technical capacity in Cambodia to collect, analyze and use data on poverty and
socio-economic development. Facilitating the development of partnerships around key pieces
of AAA work, the Bank w i l l seek to foster a shared understanding of poverty, enabling all
stakeholders to engage fully in debates concerning government strategy. In 2005, the Bank
w i l l carry out a national Poverty Assessment that w i l l build links between donor research,
government and independent research institutes, and civil society, and which will draw
together and synthesize a variety o f quantitative and qualitative insights into poverty. (These
include the CSES 2004; mixed-methods research into household poverty dynamics - the
Moving out o f Poverty Study, and the Participatory Poverty Assessment around the Tonle
Sap).

Working with UNDP in particular, the World Bank w i l l help coordinate donor support to
building the technical and institutional strengths of national actors in conducting povertyrelated M&E and analysis. An IDF grant will be used to build up the technical and managerial
strengths of the National Institute of Statistics (NIS), helping it to develop a regular schedule
of core data collection exercises (such as a CSES every 3-5 years), backed by predictable
multi-year, multi-donor funding.
CAS Objective 6: Support with Analytical and Investment Services those Under-funded Sectors
and Sub-sectors Critical to Achieving the CMDGs

118. The Bank will help to finance the achievement of the Cambodian MDGs with investments
in human development and infrastructure, providing a partnership role by supplying analytical
inputs and investment in support of those aspects of the NSDP which are currently under-funded
or where progress i s regarded as particularly important. In some cases, this involves supporting
sectors which provide a vital role in enabling the achievement of development outcomes (the
CMDGs), and which are at present under-funded relative to other sectors. In other cases, Bank

contributions to well-established reform programs aim to sharpen the pro-poor focus of service
delivery. Support to human development and infrastructure provision will be channeled both
through projects that were prepared in the closing years of the previous CAS that w i l l provide
results over the new CAS period (which amount to some US$120 million), and through new
lending (Table 8).
Table 8: Support with Analytical and Investment Services
Areas Critical to Achieving the CMDGs

119. The Bank’s program in health and education will focus on the twin goals of increasing
equity in access to services, and improving quality and eficiency of services to the poor. This will

be achieved through support for sector-wide programs consistent with government priorities and in

- 36 coordination with other donors as well as through strengthened public administration and
financial/expenditure management and targeted support for interventions that address constraints
to access for the very poor.
120. In education, the Bank will support the Ministry o f Education, Youth and Sport’s
Education Sector Support Program (ESSP) to expand access, with special focus on the poor and
underserved communities. The Bank will strive to (i)
address supply- and demand-side barriers to
education; and (ii)
promote more efficient, decentralized mechanisms to nurture improvements in
educational quality. In higher education, the Bank w i l l aim to strengthen the institutional
framework to achieve improvements in quality assurance and accountability if the necessary sector
governance reforms are undertaken as expected. The main instrument will be the Education Sector
Support Project (appraised jointly with the ADB’ s education program to ensure alignment and
complementarity). The Bank i s undertaking an ambitious technical and advisory services agenda,
including a PETS, a review of educational quality constraints, an analysis of private costs to basic
education, an impact evaluation o f scholarships as a mechanism to lower demand-side barriers to
schooling and a review of options for incentive structures to attract, retain, motivate and develop
qualified teachers. As discussed above, the Bank w i l l work to support the Education SWAP
developed under the Education TWG, for which UNESCO i s the lead donor facilitator.
121. In health, Bank support to the sector will continue to be articulated mainly through the
Health Sector Support Project (HSSP), working in collaboration with all .other key donors through
a sector-wide approach. In particular, the Bank w i l l support the Government’s commitment to
provide affordable health services to the poor b y revising the system o f exemptions and paying
(through equity funds) for services rendered to the poor in public facilities. This i s complemented
by efforts to improve service quality, reduce the burden of infectious disease, and improve sector
capacity and performance. In a policy that also supports CAS Objective 3 (improving service
delivery through P F M reform), the w o r l d Bank will continue to support the ADB-sponsored
introduction of performance-based contracts with NGOs in the health sector (an initiative which
has improved public sector performance and health outcomes, particularly with regard to maternal
and child health services). A PETS will be carried out in coordination with the Ministry of Health
and other sector partners. Analytic work will support the future development of the health sector
strategy, with a particular focus on improving the impact o f the health sector strategy and public
expenditure on C M D G targets for child and maternal mortality. Thls analysis will inform a Health
Sector Support Program I1 (likely after the CAS period in FY09) designed to help attain these
goals. As discussed above, the Bank will provide enough resources to support the development of
the SWAP jointly with DFID and with WHO, which i s the lead donor facilitator for the TWG on
health.
122.
The Bank’s infrastructure program-including both ongoing and new operations -will
continue to support the economic growth agenda and the achievement of the CMDGs. The Bank’s
investment program w i l l support government-owned strategies and will be an integral part of the

overall donor effort, with a focus on the core infrastructure for agricultural growth and access by
the poor to basic infrastructure services. Interventions w i l l support decisive shifts towards a sector
wide approach (supporting the development of sub-sector strategies and medium-term investment
and maintenance programs, in the framework o f the national development strategy). Three
ongoing lending operations-Provincial and Peri-Urban Water and Sanitation, Provincial and
Rural Infrastructure, and Rural Electrification and Transmission-are
in early stages o f
implementation and will run through much of the CAS period. All three focus on addressing
urgent policy and institutional issues in these sectors.

123. In the energy sector, the Bank will support updating the national power development
master plan; facilitate improvement of sector governance and increased competition for private
participation in power supply; and continue assistance to rural electrification and, through GMS
power trade initiatives, least-cost power supply (e.g., cross-border interconnections) to major
urban centers. While offshore oil and gas has recently been discovered, i t i s not known how large

- 37 or economically viable the deposits will turn out to be. The energy sector review will examine t h s
issue and may lead to Bank AAA work in support o f the development of a transparent fiscal
management and regulatory framework. Transport sector operations, framed within the parameters
o f a roads SWAp, will contribute to government-led and ADB-supported development of a
coherent transport strategy, medium-term investment and maintenance programs, and sustainable
road maintenance funding. Lending will complement the activities of other donors and focus on
secondary, tertiary and rural community roads.
124.
Water and sanitation sector operations will consolidate institutional reforms made in
recent years and assist the Government and municipal authorities in providing Cambodian towns
and growing peri-urban areas with sustainable potable water and sanitation services,
complementing the ADB’s Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (2005). All of these
infrastructure-related activities will be implemented through the TWG for Infrastructure and
Regional Integration, for which the donor facilitator role i s shared by ADB and Japan.
TelecodZCT operations will focus on technical assistance to help: (i)
develop a telecom regulatory
environment, consistent with Cambodia’s WTO commitments; and (ii)
accelerated improvement in
rural access to telecom and information services.
125. At the regional level, wise management of water resources and particularly the Mekong
watershed i s critical for security and poverty reduction in Cambodia. As a downstream country,
however, Cambodia remains vulnerable to upstream developments. The Government gives high
priority to improving i t s administrative capacities for water resource management and i t s
bargaining position in the MRC. The Bank has been helping (in cooperation with ADB and other
donors) to address these concerns through policy advice and TA at both the country and regional
levels, notably through the GEF-funded TA project for the M R C Water Utilization Program. The
Bank will continue to lead a regional multi-donor cooperative effort for sustainable water
management and development by developing a broad-based and long-term assistance strategy
aimed at the individual countries and the MRC. In Cambodia, the Bank w i l l help to strengthen the
country’s sector management capacity and (through the MRC) the operational partnership o f the
Government with i t s neighboring riparian countries. The Mekong River Assistance Strategy that
the Bank will develop in partnership with the Commission, ADB and the other donors, will shape
the strategic framework for sustainable regional infrastructure investments (in hydropower,
navigation, wetland management, bulk water supply, etc.) that can benefit Cambodia’s longer term
interests.

C.

PARTNERSHIPS
AND AID EFFECTIVENESS

126.
The mutually-reinforcing connections between weak govemance and poorly-coordinated,
donor-driven development cooperation have been sketched above. Seeking to break this cycle, the
Bank w i l l build on the momentum for aid harmonization and alignment that has developed in
Cambodia over the last year under the leadership of the Government o f Cambodia (Box 6) and
consolidate recent developments in the Bank’s own approach. The CAS explicitly aims to
reinforce change in the way the Bank Group does business in Cambodia, by developing Bank
Group activities within the framework of evolving partnerships with the Government, other
donors, and civil society.

127.
This increasingly explicit focus on partnerships and the move from govemance-retarding
to govemance-enhancing aid modalities emerged as a key theme during the preparation of this
CAS, and will be made a central principle of the Bank Group’s work over the next four years.
During 2004, the Cambodia country strategies for the ADB, the World Bank, DFID and UNDAF
were prepared in unprecedented close cooperation between the four partners (as well as regular
consultation with the Government, other donors, civil society and the private sector). I t i s hoped
that this has improved their common understanding of the development challenges in Cambodia
and their ability to adopt a coordinated policy dialogue, reduce the transaction costs faced b y the
Government, and, by replacing sometimes contradictory donor negotiations with a collective

- 38 dialogue, enable the Government to develop ownership and cohesion in i t s policy framework. The
partnership i s not exclusive but a nucleus around which to build cooperation with other
development partners, both on the strategic and operational levels.

128. ADB and the World Bank have built upon these discussions by agreeing on areas where
one among them acts as “lead agency” in supporting the govemment efforts to develop and
implement sector strategies. This division of labor between the ADB and the World Bank,

designed in order to maximize the impact of the allocation of their combined AAA and investment
services, has been structured according to each o f the major areas o f the RS (Table 9). In areas
where one agency takes the lead role, the other would play a supporting role. In some crosscutting areas (e.g., PFM) which are critical to the functioning of the public sector and in which
both agencies are already working together in a SWAP arrangement, they would continue to do so.
The work would o f course be done through the TWGs and in partnership with the Government and
all other donors. At the request of the Government and the donor community, the Bank w i l l
continue to act as lead donor facilitator in support to the government-led process of harmonization
and alignment.
Table 9: Agreed Division of Labor between the ADB and the World Bank for Support to
Government for Development of a SWAP

- 39 -

129. The key to improving donor coordination i s an understanding o f the need for better
communication among all development partners-including the Government-and the importance
o f sending clear and consistent messages on the steps forward for policy reform. To this end,
ADB, the World Bank, DFID and the UN System have developed a set o f "Partnership Principles"
that will serve as a basis for the relationships built among themselves and with the Government,
other international development partners, the private sector, and civil society (Box 7). The Bank
w i l l also seek to integrate a strategic and coherent communications element into i t s work, ensuring
that all stakeholders in Cambodia are informed about the Banks activities and the goals that
underpin them. Such an effort can help to ensure that the Bank closes the accountability loop and
can also play a potentially valuable role in building a foundation of informed debate and broad
support for reforms.

- 40 -

D.

BANKGROUPPROGRAM

130.
The Bank’s lending program for Cambodia for FY05-08 is presented in Table 10. I t
reflects the Government’s priorities as laid out in the RS and has been designed after extensive
consultations with the Government, donors, private sector and NGOs. In addition, detailed
consultations were held with ADB, DFID and the UN System to clarify roles and responsibilities.
Extensive consultations have also been held among ADB, Japan, and the World Bank in forging
greater synergies among the three partners at the program implementation level, especially in the
area o f infrastructure where these three are the major donor financiers in Cambodia.

IDA resources, and the remaining US$6 million w i l l come from Cambodia’s allocation.
Note: In FY09, projects in health, transport and a PRSC are planned.

131. Investment lending will be structured under the six CAS objectives described above rather
than by sectoral lines within the Bank. Wherever a SWAP exists, the investment projects
described above and summarized in Table 10 will be designed and implemented through the

SWAP framework. Where no SWAP exists, they will be designed with the intention of
contributing to the development o f a sector strategy and corresponding investment plan. The AAA
program has been reorganized to bring related studies together under sectoral or thematic cluster
headings, with designated staff cluster leaders.
132.
With the full support of the Govemment of Cambodia, the Bank’s assistance program will
make use of the new flexible country financing parameters, but carefully and according to prespecijled application criteria. Individual projects may be financed up to 100 percent including
taxes and duties, based on merit and justification. Cofinancing w i l l s t i l l be encouraged when
available. Regarding l i m i t s that would apply to the overall amount of recurrent expenhtures that
the Bank may finance, there w i l l be no country-level limit, but decision criteria will be applied for

each project and line item with due regard to sustainability. The Bank may finance local costs as
needed to achieve project objectives more efficiently. The Bank will also be able to finance taxes
and duties, as the tax system i s considered reasonable in Cambodia (Attachment 9).

133. In addition to the traditional investmentprojects, the CAS envisages support to the reform
program in the form of annual PRSCs. These would start with FY06 and would deliver about one-

- 41 third of our base case program in the form of budget support. The objective of the proposed PRSC
program i s to support implementation of the Government’s reform program by strengthening PSD,
improving access to natural resource assets, strengthening public sector performance, and
improving local governance (viz., supporting the policy and institutional reform agenda o f the
CAS pillars).
134. The December 2004 C G Meeting made a strong link between the Government’s
implementation o f reforms and donors’ contributions, with both the Asian Development Bank and
the World Bank reducing their pledges because of poor performance on governance. This, despite
the fact that Cambodia had satisfactorily implemented the legal terms and conditions of i t s
Structural Adjustment Credit and PRGF programs. The Government realizes that it must move
from announcements to implementation if it i s to continue to receive donor support. The PRSC
process i s designed to strengthen this linkage between results and donor assistance. I t will help
provide support to the implementation o f the policy agenda laid out in the RS and the NSDP so
that the goals laid out in these strategies can be attained.
135. At the December 2004 CG Meeting, the Government and donors agreed on a key set of
reforms to be undertaken by the next C G Meeting in December 2005 (Attachment 3). This reform
program was designed after extensive consultations held in the technical working groups which are
led by the Government and include all donor partners. I t includes key actions in the areas of PSD,
PFM and land management (see Box 8). The Government i s committed to meeting 100 percent of
the C G benchmarks and has set up a monitoring mechanism in the form o f a Government Donor
Coordination Committee (GDCC) that i s to meet on a quarterly basis and monitor the whole
reform program with a special focus on identifying areas o f reform that are lagging and need more
concerted effort on the part of both the Government and donors. In this regard, the first
monitoring meeting in March 2005 played a very useful role in bringing to the attention of the
Government areas that could fall behind and needed special attention. Many o f the actions agreed
to at the December C G Meeting are cross-sectoral in nature and this monitoring mechanism brings
an internal cohesion to the reform program that has been lacking until now. The PRSC process
will be linked closely to the monitoring indicators agreed at the C G Meeting so that the reform
program remains government-owned and led and supported b y the entire donor community
collectively.
The PRSC will focus on the core areas of the Bank Group’s CAS, including private sector
136.
development, public financial management, and land management. O f these areas, public
financial management and private sector development are the farthest advanced in terms o f

agreement on reform measures. PRSCs would be developed when Bank management feels that
there i s a strong likelihood that the reform actions will be undertaken and will be sent for Board
approval once actions have already been undertaken. At the same time, the reform programs for
the following year would be articulated: the second year actions for PSD and PFM are already laid
out (although they may require some fine-tuning) in the action programs and gradually additional
reform programs would be added on in other areas.
137. We would envisage broad-based donor support for PRSCs either directly through cofinancing (as indicated by several donors) or indirectly through equivalent “results-oriented”
programs o f their own. In preparing the PRSC, the Bank w i l l continue to work closely with the
Fund on macroeconomic monitoring and the overall coordination o f policy reform. In particular,
the Bank’s proposed PRSC i s being coordinated with the Funds proposed PRGF arrangement in
order to provide for streamlined policy conditionality. The timing i s also synchronized, as the
Fund i s likely to go to i t s Board with the PRGF in October 2005. In addition, the Bank and Fund
are working closely together on two core areas of the CAS (PFM and PSD).

138.
The jiducialy environment in Cambodia merits special attention in the context of
programmatic lending. The joint World Bank-ADB IFAPER 2003, concludes that “weaknesses in
the public expenditure and financial management systems not only have high costs in terms of

- 42 allocative and operational efficiency, but also create unacceptably high levels of fiduciary risk to
public funds." Based on this diagnosis the Government, with the support of i t s partners, has
developed a sequenced PFM reform program that i s expected to yield significant results over the
CAS period in terms of lowering the overall fiduciary risk level. Special fiduciary measures will
be considered in designing PRSC operations.

139. The key principles of PRSCs would therefore include: government-owned programs; high
degree of political commitment by the Government through a high visibility program; strong links
with the poverty reduction strategy and integration with the RS and the NSDP; aid to be provided
based on actions already taken, thereby reinforcing the l i n k s between implementation of reforms
and donor support; alignment o f donor support behind a common reform agenda; reduced
transactions costs of delivering aid; solid monitoring of results; and safeguards to reduce fiduciary
risks.
140. Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA). The Bank will continue to undertake a
significant program of AAA that will be clustered around the two pillars (and the six objectives) o f

- 43 the CAS to underpin our ongoing policy dialogue, project preparation activities, and push for
donor coordination and aid effectiveness (Box 9).

141. The AAA work w i l l be structured according to the AAA cycle approach, whereby the
inputs are chosen to maximize results. Each activity i s chosen, designed and implemented from
the outset as part of a thought-through medium-term strategy that builds partnerships and leads

into more detailed advisory work, lending operations, and better aid coordination. Examples from
Cambodia o f the successful application of such an approach include PSD and PFM reform, in both
of which core ESW products (the Investment Climate Assessment and the IFAPER, respectively)
laid the groundwork for a government reform program and supporting Bank investment project.
Ths approach aims to minimize the number of stand-alone studies (which the CCR and CAE
found to be of limited value), instead integrating AAA work more seamlessly with advice on

- 44 policy reforms, investment operations, and aid coordination. The Public Expenditure Tracking
Survey (PETS) in education i s another example of AAA work clearly designed from the start to
have a strategic input to sector dialogue and policy and institutional reform. World Bank Institute
support will be integrated with other AAA work to support the six CAS objectives.
142. In line with this approach and with the recommendations of the Bank’s LICUS review
(Box 4 above), the Bank will seek to undertake analytical work as part of (either leading or
supporting) multi-partner teams, using the opportunity of analytical exercises to build consensus
and institutional capacity around problem identijcation and policy options. One of the first such
opportunities will be in the preparation of the Poverty Assessment, in which the Bank will attempt
to draw in a broad range of partners (the Government, other donors, NGOs and independent

research institutes) to produce a synthesis and further elaboration of the state of knowledge of
poverty in Cambodia. This poverty assessment will, i t i s hoped, provide the analytical foundation
for the policy actions identified in the new NSDP (2006-2010).

143.
The Bank will also ensure that it draws on up-to-date socio-political analysis throughout
the implementation of the CAS. Once again, the LICUS review suggests that the understanding
obtained from such analysis i s likely to be extremely important in an environment with weak and
volatile institutions. I t suggests that an accurate assessment of the governance environment and of
the political risk factors should underpin the implementation of the Bank’s program and the
understanding o f the prospects for achieving development outcomes.

E.

LENDING
SCENARIOS AND PERFORMANCE
MONITORING
INDICATORS

144.
In FY05, Cambodia’s IDA allocation i s $38 million. For FYO6-08 (the IDA14 period), the
annual allocation o f IDA resources to Cambodia will be determined through the performancebased allocation system under the IDA14 policy framework, and i s expected to be in the range of
US$25 million to US$45 million. The actual IDA allocation could be at the lower end of this
range, due to the volume reduction based on debt sustainability (if Cambodia i s determined to be a
highly debt-distressed country, it will receive an amount which i s 20 percent lower but on grant
terms) and other adjustments. In the outer years of this CAS period lending amounts are indicative
only, and actual amounts w i l l depend on Cambodia’s performance, i t s performance relative to the
performance o f other IDA recipients, the amount of overall resources available to IDA, and the
terms o f financial assistance provided (grants versus loans). Three illustrative lending scenarios
have been developed for FYO6-08 and are presented in Table 11.

- 45 Table 11: Indicative Bank Lending Scenarios for Cambodia (FYO6-OS)

F.

MONITORING
AND EVALUATION

145. The Government recognizes the need to build i t s institutional capacity in development
management and in M&E o f the implementation and outcomes of i t s plans and strategies.
Towards this end, the restructured Government-donor TWGs will support implementation of the
RS through development o f action plans and indicators at the sector and thematic level, which will
be jointly monitored. The Bank Group will actively support the leadership o f the TWGs in which
i t participates (Table 12) in developing sector performance monitoring frameworks, ensuring that
i t measures and assesses results in a manner which complements the work o f other donors and
broader sectoral and cross-government ownership o f M&E.
146.
The CAS will be monitored by the County Team once a year. In addition, ADB, DFID,
UN and the World Bank w i l l jointly monitor and evaluate sectors in which they are involved.
Twice a year, these four partners are committed to meeting and discussing progress in
implementing their strategies, including progress against outcomes and progress in working with
other development partners. The joint review will also revisit the implementation of the
partnership principles. In another tripartite partnership discussed previously, the ADB, Japan and

- 46 the World Bank are committed to meeting in-country twice a year to monitor their programs and
forge greater synergies in the implementation o f these programs. The tripartite partners have
already met for two successive years in Tokyo to improve aid coordination and they plan to
continue with t h s very useful exercise on an annual basis. And finally, and most importantly, the
bulk o f M&E will continue through the TWGs and the Government’s annual commitment to
reforms will be implemented through the TWGs and monitored on a quarterly basis through the
GDCC and through the mid-term (half-yearly) informal CG Meeting and the annual C G Meeting.
The Harmonization Action Plan and Partnership Principles (Box 6 and Attachments 6 and 7) will
also be monitored on a six-monthly basis jointly with the Government and the donor community
with a view to significantly improving the effectiveness of the aid provided to Cambodia.
Table 12: Working with Other Donors in the Development of Sector Results Management
Frameworks: The Role of the TWGs

147. The World Bank will also continue to assist the strengthening of policy analysis and
results-oriented policy and management systems within the Govemment, building on i t s ongoing
work in reforming PFM and developing the links between PFM and cross-government, povertyfocused planning. Future support to the development of government capacities in the collection,
analysis and use o f policy-relevant socio-economic data (in planning, targeting, and policy and
program M&E) w i l l be a strategic priority, and will involve building mutually-reinforcing linkages
between a number o f trust funds designed for this purpose and core World Bank Group AAA and
lending operations. All these activities will be carefully coordinated with the activities o f other

donors seeking to support the development of government capacities to monitor and use poverty
data. The objective w i l l be to help develop a sector-wide approach to such support.

G.

PORTFOLIO
MANAGEMENT

148.
The World Bank’s portfolio includes 13 active credits totaling US$305 million and 19
grants totaling US$14.8 million. Currently there are three problem projects, which account for 23

- 47 percent of the portfolio in number and 10.6 percent in commitments. The Economic and Public
Sector Capacity Building Project (EPSCBP) i s rated unsatisfactory both in terms of
implementation progress as well as development objectives, and the Rural Investment and Local
Governance Project (RILGP) and the Forest Concession and Control Pilot Project (FCCPP) are
both rated unsatisfactory on implementation aspects alone. An attempt to restructure the EPSCBP
i s ongoing and remedial measures are being implemented on the RILGP. The FCCPP will close on
June 31, 2005. There are currently no projects potentially at risk. The realism and proactivity
indices stand at 100 percent and 50 percent, respectively. The rate of disbursement in FY03 and
FY04 averaged 27 percent and 30 percent, respectively, mostly due to the large number of old
projects in the portfolio.
149. Despite a good disbursement ratio in previous years, there are a number of generic issues
that affect portfolio performance. The January 2004 CPPR and a recent fiduciary review of 120
contracts in four projects identified the following issues: slow and cumbersame procurement, weak
financial management, delayed provision of counterpart funds, weak monitoring and evaluation
systems, poor quality o f work execution, and potential leakages o f funds.
150.
To address these issues at the country level, the World Bank Group has completed an
IFAPER and a Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR). The IFAPER identified priority
issues in the reform of public finances and public administration--notably on the critical

importance of creating an adequately remunerated, meritocratic civil service. The key findings o f
the CPAR are that the legislative and regulatory framework governing procurement activities i s
fragmented and incomplete; knowledge o f procurement procedures i s weak in many sector
agencies; and accountability mechanisms are almost inexistent. Following discussions with the
World Bank on the findings of these assessments, the Government has recently launched a P F M
Reform Program which will address the systemic issues raised (Pillar 1, CAS Objective 3).
Failure to comply with this agenda will push the World Bank’s program in Cambodia into a low
case.
151. While these measures are intended to gradually improve the Government’s own
procurement practices and fiduciary controls, the World Bank Group i s also talung i t s own
measures to insulate (to the extent possible) World Bank-financed projects from the corrupt
environment in which they operate. In consultation with the Government, the World Bank
undertook an in-depth Fiduciary Review of four projects in Cambodia that represent about 20
percent by number and 25 percent by value of the current portfolio. The objective of the Fiduciary
Review was to identify how and at which stages o f the project cycle leakages o f funds may occur
and to design measures to minimize leakages. The work was conducted in two stages by a joint
team from the World Bank‘s Country Team and the Department o f Institutional Integrity (INT)
over the period July-December 2004. Experience gained from similar programs in Indonesia and
Vietnam was used and the methodology employed was that in use by INT to detect indicators o f
fraudulent practice and other irregularities in the absence of any specific prior allegations.
152. The recently completed Fiduciary Review confirms that our regular procurement and
financial management procedures are not always sufficient to prevent leakages and misuse o f
funds. Clear indicators of collusion, fraud and poor quality o f execution, mainly on small
contracts, and weak financial management were uncovered.
153.
Consistent with the focus o f this CAS on governance issues and given the need to
significantly reduce the fiduciary and other risks to the portfolio, the World Bank intends to take a
number o f additional steps to safeguard the activities i t finances. These will be agreed with the
Government and incorporated in project documents and agreements, and include:
Identify spec@ anti-corruption measures as part of the project readiness criteria filter.
These would include identifying and addressing project-specific fiduciary risks, empowering

beneficiaries and civil society to monitor project performance and outcomes, enhancing

- 48 transparency and information flows to facilitate such monitoring and oversight, evaluating the
internal financial control environment. etc.
Improve social and environmental safeguards. T o make effective use of the World Banks
social and environment safeguards, the World Bank will review the Government’s capacity to

implement safeguard policies, support the development and implementation of national
safeguard policies, and establish improved mechanisms for reporting and handling
complaints.

.

Strengthen procurement mechanisms in project design and implementation through:

=

.

.
.

Tighter procedures for national competitive bidding, ensuring wider advertising, removal
of geographic restrictions and use of post-qualification rather than pre-qualification or preregistration processes.
Tighter shopping procedures by setting a lower threshold that restricts utilization,
requiring mandatory advertising and submission of sealed bids, public bid openings and
utilization of the UN procurement agency (IAPSO) whenever possible.
Encouraging the Government to rationalize the composition of bid evaluation committees,
and requiring early disclosure of bid evaluation results and participation of end
usersheneficiaries in the procurement process.
Improving post-procurement review procedures (going beyond compliance on paper to
address quality, price and timeliness of delivery, as well as indications of fraud).
Establishing an effective complaints mechanism to provide unsuccessful bidders with a
simple means of protesting contract awards.

Strengthen jnancial management systems in project design and implementation. T h i s would

include helping the Government prepare and implement Standard Operating Procedures
(including a Financial Management Manual, Procurement Manual and Standard Bidding
documents); improving financial management systems, focusing on strong internal controls
for revenue and expenditure processing and management and relevant and timely reporting;
bundling most project audits under one single contract to increase timeliness and quality o f
project audits; and ensuring such audits include a review of the internal control environment,
financial internal controls and systems, and the reliability of financial statements and
compliance.
e

Agree with the Govemment to enhance disclosure beyond the World Bank’s own
requirements by routinely disclosing annual procurement plans, annual financial statements
and audit reports, and mid-term review reports. The World Bank w i l l in addition develop

strong partnerships with civil society and the media to enhance understanding and awareness
of the information being disclosed and to help monitor integnty and outcomes in World Bank
projects.

Strengthen the World Bank Group’s own supervision mechanisms. The World Bank has
substantially increased the staff and financial resources i t devotes to portfolio management in
Cambodia and i s raising the awareness of task team leaders o f the need to pay increased
attention to risks o f corruption, with procurement, financial and operations specialists placed
in the field. The World Bank also intends to conduct ongoing fiduciary reviews o f the lund

recently undertaken to identify and address problems, if necessary by redesigning ongoing
operations. I t will also assess the risk of corruption in i t s operations more systematically, and
focus i t s supervision on those operations most at risk.

The World Bank i s following up systematically on cases of noncompliance, integrity issues and audit findings, and has taken and will continue to take strong
remedial measures. This was shown in the case relating to the Demobilization and

Better enforcement.

- 49 Rehabilitation Project, where the World Bank acted promptly to declare misprocurement on a
US$7 million contract and in debarring several firms and individuals for fraudulent practices.

VI.
A.

RISKS19

R I S K S FACING
THE DEVELOPMENT
GOALS
OF THE GOVERNMENTOF CAMBODIA

154.
The successfil implementation of the Govemment's RS is subject to a number of risks.
Cambodia i s at a critical juncture as i t moves away from a post-conflict situation and towards a
more normal development paradigm. The full engagement of Cambodia in regional and world
relations has reduced political uncertainty and contributed to improved policy predictability, but i s
also forcing the nation to abide by new pressures. The joint strategies o f ADB, DFID, the UN
system, and the World Bank have been designed with measures aimed at mitigating, or managing
these risks.

155. Cambodia's global competitiveness remains fragile. Cambodia's economy i s small and
vulnerable to shocks. Recent growth has been heavily dependent on a few sectors such as garments
and tourism, which are vulnerable to adverse changes in the global market and political conditions.
If Cambodia i s unable to diversify and broaden i t s competitiveness, prospects for economic growth
and poverty reduction could be seriously undermined. The joint strategies are designed to
collectively mitigate t h i s risk by focusing assistance on improving agriculture sector productivity
and i t s market orientation, infrastructure service provision, financial sector development, and
creating the enabling environment for private sector growth in general, and SMEs in particular.
156.
Weak capacity in PFM and inadequate incentives for the civil service breeds corruption,
constraints delivery of key public services and retards implementation of key reforms. Inadequate
capacity to raise and manage public finances i s a key constraint o f the Government's ability to
achieve i t s development objectives. This difficulty i s worsened by low public sector salaries,

which force public servants to depend on unofficial charges or other income earning opportunities
to secure a living wage. These factors have constrained the delivery o f public services, and made
corruption a major problem. B y working together with development partners on a comprehensive
PFM reform program that incorporates systematic approaches to corruption prevention and
positive action on the issue of civil service incentives, the four institutions will aim to mitigate and
manage this risk. Support for local governance i s designed to strengthen local voice in the
Government, improve public service delivery and reduce opportunities for corruption.

157. The various govemance initiatives fall short of expectations. There i s clear recognition
among the Government and development partners that improving governance i s essential for
improved development effectiveness. Most development partners have increased their focus on
governance and have introduced projects and programs in this area to help build government
capacity to govern itself better, as well as mechanisms to boost public accountability. However,
governance reforms are a long and complex process that requires deep and meaningful reforms in
institutions, consensus, strong internal conviction and ownershlp. This will not be easy and there
may be a temptation to substitute process for genuine reforms if the commitment to reforms i s
weak. T o minimize this risk, the assistance provided by the three institutions w i l l be conditioned
on the adequacy o f the reform effort in that the nature and volume o f assistance will be clearly
linked to progress on reforms.

l9

Note that in t h i s CAS the analysis o f risks facing the Government's medium term goals (part A) i s common text with
ADB and DFID; Part B addresses the specific risks to the timely and effective implementation of the Bank's
program.

- 50 158. Donor coordination does not improve, and transaction costs for the Govemment
increases. Better donor coordination must move beyond better relations and coordination
discussions into enhanced impact on the ground. There i s also a risk that the four organizations
(ADB, DFID, the UN system and the World Bank) work better together to the exclusion of
working better with other donors. To mitigate this risk, the four partners are committed to being
inclusive: better working amongst themselves i s clearly understood as being only part of a broader
effort towards better collective workmg amongst all donors in Cambodia. Recent initiatives at
restructuring the TWGs and on harmonizing donor procedures are also meant to minimize these
risks and improve the effectiveness of aid delivery.

159. Increased complexity of projects causes deterioration in quality. The quality of the
portfolio of the four partner institutions may deteriorate with increased complexity o f issues.
Policies, institutions, and human resources are relatively weaker in Cambodia than in other nations
with less traumatic histories. The joint strategies will help mitigate this risk by continuing to
provide adequate TA to support project preparation, and human resource and institutional capacity
building. There will also be a greater emphasis on participatory principles involving all
stakeholders in the design, implementation and monitoring o f projects.

B.

R I S K S FACINGTHE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE BANKGROUPCAS

160. Implementing the CAS faces both internal and external risks. These include risks related
to the Government and other stakeholders.
161. Govemment Risks. The greatest risk to the achievement of the CAS objectives i s that the
political will to address issues of governance w i l l not be forthcoming and sustained.
Implementing true governance reforms will require long-term and enthusiastic government
engagement, and while the Government has shown the commitment to addressing many issues,
recent political developments show that the Government’s position can be fragile and there i s some
danger that lack of political cohesion could undermine the commitment and resolve to pursue
reforms. Vested interests may also continue to hamper attempts to implement the reform program.
In addition, the Government will need to deliver an ambitious series of PFM and PSD reforms in
order to reach their growth targets and mitigate the growth and poverty impacts o f the end o f the
MFA. An extremely large Government with diffuse responsibility, limited capacity and lack of
progress in civil service reform are further risks. Lastly, government revenues andor donor
support are s t i l l insufficient to raise government wages to a level that i s adequate enough to reduce
dependence on patronage. The World Bank will address these issues by building coalitions for
reform through working with champions for reforms. The World Bank will also work to gradually
build commitment in areas where champions are currently lacking and ensure that resources
committed are contributing sufficiently to the achievement o f results.
162. Other Stakeholder Risks. Given the level of activity in the donor community in Cambodia,
there i s a risk that while donors commit to the governance agenda in principle, they will, in
practice, continue to provide large amounts of assistance without a strong focus on results. There
i s also some danger that stakeholder expectations will not be met, particularly in difficult reform
areas like forestry, and the World Bank will be blamed. On the basis of experience during the last
CAS period, it i s necessary to consider the possibility o f difficult relationships with NGOs and
civil society groups, and to think about how to avoid andor mitigate the risks that this would
entail. The World Bank will mitigate these risks by constant communication with donors and civil
society on many levels, Le., getting agreement on a more focused reform agenda through the C G
Meeting process, alignment to the NSDP and sectoral strategies, multi-donor participation in the
PRSC program, and high-level management support and communication with donor head offices.
In addition, the Bank Group will increase communication and outreach to ensure that i t s role,
challenges, and risks are well understood.

- 51 VII.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

163. The World Bank review o f Cambodia's development progress and prospects produced
before the last (December 2004) C G Meeting concluded that Cambodia was "at a crossroads." It
could choose either to explicitly and whole-heatedly embrace reform, or to continue with the path
taken, which has not yet led to significant or sustainable poverty reduction, and i s increasingly
unlikely to do so in the post-MFA world. T h i s CAS i s intended to support the Government in
choosing and following the harder path of systematic reform. I t i s intended to build on the lessons
the Bank Group has learned to date and to support recent positive developments in government
commitments and in improved donor behavior. In doing so, i t aims to bring the Bank Group's
lending and knowledge instruments to bear on the problems that face Cambodia in i t s long-term
transition from post-conflict to "normal" development.

- 52 -

K I N G D O M OF CAMBODIA

2005 CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Country:

Cambodia

Date of CAS:

February 7,2000

Period covered b y the CAS Completion Report:

F Y O O - March 2005

CAS Completion Report completed by:

Steven N. Schonberger, Rural Sector Coordinator
Tim Conway, Poverty Specialist

Date:

March 30,2005

A. INTRODUCTION
1.
This CAS Completion Report evaluates the effectiveness o f the World Bank's last Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Cambodia. This CAS was discussed on February 7, 2000 and was
intended to cover the period F Y O O - F Y O 3 . However, elections in mid-2003 resulted in a political
impasse which was only resolved with the formation o f a new coalition Government in July 2004,
almost a year after the elections. The formulation of a new CAS has also been delayed somewhat to
reflect an agreement reached in 2003 among the Asian Development Bank (ADB), UK Department
for International Development (DFID) and the World Bank Group, in which they committed
themselves to a process of preparing their new country strategies jointly, with common consultations
and shared analytical text. T h i s report accordingly describes the implementation of the World Bank
country program in Cambodia up to the period of writing in early March 2005. Appendix 1
summarizes the progress made towards the main goals set out in the CAS and the lessons learned.
Appendices 2 and 3 compare planned and actual delivery o f lending and non-lending assistance,
respectively.
2.
Cambodia was devastated b y political violence in the 1970s. Civil war ended in 1975 in the
victory of a guerilla movement (the Khmer Rouge) that sought to uproot all pre-existing social and
political institutions in pursuit of a radical socialist revolutionary agenda. Driven from power by a
Vietnamese invasion in 1979, the Khmer Rouge, together with two non-communist guerilla
movements, continued to fight the Government throughout the 1980s. Recovery was very slow.
Military stalemate led to a ceasefire and UN-supervised transition (1991-1993) from economic
isolation, one party rule, and low-intensity civil war to rapid economic integration, a fragile multiparty electoral democracy, and, with the surrender of the final Khmer Rouge elements in 1999, peace
and territorial integrity.

3.
However, Cambodia i s s t i l l in many respects a post-conflict country in which formal
institutions o f the state remain weak relative to (politically unstable) informal institutions o f patronage
based on loyalty and reward. Rapid economic growth over the last decade appears to have made only
limited impact on poverty. What gains have been made are fragile, as the quota-led garments exports
that drove economic growth are now threatened b y the end o f the Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) on
December 31, 2004. There i s urgent need for a more diversified, inclusive and sustainable pattern of
economic growth, and for dramatic improvements in delivery o f basic services. The latter w i l l require
fundamental reforms in public financial management (PFM) and the pay and management o f civil
servants.

- 53 4.
The 2000 CAS aimed to support the transition o f Cambodia’s development efforts from a
post-conflict focus on reconstruction and rehabilitation to a focus on sustainable growth and poverty
reduction over the medium to long-term. Given the large number of donors and limited contribution
o f Bank financing to total official development assistance (ODA) in Cambodia (about 10 percent), the
CAS correctly identified the need for enhanced partnerships and donor coordination as fundamental to
improving development effectiveness in Cambodia. The CAS prioritized outcomes related to
governance, service delivery and the investment climate. These were fully consistent with
Cambodia’s own priority development objectives. The CAS also provided a well-structured
framework for monitoring implementation progress, including anticipating a “results framework” with
Bank-specific and more general indicators for each area of proposed assistance.

5.
The CAS Completion Report concludes that the CAS program was delivered b y and large as
anticipated, albeit with a significant number of projects slipping b y a year or more, and some being
dropped. Even allowing for the delay in implementation, it appears that delivery of the program
resulted in very uneven progress towards CAS outcomes. The importance o f addressing governance
and developing and sustaining broad partnerships for reform were identified in the CAS, but were not
effectively operationalized in part because of a lack of full understanding of the nature of the
governance challenge, and in part because the field presence required to lead or participate in
partnerships was late in developing. The approach adopted was also somewhat piecemeal, spreading
the Bank Group’s resources too thinly across too many sectors.
B. LONG-TERM
STRATEGIC GOALS
6.
In 2000, the CAS cited the Government’s Platform on the Second Term (1998-2003) as the
main reference point in identifying the long-term strategic goals of the Royal Government of
Cambodia (RGC). The platform focused on reducing poverty by: (i)
safeguarding social stability and
security; (ii)
building human capacity; (iii)
strengthening infrastructure and fostering an environment
for private investment; (iv) fully protecting and preserving the natural environment; (v) enhancing
national revenues in the context o f a fully accountable and transparent fiscal policy; and (vi)
encouraging the private sector as an engine o f growth, investment and employment creation. While
not cited in the CAS document, the platform was consistent with Cambodia’s First Socioeconomic
Development Plan (SEDP1) covering the years 1996 to 2000 which in addition placed emphasis on
addressing constraints to rural poverty reduction.

7.
From this set of objectives, the CAS chose to support three key pillars: namely, improved
governance, access to service delivery for the poor, and an improved policy environment for private
sector development. The choice o f these three areas as priorities for long-term development was
sensible, and remains so today. As the Government further expanded on its development priorities (in
the Second Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP2) in November 2002; the National Poverty
Reduction Strategy (NPRS-Cambodia’s PRSP) in March 2003; the Cambodian Millennium
Development Goal Report (CMDGR) in July 2003; and the Rectangular Strategy in 2004), these three
pillars remained relevant and compatible with what the Government and i t s partners saw as priority
needs.
8.
The medium-term reform strategy o f the Government, as laid out in the Letter of
Development Policy that accompanied the FYOO SAC, was to increase domestic revenue
mobilization, improve inadequate and inefficient public expenditure management and
environmentally unsustainable forest management, and reform the public sector.

- 54 C. CAS OUTCOMES
Pillar I : Good govemance

Despite important progress in revenue mobilization and the institutional framework for land
9.
management, progress in other aspects of governance was less than had been anticipated in the CAS.
10.
Progress in tackling public sector corruption focused primarily on analyses and strategies,
with little evidence of enforcement or results. Although not officially ranked b y Transparency
International, polls of perceived levels of corruption (including the Bank’s own Global Poll) place
Cambodia amongst the most corrupt countries in the region. A corruption diagnostic in May 2000
introduced improved methodologies for analyzing impacts of corruption, but the Government chose
not to disseminate the report and there was no follow up. Some training was provided to government
staff in accounting and auditing procedures and project financial management systems were
implemented in all Bank-financed projects. While a Governance Action Plan was completed with
Bank assistance by January 2001, dissemination was limited and there has been little progress in key
actions (e.g., the passage o f an anti-corruption law or imposition of administrative sanctions when
corruption was verified). International accounting standards were adopted in 2003 and laws on audit,
customs and budget discipline were promulgated but have yet to be thoroughly implemented. The
National Audit Authority was established in late 2001 and, with donor assistance, i s gradually gaining
capacity.

11.
From 2004, there has been some progress in developing RGC commitments to and programs
for tackling corruption. The Bank has used key pieces of high-quality AAA, prepared with an active
effort to include partners, to help establish a government-owned reform program. An Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment and Public Expenditure Review (IFAPER) led to the development o f a tendonor sector program of sequenced P F M reforms; an Investment Climate Assessment similarly laid
the groundwork for an RGC program of reform of the environment for private sector development.
The Banks report to the C G meeting “Cambodia: A t the Crossroads” in December 2004 helped to
establish a common donor perspective on the centrality of governance reforms for Cambodia’s longterm development

’.

Progress in legal and judicial reform was very limited. Several donors are providing
12.
technical assistance to support the definition o f legal regulations with the ongoing development of
criminal, civil, and commercial codes. A draft multi-year legislative reform program tabled at the
2001 C G meeting was finalized in 2001 and Cambodia acceded to the New York Convention on
Foreign Arbitral Awards the same year. The Council for Legal and Judicial Reform was established
in June 2002 as a senior-level coordinating mechanism for national institutions involved in legal and
judicial reform. In terms o f assistance to RGC institutions, a Royal School for Magistrates was
established and a new, more competitive and transparent salary structure outside the very low civil
service pay scales was adopted for judges and prosecutors. Problems are however systemic and w i l l
require complementary “demand-side’’ interventions (that is, interventions to help strengthen the
capacity o f non-state actors effectively to demand state delivery of the rule o f law).

13.
During the first three years o f the CAS period, the Bank carried out internal diagnostic
assessments o f Cambodia’s existing legal and judicial systems and assisted the RGC in i t s efforts to
formulate i t s formal Legal and Judicial Reform Strategy and accompanying draft Action Plans. This
Strategy was adopted in June 2003 and the Short- to Medium-Term Action Plan in November 2004.
During the 2000-2003 period, the Bank also helped to lead the donor working group on Legal and
Judicial Reform (initially a sub-committee o f the Donor Working Group on Govemance),
notwithstanding the obvious difficulty in organizing these efforts from Washington. A planned
project, however, did not materialize because o f growing concerns within the Bank regarding a lack of

’

The reports were, respectively, Enhancing Service Delivery Through Improved Resource Allocation and
InstitutionalReform; Seizing the GlobalOpportunity; and Cambodia at the Crossroads.

- 55 senior-level RGC commitment to the implementation of a concerted legal and judicial reform agenda
within the Executive and Judicial branches of the Government.
Some military demobilization occurred, but the donor-supported process came to a halt due
14.
to misprocurement. Initial progress (in Bank-led donor coordination and AAA for the design,
implementation and evaluation of a pilot program for 1,500 soldiers) led to the development o f a fullscale program for the demobilization of another 30,000 soldiers, supported by US$42 million from
five donors (including a US$22.4 million Bank credit, which had not been anticipated in the CAS).
With the transition from pilot to full-scale project, demobilization became much more problematic.
Irregularities in the registration database raised concerns regarding the potential contribution of the
program to broader defense reform. The program has been stalled since June 2003, when the Bank
declared misprocurement for a major contract for motorcycles provided as part of reintegration
assistance. In total, 16,500 soldiers were demobilized with some reintegration assistance, but with the
suspension of government implementation, monitoring has not been sufficient to determine the
current status o f the former soldiers and their families. The demobilization program did not include
any systematic land allocation. Demobilization does appear to have contributed to reduction in
defense expenditures (from 3.5 percent of GDP in 2000 to 2.8 percent in 2002), although the lack of
transparency around all defense spending i s such that the accuracy o f these figures must be treated
with caution.
Public administration reform has lagged, relative even to the modest objectives set at the time
15.
of the CAS. A medium-term vision which articulates the role o f the civil service, consistent with on-

going decentralization and fiscal constraints, has yet to be completed. There i s an on-going program
for defining civil service staffing requirements, supported b y the Bank, which could provide the basis
for adjusting the public sector wage bill, including differentiation o f wage level, in line with
functional needs. However, a s i m i l a r scheme (for “Priority Mission Groups”) approved b y the
Council of Ministers in late 2002 has been rudderless. Bank support (including AAA and a credit to
support the Economic and Public Sector Capacity Building Project to train civil servants) has
proceeded despite a difficult policy dialogue. Fundamental disagreements based on the opposition of
vested interests to reform delayed and undermined the Bank’s ability to support the reform agenda
and the functional analysis planned for 2004 was not carried out. Nonetheless, a civil service census
was completed in 2000 and 9,000 irregular or “ghost” workers were identified and removed from the
payroll.
More progress has been seen with regard to domestic revenue mobilization. Formal domestic
16.
revenue collection increased from 9 percent of GDP in 1999 to 12 percent in 2002; the share of nontax revenues has increased from 2.7 percent of GDP in 1999 to 3.2 percent o f GDP in 2002, but there
i s considerable room for improvement in both tax and non-tax revenue collection given inferences
about informal revenue collection.

17.
In the forestry sector, revenues declined from 0.3 percent o f GDP in 2000 to 0.1 percent of
GDP in 2002, reflecting the sharp decline in forestry’s contribution to GDP (from 3.4 percent o f GDP
in 2000 to 2.2 percent o f GDP in 2002), even though royalty rates have been established at
US$54/cubic meter. These declines were due in part to the suspension of logging and log transport
which the Government imposed following delays in the implementation o f concession rationalization
and concerns voiced b y donors and NGOs that commercial logging was not being effectively
controlled. A Review o f Sustainable Forestry Management Plans required under the Forest
Concessions Sub-decree resulted in several cancellations (the number o f concessions declined from
25 in 2000 to 8 in 2003). A new Forest Law was promulgated in 2002 and a Community Forestry
Sub-decree in mid-2003, and the Government has committed to the development of a National Forest
Policy. The Royal Government’s official independent forest monitor, Global Witness (GW), was
replaced by SGS towards the end of the CAS period (SGS’ appointment was confirmed in December
2003). T h i s followed two years of accusations and counter-accusations regarding access to and
release o f information, government’s commitment to enforcement, and specific allegations against
government officials. Concerns were raised b y NGOs that the new monitor would not aggressively

- 56 seek out forest crime as GW had. The quality of forest crime reporting and follow-up has been
irregular, and prosecution insufficient to serve as an effective deterrent.
18.
Bank support to the forest sector was based on AAA, carried out prior to the CAS period,
which focused on rationalizing the concession management system, while a Learning and Innovation
Credit (and conditionality under the SAC) supported the Forestry Concession Management Project.
T h i s was another difficult reform area, once again due to resistance from vested interests, but also due
to the Bank operating in the middle o f a highly contentious dialogue between the Government and
international NGOs. Despite reasonable progress on many elements o f the reform agenda, a complex
environment undermined a collaborative and positive reform process and the Bank frequently found
itself under attack (most recently in a Global Witness report o f November 2004). The Bank
contributed to funding for a multi-donor review o f the forestry sector: the recommendations arising
from this review are now being discussed between the Government and donors through the forum of
the sectoral Technical Working Group (TWG).
19.
Overall allocative efJiciency of public expenditure has improved, but actual disbursements
are often low, late and unpredictable. Total expenditures achieved slightly over the budget target in
2002 with 113 percent. Budgetary allocations to priority sectors increased from 2.3 percent to 3.6
percent of GDP between 2000 and 2002: while cash disbursement to these sectors remained slow,
reaching less than 30 percent of the budget plan for the health and education ministries in mid-2003,
progress has been made since then, with the 2002 and 2003 backlog cleared in these sectors, together
with most of the 2004 budget. Overall, however, progress in this area has been limited, despite a high
quality Public Expenditure Review carried out just prior to the CAS. Some progress has been made
where other donors (IMF and- ADB) have been active under the IMF-coordinated Technical
Cooperation Program (TCAP) and some public expenditure management training has been provided
under the TCAP. However, these developments have not resulted in substantial improvements in the
budget management process (although ADB-funded TA has supported the preparation o f MTEFs for
two ministries-education and health-with additional ministries to be added over time) and, in
general, financial management processes and procedures remain opaque and inadequate. An
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment and Public Expenditure Review in 2004 provided follow-up to
TCAP and established the basis for targeting direct Bank support through a more focused,
programmatic P F M Reform Program (PFMRP) launched b y the Prime Minister in December 2004
and supported by 10 donors.
The legal and institutional framework for land administration and management improved
20.
significantly over the CAS period. A new Ministry o f Land Management, Urban Planning and
Construction (MLMUPC) was established in 1999 and consulted with various stakeholders in the
preparation and promulgation of a new and comprehensive Land Law in 2001. An inter-ministerial
Council for Land Policy, hosted at MLMUPC, has helped to integrate all land-related issues and
provide a policy, regulatory and implementation framework for all agencies. The Ministry has been
strengthened and, with considerable donor assistance (from World Bank, ADB, GTZ and Finland),
has significantly expanded titling activities and disseminated information on land policies and
regulations. However, land titling activities remain limited in coverage, despite the creation of a
National Cadastral Commission with operational units at the national, provincial and district levels in
2002.
21.
The Ministry has started work on land use planning, establishing guidelines for Participatory
Land Use Planning (PLUP) and an inter-ministerial task force to coordinate issues relating to land use
planning, prioritizing the enforcement o f planning processes in economically important areas of the
country. Land disputes remain a concern, particularly between local communities and forest and
economic concessions. The 2001 Land Law includes provisions for limiting the size of economic
concessions and facilitating redistribution o f state lands to farmers through social concessions. The
sub-decree in support o f social concessions was passed ahead o f expectations in March 2003 and
some pilot activities are under formulation: the Bank supported these with a Poverty and Social

- 57 Impact Analysis in 2004. A framework for economic concessions was elaborated in June 2003 and a
national Working Group on Economic Concessions was established to address key concems.
The Bank has provided substantial support to the development of land policy through AAA
22.
and through lending to support the Land Management and Administration Project (LMAP). L M A P
has become the Government's primary mechanism for coordination of land-related initiatives
(including German, Finnish and more recently, Canadian assistance in addition to that provided by the
Bank). A technical working group has been formed to complement the project coordination
mechanism and assist the Government and donors in formulating a more formal, sector-wide
approach. Technical assistance from the Bank and ADB helped the Government develop a Land
Policy, a Land Law and several sub-decrees on land tenure and security. Mapping and registration
has proceeded in pilot areas as the basis for the design of the LMAP. Regular stakeholder
consultations have been an important element of the program.
Pillar 2: Greater accessfor the poor to basic social services and economic opportunities

Progress in social service delivery has generally been more positive than in the core areas of
23.
governance reform. However, improvements in physical facilities and personnel training have
outpaced gains in the accessibility and maintenance of services which have been undermined b y
corrupt practices which increase the costs of facility construction, reduce the funds actually received
at the point of service delivery, and impose unofficial costs on users o f health and education services.
24.
Although Cambodia's health indicators remain extremely poor, improvements have occurred
in several indicators, reflecting good progress in reform of the sector. The Health Sector Strategic
Plan for 2003 to 2007 has prioritized health service improvements and i s being used as the basis for
sector financing with broad donor and NGO support. Although the Bank contributed to the
development of the strategy, this contribution was limited by the absence of regular, in-country staff
engagement. This was addressed later in the CAS period, when a new staff member was recruited and
began participating actively in the health sector TWG. The Bank's main contribution to the progress
made in strengthening the framework for health service delivery was through: (i)AAA which
focused on health care financing: and (ii)
lending under the Disease Control and Health Development
Project and subsequently the Health Sector Support Project. Institutional capacity and health
infrastructure have steadily improved. Retraining of public sector health staff has been initiated as
planned, although redeployment has yet to be carried out. The funding o f communicable diseases
programs has increased significantly with support from the Global Fund and IDA grants: but, while
the availability, price and quality of medicines have improved, shortages o f essential drugs are still
encountered in health centers and referral hospitals due to unpredictable budget disbursement and
procurement delays. Budget implementation-and slow and uneven disbursement o f the recurrent
budget in particular-is a serious and long-standing constraint. While per capita contact rate with
health services has increased (to 0.38 percent in 2002), i t i s s t i l l much lower than WHO-set
international standards for l o w income countries (0.6 percent for the rural areas and 1 percent for
urban areas). The regulatory framework for private provision o f health services-identified as a
priority in the sector plan-is still to be developed. Out-of-pocket healthcare costs to households
remain high at US$34 per capita per annum.
Educational outcomes also reflected good progress. The Education Sector Support Strategy
25.
has provided a framework for donor and NGO support and facilitated monitoring and supervision of
sectoral progress, helping the Ministry to make effective use of increasing budget allocations (which
rose to 15.7 percent o f total government recurrent expenditure). Net enrolment rates in 2001/02 were
slightly higher than CAS targets (e.g., primary education rates of 87 percent, compared to 85 percent
target: and female lower secondary enrolment rates o f 16 percent, compared to 15.5 percent target).
Increases in enrolments, however, have brought about increases in the overall pupi1:teacher ratio
levels (now at 57:l). Efforts at accreditation at the tertiary level foundered in 2002, when the Council

- 58 of Ministers became heavily involved in the accreditation of individual institutions; a Sub-decree i s
now issued for each private institution o f higher learning.
26.
The Bank's program in support of education was sound, although-as in much of the Bank's
country program-in this period quite heavily oriented to analysis and piloting, taking the form of a
Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL), in the form o f the Education Quality Improvement Project
(EQIP), which has fostered greater professional dialogue on how to improve schools. Enrolment rates
have increased and repetition rates fallen in school clusters supported b y the project. The project
AAA associated with preparation of higher education sector credits led to the promulgation of a
Decree on Accreditation, although there are concerns regarding the independence of the accreditation
committee under the current institutional arrangements. An Education Sector Support Program was
developed and has become the model for coordinated, government-led sector programs. As in other
sectors, a lack of in-country presence limited the Bank's capacity to contribute to policy dialogue.
There was significant upgrading of roads before and during the CAS period. The Bank
27.
contributed to the building or rebuilding o f rural roads (a major strategic development priority o f the
Government), and helped to establish guidelines for future transport sector reform through the Road
Rehabilitation Project (although project implementation was delayed b y complications in the
procurement process and i t i s not yet clear how operation and maintenance financing w i l l be assured).
A transport strategy adopted in 2002 provides some clarification regarding management roles for
national, provincial, and rural roads. This has enhanced coordination between the relevant
government ministries, although the role of the military in road rehabilitation activities remains a
contentious issue. Despite these improvements, the quality o f transport infrastructure remains a
serious constraint to growth. A road maintenance fund was established in 2002 based on revenues
from tax on fuel but an effective mechanism for management o f the funds has yet to be established,
and contracting for road works remains nontransparent. The anticipated SWAP for roads was not
introduced.

28.
Urban water supply and sanitation coverage improved over the CAS period. Access to safe
water supply in 2000 (30 percent) exceeded the target for 2002 (17 percent), implying that i t should
be possible to reach the Cambodia MDG target o f 50 percent by 2015. However, Cambodia's sectoral
performance indicators remain amongst the lowest in the world. Through the Urban Water Supply
and Sanitation Project, the Bank supported water supply availability in Phnom Penh. The number o f
metered water connections increased and unaccounted water consumption dropped dramatically,
while average availability increased to meet and exceed the CAS target o f 16 hours per day. The
Phnom Penh Water Authority i s seen as a real success story, including the piloting and evaluation o f
innovative mechanisms for ensuring access to water supply and sanitation for poor communities. Due
to delays in delivering the Provincial and Peri-Urban Water Supply Project (originally part of the
Provincial Infrastructure Project), the Bank has not contributed directly to provincial town and rural
water supply and sanitation access in the ways originally anticipated in the CAS. Private investment
in water supply and sanitation has increased little due to the absence of appropriate regulatory
framework; a regulatory body was eventually established in July 2003.
29.
Electricity provision also improved. An Electricity Act passed in February 2001 established
institutional roles and a new legal and policy basis for electricity generation and distribution. The
Government's rural electrification strategy (combining grid expansion with support to the
development of small, independent producers) has resulted in some improvements in coverage and
reduction in prices: despite this, electricity remains extremely expensive compared to neighboring
countries. The financial position of the state-owned Electricit6 du Cambodge (EDC) remains
precarious due principally to high electricity production costs (based almost exclusively on imported
fuel or IF'P-purchased power, both payable in US dollars) and a past o f poor collection of government
arrears. As the Rural Electrification Project anticipated for F Y O l was not approved until FY03 (due in
large part to complications with potential co-financing arrangements), the Bank has not contributed
directly to electricity access. However, policy advice and studies during project preparation have
directly contributed to improving EDC's financial position.

- 59 30.
Income eaming opportunities in rural areas have improved somewhat with overall growth
and improvements in infrastructure (with more rural roads and some increase in the area under
irrigation), despite limited progress in agriculture. Allocation of investment expenditure to rural areas
has increased slightly (mainly financed through ODA) and can be expected to increase more rapidly
as the commune councils elected in 2002 have increased the political voice of rural communities and
increased the focus of the Government and donors on supporting decentralization through investment
support (including direct funding o f commune investment budgets through the Seila program). The
Bank provided direct support to rural income earning opportunities and livelihoods through a number
of projects, including the on-going Agricultural Improvement Project and the Northeast Village
Development Project. In response to the large floods in 2000, a Flood Emergency Rehabilitation
Project and supplemental Social Fund Project were appraised in F y O l to support reconstruction of
rural and national roads, irrigation systems and schools. A community-driven Rural Investment and
Local Governance Project for support to the new commune councils was approved in FY03. Overall
food security has been maintained and income earning opportunities have increased in some rural
areas. However, significant constraints-weak governance, an unattractive environment for private
investment, vulnerability to natural disasters, and limited access to land and other productive inputshave limited overall growth in agriculture and natural resources to average annual rates of only 3.2
percent per annum (compared to the CAS target o f 4.5 percent). Agricultural diversification has been
limited with rice and fisheries production continuing to account for 33 percent of agricultural and
natural resources GDP (compared to 38 percent in 2000). While specific data i s not available, the
contrast between slow growth in agriculture and rapid growth in manufacturing and services makes i t
likely that the rural-urban income gap has expanded considerably.
Pillar 3: Policy environment that encourages private investment and entrepreneurship

31.
There have been only very limited gains in the environment for private sector development
over the CAS period, despite some improvements in legislation and regulations. Important gains were
made in trade relations through bilateral agreements (e.g., quota agreements with the US and EU for
garments and footwear), multilateral agreements with ASEAN, and accession to WTO in September
2003'. Financial sector reform has improved the foundations o f the sector (which remain quite
shallow, with bank deposits representing only 12 percent of GDP and commercial bank loans only 8
percent of GDP). A poorly defined and corrupt legal system and high levels o f bribery and red tape
remain serious constraints to business activity. Some diversification in the sources o f economic
growth occurred with stronger growth in services (mainly tourism) and manufacturing (mainly
garments, which grew b y an average of 18 percent per annum and account for over 75 percent of
exports). However, the problems with the overall investment climate were reflected in the limited
growth in total investment (16.6 percent of GDP in 2002 compared to a CAS target o f 22 percent) and
in the continuing decline of FDI (which contracted b y 22 percent in 2002). Apart from the problems
arising from underdeveloped institutions for transparent and effective economic governance, growth
and diversification in the Cambodian economy are also constrained b y inadequate infrastructure and
shifts in regional and global trading opportunities.
32.
Support to the private sector has focused on coordination and capacity building to enhance
s k i l l s and increase the ability of the private sector to engage in policy dialogue. A regular private
sector forum was established by the Government with a full-time facilitator provided by IFC. The
Forum meets twice a year with the Prime Minister and his cabinet and more frequently with relevant
line ministries to address constraints in the business environment. MPDF has actively supported the
formation and consolidation o f business associations, including silk weavers and other SME-based
enterprises. Work on the framework for leasing began towards the end o f the CAS period.
Applications for IFC equity participation increased with expansion of the MFDF office in Cambodia,
but the number of qualifying sponsors remained low, due in part to weak corporate governance and in
part to the small size o f most Cambodian enterprises (and the formal private sector as a whole).

'

Cambodia was amongst the first LDCs to join the WTO. Accession was made possible with an extensive
program of support trough the IntegratedFramework mechanism.

- 60 33.
A high-profile piece of AAA work on the investment climate, finalized in August 2004,
quantified and prioritized the various barriers to investment and growth. I t also helped start to change
the perceptions of the private sector in Cambodia with regard to the Bank, perceptions which had
initially been marked b y tension because of the Banks role in supporting a tightening up of tax
concessions given out under the previous investment law. The analytical work conducted towards the
end of the CAS period has helped to improve the tone of this relationship, as private sector actors
have begun to see the Bank as a strategic ally in tackling the systematic problems they faced. I t also
galvanized a comprehensive government response in the form o f a 12-point program. The problem
that emerged from the analysis as the most serious obstacle to private sector development-that of
trade administration-is now addressed through a sub-sector SWAp, supported by a multi-donor
partnership which includes the Bank.
34.
Private participation in infrastructure (PPI) increased but with limited scope given the
continued lack of transparency in contracting, particularly for large-scale transport and tourism BOT
activities. The Bank supported several workshops and TA inputs leading to the preparation of a
Country Framework Paper for PPI in FY02. However, i t was only towards the end of the CAS period
that the Govemment requested additional assistance in developing the legal and regulatory framework
for PPI. The geographical spread o f private investment has increased for small and medium providers
of electricity and potable water services. The law on concessions has been drafted and i s scheduled
for adoption in 2005.
35.
Management o f Cambodia’s cultural heritage has improved, although this remains
concentrated on the Angkor temple complex with little management or development of other sites.
N o comprehensive conservation program has been implemented and cultural tourism development has
been pursued primarily through large scale wholesale concessions rather than community-based
activities. There has not been any IDA assistance for cultural heritage management, although IFC
did support investment in a hotel in Siem Reap.
Other CAS outcomes

36.
National capacity for poverty monitoring has improved somewhat but poverty data remains
underdeveloped. A Poverty Monitoring and Analysis Technical Unit was established with UNDP

support in the Ministry of Planning, but the training of individuals under the project largely failed to
add up to a sustainable improvement in institutional capacity. Cambodia’s first participatory poverty
assessment was carried out in 2001, and a poverty map, providing headcount estimates down to the
commune level, was prepared based on 1997 household survey data. However, the quantity and
quality of basic survey data remain far short of what i s needed. The Bank stepped in to provide gapfilling financial and technical support to the UNDP-funded 2004 Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey:
while this i s undoubtedly technically superior to the previous surveys, the inability to compare the
results (due out in mid-2005) with those obtained in 1993/94, 1997 and 1999 makes i t very hard to
establish poverty trends.

37.
The launch o f the National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS 2003-05) in 2003, combined
with the completion o f Cambodia’s first MDG report in 2003, provided a framework and initial
impetus for better linking development assistance to development outcomes. Assistance provided b y
the Bank Country Team to central and line ministries in the preparation of the NPRS-including
assistance with integration of participatory approaches-laid some foundations for cross-government
planning. However, a year o f political deadlock before and following the July 2003 elections meant
that the implementation o f reforms laid out in the NPRS (requiring the integration o f budgetary,
public investment, C G and O D A management mechanisms and enhanced capacity in line ministries)
stalled. A change in NPRS leadership as the new Government formed, combined with the roll-out b y
the new Govemment o f i t s latest vision document (the Rectangular Strategy), provided the final blow
to the profile and implementation prospects of the NPRS.

- 61 38.
Towards the end of the CAS period, donors who had in earlier years supported parallel
exercises in medium-term strategy development or M&E (see paragraph 46 below) made a public
commitment to provide support to one national strategy process and document. The Government in
December 2004 launched the process for the preparation of the new five-year National Strategic
Development Plan (NSDP 2006-2010). In March 2005, the Ministry of Planning created a new TWG
to coordinate inter-Ministerial and Government-donor interaction during NSDP preparation.

D. BANKPERFORMANCE
39.
Under the CAS, delivery of outputs (lending and non-lending support) was broadly achieved,
albeit with slippages occurring in each year. Outputs were generally o f good quality and achieved the
relevant anticipated CAS results. The Bank was also responsive to client needs by delivering nonprogrammed services. However, the Bank did not perform very well in the areas of partnership and
outreach4espite a very good CAS consultation process. This reflected, in large part, the failure to
anticipate the resources required b y the field office to support these activities which was not
significantly expanded until the end of the CAS period. These deficiencies were reflected in the
difficult process of developing and generating support for the NPRS, difficulties which mirrored
problems o f donor coordination and poor understanding of the PRSP agenda amongst the
other aspects of the CAS in
Government, donors, NGOs and the media in Cambodia. This-and
which partnerships were difficult to build or sustain-reflects in large part the inadequate field
presence o f the Bank during the first few years of the CAS period. Over the last two years, however,
staff strength has increased from 2 to 28.
Portfolio p e l f o m n c e

40.
The Government implemented the reforms needed to keep Cambodia in the base case
scenario o f US$270 million over the four year period. Fourteen of fifteen new projects programmed
in the CAS were delivered, though several slipped between years, and some slipped out o f the initial
CAS period into FY04. Four out of five projects which had quality at entry reviews were rated
satisfactory. The active portfolio grew from 10 to 18 projects, and from US$245 to US$364 million,
supporting a sectorally and geographically diverse range of activities. Portfolio performance was
generally good in terms of disbursement rate, but a number of generic issues-lack o f transparency
and slow and cumbersome procurement, weak financial management, delayed provision of
counterpart funds and weak evaluation and monitoring systems-threaten portfolio quality. Towards
the end o f the CAS period the portfolio contained as many as four problem projects (accounting for 15
percent o f the portfolio), mainly in "difficult" sectors (forestry and demobilization). T o address these
issues at the country level, the Bank Group has completed an Integrated Fiduciary Assessment and
Public Expenditure Review (IFAPER) and a Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR).
Quarterly portfolio monitoring was initiated with the Government and a joint portfolio strengthening
program identified with ADB (although implementation o f the latter was delayed).
41.
An ambitious program of 18 AAA products was delivered, including several high-profile
studies and strategic documents (e.g., support for the Governance Action Plan and the Integrated
Framework for Trade). Cross-sectoral country team support was provided to the preparation of
Cambodia's I-PRSP and NPRS, the Joint Staff Assessment, the IFAPER, and in support of the Bank's
role as co-chair o f C G meetings. IDA, M P D F and IFC worked closely to develop a program for PSD
including assistance to banks and SMEs (MPDF) and facilitation o f the Private Sector Forum (IFC).
The Bank also supported the Integrated Framework studies which led to Cambodia's WTO accession
and delivered a detailed assessment of the constraints to enhanced competitiveness and investment,
which-as with the IFAPER-evolved directly into a government reform program and multi-donor
support program. The Bank has also supported an improved framework for private participation in
infrastructure.

- 62 42.
Utilization of trust fpnds (which amounted to US$11 million b y the end of the CAS period)
was constrained by limited knowledge and understanding o f trust fund opportunities within the
Government and amongst project counterparts. Only 4 o f the 14 new operations had formal cofinancing or parallel financing arrangements, further limiting resource mobilization.
43.
The Bank demonstrated an ability to respond to urgent needs and unforeseen opportunities:
for example, b y providing emergency assistance for rebuilding flood-damaged infrastructure in 2000
(via a supplemental Social Fund credit and a stand-alone Flood Emergency Rehabilitation Project
credit), and by assisting Cambodia’s accession to WTO with technical support under the Integrated
Framework and WBI seminars.
Consultation, outreach and aid coordination

44.
The preparation of the CAS included several consultations with the key stakeholders and an
inventory of development issues as viewed b y communities. Community-level consultation during
implementation involved three community-driven development projects which worked on the basis of
local demand3.
I t i s important to highlight that the Bank’s engagement in forestry and demobilization did
45.
involve consultation among key stakeholders even before the identification of projects. However, the
Bank did not anticipate a need for a systematic approach to engaging civil society. In retrospect, this
might have facilitated broader understanding of the Bank’s position4. At least two projects did
demonstrate satisfactory consultative process from the design stages. In LMAP, the Bank and the
implementing Ministry consciously included NGOs and community representatives in the preparation
o f the project itself. A s i m i l a r effort was made in the education project (EQIP) and in the preparation
o f NPRS. On the other hand, several other Bank initiatives during the CAS period could not generate
sufficient participation from key stakeholders.

46.
Despite the recognition in the CAS of the importance of building partnerships, resources
devoted to this were grossly inadequate until late in the CAS period. The CAS noted that Cambodia
was not a CDF country, but i t did emphasize the important role of the Bank in strengthening donor
coordination and encouraging partnerships. However, this emphasis was not reflected in the results
framework through specific monitoring indicators, and the CAS document, while discussing SWAPS
extensively, made scant reference to the process o f developing the PRSP framework for development
assistance, despite the fact that the I-PRSP and PRSP were both deliverables under the CAS program.
CGs in Paris, Tokyo, and Phnom Penh were effective forums for exchange o f views between the
Government and donors and provided the basis for focusing the reform agenda and establishing
working groups to maintain dialogue between the annual C G meetings. However, with the exception
of a joint portfolio strengthening program with the Government and ADB, and support for the drafting
o f the I-PRSP and W R S , t h i s “architecture” was not supported with on-going support to the
Government to develop mechanisms for improved O D A management until later in the CAS period,
when the Bank provided strong support to the development o f a government-led Harmonization and
Alignment reform agenda. The Bank has also been active in the TWGs o f those sectors in which i t
participates; has participated, with ADB, DFID and (towards the end) the UN system, in a joint
country strategy preparation process; and has begun to develop, with ADB, an agreement with Japan
on the coordination of large-scale financial assistance.
These development projects were: the Social Fund, Northeast Village Development and Education Quality
Improvement. Other projects have engaged local communities on a less systematic basis.
Although systematic engagement of civil society was not anticipated in the design of the demobilization
project, such consultation did develop once the project started. This consultation, and the structured
inclusion o f civil society in the project monitoring process, were instrumental in helping the Bank to
understand and start addressing the problems that emerged. The broader conclusion - that there was
untapped potential to improve the effectiveness o f aid delivery (and service delivery more broadly) b y
providing a larger role for civil society - has been an important lesson learned during thus CAS period.

- 63 47.

Outreach was another area in which performance was unsatisfactory in the early years of the
period under review (despite high quality consultations carried out during the preparation of the
CAS), but improved towards the end. The failure to develop a systematic approach for outreach to
NGOs, the private sector and the media resulted in limited understanding o f the Bank’s activities and
limited trust in the Bank’s motives, due in large part to a partial or incorrect understanding of the
Bank’s position and role in the reform process. A lack of deliberate efforts at engagement with these
groups was in sharp contrast to the Bank’s perceived close relationship with a Government which
many in civil society viewed as inherently corrupt and more often part of the problem than the
solution to Cambodia’s challenges. As a result, in the most difficult areas of policy reform, the Bank
soon came to be perceived as the impediment to progress b y NGOs (in forestry), the private sector (on
the Law on Investment) and the media (in regard to demobilization). Over the last one to two years,
however, the practical constraints on outreach have been gradually addressed as the Country Office
has expanded. All reports are now produced in both Khmer and English and a much larger volume of
information on Bank projects and policies i s now available on the website. The Public Information
Center (PIC) receives some 300 visitors per month.

48.
The limitations in partnership and outreach were clearly seen in the NPRS preparation
process. The I-PRSP, prepared b y the Ministry of Economy and Finance, was viewed as a good
document but with very limited line ministry engagement. Preparation of the Second Five-Year Plan
(SEDP2) more or less concurrently with preparation of the full NPRS gave rise to a broad consensus
amongst donors and NGOs that the Bank and IMF were imposing another strategy document on
Cambodia. Although i t was agreed with the Government and ADB (which supported SEDP2
preparation) that the PRSP would become the implementation plan for SEDP2, in fact the two
documents lacked complementarity, reflecting the limited internalization o f the SEDP2 strategies in
the Government and the failure of the two lead donors to coordinate the overall strategy processes5.
This situation was aggravated b y UNDP’s subsequent focus on MDGs, elaborated outside both the
SEDP2 and NPRS frameworks. Given this context, and concerns that the NPRS would be a BankIMF document, the Bank decided to take a less direct supporting role and worked closely with other
donors and some NGOs to support a government-led process. While there i s s t i l l criticism of the
preparation process, the Government’s leadership was firmly established and most donors, including
the more skeptical ones, began actively supporting the NPRS as a framework for enhanced donor
coordination-until, as described above, the elections, political impasse and launch o f the Rectangular
Strategy rendered i t increasingly irrelevant.
49.
The preparation of the new National Strategic Development Plan provides an opportunity to
improve on the practices associated with the SEDP2 and NPRS (and the Cambodian Millennium
Development Goals Report o f 2003). Both donors and the Government have publicly stated that there
will be just one national document for the 2006-2010 period, and have started to put in place the
institutional arrangements to make this possible.
Overall assessment of the pe$ormance of the CAS

50.
Performance under the CAS b y the end of FY03 reflected delivery o f outputs and
achievement o f results broadly as anticipated, but with very limited impact on Cambodia’s
development outcomes, including poverty reduction. Task teams effectively delivered the agreed
program, albeit with some significant delays, with generally good quality. Most self-evaluation
results indicators were thus met. However, Cambodia’s very limited progress towards expected
outcomes in two o f the three pillars o f the CAS (governance and private sector environment), together
with poor performance in reducing poverty despite relatively high growth, suggest either
shortcomings in the assessment o f the enabling environment, and/or poor design or implementation of
key aspects of the program.
The process of NPRS preparationand i t s relationship to SEDP2 i s reviewed in detail in an OED assessment,
conducted as a country case study in a review of experiences with PRSP formulation. This assessment
was finalized in July 2004.

- 64 51.
In attempting to identify the key factors that limited progress towards CAS outcomes, the
Country Team has identified weaknesses in the development assistance framework, and weaknesses
in the governance framework. These two key limiting factors identified by the country team in the
CAS Completion Report were clearly identified in the CAS. However, ambitious plans to build donor
partnerships through sectoral approaches and to continue outreach activities initiated during CAS
consultations were not backed up with adequate resources until late in the CAS period. These plansand associated CAS resource allocations-certainly did not adequately anticipate the demands of
supporting a PRSP process. Outcomes and results in and constraints to private sector development
were clearly specified in the CAS, but with limited linkage to sectoral activities and with results
indicators defined based on sector-specific rather than cross-cutting approaches, even though the
issues identified affected all sectors.
52.
Given the weak overall governance environment in Cambodia, the key determinant of
sustainability i s the demand for CAS-supported outcomes amongst key stakeholder groups. Political
w i l l for reform i s limited given the strength of vested interests within and outside the Government.
Broader-based demand for reforms i s required as a complementary force to drive and sustain the
reform process, and to ensure the maintenance of service provision. The ability of civil society to
effectively demand and monitor the quality and quantity of services from the Government i s limited
(reflecting the legacy o f thirty years of continued political violence), but growing, and needs to be
supported.
53.
The primary analytical gap recognized b y the country team in ex-post assessment was better
analysis o f how governance problems manifest themselves in the policy development and
implementation processes, including in the context o f Bank-funded projects. In a post-conflict society
such as this, the Bank’s ability to influence results on the ground requires that its limited resources be
focused where there i s the political will and ability to implement reform. Poverty analysis, too, could
have been stronger during the CAS period. Although there were significant weaknesses in
implementation o f the 1999 household survey, little effort was made during the CAS period to extract
information to assist in understanding household status, and no supplementary poverty analysis was
carried out. Finally, gaps in the analytical process were as important as gaps in analysis. With the
exception of the Integrated Framework for Trade, the IFAPER and the investment/private sector
development assessment, analytical work was not carried out in a fully participatory manner which
limited opportunities to build broader consensus around key reforms and activities.
Extemal factors which limited real progress included highly centralized decision-makmg
54.
processes and limited high-level commitment to reforms introduced by Bank lending or AAA. L o w
civil servant salaries provide little incentive to innovate or overcome institutional or political
impediments. Capacity constraints, particularly in terms of empowerment of lower level and subnational government staff, limit the ability of projects to catalyze broader change without direct buyin from the highest levels, while systemic, centralized corruption creates incentives to resist changes
introduced b y new policies or projects.
Zntemal factors which limited progress included insufficient field support for the partnership
55.
approach (including NPRS formulation): insufficient attention to building partnerships to support the
Bank program: and failure o f the Country Team to effectively monitor and evaluate progress toward
outcomes, despite having a results framework.

E. LESSONS
LEARNED
56.

.

The review o f the last CAS provides several overall conclusions:
The foundations o f the last CAS-governance, service delivery and investment climatewere appropriate and remain so today. However, delivery o f program outputs did not lead to
indicated b y the lack o f effective
the broader impact anticipated in the CAS-as

- 65 -

.
.

implementation of new laws, policies and strategies, and b y the limited catalytic effect of
project approaches on overall service delivery.
The primary impediment to greater impact was the poor governance environment,
characterized b y the capacity o f vested interests to block reforms operating through a poorly
paid, patronage-based civil service system, weak legal protections for the poor, and a private
sector characterized b y high levels of bureaucratic intervention and unofficial charges.
Poor donor coordination accentuated the problems of weak govemance by: providing
conflicting messages to the Government; preventing the sharing o f experiences for scaling up;
imposing high transactions costs for all stakeholders; and failing to build effective
constituencies for most challenging reforms.

A stronger country team approach was needed to better utilize the CAS document as a tool for

monitoring progress. The large number o f self-evaluation indicators and outcome areas
discouraged cross-sectoral approaches in support o f the three pillars of the CAS.

A lack of selectivity in the Bank's program resulted in too broad a spread o f analytical and
investment activities, with reliance on a high number of L I L s . These characteristics o f the
Bank program made i t harder to manage, and imposed high transactions costs on the
Government.

57.

.

.

.
.

A number of lessons learned emerge that are o f value for formulation of the new CAS:
The need to focus directly and consistently on govemance as the overall cross-cutting theme
throughout the country program, if Bank activities are to have greater impact on results. The
need to focus on governance i s reinforced b y the Royal Government's own analysis and
statements (it is, for example, at the core o f the Rectangular Strategy). I t i s important to
recognize that governance reforms inevitably take longer than anticipated, given resistance to
change by vested interests within and outside government. "Demand side" approaches to good
governance (building broad constituencies for reform through outreach to civil society and the
private sector, e.g., through the provision o f information and organizational tools) are an
essential complement to more common "supply side" approaches to good governance, and
one that the World Bank Group needs to strengthen in future.

The need to improve donor coordination and partnerships. Poor donor coordination and
inadequate outreach to civil society have accentuated the problems o f weak governance and
contributed to low levels o f aid effectiveness. A serious commitment to working in a
partnership-focused approach requires a much larger field presence. The CAS consultation
process should provide the basis for continued consultations rather than be focused on the
needs of CAS document preparation.
The need for a more long-term orientation to the Bank's work, with consistent engagement in
the same sectors over time enabling the Bank to build long-term institutions and steadily
increase i t s effectiveness over time.
The need for a clear focus on results. T h i s requires (i)greater selectivity, involving the
identification and consistent application of criteria for choosing what the Bank w i l l and will
not take on with the resources available; (ii)
building stronger, results-focused cross-sectoral
teams to better inform reform design as well as to increase instruments for supporting
implementation; and (iii)
a clear definition in the CAS of the expected relationship between
World Bank inputs and activities, intermediate progress indicators, and outcomes.

- 66 -

0

- 67 -

0

*

*

- 68 -

*

e

e

e

*

e

.

.

e

.

*

.

El

*

P

Y

8

b

4

&

.

e

- 69 -

. .

b

1

b

.

a

a

0

.

.

b

.

.

a

a

a

a

a

a

.

- 70 -

. . ..

. .

...

.

.

-71 -

a

a

a

a

a

a

a .

a

a

- 72 -

8

8

2
Y

0

-73 0

Y

Y

'8,
2

m

9

. .. .. . .

. . .. . . . . .
d

- 74 -

-

Table 2. Cambodia Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
(FYOO-Dec 04)
CAS PLANS (February 2000)
PROJECTS APPROVED B Y E
US$(M)
IDA

Project

FY

1

Project

4RD
MW)
IDA

SAC
Forestry LIL
Biodiversity LIL
Education Quality LIL
IFC Investment
Subtotal

30.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
NIA
45.0

SAC
Forestry LIL
Biodiversity LIL
Education Quality LIL

30.0
4.8
1.9
5 .O

Subtotal

41.7

Health Sector Support Operation
Economic Capacity-Building Operation
Land Management Operation
Rural Electrification and Transmission Project
IFC Investment
Subtotal

30.0
3.0
5.0
40.0
NIA
78.0

Flood Emergency Rehabilitation

35.0

35.0

YO2

Public Sector Reform Operation

40.0
40.0
5.0
12.0
N/A
97.0

YO3

RuraWrovincial Infrastructure Operation
Legal Reform Operation
Higher EducatiodLeadershipDevelopment
IFC Investment
Subtotal
Basic Education Quality Improvement
Operation

Subtotal
Land Management &
Administration
Economic & Public Sector
Capacity Building

Rural Development Operation

25.0

Cultural Heritage LIL
IFC Investments
Subtotal
Subtotal FY00-03

5.0
N/A
50.0

YO0

YO1

YO4

I
I
I

20.0

Health Sector Support
Rural Investment & Local
Governance
Provincial & Peri-UrbanWater
Supply
Demobilization and Reintegratio
Subtotal

270.0

Not covered by CAS

a/ Actual, Dropped, or Forwarded to a different FY.

Subtotal

I
I

Subtotal FY00-03

24.3
5.7

30.0
27.0
22.0

16.9
18.4
84.3
191.0

-

IProvincial & Rural Infrastructure

20.0

ITransmissions
Subtotal

40.0

I

60.0

- 75 -

-

Table 3. Cambodia Nonlending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY2000-2005)

FY
FYOO

7YO1

FY02

Poverty Assessment and Strategy Report

Actual

Diagnostic Study on Governance and Corruption

Actual (FYO1)

Analytical Sector Notes for CAS

Dropped

Rural Electrification

Dropped

Water Sanitation Policy

Dropped

Land Policy and Issues Note, Land Study/Analysis

Actual (FYO1)

Governance Analysis and Action Plan

Actual (FYO1)

Design of Demobilization Pilot Program

Actual

Public Sector Accounting and Auditing

Actual

Socioeconomic Survey

Planned (FY05)

Private Sector Forum

0ngoing

IFC: TA for small businesses

0ngoing

WBI Activities (demand driven)
LegaUJudicial Assessment

0ngoing
Actual (draft FY04)

Country Framework Report for PPI

Actual (FY03)

Healthcare Financing Study

Actual (FY02)

Public Institutional Review

Dropped

Capacity-buildingfor Poverty Monitoring

Actual (FY04/05)

Support for PRSP Preparation

Actual

Transport Strategy Support

Actual (FY04/05)

Private Sector Forum

0ngoing

IFC: TA for Small Businesses

Ongoing

WBI Activities (demand driven)

Ongoing

Participatory Poverty Assessment

Actual (FY04105)

Support for PRSP Preparation

Actual

Rural Development Strategy

Actual (FY04/05)

Capacity-building for Poverty Monitoring

Actual (FY04/05)

Private Sector Forum

Ongoing

IFC: TA for small businesses

0ngoing
Ongoing
Integrated Framework for Trade

WBI Activities (demand driven)
Additional Actual Products
FY03

FY04

Support for PRSP preparation

Actual

Private Sector Forum

Ongoing

IFC: TA for Small .Businesses

Ongoing

WBI Activities (demand driven)
Additional Actual Products

0ngoing
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment and Public Expenditure Review
(includes CFAA and CPAR)

Investment Climate Assessment

Actual

Social Land Concession PSIA

Actual

Country Gender Assessment

Actual

Value Chain Analysis

Actual

Environment Monitor

Actual

Civil Society Assessment
Rural Sector Strategy Note

Ongoing
Ongoing

PPI Study

Ongoing

Sources of Growth and Employment

Ongoing

Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
FY05

0ngoing

Mixed methods research into household poverty dynamics Ongoing
Social Protection Strategy Note
Actual
Education Assessment

0ngoing

-76 -

-77 -

I

9..

...

h

8.

..

- 78 -

I .

698

* . . .
*

.

.

.

- 79 -

I

I

-81 -

.... .

- 83 -

- 84 -

- 85 -

I

C
c

d

4

I

i

>

3

3

8

E

8

- 86 -

- 87 -

- 88 a

SF!

..B

-8

c

.3

cd

8

3

3

Pi

vi

- 89 -

-r

- 90 Attachment 4
CAS Response to Gender Assessment Findings
F a i r Share for Women:
Conclusion
! The challenge of economic empowerment
ncreases as the adult population expands
Formal paid employment
opportunities need to expand
rapidly to absorb a growing
workforce
A broader range o f formal
employment choices i s needed for
both men and women
Employment opportunities in rural
areas are limited and unreliable
‘1. Poor rural women do not have access to
resources and services that would help
Most farmers who are women do
not have access to the resource
they need
Basic services (e.g., roads and
water supply) are a priority for
poor women and men alike
VI. Gender inequality in access to services
is most severe among the poor and in rural
zreas
Education gender ratios worse in
rural areas
Current health services not
reaching rural areas especially
women and girls
IV. The vulnerable have little support
available
HIV/AIDS moving to broader
population
Violence against women
V. Social, legal and political institutions
perpetuate gender discrimination
0
Gender-related social norms have
negative effects on both men and
women
0
Participation o f women in decision
making at all levels i s essential
Judicial systems and law
enforcement agencies need to be
held accountable
VI. Institutions still struggle to mainstream
gender effectively
Weak governance and poor
financial management are a major
constraint
Mechanisms in place to integrate
gender into the budgeting and
planning process are not effective
Weak mechanisms to mainstream
in sectors

Fair Share for Women:
Recommendation

~~

World Bank Group
CAS resDonse

Improve governance to encourage
foreign investment and growth
Promote decentralized growth
Develop small and informal
enterprises
Upgrade skills and literacy o f women
in the existing labor force
Social protection for migrant
workers; monitor compliance with
labor code

PSD
W T O PSIA (EASPR)
MFDF
Corporate social
responsibility (FIAS)
Labor code
compliance study
(EASHD)

Provide women with secure access
to land and natural resources
Ensure women’s voice in planning;
locally-planned infrastructure
Develop gender-sensitive ways to
deliver extension, services and
information

LASEDLMAP
(EASRD)
RILGP (EASRD)
Womenand
Children’s JSDF
Grassroots media
AAA

Keep girls in primary school;
increase girls’ enrolment in secondary
school
Make health services affordable for
women; more rural midwives
Refine culturally-appropriate
outreach

Womenand
Children’s JSDF
Basic education
(EASHD)

~

Care and support for vulnerable
groups
Systematic approach to assist
survivors o f violence against women

0

0

HSSP Project
JSDF Grant

Develop consensus on the meaning of
gender equality in Cambodian
context
Introduce affirmative action policies
Increase women’s participation at
village level
Monitor the functioning o f the legal
and judicial system

GenderTWG
Justice for the Poor
RLGP

Improve PEM and increase
accountability
Improve mechanisms to integrate
gender into planning and budgeting
Improve collection and analysis of
data to monitor gender targets
Gender mainstreaming plans in line
agencies; build M o W V A capacity to
focus on policy and advocacy

PFM
IDF
Poverty Assessment
Gender and economic
policy AAA

-91 -

Attachment 5
Environmental Sustainability in Cambodia

State of the Environment
1.
Cambodia’s economy depends heavily on agriculture, fisheries, and natural resources.
The agricultural sector accounts for a third o f GDP, but reliance on natural resources i s even
higher in rural areas, where they provide for much direct household consumption, and serve as a
safety net when other sources fail. Almost all rural people engage in some fish harvesting, and 82
percent o f national energy consumption measured in 1995 was in the form o f fuel wood. The
unique eco-system centered on the Tonle Sap Basin supports a fishing industry which alone
provides an estimated 40-70 percent o f Cambodia’s protein intake and 5 percent of GDP, and
upon which approximately 1.7 million people (14 percent o f the total population) depend.
2.
Environmental pressures have been exacerbated b y the high population growth rate (2.8
percent over the last two decades), owing partly to the baby boom that followed the Khmer rouge
era. These pressures have led to a higher demand for natural resources, especially land. If
improperly managed, widespread land grabbing i s likely with severe impacts on poor and
vulnerable groups. Rapid urbanization has also put increasing pressure on the municipalities,
which have to manage both solid waste and wastewater generated b y residents. Furthermore,
transboundary issues involving illegal logging and wildlife trade are also on the rise despite the
agreement in 2001 among Cambodia, Lao PDR, and Vietnam to promote international
cooperation in environmental protection.

3.

Table 1 compares Cambodia’s key environmental indicators with some o f i t s neighbors.

I Population (million persons)

I

Average annual population growth
1980-2001(percent)
Land area (sq. km.)
Forest (1,000 sq. km.)
Deforestation (average annual %
change 1990-2000)

I

I

13.4

I

5.5

I

64.8

1

82.7

2.8

2.5

1.3

1.9

181,040

236,800

515,113.6

331,114

93
0.6

I
I

126
0.4

I
I

148
0.7

I

I

98
-0.5

18

14

18

Water use (% of total resources)

0.1

0.3

8

6

C02 emissions (metric tons per
capita)

0.1

0.1

3.2

0.6

Access to an improved water source
(% of pop.)

30

35

80

56

Access to improved sanitation
facilities (% of urban pop.)

58

29

97

86

Environmental expenditure (% o f
total expenditure

da

0.6

1.2-14

0.8-1

Land under protection (% o f total
land)

1

I

I

-924.
The importance o f natural resources and environmental management in Cambodia has
been recognized in the following key national policies and legislation: (i)
National Environmental
Second Five Year Socio-Economic
Action Plan (NEAP) covering the period from 1998-2002; (ii)
Land and Forest Policies; (iv) Royal Decree on the Creation
Development Plan (2001-2005); (iii)
and Designation of Protected Areas, 1993; (v) Environmental Protection and Natural Resources
Management Act 1996; (vi) Sub-decree on Water Pollution Control, 1999; (vii) Sub-decree on
Solid Waste Management, 1999; (viii) Sub-decree on Environmental Impact Assessment, 1999;
and (ix) Sub-decree on Air Pollution and Noise Disturbance Control, 2000.

5.
Yet environmental management in Cambodia remains weak. The legal framework for
environmental management does not yet fully meet the country's needs, and practical
implementation measures including coordination and enforcement lag behind. Although many
environmentally unsustainable forest concessions have been cancelled, illegal logging and land
grabbing continues. Information and sector guidelines are lacking on crucial aspects such as
allowable forestry cut, fish yields, and groundwater resources. The roles and responsibilities of
the environmental agencies at various levels need to be clarified; as many as 14 agencies are
involved in the management o f the Tonle Sap Basin. Management capacities are particularly
weak at local levels, forcing many environmental management decisions to be made centrally.
Although 20 percent o f rural cash incomes derive from common access resources, poor
stakeholder participation weakens community-based management. The Government has released
many private fishing concessions in the Tonle Sap to communities, but the regulatory framework
and local capacity for management are insufficiently developed.
Key Environmental Challenges

Decreasing Forest Cover. Forestry has made a relatively small contribution to both
national revenue and to GDP, not exceeding 4 percent and 8 percent respectively since
1994. Although growth in other sectors o f the economy have contributed to the decline of
forestry growth, the fall in logging revenues and increase in the volume o f timber
extracted during the 1990s are more a consequence o f weak governance. The
Government responded with a crack-down on illegal loggers and sawmills, and closed
many commercial forest concessions, but longer-term commitments are s t i l l needed.

Pressures from various factors contribute to the loss o f forest cover in Cambodia: (i)
many forms o f land concessions; (ii)
population growth and increasing demand for land;
(iii)
unsustainable types o f agriculture; (iv) encroachment on seasonally forest, wetland,
and protected areas; and (v) impact from development activities e.g., mining and quarries
for construction and extraction.
0

Waste and Wastewater Management. Urban population growth has averaged 3.5
percent per annum in the last two decades. In 2002, roughly 800 tons o f solid waste were
collected every day in Phnom Penh, the largest city in Cambodia with over 2 million
people. I t has been estimated that a little over 80 percent o f all solid waste i s collected
and disposed o f within Phnom Penh. This ratio drops significantly in other major cities.
Sewage and wastewater treatment and disposal are unable to meet the growing population
needs. In Phnom Penh, the sewerage system has not been maintained for more than three
decades and 80 percent o f sewers are blocked or severely damaged. Sewerage coverage i s
only about 10 percent, and o f the 194 factories in the city assessed in 2000, only eight
had on-site primary treatment and their effluents generally exceeded Cambodia's water
quality standards. During the dry season, untreated sewage i s directly discharged into

- 93 rivers, and during the wet season a mixture o f sewage and storm water backs up into
houses in low-lying areas, posing significant health risks.
Inland Fisheries and Coastal Resources Degradation. Cambodia has the fourth largest
freshwater fishery in the world, after China, India and Bangladesh. This i s remarkable
given Cambodia’s population relative to these countries, and i s possible largely due to the
productivity o f the Tonle Sap Basin. Official figures record an increase in freshwater fish
catches since 1980, but true trends are difficult to determine given that much small-scale
freshwater fishing does not appear in national statistics. Population growth, especially in
the Tonle Sap basin where around 40 percent o f households are directly dependent on
fishing, suggests that the rise in fishing efforts may have outstripped the growth in
catches over recent years. The marine fish catch has declined from a high of 40 to 36
billion tons between 1990 and 2000. The illegal use o f destructive fishing tools and
methods has undermined the long-term sustainability o f fish and marine resources. This
w i l l have adverse implications on the livelihoods o f people whose daily consumption and
cash income depend on these resources.
Poor Protection of Biodiversity and Protected Areas. Cambodia has one of the highest
protected area coverages in the region (18.3 percent), but insufficient resources have been
allocated to the responsible agencies at the national and local levels to carry out their
duties. There are many settlements within and around protected areas, and overexploitation o f forest resources i s common. Protected areas are normally surrounded b y
forest and other land concessions, making i t very difficult to ensure protection. Few
protected areas are patrolled on any consistent basis, and ongoing surveys and trade
research reveal that wildlife populations are being poached at an alarming rate.

Recently, the Government established a protected forest system for conservation o f
wildlife and forest covering 1.03 million ha. These protected forests are under the
jurisdiction o f the Ministry o f Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries, whereas other protected
areas are under the responsibility o f the Ministry o f Environment. I t remains to be seen
how the two agencies w i l l coordinate and work together to strengthen their protection
efforts.
Weak Environmental Znstitutions and Instruments. The Government has put in place
many forward-looking environment legislations and policies, but inadequate resources,
including human, financial, and physical resources have been allocated to implementation
and enforcement. In 2001, M O E received a budget o f only US$ 1.25 million or about 0.3
percent o f total government expenditure. I t i s critical that innovative sustainable
financing o f environmental protection be identified. Payment for ecological services
might provide a viable option for the Government to consider.

In addition to resources, better environmental governance needs to be provided in terms
o f clearer mandates and guidelines for implementation o f new legislation, and
coordination between management agencies. The existence o f numerous agencies
involved in the management of the Tonle Sap Basin and the division o f protected area
management between two separate ministries are examples o f overlapping jurisdictions.
Clarification o f responsibilities and transparency in management transactions w i l l ensure
proper accountability and reduce the incidence o f abuses. Appropriate regulatory
frameworks at the local level are also needed to address national-level policies and
priorities, including provision of secure land and resource tenure to provide for
community or local management.

- 94 -

Environmental Linkages to CAS Objectives

6.

Cambodia has a considerable natural resource base that has the potential to provide
sustainable benefits to the poor. Since the Cambodian economy depends heavily on natural
resources, economic growth and poverty reduction can be significantly undermined b y their overexploitation and degradation. The CAS clearly recognizes the importance o f NRM and the key
linkages between natural assets and poverty reduction. Objective 2 o f the first CAS Pillar
specifically supports the improvement of transparency and accountability in the governance of
natural resources, ensuring security of access to land for smallholders and supporting
improvements in state land management. The expected outcomes and the proposed instruments
supporting the CAS objectives are listed in Table 2.

Table 2: Environmental Outcomes and Bank Instruments
Outcomes
A. Improved provincial land use management
1. Provincial land classification & allocation maps
completed with local participation
2. Public access to state land registry

B. Accelerated land distribution & increased
number of secure land titles
1. Increasing proportion of plots e 5ha. registered
2. Increasing proportion of state land allocated to
social concessions

C. Transparency regarding generation of public
& commercial benefits from forests
Government adopts strategy for prioritizing &
monitoring forest resource management & benefits
obtained, & for resolving disputes over forest use
D. Expansion of community forestry
Annual increase in forest area under local benefitsharing
E. Improved policies & institutions for protected
areas management
1. Protected areas law submitted to National
Assembly
2. System-wide plan for protected areas
management adopted
3. Five protected areas complete management
plans & boundary demarcation through
participatory processes

Instruments
Lending
1. Land Management and Administration Project I
(ongoing)
2. Forest Concession Management and Control
Pilot Project (ongoing)
3. Biodiversity and Protected Area Management
Project (ongoing)
4. Land Management for Social and Economic
Development (FY06)
5. Land Management and Administration Project
(LMAP) I1(FY08)

AAA

1. Poverty-Environment Nexus (FY05). This T A
will improve the environmental and natural
resources management coverage of poverty
reduction efforts
2. Rural Sector Strategy (FY05)
3. Agrarian Structure in the context of Trade
Liberalization (FY06)
4. Cambodia Environment Monitor (FY06) will
focus on environmental education and
awareness raising
5. Support to Forestry Policy and Strategy
through TWG (FY06FY07)
6. Land Policy and Strategy (FY06)
7. Support to Agricultural Policy and Strategy
through TWG (FY06RY07)
8. Strategic Environment Assessment (FY07) will
provide a strategic environmental assessment of
selected priority sectors such as water, land and
forests
9. IDF Strengthening Environmental Management
Capacity at Local Levels (FY06-08)

7.
To enhance coordination with development partners, the Government signed the
Declaration on Harmonization and Alignment on December 2, 2004 in which all parties have

- 95 committed to change the way they do business in Cambodia by implementing the Harmonization
Action Plan (see Attachments 6 and 7). These processes were actively supported b y the World
Bank in i t s role as co-chair o f the C G meeting and the Bank w i l l continue to play an active role in
assisting the Government to improve donor coordination. Support i s provided in environmental
protection, capacity building, forest management, biodiversity conservation, and land
management through activities aimed at strengthening institutions and enhancing environmental
governance at the national and provincial levels, and financing infrastructure and services.
Among the main international partners supporting the government’s program are the Agence
Franqaise de Diveloppement (AFD), Asian Development Bank (ADB), Swedish International
Development Agency (Sida), United Kingdom Department o f International Development (DFID),
United Nation Development Program (UNDP), and the World Bank.
Table 3: Key Environmental and Natural Resources Indicators
Environmental strategy / action plan prepared in 1999
Group Data
Country Data

East Asia & Pacific

Low Income

Population (millions)

13.4

1,838.50

Urban population (% of total)

18.6

38.2

2,494.60
30.6

GDP ($ billions)

4.1

1,833

1,124

GNI per capita, Atlas method ($)

3 00

960

430
32,424

Agriculture

Land area (1,000 sq km)

177

15,885

Agricultural land (% of land area)

30

50

43

Irrigated land (% of crop land)

7.1

34.7

26.3
710

0

2,077

Food production index (1989-91 = 100)

159

171

136

Populationdensity, rural (peopldsq km arable land)

274

568

510

Fertilizer consumption (100 gramsha arable land)

Forests

Forest area (1,000 sq km)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Annual deforestation (% change, 1990-2000)

93

4,238

9,031

52.9

27.2

27.1

0.6

0.2

0.8

9.2

8.4

854

518

Biodiversity
Mammal species, total known

123

Mammal species, threatened

24

Bird species, total breeding

183

Bird species, threatened
Nationally protected area (% of land area)

19
18.5

Energy
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$/kg oil equiv)

3.6

Energy use per capita (kg oil equiv)
Energy imports net (% energy use)
Electric power consumption per capita (kWh)
Share of electricity generatedby coal (%)

...

-3

-8

816

317

65.1

49.2

- 96 Table 3: Key Environmental and Natural Resources Indicators (cont’d)
Environmental strategy / action plan prepared in 1999
Group Data
Country Data

East Asia & Pacific

Low Income

Emissions and pollution

C02 emissions per unit of GDP (kglPPP$ GDP)

0.0

0.6

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

0.0

2.1

0.9

Consumption of CFCs (ODP metric tons)

94

42,259

14,561

Particulate matter (pop-weighted average-pglm3)

0.5

69

69

64

312

10

6

38,136

6,020

6,416

0.1

7.2

6.5

- agriculture (% total freshwater withdrawal)

94

81

92

Access to an improved water source (% total pop)

30

76

76

- rural (% rural pop)
- urban (% urban pop)

29

67

70

70

93

90

Access to sanitation (% total pop)

17

47

43

- rural (% rural pop)

10

36

31

56

72

71

118

42

121

18.5

38.8

21.5

7.3

9.2

8.4

Education expenditure (% GNI)

1.8

2.2

2.6

Energy depletion (% GNI)

0.0

3.4

5.9

Mineral depletion (% GNI)

0.0

0.3

0.4

Net forest depletion (% GNI)

0.9

0.1

0.8

C02 damage (% GNI)

0.1

1.8

1.3

Particulate emission damage (% GNI)

0.1

0.8

0.6

11.9

25.5

6.7

Passenger cars (per 1,000 people)
Water and sanitation

Freshwater resources per capita (m3)

- total (% total water resources)

- urban (% urban pop)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

-

National accounting aggregates 2002

Gross national savings (% GNI)

Consumption of fixed capital (% GNI)

Adjusted net savings (% GNI)
Source: The Little Green Data book (2004)

-97-

B

a

co

0
0

?
d

0
0
hl

I=

z
W

B

z

c3

i

a
0
z
a
z

0

5
Y
0

E

U

a

a

0

.-c

z

z
-

n
v)
z

I
U

0

0

c

LL

D
al

B

4n

8
c
8

z
0
F
0
a

S
v)

m

h

.-0

8
0,

s
G
e
0
c

u)

b

c

0

8

c3

U
m

P

w
sc
fn

al

c

d

._
8
>

E
a

53
z

-98 -

a
UJ

W

-a3

2!

N

8

8

x
I=

m

w

W

s

a

n

.-c

v)

-8

LZ

c

P’E;

E

8

.-c
.-m
v)

c

.S
‘E
0

n

bLi

-w

%+

02s

0
Q
0

a

8
I

U”

LL

U

5

9

W

2

2
m

Y

LL

Y

’E;

.-s
c

E

B
F

Q

m

- 99 d

8

0
d

In
0

2
E

n

z

B
z

E

a
n

0"

Ei
8

In

8

Ei

L

L

W

n

E

EB

8

d

z

c

s o

-I

'L

v)
._
.-c
E

2
m

8
0

8
0
d

0

8

0

- 100 -

o
n

o

- 101 -

:l
.-tu
0

F

0

- 102 0
m

R

E

7
x

v)

5

-

h

.-s

Y

'W
C

U

E

8
c
8

v)

.-fcn
.c

U
al

E

.g

E

-s0 -

0

0 2

8

s

=a -.P.G
Q:

v)

c

c

so
=2!

EO

88

- 103 -

E

e

LL

$2

0
c
-0
0

LL

w

z

d
0

z

- 104 -

.P

r
0
0

L

.-P

r
0
0

W

0)
S
._

n

0

na

E,

W

L

o
R

2

%8

.-E

U
W
L

W
S

x

m

v)

e
m

L

z

v)
Q

E

h

h

E

E

E

E

s

s

I

E
m

s

P
E

%
S
8

LL

Y

a0
H

8
0

u "
c

.@

m,

LL

LL .E

H

H E

W

r
0

0.
Q
VI
3

w .G

LL
W

H

LLW

H

8
z

0

0

0

0

n

n

- 105 -

I

LL

w

z

U

5

d

8
0

8
0

5

2
0

- 106 -

9

9
LL

W

r

P

(I)

0

n
0

- 107 -

Attachment 7

Declaration by the
Royal Government of Cambodia and
Development Partners
On Harmonization and Alignment
December 2,2004
Phnom Penh

- 108 -

Declaration by the
Royal Government of Cambodia and Development Partners
on Harmonization and Alignment

Introduction

The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) and Cambodia's development partners declare
their willingness to create an effective development partnership based on mutual commitment,
trust, respect and confidence. We do so in the interests of the people of Cambodia-aiming to
reduce poverty, improve our collaboration and sustain development gains towards achieving
Cambodia's Millennium Development Goals. The objective of this Declaration is to enhance aid
effectiveness through harmonization and alignment of donor and RGC practices and procedures
to achieve quality outcomes and greater development impact.
The spirit of this understanding follows from the Royal Government of Cambodia 's statement at
the Fourth Consultative Group (CG) Meeting, A New Development Cooperation Partnership
Paradigm for Cambodia (May 2000), the work of the OECDl DAC, the resolutions of the
Monterrey Consensus (March 2002), and the Rome Declaration on Harmonization (February
2003). This Declaration has been developed following discussions and exchanges at four
Harmonization and Alignment Workshops held in Cambodia during January October 2004 to
implement the Rome Declaration's commitments.

-

We the Royal Government and the development partners of Cambodia are committed to the
Rome Declaration on Harmonization and through this Declaration express our willingness to
support the following:
Rome Declaration #
:IEnsuring that development assistance is delivered in accordance with
partner country priorities, including poverty reduction strategies and similar approaches, and
that harmonization efforts are adapted to the country context.

In Cambodia, we will align our programs to existing government strategies such as the
Rectangular Strategy (RS), the National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NRSP) and the SocioEconomic Development Plan I1 (SEDPII), and we will work together to help the government
produce an integrated National Strategic Development Plan NSDP (2006-2010).
Rome Declaration #2: Reviewing and identifying ways to amend, as appropriate, our individual
institutions' and countries' policies, procedures and practices to facilitate harmonization. In
addition, we will work to reduce donor missions, reviews, and reporting, streamline
conditionalities, and simplify and harmonize documentation.

In Cambodia, we will turn best practice in the following areas into common practice:

.

working towards Sector Wide Approaches where appropriate, and in all cases we will
harmonize our resources, provision of TA and channels of delivery around one

- 109 strategy; strengthening the involvement of civil society - as appropriate - to support
the activities of government and donors in achieving the goals identified by the
government in its national polices and strategies;
working to improve the government systems--such as procurement and financial
management-to international standards so that we can adopt them; and
Harmonizing, streamlining and simplifying donor requirements through joint
formulation/ missiondprojectdworksh op/reporting etc.

Rome Declaration #3: Implementing progressively-building on experiences so far and the
messages from the regional workshops-the good practice standards or principles in
development assistance delivery and management, taking into account specific country
circumstances. We will disseminate the good practices to our managers and staff at
headquarters and in country offices and to other in-country development partners.
In Cambodia, we will produce a Partnership Report every six months for the Consultative
Group meeting and the mid-CG Meeting. These reports will take stock of progress and will
enable government and donors to share emerging good practices with the donors’
headquarters and with the international community.

Rome Declaration #4: Intensifying donor efforts to work through delegated cooperation at the
country level and increasing the flexibility of country based staff to manage country programs
and projects more effectively and efficiently.
In Cambodia, we will encourage all development partners to look at ways to provide
assistance through delegated cooperation -- especially those donors without an in-country
presence.

Rome Declaration #5: Developing, at all levels within our organizations, incentives that foster
management and staff recognition of the benefits of harmonization in the interest of increased
aid effectiveness.
In Cambodia, this will mean that increasingly we will recognize and reward results achieved
through collaboration rather than the number of inputs.

Rome Declaration #6: Providing support for country analytic work in ways that will strengthen
government’s ability to assume a greater leadership role and take ownership of development
results. In particular, we will work with partner governments to forge stronger partnerships and
will collaborate to improve the policy relevance, quality, delivery, and efficiency of country
analytic work.
In Cambodia, we will make efforts to have all analytic work carried out in harmony with the
relevant sectoral TWG, fhereby avoiding duplication, and achieving government ownership
and building government capacity. Furthermore, both the RGC and donors recognize the
importance of civil society in undertaking policy research and dialogue. Donors will support
the government in fulfilling its responsibilities to undertake open, inclusive and respectful
consultations with Cambodian civil society when undertaking studies or developing policies.

- 110-

Rome Declaration #7: Expanding or mainstreaming country-led efforts (whether begun in
particular sectors, thematic areas, or individual projects) to streamline donor procedures and
practices, including enhancing demand-driven technical cooperation.
In Cambodia, this will mean that we will make efforts to provide Technical Assistance
necessary for meeting capacity development needs identified at the sector/program level
and within the framework of the relevant sectoral TWG -- and where appropriate, in the
context of a Sector Wide Approach-so as to move towards more integrated and demanddriven technical assistance and more sustainable capacity.
Rome Declaration #8: Providing budget sector, or balance of payments support where it is
consistent with the mandate of the donor, and when appropriate policy and fiduciary
arrangements are in place. Good practice principles or standards-including alignment with
national budget cycles and national poverty reduction strategy reviews-should be used in
delivering such assistance.
In Cambodia, in addition to the actions spelled out in point 8, we will make efforts to provide
full information to RGC on ODA flows (including contributions to NGOs) in a timely manner,
to enable integration into budget cycle, improve predictability of resources, provide more
medium-term indication of donor support to Cambodia, in the context of the Medium Term
Expenditure Framework.
Rome Declaration #9: Promoting harmonized approaches in global and regional programs.
In Cambodia, we will aim to do this in the context of the Mekong River Commission, GMS,
ASEAN and other regional fora.
THE WAY FORWARD
We, the Royal Government and the development partners of Cambodia express our willingness
to implement the RGC’s National Action Plan on Harmonization and Alignment and to monitor
progress in implementing the Plan, which will be reported through the Consultative Group
process twice a year.
On its part the Royal Government of Cambodia will undertake the necessary reforms to
enhance transparency and accountability especially in the areas of procurement, financial
management and reduction of corruption.
We, the development partners will aim to make the planning and delivery of our assistance
more transparent so that we can increase the accountability of all development actors and to
improve aid effectiveness to maximize its benefits for the Cambodian people.

- 111PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
We, the undersigned, hereby confirm our willingness to jointly work on enhancing aid
effectiveness and efficiency in Cambodia.
Signed this day, 2 December 2004, in Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

For the Royal Government of Cambodia:
H.E. Keat Chhon, Mp
Senior Minister, Minister o f Economy and Finance
First Vice Chairman o f the Council for the Development o f Cambodia
Royal Government o f Cambodia

For the Development Partners:

Shyam P. Baypai
Countrv Director ADB

Y v o n R o t &Albert

Lisa K. Filipetto
Ambassador o f Australia

Elgabeth Smith
Representative o f DFID

Fumiaki Takahashi

Claewon
Rearesentative o f Sida

I
.

~ 0 g . dL.
~ Christensen
.

Resident q h r d i n a t o r

Country Manager, World Bank

-

- 112Attachment 8
World Bank Group Joint Private Sector Development Strategy for Cambodia
World Bank, International Finance Corporation, Mekong Private Sector Development Facility,
Foreign Investment Advisory Service, Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

1.
The World Bank Group’s Private Sector Development Group has worked to deliver an integrated
program o f support to Cambodia’s public, private and civil society stakeholders in achieving the
country’s medium-term vision o f private sector led growth. Informed by a jointly produced Investment
Climate Assessment that has been adopted as a key strategic document b y the Government, the thematic
focus o f the work has been on removing governance-related constraints to productivity, helping to
diversify the private sector, and private delivery o f public services. The Group has aligned policy advice,
technical assistance, private investment, high-profile dissemination events and donor coordination against
these development priorities.

I.

COUNTRYCONTEXT

2.
Cambodia i s among the world’s least developed countries as a result of decades of conflict,
international embargo, and post-war population growth. T o address deep, multi-dimensional poverty,
private sector growth i s needed to provide economic opportunity, to deliver public services, and to
provide the revenue base needed to ensure sustainable development.
The legacy of conflict. Decades o f war, ruinous policies and embargo destroyed the institutional
fabric o f civil society and commerce, as well as the human talent on which entrepreneurship i s based.
War and embargo disrupted the development o f social institutions and formal and informal rules that
provide the framework for trade and investment.
Narrow growth based on a n extremely small formal private sector. The majority o f the
population i s rural, and linked to subsistence agriculture, which has grown at less than 2 percent per
year over the past ten years. An estimated 80 percent o f families headed b y someone employed in
agriculture are poor. According to Cambodia’s Labor Force Survey, the manufacturing sector
employs less than nine percent o f the workforce, compared with over 70 percent in agriculture,
forestry, and fisheries. A large share o f the private sector operates informally, contributing minimally
to the tax base and facing limited access to finance and trade.
Extreme dependence on one export sector, and substantial risks. The remarkable growth o f the
garment sector since 1995 demonstrated the potential impact o f private sector development on
poverty. Garment sector exports grew from US$28 million in 1995 to approximately US$2 billion in
2004, employing over 270,000 people. B y the end o f 2004, after several years in which the annual
quota increase was near the 14 percent maximum allowed, Cambodia had become one o f the 20
largest exporters o f garments to the U S market. However, the quota system under which Cambodia’s
exports flourished has given way to a highly competitive marketplace in which China i s expected to
increase i t s market share to 50 percent. Cambodia now faces significant risks because i t s garments
comprise 76 percent o f i t s exports and i t produces many o f the same commodities as China. In the
Investment Climate Survey, only 16% o f the sample actually exported.

- 113 0

0

11.

Poor infrastructure. Cambodia’s low income, low population density, and history of conflict are
reflected in the poor coverage, quality and efficiency of much o f i t s infrastructure. The services that
exist are mainly concentrated in urban areas, and the substantial rural population suffers from lack of
access to markets, unsafe and unreliable water supplies, and dependence on traditional biomass forms
o f energy or high-cost alternatives.
Declining FDI over the past decade. FDI has declined steeply since 1996, when inflows reached
nearly US$300 million. F D I inflows for 2003 were US$87 million (World Development Indicators).

THE OPPORTUNITY

3.
Past performance provides hope that the private sector will respond robustly to an
improved investment climate. The formal private sector, and particularly the manufacturing sector, was
virtually non-existent following Cambodia’s first elections in 1993. Industry constituted just 15 percent
o f output, among the world’s lowest. The 1995 Survey o f Establishments indicated that only 829
businesses in Cambodia employed 10 or more employees, and garment exports were US$26 million. The
Government responded to the challenge of peace b y embracing the market, opening the economy to
private and foreign investment by dismantling much o f the central planning and state-trading
infrastructure, selling state-owned enterprises, establishing macroeconomic stability, liberalizing trade
and freeing prices. The response from investors was robust. Joint ventures and FDI project commitments
exceeded US$2.2 billion from 1994 to 1996, primarily into garments, construction and tourism. Progress
was halted in 1997, due to a combination o f political violence and a lack o f progress in further
strengthening governance.
I n a limited number of sectors, innovation and rapid growth has taken place. As a result o f the
combination o f market opportunity and evolving legal environment, Cambodia emerged as a home of
some o f the world’s more innovative private enterprises. Acleda Bank was one o f the world’s fastest
growing microcredit institutions, and one of the f i r s t microcredit institutions to evolve from NGO to
full commercial bank license. Rural electricity enterprises emerged to provide power to rural
communities despite the absence o f a national grid. Highly innovative experiments were undertaken,
with ADB support, on the outsourcing and in-sourcing o f public health services.

Garments sector. The garment sector i s less demanding of longer-term fixed capital investment, and
i s therefore more likely to grow without a well-developed legal framework and financial market. The
sector has grown phenomenally due to preferential access to 26 countries (Generalized System of
Preferences), and particularly favorable treatment from the EU and US. In 1999, Cambodia entered
into the US-Cambodia Textiles Agreement, which provides for a quota on textile and apparel imports
from Cambodia and reduced tariff rates on U S exports to Cambodia. The Agreement created an
incentive to improve working conditions by providing for an annual increase in quota o f up to 14
percent if labor conditions were found to comply with core labor standards embedded in Cambodia’s
Labor Law. Cambodia’s exports to the U S increased by 200 percent during the first two years o f the
Agreement. B y 2004, Cambodian exports to the U S alone exceeded US$1.5 billion. Cambodia i s
now attempting to compete in a post-MFA environment without benefit o f quota allocation b y
positioning itself as a destination that protects core labor standards. I t i s receiving technical support
from the International Labor Organization’s Better Factories Campaign. A recent FIAS survey
suggests a positive market response, but one that i s conditional on improvements in cost structure.
Tourism. Cambodia i s blessed to have one o f the seven wonders o f the ancient world that continues
to attract visitors from around the world. Cambodia received 1.06 million tourists in 2004, a 50
percent increase from SARS-affected 2003, and peak monthly tourist arrivals have increased by

- 114around 20,000 each o f the past two years to 120,000, leading to a massive hotel construction boom in
Siem Reap. Although there has been a considerable increase in tourist-related construction in the
Siem Reap area, there i s broad consensus- that the potential for cultural and eco-tourism, as well as
backward linkages to handicrafts and art, have not been tapped. China, whose citizens have increased
their leisure expenditure, i s currently only the seventh largest source of tourists to Cambodia behind
South Korea, Japan, USA, UK, Thailand and Taiwan. The issue o f creating a sustainable tourism
industry that w i l l effectively incorporate linkages to the agriculture sector and the preservation o f
Cambodia's tourist assets remains a challenge for the industry and the Government.

I1
I

1
0

Figure 1: International Tourist Arrivals into Cambodia

f

140,000 I
120.000 I
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
0

i

Source: Ministry of Tourism

The agro-industrial sector arguably has the highest potential for creating broad-based
employment. Agricultural output i s substantial, particularly in rice and seafood, but a large share
o f output i s not commercially marketed but sold informally to Thailand or Vietnam due to
fragmented markets and uncompetitive domestic supply chains. Four-fifths o f the exportable rice
crop i s sold as unprocessed paddy. H a l f o f arable land i s underutilized, and 80 percent o f the
population lives in the provinces with the majority involved in the agrarian sector.
Infrastructure and construction. Cambodia's infrastructure indicators per capita are the lowest
in the region, falling behind Lao PDR. There i s substantial potential to increase both public and
private investment, and there has been a history o f private participation particularly in mobile
telecom and power. As described below, a lack o f transparency and corruption in infrastructure
deals appears to be the key constraint.

0

0

Extractives. International f i r m s have discovered quantities o f off-shore o i l and gas reserves that
are believed to be commercially viable. While previously these had been located in zones subject
to territorial dispute, recent discoveries are clearly in Cambodian territory. Recent interest has
been shown in mining minerals in the North East o f Cambodia and exploring the potential of o i l
deposits close to the Tonle Sap lake. The lack o f a transparent legal and regulatory structure for
managing the concessions appears to be a constraint.
Services. The pace o f urbanization has increased, creating an increasingly viable urban market
with gradually increasing purchasing power. This has led to rapid growth o f retail trade.
However, this remains in i t s infancy. There are no modern format supermarkets or shopping
centers, very little in the form o f modern commercial banking, no capital market, and a distorted
housing market serving primarily those with access to cash savings to fund purchases. In all of
these areas, there i s great potential but foreign investors who would bring productivity-enhancing
technology are dissuaded by the investment climate.

- 115 111.

THE K E Y CHALLENGES

4.
Sustained high growth would require a more conducive environment for private sector
development and long-term investment. The Govemment and donors called for a renewed emphasis on
sustainable growth in the 2002 Consultative Group meetings, and the World Bank Group has been
working toward these objectives. In 2003, the World Bank supported an Investment Climate Survey in
2003 o f 502 enterprises in 10 sectors in five major Cambodian cities: Phnom Penh, Siem Reap, Kampong
Cham, Sihanoukville, and Battambang. These enterprises ranged in size from micro (fewer than 10
employees) to large (over 100 employees) and included both domestic f i r m s and those with foreign
ownership.

The Productivity Challenge

5.
The key challenge i s to raise productivity levels to allow more growth and employment, or
in the case of the garment sector, to retain existing employment. The results o f the I C A indicate that
total factor productivity i s 18 percentage points below India, 24 points below China, while roughly even
with Bangladesh. Because of i t s scarcity, the productivity o f capital i s high. However, TFP i s brought
down b y labor productivity, which i s roughly 65 percent behind India, 62 percent behind China, and
about 10 percentage points below Bangladesh. Labor costs are low, but do not compensate for low
productivity levels.
Figure 2
Performance Gaps (Nominal Exchange Rate, base country: India)

100

0

50

%

dB

o

-50

-100

I

1

mTFP Gap

Source: PlCS for Indla, Poland, Bangladesh. Chlna, Pakistan, Cambodia

Labor Productivity Gap

1

- 1160

The primary constraints are governance-related. Cambodia f i r m s identify corruption as their
leading constraint. Four-fifths of the private sector sampled acknowledges the necessity of paying
bribes, and 7 1 percent of large firms report that these payments are frequent. The private sector
estimates that unofficial payments cost f i r m s an average o f 5.2 percent o f total sales revenue.
Business's view o f agency integrity i s alarmingly negative, with the Judiciary and Customs viewed
the most negatively. Comparing these ratings to results from a related 1999/2000 survey, perceptions
o f corruption have not improved. Unfair and informal competition and the functioning of the
judiciary are now rated as more constraining than before.

Figure 3: Top Ten General Constraints to Private Enterprise Operation and Growth

Corruption
Crime, theft and disorder
Anti-competitive or informal practices
Regulatory Policy Uncertainty
Lega I sys temlcon f I ict re so Iutio n
Customs and Trade Regulations
Tax administration
Tax rates
Macroeconom IC Instability
Business Licensing, Operating Permits
0.00

10.00

20.00

30.00

40.00

50.00

60.00

70.00

80.00

% of Firms Identifying Problem as "Moderate", "Major" or "Very Severe"

Source: The World Bank, Cambodia PICS 2003

0

0

Trade facilitation processes are particularly constraining, with the second longest clearance times
after Pakistan and some o f the highest observed incidences of unofficial costs in any ICA. Within
Cambodia's regulatory environment, import and export processes were identified as having the
highest unofficial costs at the time o f the survey (June 2003). The Bank supported a 2003 Value
Chain Analysis which found that the cause o f high trade costs was not related to any one particular
institution, but rather the cumulative impact o f overlapping institutions, each o f which required
streamlining.
Weak governance of public-private partnerships and concessions. The institutional framework
for private participation in infrastructure (PPI) in Cambodia has been weak, as manifested b y a lack o f
clarity over roles and responsibilities within and between various government agencies with respect to
PPI design, procurement, approvals and implementation, a general lack o f transparency in the
handling o f dealings between the public and private sectors, and specifically in the negotiation and
management o f contracts between government and investors, from the initiation of a potential project
through the construction, implementation or transaction to the operation o f the project - few if any
concession agreements or negotiated contracts have been made available for audit or public scrutiny.

- 117 0

0

Closed, non-transparent transactions characterized most private infrastructure concessions.
The consequences o f these problems include non-bankable projects, higher than necessary prices to
consumers in the Cambodian economy, and a lack of information on the value-for-money received b y
the public and the RGC from infrastructure projects, due to the inability to assess the full value set o f
risks and the distribution of revenues and profits in concessions.

A lack of credible legal institutions. Progress i s being made on commercial laws and regulations,
but judicial capacity, remuneration and integrity are not being addressed. This has restricted the
ability o f the financial sector to expand services to even 10 percent o f the private sector, and
undermines investor confidence. Legal decisions are seen in the private sector as arbitrary and
subject to capture. Credible alternatives to the courts for the resolution o f commercial disputes have
not been institutionalized.

The Diversijication Challenge

6.
The second challenge of private sector development i s to broaden the base of economic
opportunity and jobs. The private sector i s exceptionally narrowly-based. The garment sector
contributes nearly four-fifths o f Cambodia's total official exports, yet, employment and the great majority
o f enterprises numerically are concentrated in agriculture and agro-industry,' which exports little and has
less than half the labor productivity o f the garment sector. For reasons o f equity, risk, and poverty
reduction, the country needs a broader base o f firms and sectors that operate at higher productivity levels.
From a cost and resources standpoint, Cambodia may have a comparative advantage in agro-industry.
However, rural markets are fragmented, with the bulk o f sales made to local individual consumers.
Figure 4: Marketing & Distribution Channels in Rural Cambodia

i
U
0 Small Business

1;
80
70
60
50

Producers/Coops

40
30

W Individual Consumers

20
10

0
Battambang

Kampong Som

Kampong
Chhnang

Kratie

Source: The World Bank, Cambodia PICS 2003

7.
To support diversification, the focus i s on integrating agro-industry and other rural f i r m s
into urban, and ultimately, international markets. This w i l l require (i)
removing impediments in such
areas as trade facilitation, inspections, and exclusive licensing; and (ii)building trade-supporting
institutions including dispute resolution, product standardization and market information systems.
Because most industries are at a formative stage, non-state institutions, including business and trade
associations are important actors in the institutional learning process.

Both statistics are somewhat misleading, since a large share o f agricultural trade and employment i s informal and not captured
in official export or industrial data.

- 118 The Service Delivery Challenge

8.
The third challenge of private sector development i s to play a role in improving access to
efficient and affordable water, electricity, transport, and telecommunication services. This can
have major impacts on Cambodian living standards and on the investment climate. Efficient
infrastructure i s essential to sustain economic growth and industrial competitiveness. Cambodia has one
o f the lowest electrification rates outside sub-Saharan Africa; i t has no power transmission system and has
no large generation capacity. Where electricity i s available, f i r m s and individual consumers face some o f
the highest energy prices in the world. Cambodia has the least developed road network in the region with
the smallest percentage o f paved roads.
I t i s difficult to see how Cambodia can address these backlogs in a short period using
9.
internal resources alone. Inadequate domestic revenue mobilization and skewed public expenditure
allocations have kept Cambodia heavily dependent on foreign aid for financing the provision of basic
goods and services. A 2002 study revealed that 65 percent o f the costs o f all infrastructure projects to be
undertaken between 1999 and 2001 had no identified source o f funding.’ Further, government resources
are able to cover less than one-third o f the total annual cost o f rehabilitation and maintenan~e.~
There i s
growing recognition around the world that the private provision of infrastructure, within an appropriate
contractual and regulatory framework, can offer services at lower unit costs, with faster implementation,
reduced whole life costs, better risk allocation, better incentives to perform, improved management o f
quality, enhanced public management, and at times generate revenues. The need for efficiency in service
delivery i s a key driver for change and creates an opportunity for growth. A number o f international
f i r m s have already made substantial investments in power, telecom, transport, and airports.

10.
However, PPI practices prevent Cambodia from enjoying the benefits of private
participation. There i s a general lack o f transparency in the negotiation and management o f contracts
between government and investors. Few if any concession agreements or negotiated contracts have been
made available for review, publication, audit, or public scrutiny. Significant gaps pervade in the legal
framework in a number o f sectors, with some over-arching sector laws s t i l l in draft, and persistent
bypassing o f existing laws and processes. Scant respect i s paid to examining and documenting contingent
and ongoing liabilities taken on by the public sector. Planning processes across sectors are generally
inadequate, and as a result, private f i r m s frequently present unsolicited offers independent o f sector plans
or in conflict with previously negotiated concessions. Little auditing o f concessions takes place prior to
or after implementation. In several sectors, there are multiple agencies providing oversight, licenses, and
permissions to operate, but limited coordination between them. In some instances, officially designated
roles and responsibilities have been over-ridden b y more senior individuals. The power sector i s welldeveloped from a regulatory standpoint, but other sectors lag. The consequences o f these problems
include unbankable projects, higher than necessary prices, unavailability o f information on the efficiency
of services and limited protection o f the public interest.

IV.

THE GOVERNMENT’S
REFORM PROGRAM

Cambodia now faces a n historic opportunity to change i t s growth path. Cambodia i s faced
11.
with a growing, stable, and integrating East Asian region, macroeconomic stability, and new market
opportunities afforded b y i t s successful bid to become the first Least Developed Country to be invited to
j o i n the WTO. Beyond WTO, the Asean Free Trade Area and China Early Harvest measures provide
Cambodia with an increasing number o f market access opportunities free o f tariffs. This provides a good

‘

World Bank and the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (2002). A Country Framework Report: Private Solutions
for Infrastructure in Cambodia.
World Bank and Asian Development Bank (2003). Cambodia - Enhancing Service Delivery through Improved Resource
Allocation and Institutional Reform: Integrated Fiduciary Assessment and Public Expenditure Review.

- 119 context to undertake a second generation o f reform focused on enabling broad-based growth. However,
without also addressing “behind the border” investment climate constraints, the extent to which market
access can be converted to employment gains i s sharply limited.
The Government has elaborated a private sector development strategy. In August 2004, the
12.
Government released i t s Rectangular Strategy, in which i t committed to “broaden the base o f growth b y
In February 2005, the
strengthening governance to attract investment and ensuring competiti~eness.”~
trade facilitation, by rationalizing government agencies
Government further described i t s platform as (i)
promotion o f
that impose high costs and delays on the private sector and reducing transaction costs; (ii)
enhancing market access and access to information; (iv)
market infrastructure and deregulation; (iii)
institution building and enhanced Rule o f Law; and (v) promoting small and medium-sized enterprises.
K e y features o f this strategy are listed below:
0

0

0

0

Implementing WTO commitments and promoting exports are cornerstones of the
Government’s strategy. Cambodia’s Protocol o f Accession commits the country to low bound
tariffs, phased implementation o f the agreements on Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS), Trade Related Investment Measures (TRIMS), the Telecom Reference Paper, and opening
key service sectors, and use o f WTO-compliant trade measures (pricing, tariffs, fees, subsidies and
customs measures inter alia) in exchange for MFN treatment b y all members. T o take advantage o f
market access, a new National Export Strategy i s being developed with support o f the International
Trade Center Gevena (ITC), which focuses on expanding the base o f exporters to include agroindustry, handicraft, aquaculture and organically-certified products.
Evolving legal infrastructure. Legal and judicial reform has been an area o f slow progress over the
past five years, but there are indications that CY05 may see the development o f a more conducive
regulatory framework. At the time o f writing, the following laws had either already been presented to
Parliament or were in an advanced stage o f the drafting process: the Company Law, the Insolvency
Law, Secured Transactions Act, C i v i l Code, the L a w on Commercial Arbitration, Sub-Decree on
Economic Concessions and L a w establishing a Commercial Court. Drawing attention to the pressing
issues o f transparency and reliability in the implementation o f the law, in March 2005, the Prime
Minister took initial steps to crack down on judicial corruption.

A Policy on Private Participation in Infrastructure and L a w on Concessions i s being considered
at the Council of Ministers. In the PPI/investment climate area, the Government has defined a clear
process for planning, approving, awarding, negotiating, and managing PPI investment, and has
enshrined this revised process in a new Concessions L a w and subdecree which i s currently under
review at the Council o f Ministers following extensive consultations with the private sector.
New investment promotion strategy. While foreign investment i s responsive to improvements in
the investment climate b y addressing the very problems identified in the investment climate review,
many countries actively promote foreign investment through investment promotion agencies. The
Council for Development of Cambodia (CDC)’s Cambodian Investment Board (CIB) currently serves
a number of administrative and regulatory functions that are affected by the Amendment to the Law
on Investment, which was approved b y the National Assembly in February 2003. The Amended L a w
on Investment explicitly moves the CIB toward serving as a facilitative and promotional agency, with
many evaluative and regulatory functions replaced by automatic systems.

~

“Our Hope, Our Strategy, Our Actions” Keynote Address, Seizing the Global Opportunity Conference, February
11.2005.

- 120 0

A Twelve-Point Plan of investment climate reforms. The Prime Minister appointed a Special InterMinisterial Task Force (SITF) to respond to the findings o f the Investment Climate Assessment. In
June 2004, the SITF defined an integrated program o f reform to reduce unofficial costs and clearance
times, while increasing public revenue. I t determined, inter alia, to create a cross-agency Reform
Team, consolidate inspection mandates across agencies, introduce selective inspections based on risk
criteria, reduce documents to a Single Administrative Document, introduce a Single Window process,
and reengineer and automate procedures. At present, five o f the twelve actions have been
implemented, and the remainder i s being implemented on a schedule through December 2005 (see
Box 1). Importantly, within the Twelve-Point Plan, the Ministry o f Commerce has substantially
reduced the cost and time required to register a business. The cost to register has been reduced b y
over $400, while the MinimumDeposit Requirement has been reduced from approximately
US$5,000 to US$l,OOO.

- 121 0

0

Performance-based compensation. The Government i s introducing, on a pilot basis, differentiated
compensation based on performance and merit in the context of Public Financial Management (PFM)
in the Ministry o f Economy and Finance. There has been a decision to, identify a proposal by May
20, 2005, to apply M e r i t Based Pay Initiative (MBPI) to the trade facilitation process. The Ministry
o f Commerce, Customs and Excise Department and Port Authority are currently working on this
proposal.
Customs reforms. As part o f the W T O accession, Cambodia i s reforming i t s customs regime
consistent with the Revised Kyoto Protocol. The law i s now before the National Assembly, and 29 o f
5 1 implementing regulations are drafted.

V.

BANKGROUPPROGRAM
AND STRATEGY

13.
The World Bank Group's PSD group has taken a programmatic approach in Cambodia, offering a
range o f complementary technical resources to serve the key thematic objectives that emerged .from our
the policy dialogue. These include (i)
removing governance-related constraints (particularly corruption)
that limit firms' productivity; (ii)building institutions to enable export diversification; and (iii)
strengthening the private sector role in public service delivery b y improving transparency and
competition.
Strengthening
governance
World Bank

IFC
MPDF

Trade Facilitation &
Competitiveness Project

Trade-Supporting
Institutions

Seizing the Global Opportunity
Conf.

Doing Business indicators

Value chain analysis

-

Legal transuarencv comuonent
coordinator of Govmmentprivate Sector F m
Supporting gender
representation
Sponsor 1'' Corporate
Citizenship Award
I

Research on PSD issues

ConsultativeGroup
Benchmarks, PRSC

Business Issues Bulletins
Corporate social responsibility

Provincial investment
climate assessment
Simplification of
provincial business
licensing / registration

-

Business Edge TV
Streamlining m>I
processes
Duty SuspensionScheme

PPIAF and
Infrastructure
sectors
Social Sectors

Private delivery of
public services

.

Gender equity

FIAS / MIGA

Broadening &
diversifying
opportunities

Investment Climate Survey
and Analysis

Sector Wide Approach

*

Removing
impediments

Transparency and competition
in "I processes

Clarifying institutional
roles for PPI

Catalytic investments in
agrc-industry, tourism,
microfinance and
infrastructure
Supplier development
Capacity building for
grassroots business
organizations, SME
managers, banks and MFIs

WTO guide for businesses
Investment Romotion
Strategy and
Capacity building for
Cambodia Investment
Board
Investment opportunities in
infrastructure
Rural electrification

Support for ADR mechanisms

Law on Concessions
Electricity, Water Laws
Telecom sector reforms

EducationLaw, Private
provision of education

Coordination takes place in both planning and executing tasks. In the recent Seizing the Global
14.
Opportunity conference, the Bank coordinated the event and contributed to the dialogue on the investment

- 122 climate, FIAS provided the content on corporate social responsibility, the Mekong Private Sector
Development Facility (MPDF) sponsored the f i r s t Corporate Citizenship Award, and I F C co-sponsored
the conference and led the dialogue on private investment. Over the past few years, the division of labor
has been that the Bank leads the policy dialogue with a focus on governance-related issues, FIAS supports
development of a sustainable framework for core labor standards, a new L a w on Investment and now on
the development of an investment promotion function, IFC coordinates the Private Sector Forum and
therefore leads the interface with the private sector, and M P D F supports access to finance initiatives,
business associations, business linkages, business service providers, and management training for SMEs.
This level o f coordination i s appreciated by the Government and has contributed to the Bank Group being
named to lead two o f three subsectors.
World Banldlnternational Development Association (IDA)

15.
The World Bank’s East Asia Private and Financial Services (EASFP) unit has played a role in
leading and coordinating the policy dialogue with the Government through Economic and Sector Work,
donor coordination and an investment operation. In 2003, the Bank released i t s Value Chain Analysis,
and in August 2004, the Bank released: Seizing the Global Opportunity: Investment Climate Assessment
and Reform Strategy. The policy dialogue around t h i s document led to the twelve-point plan described
above, as well as an investment operation for potential delivery in June 2005.
Figure 5: Overview of Proposed Trade Facilitation & Competitiveness Project (FY05)
OPPORTUNITY

CONSTRAINT

PROJECT
RESPONSE

COMPLEMENTARY
REFORMS

Facllltatlon:
lnstltutlonal
Reform B

Customs Law
Single Admin. Document (EU)
CamControl Revlew (EU)
Risk Mgmt Strategy (AusAlD)

Export
Market
Access

WTO Accession
Tariff Reform
National Export Strategy (ITC)
Ag. Quality Improvement (AQI
Better Factories (ILO)

PPI
Governance

Legal
Transparency

GOALS

,

Gov’t Concessions Law
UNDO Concessions
UNCTAD “Blue Book”
Gov’t Amended LOi
Electrlcily Law
Water Law

Commercial Court
Company Law
Insolvency Law
Commercial Arbitration

16.
Future engagement w i l l focus on implementation o f the reform agenda, deepening work on
diversification, and ensuring that a pro-poor focus. The Bank w i l l undertake a new Investment Climate
Assessment in 2006/2007.
Donor Coordination. The Bank has helped to coordinate a multi-donor response to the
17.
Government’s reform strategy, with the objective o f creating a Sector-Wide Approach. The European
Union has provided technical support to help streamlining administrative and institutional overlaps, while
AusAID i s supporting the development o f risk management capacity. The World Bank leads two donor

- 123 subcommittees supporting private sector development. Other donors involved in the trade facilitation
sub-committee are AFD, AusAID, European Commission, IMF, JICA, UNCTAD, UNDP and UNIDO.
Donors involved in the Private Participation in Infrastructure subcommittee are AFD, AusAID, FIAS,
JICA, UNCTAD and UNIDO.
International Finance Corporation (IFC)

Economic Growth and Poverty Alleviation through Private Sector Development. The
18.
missions o f I F C and the IFC-managed MPDF are to promote sustainable private sector development and
investment, reduce poverty and improve peoples’ lives. IFC invests in larger private enterprises and banks
in Cambodia and manages the Private Sector Forum, a mechanism for promoting dialogue between the
Government and the private sector. MPDF focuses on promotion o f small and medium enterprises.

IFC’s Investments in Cambodia. IFC invests in commercially viable projects that create jobs
19.
and transfer knowledge on international best practices. Often IFC investments are combined with
technical assistance to help lay the groundwork for good practices to thrive. For example, after M P D F
assisted A C L E D A Bank in improving accounting practices, organizational structure and other aspects of
i t s operations, IFC provided an equity investment o f US$1.5 million in 2000 and a US$6 million line of
credit in 2004. ACLEDA, which i s Cambodia’s only bank targeting the poor, now has over 104 outlets
spread across 14 provinces and has been able to lend to more than 117,900 low-income borrowers, nearly
70 percent o f whom are women.
20.
T o encourage sustainable tourism, IFC has provided financing o f US$1.8 million to Amansara
Resorts to develop a boutique hotel in Siem Reap. This resort i s a leader in employee compensation and
benefits, i t strongly supports the revival o f Cambodia’s traditional arts and i t i s committed to locally
sourcing supplies. IFC also supports tourism indirectly through a loan o f US$10 million to Societe
Concessionaire de 1’ Aeroport, the concessionaire that manages airports in Phnom Penh and Siem Reap.
As a result of MPDF’s extensive technical assistance, IFC has taken equity o f US$450,000 in
21.
Hagar Soya, a UHT soya milk factory launched in 2003 to employ residents o f Hagar NGO’s women’s
shelter, generate income for the N G O and produce a popular, nutritious and affordable beverage. Also as
a result o f MPDF’s efforts, I F C has provided US$5 million in financing to Canadia Bank to help the bank
develop i t s housing finance mortgage product for middle income borrowers.
Government Private Sector Forum. Funded b y I F C and the Government o f Australia through
22.
AusAid, the Govemmenflrivate Sector Forum i s a mechanism for improving the business environment,
building trust between the public and private sector, and fostering private investment. The meetings are
typically held twice per year and chaired b y the Prime Minister. Throughout the year, working groups
specializing in sectors such as agro-processing, financial services, law, tax, governance, and tourism meet
regularly in Phnom Penh and the provinces both to review and comment on proposed legislation and
identify issues for discussion at the next Forum meeting. Achievements include high-level consultation on
investment and tax law, the introduction o f private sector monitors within the Customs Department,
improved labor standards, and negotiations on cost reductions for a major road concession.
Mekong Private Sector Development Facility (MPDF)

23.
IFCMPDF, a multi-donor funded initiative o f the International Finance Corporation works at the
macro, meso and micro level to promote the development o f small and medium enterprises in Cambodia.
I F C M P D F w i l l continue to work in collaboration with government, other members o f the World Bank
Group and donors on initiatives designed to: improve the private sector climate in Cambodia; increase the

- 124 supply of financing available to SMEs; enhance prospects for trade with a focus on certain key sectors;
and improve corporate citizenship.

24.
To improve the business climate, initiatives include producing and widely distributing short
analytical pieces on key private sector issues through IFCMPDF’s quarterly Business Issues Bulletin (in
Khmer and English) and i t s weekly Khmer language television series for entrepreneurs, Business Edge
W, conducting research at the provincial level on selected key indicators o f business success that have
been developed for Doing Business worldwide, and publicizing the results to advocate for improvements
in the business climate as well as support to simplification o f business registration and licensing where
appropriate; working with certain business associations to improve their capacity to advocate with
government on behalf of members; and support donor coordination. Moreover, MPDF actively
participated with the WB/IFC Investment Climate Assessment Team to share and seek feedback on the
findings o f the investment climate survey in Cambodia in 2003.

25.
To support diversification, including prospects for trade, initiatives include reducing constraints
in supply chains o f certain key sub-sectors, including tourism and agri-businesses; providing managerial
training to improve the capacity o f S M E owners and managers; enhancing the understanding o f W T O
opportunities and challenges b y producing an accessible guide, conducting seminars and using TV and
DVDs. Diversification w i l l require access to capital. T o increase the supply o f financing and banking
services to SMEs, initiatives include mobilizing funding from international sources for local banks and
Microfinance Institutions (MFIs), providing technical support to banks, M F I s and to the Cambodia
Institute o f Banking in order to enhance the capacity o f banking staff in a range o f areas; supporting the
development o f the Cambodian microfinance association and enhancing i t s capacity to advocate with
government; facilitating the establishment o f a credit information sharing mechanism which w i l l provide
an ideal means o f objectively assessing risk and enabling banks to lend without collateral. MPDF also
supports capacity building efforts to strengthen grassroots business initiatives which are mostly impacting
rural businesses.
26.
T o improve gender equity and corporate social responsibility, initiatives include organizing
the Cambodian Corporate Citizenship Awards and raising awareness o f the business case for good
corporate citizenship, improving gender equity in the private sector b y advising the Ministry o f Women’s
Affairs on programming for women entrepreneurs, including engendering relevant PSD decrees; raising
awareness about gender issues in private sector development; working with the Private Sector Forum to
increase the participation o f women entrepreneurs; and supporting the development o f an association o f
women entrepreneurs.
Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS)

27.
FIAS has long advised the Government o f Cambodia to improve i t s L a w on Investment (LOI).
Based on FIAS recommendations, an amended LO1 was introduced and implementing sub-decrees are
under preparation. FIAS has also worked recently with the Cambodia Investment Board on the revision
o f some o f these sub-decrees. Following this, FIAS, together with MIGA, organized an investment
promotion strategic planning workshop for CIB in March 2005. The preparation o f a strategic plan was
considered desirable b y CIB management in view o f the changes to the current responsibilities o f CIB
which are likely to occur as a result o f the introduction of a new Investment L a w and proposed
implementing decrees. These changes are likely to reduce the regulatory responsibilities currently
allocated to CIB, thereby releasing resources which could be used for additional promotional activities.
Following up on the strategic planning, F I A S intends to appoint a long-term resident advisor to
implement the strategy. In addition, FIAS has been assisting the Government in seeking ways to improve
corporate social responsibility in the Cambodian based garment sector as a way o f improving the long
term competitiveness o f the sector.

- 125 -

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)

28.
MIGAs activities in Cambodia are directed toward improving the investment climate and
supporting foreign direct investment in the country. MIGA achieves these goals by providing technical
assistance (analytical and diagnostic tools as well as capacity building) to investment promotion
intermediaries. MIGA i s also a provider o f political risk insurance to foreign investors interested in
investment opportunities in Cambodia.
29.
On the technical assistance side, MIGA conducted an institutional needs assessment o f the CIl3
and subsequently held a joint F I A S M I G A investment promotion strategic planning workshop for CIB in
March 2005 (see FIAS section). As a follow-up to the workshop, MIGA and FIAS intend to support the
implementation phase o f the plan which w i l l include various forms o f capacity building programs. MIGA
currently has n o political risk insurance projects in Cambodia, but remains open to consider opportunities
in priority sectors of the Government.

- 126 Attachment 9
CAMBODIA: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
T h e country financing parameters f o r Cambodia set out b e l o w have been approved by the
Regional V i c e President, East Asia and Pacific Region, and were posted on the Bank‘s internal
website in October 2004. No changes have been made since then.

I

Item
Cost sharing. Limit o n the
proportion o f individual
project costs that the Bank
may finance.

costfinancing.
that w o u l d apply to

I

Local costfinancing. A r e the
requirements for B a n k
financing o f local expenditures
met, namely that: (i)
financing
requirements for the country’s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s o w n
resources (e.g., f r o m taxation
and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing;
and (ii)
the financing o f
foreign expenditures alone
w o u l d not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing o f
individual projects?
Taxes and duties. A r e there
any taxes and duties that the
Bank w o u l d not finance?

~~

RemarkdExplanation
Individual projects may be financed up to
100 percent, based o n merit and justification.
Bank financing o f 100 percent i s expected for
social sectors and the rural sector, including
the environment and biodiversity subsectors.
Counterpart funding will s t i l l b e encouraged
based o n project-level assessment.
In determining recurrent cost financing in
N o countryindividual projects, the B a n k will take into
level limit, but
account sustainability issues at the sector and
recurrent cost
financing w o u l d project levels. Specific criteria to be applied
at the project-level for B a n k financing o f
be temporary
recurrent costs w o u l d include: analysis o f
and based o n
specific criteria. fiscal impacts to ensure sustainability, and
appraisal that government will sustain Bankfinanced recurrent costs. Further, the B a n k
w o u l d only finance remuneration where a
sustainable and institutionalized program for
gradual financing by government i s agreed.
The B a n k w o u l d not finance ad hoc salary
supplements
The t w o requirements are met. The B a n k
Yes
expects to finance local costs up to 100
percent as needed to achieve individual
project objectives more efficiently.
Parameter
up to 100
percent

None

Taxes and duties are considered reasonable.
Any further development in local
government taxation w o u l d be monitored. At
the project-level, the B a n k w o u l d consider
whether taxes and duties constitute an
excessively high share o f projects costs.

- 127 Attachment 10
Cambodia: Debt Sustainability
(IMF, August 2004)
Under the staff‘s baseline scenario, Cambodia’s debt i s expected to be
1.
sustainable.’ The baseline scenario assumes sustained real GDP growth o f 6 percent, export
growth o f 9 percent, and broadly stable foreign aid in nominal U.S. dollars. On the fiscal
front, budgetary consolidation i s expected to begin with the 2004 budget, which would
require discretionary tax revenue measures and improvements in tax and customs
administration.

A. The Current Situation
Cambodia’s total external public debt was $3.0 billion (71 percent of GDP) at
2.
end-2003, of which $1.9 billion was owed to the United States and the Russian
Federation. Other external debts were owed largely to multilateral creditors on highly
concessional terms. Domestic public debt, all denominated in local currency, accounted for
about 5 percent o f GDP.

3.
RestructuringCambodia’s debts to the United States and the Russian
Federationin highly concessional terms, which together account for 64 percent of total
external debt, i s critical for securing debt sustainability. The baseline scenario assumes
that agreement i s reached with the U.S. by mid-2004 on comparable terms to the 1995 Paris
Club agreement (Le., flow rescheduling on Naples terms). It assumes a 40-year maturity, a
16-year grace period, and an interest rate o f 3 percent. Similar terms are assumed on the debt
owed to the Russian Federation, after an initial upfiont discount o f 70 percent. The
restructured debt would amount to $1.7 billion at the end o f 2004. The total stock o f
outstanding debt at the end o f 2004 would amount to $2.1 billion (46 percent o f GDP), or
29 percent o f GDP in net present value (NPV) terms.
B. Public Debt Sustainability
4.
Cambodia’s stock of public debt i s projected to decline after an initial increase
from 34 percent of GDP in 2004 to 35 percent of GDP in 2006 in NPV terms. In the
baseline scenario, total public sector debt in N P V terms i s expected to fall to 16 percent by
2023 if the primary deficit i s kept to about 2% percent o f GDP over the medium term and to
about 3 percent o f GDP in the longer run. The N P V o f the debt-to-revenue ratio at
237 percent in 2004 i s high, reflecting the weak revenue base. Hence, failure to improve
revenue collection steadily over time would undermine public debt sustainability.

Standard Fund templates for low income countries and sensitivity tests are used to assess
Cambodia’s debt dynamics. Tests involve applying temporary deviations o f key variables
from the baseline with magnitudes based largely on historical deviations.

- 128 -

5.
Sensitivity tests suggest that the debt dynamics are vulnerable to a real
depreciation, to debt-creating flows in the medium term, and to lower GDP growth in
the long term. A one-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004 (test BS) would increase the
NPV o f the debt-to-GDP ratio from 34 percent o f GDP in the baseline to over 50 percent o f
GDP, and the N P V o f the debt-to-revenue ratio to more than 300 percent in the medium term.
A 10 percent o f GDP increase in debt-creating flows in the first projected year (test B6), such
as might arise fiom an unexpected realization o f contingent liabilities, would increase the
NPV o f the debt-to-GDP and debt-to-revenue ratios to 40 percent and 270 percent,
respectively. If the real GDP growth rate were to fall by two standard deviations f i o m i t s
recent average (test B4), which corresponds broadly to the difference between the GDP
growth shown in the non-adjustment scenario and the baseline presented in the main text (see
paragraph 14), the N P V o f the debt-to-revenue ratio would reach about 240 percent in the
medium term.
C. External Debt Sustainability

In the baseline scenario, all debt indicators are projected to improve over time.
6.
The N P V o f the debt-to-GDP ratios are expected to fall below 20 percent, the NPV o f the
debt-to-exports ratios to fall below 30 percent and the debt service-to-exports ratio would
decline to below 2 percent in the long run.
The debt dynamics are most vulnerable to a real depreciation and export
7.
decline. A one-time 30 percent real depreciation would push up the NPV o f the debt-to-GDP
ratio to about 45 percent in the near term. A one-time t w o standard deviation shock in
exports, which i s about twice as large as the shock assumed in the non-adjustment scenario in
the main text, would raise the debt service-to-exports ratio to 4.8 percent compared with
3.4 percent in the baseline scenario, and the NPV o f the debt-to-exports ratio would rise to
91 percent compared with 58 percent in the baseline scenario in 2013. Even then, these ratios
are not high enough to threaten external viability.

D. Conclusion
The key vulnerability in Cambodia’s debt dynamics i s i t s weak fiscal revenue
8.
base. While the nominal stock of debt and service payments are modest relative to GDP, the
revenue base, currently at 11 percent o f GDP, may pose difficulties in servicing debt. A
one-time real depreciation i s also a source o f risk as it increases the size o f the stock o f debt
relative to GDP and fiscal revenue.

- 129 -

N

0

ri

s
8

- 130 -

Table 2. Cambodia: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators o f Public Sector Debt, 2003-2023
Estimate
2003

2004

2005

Projections
2001
2008

2006

2013

2023

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Basellne

64

34

34

35

35

33

27

16

64
64

33
34

32
35

32
31

32
37

31
31

26
34

14
26

64
64
64
64
64
64

34
34
34
34
58
39

36
35
36
35
57
39

37
36
36
31
56
40

38
36
36
31
54
40

31
34
35
31
38

31
28
28
34
38
31

22
11
16
36
23
18

496

231

234

231

228

216

177

113

496
496

232
241

221
242

215
243

212
245

202
238

172
226

94
181

496
496
496
496
496
496

231
240
241
239
406
214

241
240
242
240
389
269

247
231
239
241
310
265

245
234
235
242
354
259

236
222
222
235
330
246

205
181
180
224
252
201

154
116
113
244
151
121

15

51

52

53

52

51

41

23

15

50
52

49
55

49

51

48
51

41
51

40
54

39

51

56
54
54
54
84
62

51
55
55
56
83
63

51
54
54
56
81
61

56
52
52
56
11
59

48
42
42
54
60
47

32
23
22
55
33
26

0

6

A. Alternatlve scenarios

AI. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
AZ. Primary balance is unchanged t o m 2003
B. Bound tests
B I.Real GDP growth is at baseline minus hvo standard deviations in 2005
B2. Primary balance is at baseline minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B3. Combination of2-3 using one half standard deviation shoch
8 4 . Long-runreal GDP growth is at baseline minus two standard deviations
B5. One time 30 percent rcal depreciation in 2004
86. I O percent ofGDP increase in other debtsreatmgflows in 2004

51

NPV ofDebt-to-Revenue Ratio I!
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios

AI. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
AZ. Primary balance is unchanged boom 2003
B. Bound tests
B I.Real GDP growth is at baseline minus two standard deviations in 2005
B2. Primary balance is at baseline minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
83. Combination of2-3 using one halfstandard deviation shocks
84. Long-runreal GDP growth i s at baseline minus two standard deviations
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
B6. I O percent ofGDP increase in other debt-creatingflows in 2004
Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternntlve scenarios
AI, Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
AZ. Primary balance i s unchanged t o m 2003
B. Bound tests
BI. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus two standard deviations in 2005
B2. Primary balance is at baseline minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
83. Combination o f 2-3 using one halfstandard deviation shocks
B4. Long-runreal GDP growth is at baseline minus two standard deviations
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
86. I O percent of GDP increase in other debt-creatingflows in 2004

15

15

15
15

15

15

15

52
52
52
84
61

11

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio I!
Baseline

5

9

8

5
5

9
9

8

5
5
5
5
5
5

9
9
9
9

8

9

9

1

A. Alternative scenarios

A I . Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
AZ. Primary balance i s unchanged from 2003

8

8

9

8

9

9

1

1
0

1

0
2

1

6
0

B. Bound tests
B I,Real GDP growth is at baselineminus two standard deviations in 2005
82. Primary balance i s at baseline minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
83. Combination of 2-3 using one halfstandard deviation shocks
B4. Long-runreal GDP growth is at baseline minus two standard deviations
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
86. 10 percent ofGDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004

9
9
9
9
II
IO

9
9
9
9
II
IO

1 0 1 1
1 0 1 0

9

9
8
9
8
II
IO

0.7

1.3

1.2

1.3

1.3

1.4

1.5

0.9

0.7
0.1

1.2
1.3

1.1
1.2

1.2
1.3

1.2
1.4

1.3
1.6

1.5
1.8

0.8
1.4

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.7
07
0.7

1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.3

1.3
1.2
1.3
1.2
1.6
1.5

1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.6
1.5

1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.7
1.5

1.7

1.2
0.9
0.9
1.1
1.1
1.0

10

1 0 1 0
1 0 1 2
12
12
11
12

1

8
6
6
2
8
1

Debt Serviceto-GDP Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternativc scenarios
A I . Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
AZ. Primary balance i s unchanged from 2003
B. Bound tests
B 1. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus huo standard deviations in 2005
B2. Primary balance i s at baseline minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
83. Combination of 2-3 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. Long-runreal GDP growth is at baseline minus two standard deviations
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
B6. I O percent ofGDP increase in other debt-creatingflows in 2004

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
I/Revenues are defined inclusive ofgrants.

1.6

1.5
1.5

1.6
1.8
1.6

1.5

1.6
1.8
1.8
1.8

- 131 -

I

.
-

a

2

;

i?

- 132 -

Table 4. Cambodia: Sensitivity Analyses for K e y Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Extemal Debt, 2003-23

(In percent)
Estimate
2003

P r oj eetions
2006
2007

2004

2005

2008

2013

2023

59

29

30

31

32

32

26

15

59
59

28
30

27
32

26
35

26
36

25
36

18
33

10
23

59
59
59
59
59
59

29
29
30
29
29
41

32
35
34
30
27
43

33
31
35
31
28

44

34
37
36
32
29
46

33
37
36
31
29
45

21
30
29
26
24
31

16
17
17
15
I5
22

148

68

76

80

81

78

58

28

148
148

66
71

68
82

67
88

65
91

61
90

40
13

18
42

I48
148
148
148
148
148

68
68
68
68
65
68

76
122
76
75
53
76

80
126
80
I9
56
80

81
127
81
80
57
81

78
122
78
77
55
78

58
91
58
51
41
58

28
42
28
28
21
28

1.7

2.9

3.1

3.1

3.3

3.5

3.4

1.6

1.7
1.7

2.9
2.9

3.0
3.2

2.9
3.4

3.8

3.1

3.4
4.2

3.3
4.3

2.5

1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7

2.9
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.7
2.9

4.2
3.1
3.1
2.5
3.1

3.1

3.1
4.5
3.1
3.0
2.3
3.1

3.3
4.1
3.3
3.2
2.5
3.3

3.5
5.1
3.5
3.5
2.7
3.5

3.4
4.8
3.4
3.4
2.6
3.4

1.6
2.6
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.6

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A I . Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 I/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B I . Real GDP growth at baseline minus two standard deviation in 2005
B2. Export value growth al baseline minus two standard deviation in 2005 31
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 200445
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 2004-05 4/
85. Combination o f 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the bassline in 2004 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports r a t i o
Baseline
A. Alternative Seenarlos
A I , Key variablss at their historical averages in 2004-23 I/

A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B 1. Real GDP growth st baseline minus two standard deviation i n 2005
82. Export value growth at baseline minus two standard deviation in 2005 3/
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 200445
84. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 200445 4/
B5. Combination of 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline i n 2004 5/

D e b t service r a t i o
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
AI. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 I/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/

1.1

B. Bound Teats
B 1. Real GDP growth at baseline minus two standard deviation i n 2005
B2. Export value growth at baseline minus two standard deviation in 2005 31
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 200465
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 2004-05 4/
BS. Combination o f B 1-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline i n 2004 5/
Memorondm item:

Grant element assumed on residual financing (Le., financing required above baseline) 61
Source: StaffprOjectiON and simulations.

11 Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in US. dollar term), non-interest current account in percent o f GDP, and non-debt creating flows,
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing i s b y 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
31 Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share ofGDP i s assumed to retum to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
41 Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
Si Depreciation i s defined as percentage decline i n dollarllocal currency rate,,such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
61 Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on a l l new fmancing are as specified in footnote 2.

- 133 -

Figure 1. Cambodia: Indicators o f Public Debt Under Altemative Scenarios, 2003-2023 1/
(In percent)

60 50 70

-

40

-

30
20

I

- - e

N o Reform

-Most

lo

extreme stress test

0 1
"
"
"
"
'
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
600

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 21

500
-Baseline

- - - N o Reform

400

-Most

extreme stress test

300

--<- - - - -

200

100

12
IO

-

-

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

--_---

8 6 -

1/

2

-Baseline

- - - No Reform
-Most

extreme stress test

n

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
l / Most extreme stress test i s test that yields highest ratio in 2013.
21 Revenue including grants.

- 134 -

70
60
50
40
30

-

10 -

20

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio

---

- - - - - _ _-_- - - - - .

-Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0

I60

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

0

-Baseline

-

NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio

- - - Historical scenario

Most extreme stress test

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
6.0
5.0

4.0
3.0
2.0
1 .o

Debt service-to-exports ratio/]

- - - Historical scenario

Most extreme stress test

-- -- --

- 4 -

0.0

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Debt service in 2003 i s cash basis. The difference between cash and accrual basis comes f r o m arrears for the
U.S. and the Russian Federation.

,

- 135 -

Cambodia at a dance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Cambodia

East
Asia B
Pacific

Low.
income

13.4
300
4.0

1,855
1,080
2,011

2,310
450
1,038

4/14/05

Development diamond'

Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 1997.03

2.4
2.5

Population (%)
Labor force (%)

1.o
1.I

1.9
2.3

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997.03)

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000live births)
Child malnutrition (% ofchildren under 5)
Access to an improvedwater source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

capita
36
19
56
84
45
30
30
118
124
112

40
69
32
15
76
10
111
112
111

30
58
82
44
75
39
92
99
85

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports of goods and servicedGDP
Gross domestic savingdGDP
Gross national savingslGDP

2.5
11.2
16.4
-5.1
0.5

4.0
22.2
59.1
14.0
20.9

4.1
24.9
62.2
15.3
22.4

Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentdGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicelexports (cash basis)
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debffexports

-4.2
0.0
73.4
9.9

-1.4
0.1
72.4
0.9
61.2
97.1

-3.0
0.2
75.9
0.9

1983

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

I

Access to improved water source
-Cambodia

___ Low-income group

I

Economic ratios'

Trade

Domestic
savings

I

1993.03

2002

2003

2003.07

..

6.6
3.4
20.8

5.5
3.8
19.2

5.3
3.5
9.4

4.8
3.1

1983

1993

2002

2003

47.3
12.9
8.6
39.8

35.0
28.0
20.2
37.0

36.0
27.7
20.2
36.2

100.5
4.6
32.8

80.2
5.8
67.3

78.7
5.9
71.7

-401

3.1
14.7
17.4
5.8

-3.2
17.7
15.1
4.3

9.6
6.6
10.2
2.1

50

4.3
7.7
12.8
14.7

3.2
7.8
13.4
16.9

0.7
6.8
22.7
8.7

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and setvices

Investment

Indebtedness

1983-93

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

Gross
primary

-Cambodia
Low-income group

~

1

1

I

2:b

-20

-GO1

+GDP

1983-93

54.2

-10

-Exports

elmports

Note: 2003 data are preliminaryestimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its incomegroup average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

- 136 Cambodia
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1983

Government finance
(% of GDP, excludes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpluddeficit

TRADE

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Rubber
Logs and sawn timber
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1983

1993

2002

2003

3.7
2.1

0.5
-0.5

4.6
-1.o
-4.5

11.1
1.1
-6.7

10.4
-0.2
-7.1

1993

2002

2003

284

1,750
63
41
1,440
2,314
75
353
648

2,046
98
23
1,700
2,596
80
413
758

422

1

-GDPdeflator

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
3,m
,5001

87

Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

1993

2002

2003

348
592
-244

2,354
2,687
-333

2,572
2,990
-417

-16
156

-169
447

-183
475

-55

-125

154
-99

191
-66

2,689.0

663
3,917.0

737
3,980.0

1983

I993

2002

2003

9
0
0

1,820
0
0

2,900
0
306

3,139
0
400

0
0
0

34
0
0

22
0
2

25
0
2

25
0
0
0
0

176
5
0
70
0

180
146
0
139
-8

188
155
0
77
-8

0
0
0
0
0
0

63
0
0
0
0
0

30
47
0
47
2
45

76
63
0
63
2
60

-104

Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
iBRD
IDA

Total debt service (cash basis)
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

98

88

00

01

Exports

1983

I

-CPI

02

03

Imports

Current account balance to GDP (YO)

-7

1

A - IBRD
6 IDA
C - IMF

-

-

D Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F Private
G -Short-term

-

4/14/05

I

- 137 -

Annex B2

-

CAS Annex B2 Cambodia
Selected Indicators** of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 04/14/2005

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a , c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a * d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount as
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)*
Supervision Resources (total US$ millions)'
Average Supervision (USWproject)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
Yo of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2002

2003

2004

2005

14
2.8
0.0
0.0
21.4
26.2
24.0

16
3.0
25.0
23.6
25.0
23.6
28.3

14
3.3
21.4
7.1
21.4
7.1
26.2

13
4.0
23.1
10.6
23.1
10.6
9.8

No
0.88
58,667

No
1.10
64,824

Yes
1.36
75,667

No
1.33
95,071

Since FY 80

8
233.3
12.5
6.8

Last Five FYs
4
78.0
25.0
20.5

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY), excluding the GEF
project on Biodiversity and Protected Areas.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. The supervision resources include supervision costs charged to the projects (including GEF projects),
and COSU staff working on supervision not directly charged to the projects. They exclude the
resources spent on portfolio management.
g For FY05, they are planned resources (including GEF projects); also include resources for ICRs.
* Informal quarterly CPPRs (QPPRs) were conducted each year.
** All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

,

- 138 -

Annex B3

-

CAS Annex B3 CAMBODIA
IDA Program Summary
As of 0411412005

Proposed World Bank-Financed Projects
Fiscal year
2005

Project
Education Sector Support Program
Trade Facilitation & Competitiveness Project

Total
2006

2007

Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I
Public Financial Management Project
Contribution to Reaional GMS Enerav Proiect

Total

Rural Investment & Local Governance Program II
Justice for the Poor & Community Empowerment
Povertv Reduction S U D D OCredit
~ ~ II

Total
2008

Overall Total

Provincial and Peri-Urban Water & Sanitation Project II
Land Management and Administration Project II
Poverty Reduction Support Credit Ill

US$(M)
28.0
10.0
38.0
15.0
15.0
10.0
6.0
46.0’
20.0
10.0
15.0
_ .

45.0
15.0
15.0
15.0

174.0

- 139 -

Annex B3

-

CAS Annex B3 Cambodia
IFC and MIGA Program
FY 2002-2005
As of 04l14l2005

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)
Accommodation & Tourism
Finance & Insurance
Transportation
Total
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total
MlGA guarantees (US$m)

2002

2003

2004

2005

2.75

1.20

17.10

5.00

100

100

100

100

100

42
58
100

100

73
27

100

94

100

0

0

0.00

0.00

0
0.00

0.00

- 140 -

Annex 84

-

CAS Annex B4 Cambodia
Summary of Nonlending Services
As of 0411412005

Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
Investment Climate AssessmenVPS
Poverty & Social Impact Analysis
Forestry Sector Note
Country Gender Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment
Report for the CG Meeting (Cambodia at the Crossroads)

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05

Underway
Public Expenditure Tracking/PETS (Education)
Quality Basic Education for All
Social Protection Policy Note
Rural Sector Strategy
Investment Climate Assessment
Fiduciary Review

FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

Planned
Sources of Growth
Poverty Assessment
Agrarian Structure in Trade Liberalization
Land Policy and Strategy
Urban Water & Sanitation Strategy
Support to Decentralization Policy & Strategy Note
Safeguards Research
Civil Service Reform for Teachers
Child Labor Study
Environment Monitor
Public Expenditure Tracking/PETS (Health)
Annual Report for the CG Meeting

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

Support to Forestry Policy and Strategy
Energy Sector Strategy
Labor Market and-Industrial Relations Strategy
Support to Agricultural Policy and Strategy
Tackling Obstacles for Progress in Health CMDGs
Gender Mainstreaming
Support to Transport Policy and Strategy
Urban Development Strategy
Strategic Environmental Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment
Fiduciary Review
Annual Report for the CG Meeting

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07

- 141 -

Annex B5

-

CAS Annex 8 5 Cambodia
Social Indicators
As of 0411412005

Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (“h annual average for period)
Urban population (“h of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

1997-03

East
Asia 81
Paciflc

7.1
0.5
10.3
5.0

7.8
2.7
12.6
6.0

13.4
2.4
18.6
4.0

1,854.5
1.o
39.7
2.1

2,310.3
1.9
30.3
3.7

1,080

450

1.2

1.9
3.2

1.2
2.7

89
91
87

92
92
92

78
84
72

30
70
29

76
93
67

75
90
69

29
23

55
49
45

70
78
15

64
64
44

35
34
36

47
46
49

56
55
58

69
68
71

58
57
59

230
244

112
330

84
118

32
42

82
126

509
406

473
355

386
334
437

184
129

319
268

68

38

POVERTY
(“h of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

36.1
21.1
40.1

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

300
141
135

INCOMWCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (“9 of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

40.4
6.9
47.6

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (“7 of GDP)
Education (“h of GNl)
Social security and welfare (“h of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
( “ 5 of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(“h of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(“7 of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Chiid malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(Years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 liie births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Femate (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (“A)

Lowincome

CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one

04/14/05

- 142 -

Annex B6

-

CAS Annex B6 Cambodia
Key Economic Indicators
As of 0411412005

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

40

37

35

36

36

35

34

33

31

Industry

23

26

28

28

28

28

28

29

30

Services

37

37

37

36

37

37

38

38

39

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

95
19
6
12

88
19
7
13

86
23
8
15

85
22
7
14

89
21
7
15

89
21
7
15

86
22
7
16

81
23
7
17

77
25
7
18

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

51
63

55
64

59
67

62
72

66
77

57
72

59
73

62
75

66
77

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings"

5
13

12
18

14
21

15
22

I1
18

10
16

11
17

13
19

15
20

3594

3714

4007

4133

4597

4762

5022

5457

5895

280

280

290

300

320

320

330

340

340

5.6
5.1

5.5
5.7

5.3
3.8

6.0
6.6

2.7
3.8

4.3
4.8

5.5
5.6

6.0
6.1

3.6
1.6
1.3

3.5
-0.7
-1.0

4.1
3.0
2.0

0.8
1.3
1.5

3.2
1.8
1.9

3.5
2.3
2.4

3.5
3.3
2.9

2813
2130
3391
2948
-578
546
-215

3030
2239
3622
3150
-592
560
-187

3260
2384
3900
3370
-640
562
-181

Gross domestic producf

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 2000 prices)
7.0
Gross domestic product
Gross Domestic Income
7.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 2000 prices)
3.6
4.9
Gross domestic product
-1.5
4.2
Total consumption
-2.1
3.8
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates (2000 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

1830
1401
2267
1939
-438
425
-136

2096
1571
2441
2094
-346
396
-86

2354
1750
2687
2314
-333
447
-55

2572
2046
2990
2596
-417
475
-125

2829
2247
3313
2891
-484
480
-100

2723
209 I
3230
2808
-507
525
-239

I42
112
72
40
-57
-62

142
134
91
43
-133
-57

139
147
100
47
-132
-99

77
150
100
50
-36
-66

83
151
100
51
-88
-46

83
153
90
63
-6
9

91
155
90
65
I
-32

I05
162
90
72
-30
-50

121
165
85
80
-40
-65

-12.2

-9.3

-8.3

-10.1

-10.5

-10.6

-11.5

-10.8

-10.9

19.4

21.5

19.5

16.2

11.2

6.3

6.1

6.1

6.1

- 143 -

-

Annex 86

Cambodia Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Actual
Indicator

2000

Public finance (as %of GDP at market prices)'
10.0
Current revenues
8.6
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
I.4
6.5
Capital expenditure
5.1
Foreign financing
Monetary Indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (YO)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (YO)
Price indices (2000 = 100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (YOchange)
GDP deflator (YOchange)

a.
b.
c.
d.

2001

Estimate

2002

2003

2004

Projection

2005

2006

2007

2008

10.6
9.5
1.1
6.7
5.2

11.1
10.1
1.1
7.9
7.0

10.4
10.6
-0.2
7.4
6.0

10.9
10.1
0.8
7.2
5.9

12.0
10.7
1.3
7.6
5.8

12.5
11.2
1.3
7.5
5.9

12.9
11.5
1.4
7.2
5.5

13.1
12.3
0.8
6.9
5.2

13.2
26.9
484.1

15.1
20.4
-104.2

18.4
31 .O
165.4

20.2
15.3
104.0

23.5
30.0
120.2

24.2
10.3
65.0

24.7
12.2
55.0

25.5
15.0
55.0

27.3
20.5
55.0

100.0

113.5

114.8

106.8

109.5

1io.a

112.2

113.6

115.1

19.0
-0.8
-1.7

18.7
0.7
-0.3

15.4
3.7
2.1

17.8
0.5
-0.5

16.7
5.6
5.4

16.5
3.2
2.9

16.0
3.0
2.5

16.0
3.0
2.9

15.6
3.0
3.0

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

- 144 -

Annex 66

-

Cambodia Selected Indicators Table
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2006

2006

2007

2008

Part A: Main Macro Aggregates
Annual growth rates, calculated from constant 1900 price data
GDP (mp) per capita
4.9
Total consumption per capita
4.2
GDP at market prices
7.0
6.2
Total consumption
5.9
Private consumption
8.6
Gross domestic investment (GDI)
27.2
Gross dom. fixed investment (GDFI)

3.9
2.1
10.3
16.9

0.8
1.3
2.7
1.5
0.8
5.1
5.5

3.2
1.8
4.3
1.9
1.5
6.5
8.3

3.5
2.3
5.5
2.3
2.0
8.7
10.2

3.5
3.3
6.0
2.5
2.5
9.5
13.5

9.3
16.9
8.7
12.2

10.0
9.8
10.8
11.4

-3.7
-6.9
-2.5
-2.9

3.3
1.9
5.0
5.0

7.7
5.1
6.8
6.9

7.6
6.5
7.7
7.0

22.2
7.8

24.9
7.4

21.5
6.6

19.5
7.0

19.5
7.2

20.0
6.9

20.5
6.6

2.5
22.4
0.3
22.1

3.9
17.6
1.o
16.5

3.5
16.0
0.9
15.1

2.5
17.0

17.3

1.4
20.8
1.1
19.7

16.0

1.4
18.6
1.2
17.4

19.5
1.3
18.2

5.2

11.5

14.0

15.3

10.8

10.0

11.0

13.0

15.0

-1.7
3,854
100.0

-0.3
3,924
113.5

2.1
3,917
114.8

-0.5
3,980
106.8

5.4
4,000
109.5

2.9
4,009
110.8

2.5
4,017
112.2

2.9
4,025
113.6

3.0
4,033
115.1

2.4
313.4
26.9

3.1
143.4
20.4

3.5
191.5
31 .O

3.8
228.1
15.3

4.0
189.7
30.0

4.0
-106.3
10.3

115.9

4.1

12.2

4.2
124.6
15.0

4.4
116.4
20.5

10.2
7.4
15.1
5.3
-4.9

10.7
7.7
16.2
5.7
-5.5

11.2
7.9
18.0
5.8
-6.7

10.4
7.4
17.5
5.9
-7.1

10.9
8.0
17.8
6.2
-6.9

12.0
7.8
17.7
, 6.1
-5.7

12.5
7.8
18.1
6.2
-5.6

12.9
7.9
17.9
6.3
-5.0

13.1
7.9
17.7
6.5
-4.6

4.8
5.1
-0.7
0.4

5.5
5.2
-0.5
0.8

6.8
7.0
-0.4
0.1

7.1
6.0
-0.1
1.2

6.9
5.9
-0.2
1.2

5.7
5.8
-0.5
0.4

5.7
5.9
-0.3
0.1

5.1
5.5
-0.4
0.0

4.7
5.2
-0.5
0.0

73.1
2.1

72.6
1.9

72.4
2.2

76.0
2.8

69.6
3.8

47.4
3.8

49.4
3.5

49.1
3.5

48.5
3.5

Total DOD a n d TDS
DOD (US$ millions)
DOD / GDPmp ratio
TDS (US$ millions)
TDS /exports (XGS) ratio
Total gross reserves (months' imports G&S)

2,628
73.1
136.2
7.4
2.6

2,696
72.6
61.8
2.9
2.7

2,900
72.4
63.1
2.7
3.0

3,139
76.0
71.2
2.8
3.0

3,199
69.6
70.1
2.5
2.7

2,259
47.4
55.5
2.0
2.7

2,482
49.4
60.5
2.2
2.7

2,680
49.1
70.2
2.3
2.7

2,859
48.5
84.2
2.6
2.8

Pari D: External Financing Plan
(US$, millions)
Official capital grants
Private investment (net)
Net Long term borrowing excl IMF
Adjustments to scheduled debt service
All other capital flows
Financing Requirements (incl IMF)
of which current account deficit

35.6
142.0
112.0
0.0
-92.1
197.5
135.5

44.8
142.0
134.0
0.0
.177.9
142.9
85.9

13.3
139.0
147.0
0.0
-145.7
153.6
54.6

-6.0
77.3
150.0
0.0
-30.1
191.2
125.2

15.0
83.0
151.0
0.0
-103.0
146.0
100.0

21.5
83.0
153.0
0.0
-107.5
150.0
239.0

21.5
91 .o
155.0
0.0
-117.5
150.0
215.0

15.0
105.0
162.0
0.0
-132.0
150.0
187.0

15.0
121.0
165.0
0.0
-151 .O
150.0
181.O

Exports (GNFS)
of which Goods
Imports (GNFS)
of which Goods
Savings-investment balances, as percentage of GDP
Gross Domestic investment
of which Government investment
Foreign savings
Gross national savings
Government savings
Non government savings
Gross domestic savings
Other
GDP inflation
Annual average exchange rate (LCU/US$)
Index real average exchange rate (VAPORVAB =loo)
Terms of trade index (VAPORVAB =loo)
Incremental capital-output ratio (GDI based)
Import elasticity with respect to GDP
Money growth

3.6
-1.5
5.6
0.4
-0.2
16.5
-1.5

3.6
1.6
5.5
3.4
3.2
13.4
29.3

3.5
-0.7
5.3
1.1
0.7
22.7
0.8

39.4
19.4
20.4
21.9

14.6
12.1
7.7
8.0

19.2
11.4
16.9
10.5

17.2
6.3

20.7
6.6

3.8
13.4
1.4
12.1

2.3
18.4
1.1

4.1
3.0
6.0

1.o

1.o

Part B: Government Finance Indicators
Percentage o f GDP
Total revenues, of which
Tax revenues
Total expenditures, of which
Consumption
Deficit(-)/Surplus(+)
Financing:
Foreign
Monetary sector
Other domestic
Other
Total Debt/GDPmp
Total interest paymentsmax revenues
Part C: Debt &,Liquidity Indicators

- 145 -

Annex 67

-

CAS Annex B7 Cambodia
Key Exposure Indicators
As of 0411412005

Indicator *
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"

2000

Actual
2001
2002

2003

Estimate
2004
2005

2006

Projection
2007

2,628

2,696

2,900

3,139

3,1 99

2,259

2,482

2,680

2,859

136

62

63

71

70

56

61

70

84

143.6
73.1

128.7
72.6

123.2
72.4

88.2

88.4
49.1
2.3
63.0

87.7
48.5

2.7
88.9

47.4
2.0
62.3

49.4

2.9
88.4

113.1
69.6
2.5
120.0

83.0

7.4
88.2

122.0
76.0
2.8
89.3

2008

Net disbursements (US$m)"
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators (YO)
TDO/XGS~
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

2.0
62.4

2.6
63.2

IBRD exposure indicators (YO)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

0

0

0
85.4

0
86.1

0

0

0

87.8

0
85.5

0

39.2

86.3

86.5

86.7

87.3

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0
0

0

0
0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

207

0.0
238

306

400

460

506

556

583

612

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

n
-

0

n
-

n
-

n
-

n

DS (Yo)"
IBRD DS/XGS

IBRD TDO (us$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (YO)
IDATDO (us$mld

0

0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equityc
MlGA

.,

MlGA auarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
Assumes debt rescheduling with the Russian Federation and the U.S. in 2005

- 146 m

m
x

E

2

al

U
m

v)

.-c

E

- 147 -

Annex B8

-

CAS Annex 88 Cambodia
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Amounts in US Dollar Millions
Accounting Data As Of: 02/28/2005

FY Approval

Company

2003
2005
2004
2000l2004

Amansara
Canadia Bank
SCA Cambodia
SEF ACLEDA Bank

Total Portfolio:

Loan

Held
Equity
Quasi

1.04
5.00
10.00
6.00

0
0
0
1.10

Loan

0
0
0
0

1.04
0
10
6.00

17.04

0
0
0
0

0

22.04

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan

2003

Partic

SEF ACLEDA Bank

Equity

1

Quasi
0

Partic
0

0

E

Disbursed
Equity
Quasi

Partic

0
0
0
1.10

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

1.10

0

0

MAP SECTION

