Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 32412-NG

WORLD BANK GROUP
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (UK)

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
(2005 - 2009)
June 2,2005

Country Department 12
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

UK Department for International Development
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

-ii-

Country Partnership Strategy

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (May 20,2004)
Nigerian Naira (N)
137 N s
0.0073 US$

Currency Unit =
US$l
1 Naira
-

FISCAL YEAR

January 1 -- December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AML/CTF
AU
CAP
CPS
CDD
CENA
CFAA
CIDA
CPAR
CPPRs
CSP
DFID
DOC
EC
ECOWAS
EFA
EFCC
EITI
FATF
FCT
FGN
ITA
IAS
IASC
ICPC
IDA
IDG
IMF
JICA
JIS
LGA
M&E
MDGs
MSME
MTEF
NAPEP
NFIU
NEEDS
NEPA
NEPAD
NCP
NITEL
NNPC

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Anti-Money Laundering and Country Terrorist Financing
African Union
Country Assistance Plan
Country Partnership Strategy
Community-Driven Development
Capacity Enhancement Needs Assessment
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian International Development Agency
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Portfolio Performance Reviews
Country Strategy Paper
Department for International Development (UK)
Drivers of Change
European Commission
Economic Community of West African States
“Education for All”
Economic & Financial Crimes Commission
ExtractiveIndustries Transparency Initiative
Financial Action Task Force
Federal Capital Territory
Federal Government of Nigeria
Free Trade Association
International Accounting Standards
International Accounting Standards Committee
International Centre for the Prevention of Crime
International Development Association
International Development Goals
International Monetary Fund
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Joint Interim Strategy
Local Government Authority
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Poverty Eradication Program
NigerianFinancial IntelligenceUnit
National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy
NigerianElectric Power Authority
New Partnership for Africa’s Development
National Council on Privatization
NigerianTelephone Company
Nigeria National Petroleum Company

Nigeria

Country Partnership Strategy

NPC
NPV
ODA
OED
PEMFA
PER
PRSP
SAP
SEEDS
SFAA
SIL
SME
SPAR
tbc
TI
UBE
UN
UNDP
UNICEF
UNPF
USAID

Vice President
Country
Director
Core Team

-iii-

Nigeria

National Planning Commission
Net Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Structural Adjustment Program
State Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy
State Financial Accountability Assessment
Specific Investment Loan
Small and Medium Enterprises
State Procurement Assessment Review
to be confirmed
Transparency International
Universal Basic Education
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Population Fund
United States Agency for International Development

The World Bank

The International Financial
Corporation

Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency

Gobind Nankani
Hafez Ghanem

Assaad Jabre

Yukiko Omura

Department for
IntemationalDevelopment
(UK)
William Kingsmill

Galina Sotirova (Team Leader), Andrew Kidd (Team Leader, DFID), Paul Collier (Advisor), Luis Alvaro Sanchez
(Consultant),Victoria Kwakwa, Subramaniam V. Iyer, Peter Mousley, Alex McPhail, John Elder, Foluso Okunmadewa,
Larisa Leshchenko, Chinedum Nwoko, Michael Moms, Samuel Wariboko Eremie (WB); Andrew Alli, Charles
McPherson, Hillmare Schulze (IFC), Guy Darlan, Kofi Anani (WBI), L i z Gaere (DFID), Peter Hawkins (DFID), Mavis
Owusu-Gyamfi (DFID), James Zasha (DFID), Matthew Moms (DFID), Mavis Owusu-Gyamfi (DFID), John Leigh
(DFID), Graham Gass (DFID), Jeri Larson, Gloria Kwembe, Patricia Claggion

Country Partnership Strategy

-iv-

Nigeria

THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIPSTRATEGY
Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms
List of Tables, Figures, Text Boxes and Annexes

-

..

11
V

NIGERIA AT A TURNING POINT EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

vi

I.AN OPPORTUNITY FOR SUSTAINABLE PROGRESS
Political and Economic Reforms in Nigeria
International Support, IDA Classification and Debt Reduction
11. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGESAND PROSPECTS
Political Economy and Social Context
Poverty in Nigeria
An Agenda to Achieve Non-oil Growth
Medium Term Economic Prospects
111. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT AGENDA: NEEDS AND SEEDS
A New Framework for Reform, Growth and Poverty Reduction
Tangible Progress on Implementingthe NEEDS and Improving Governance
IV. PARTNERSHIPSTRATEGY A NEW WAY OF DOING BUSINESS
Lessons from Joint Interim Strategy and DFID CSP
A Results Based Strategy
Supporting Human Development
Supporting Growth
Supporting Good Governance
World Bank Group Lending, DFID Grants, and Non-lending Services
V. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
Portfolio Management
IDA Country Financing Parameters
Boosting Aid Effectiveness: Strengthening Donor Harmonization
Outcome-based Monitoring
Communications Strategy
Risks

1
1
3
6
6
8
10
13
17
17
19
21
22
23
27
28
30
31
37
37
39
40
41
42
43

-

Country Partnership Strategy

-V-

Nigeria

Tables
Table 1 The MDG Challenge in Nigeria
Table 2 Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework, 2005-08
Table 3 Summary CPS Results-Based Framework
Table 4 Indicative 2-year IDA Lending Program (US$ millions)
Table 5 DFD Nigeria Resources (2 million)
Table 6 Four-year Core Non-lending Program
Figures
Figure 1: Income poverty levels b y region
Figure 2: Infant mortality according to region
Figure 3: Selectivity o f CPS in relation to NEEDS priorities
Text Boxes
B o x 1: Poor Growth in Resource-Rich Economies: Nigeria i s not unusual
Box 2: The Poor in Nigeria
B o x 3: The poorest Nigerians depend heavily on natural resources
B o x 4: Impact o f €€IV/AIDS on livelihoods
Box 5: Progress on implementation o f NEEDS
B o x 6: Tackling Corruption - A growing consensus and agenda
Box 7: Partnership for Impact - WB/DFID
Box 8: Development o f the CPS - A participatory approach
B o x 9: Hastening Impact, Building Demand for Change
B o x 10: SEEDS Benchmarking
Box 11: Mainstreaming cross-cutting issues in interventions
Box 12: New World Bank Group and Donor Coordination: the Case o f Micro, S M E Development in
Nigeria
Box 13: Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness
Box 14: Outcome-Based Management
Annexes
Annex 1. Results Framework
Annex 2. Interim Strategy Completion Report
Annex 3. Working with Lead States
Annex 4. Nigeria’s Opportunity o f a Generation: Meeting the MDGs, Reducing Indebtedness
Annex 5. Analytical, Advisory and Capacity Building Services
Annex 6. Country Financing Parameters
Annex 7. Donor Activities & Aid Effectiveness
Annex 8. Nigeria CPS - participation and consultation process
Annex 9. World Bank Group CAS Annexes

Country Partnership Strategy

-vi-

Nigeria

NIGERIA AT A TURNING POINT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
A National Comprehensive Framework for Reform, Growth and Poverty Reduction. In M a y 2004,
Nigeria launched i t s strategy for growth and poverty reduction, the National Economic Empowerment
and Development Strategy (NEEDS) and the state-level State Economic Empowerment and
empowering people and
Development Strategy (SEEDS). The NEEDS i s based on three pillars: (i)
growing the private sector and focusing on non-oil growth, and
improving social service delivery, (ii)
(iii)changing the way government works and improving governance. Over the past two years,
Nigeria has made good progress implementing key reforms, particularly in macroeconomic
management and the fight against corruption.

A development challenge of global significance. Despite the reform efforts, Nigeria s t i l l faces
significant challenges in accelerating growth, reducing poverty and meeting the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Nigeria i s Africa’s most populous country, but 70 million o f i t s
population lives in poverty. Only China and India have more poor people. Lagos State, just one o f
Nigeria’s 36 states, i s larger than each o f 32 African countries. Africa’s attainment o f the MDGs
depends on Nigeria’s success.
Nigeria’s reform efforts and development challenges need strong international support. Even with
recent high o i l prices, Nigeria’s shortfall in development financing remains large. Nigeria receives
only US$2 per capita in Official Development Assistance (ODA) compared to an African average o f
US$28 and faces negative net transfers o f US$1.3 billion annually, given current levels o f debt
servicing. Yet, significant public financing i s needed to ease the economy’s enormous infrastructure
needs and make progress in human development. Nigeria w i l l require a marked increase in external
aid inflows - through increased IDA and DFID assistance, and debt relief - to be able to unleash
growth and meet key MDGs.
World Bank Group / DFZD Partnership. The World Bank Group and DFID recognize that Nigeria i s
at a turning point, one that requires a significant, consistent response from the international
community. Responding to the Paris Declaration o f 2005, the two organizations aim to continue to
build a successful partnership in support o f a country-led approach to growth and poverty reduction.
The World Bank Group and DFID aim to broaden this partnership - including with the UN, other
multilaterals and bilaterals - to increase donor harmonization and enhance aid effectiveness.
The Strategy. The CPS proposes to step up financial and technical assistance to signal strong support
for the Government’s reform efforts and help finance investment necessary to remove obstacles to
growth and development. The CPS proposes specific activities to support the Federal Government and
selected well-performing states (lead states), and targeted MDG-related action elsewhere. Work with
the Federal Government w i l l be in four areas: (i)
financing investments in infrastructure (especially
financial and technical support to improve accountability
power, gas infrastructure and transport); (ii)
technical assistance and advisory services on investment
and transparency and to fight corruption; (iii)
climate and policies to stimulate private sector led growth; and (iv) support to national initiatives for
human development, particularly those aimed at fighting HIV/AIDS, strengthening the health system
and supporting the knowledge economy.
In lead states, financial and technical assistance w i l l seek to leverage state effort and resources to
boost economic activity and improve social service delivery. State interventions w i l l be designed to
support state development strategies and w i l l help create a model o f growth and development that can
be scaled up. Initially, the World Bank and DFID propose to work in up to six lead states, chosen on

Country Partnership Strategy

-vii-

Nigeria

the basis o f their governments’ commitment to reforms - especially in the area o f budget and financial
management, transparency and fighting corruption.
In the remaining states, the strategy i s to impact more directly on the lives o f poor people and their
access to social and productive infrastructure, goods and services. Focused programs w i l l work with a
range o f stakeholders - in close cooperation with UN agencies and others - on specific MDG-related
issues, such as girls’ education, maternal health, routine immunization or access to safe water. An
important aspect o f work in these states w i l l be to strengthen voice and demand for change among
service users and communities.

A distinctive feature o f the CPS strategy i s the variety o f aid instruments i t w i l l be able to offer at
different levels of intervention. Interventions at the federal level w i l l continue to be predominantly
Specific Investment Loan (SIL) projects. Lead states w i l l be able to access a “performance package”,
a more programmatic, cross-sectoral approach to both analytical work and financing, drawing in both
IDA and DFID resources. I t i s foreseen that Sector-Wide Approach (SWAP)-type operations w i l l
emerge for the lead states. With increased accountability and efficiency o f public expenditures across
all levels o f government, i t i s expected that the basis for using budget support instruments in some
lead states w i l l be established prior to the end o f this CPS period (although budget support i s not
anticipated during this CPS period). In other states, support w i l l target direct impact on the livelihoods
o f poor people through nationally designed Community Driven Development (CDD)-type projects in
the social and productive sectors and MDG-related programming, particularly through the UN, civil
society and the private sector. Both at the federal and state level, the CPS w i l l help strengthen
dialogue between Government and civil society and build coalitions on economic reforms,
transparency and accountability.
The CPS resonates with key elements o f the Africa Commission report, including i t s support for
private sector growth and i t s emphasis on new investments in infrastructure, agriculture and human
development. The CPS’s push for increased resource flows to Nigeria i s also in line with the
Commission’s report for increased resource flows to Africa, including through debt relief.

Risks. Nigeria’s reformers have the necessary political w i l l and a broadening consensus and
constituency for sustaining change. However, given Nigeria’s history, today’s reform efforts are high
r i s k hence the World Bank’s and DFID’s strong commitment to provide support to Nigeria in i t s
efforts to sustain reforms while mitigating risks. A key risk i s that the political landscape and
commitment to reform may shift, particularly after the 2007 elections. The CPS w i l l support

Government in completing the reforms i t has initiated, and support Nigerian c i v i l society in
strengthening i t s capacity to demand change on accountability, transparency and service delivery.
The international community can also help protect against the erosion o f gains by providing greater
moral and financial support to Nigeria. Given Nigeria’s reliance on oil, it w i l l not be free from the
risk o f strong negative external shocks. Nigeria i s currently building up reserves to smooth i t s
expenditure profile and sustain growth in the longer-term. The Government has built a strong
relationship with the IMF on macroeconomic management that w i l l help mitigate risks associated
with external economic shocks.

Country Partnership Strategy

-1-

Nigeria

I.AN OPPORTUNITY FOR SUSTAINABLE PROGRESS
1.
Nigeria’s current political and economic transformation provides an opportunity to assist
Africa’s most populous nation to turn i t s economy around to achieve sustained economic and social
development. Nigeria i s a regional giant; a growing and prosperous Nigeria moving towards
achieving the MDGs would translate to gains in social and economic progress for the whole region.
However, the challenges facing Nigeria’s reformers are formidable and success i s not assured. T o
the implementation and support for reforms need to continue; this
enhance the chances for success: (i)
would be strengthened if reformers are able to show early results; and (ii)
the international community
needs to ensure that Nigeria’s economic program i s adequately financed. This would require an
increase in new commitments and a resolution o f Nigeria’s debt problem.
Political and Economic Reforms in Nigeria
2.
In April 2003, Nigeria successfully held i t s second consecutive national elections, further
consolidating the transition from military to democratic civilian rule that began in 1999. Institutions
and mechanisms for accountability and good governance are being strengthened; a vibrant press and
civil society groups are emerging and gaining strength. Naturally, after more than three decades o f
military dictatorship, Nigeria’s democracy remains fragile; and ethnic and religious tensions flare up
from time to time. The next Presidential elections are scheduled for 2007 and President Obasanjo w i l l
not run. Much therefore depends on whether his successor w i l l continue to implement the ongoing
political and economic reforms.
3.
Nigeria i s gaining respect and international standing as a leader in Africa. President Obasanjo
has become Chair o f the African Union (AU). Nigeria has become a leading player in the
Commonwealth, in the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), in the Economic
Community o f West African States (ECOWAS) and plays an important role in peacekeeping
throughout Africa.
Economic reforms are gaining momentum. The second Obasanjo administration has
4.
assembled a highly competent, professional group o f reformers that i s implementing policies to: (i)
strengthen governance and fight corruption, (ii)
grow the private sector; and, (iii)
empower people and
improve social service delivery. The process i s slow and gradual, given the depth o f institutional
deterioration caused by years o f mismanagement and rampant corruption. However, the Government
i s showing strong resolve, and reform implementation i s generally on track.

5.
Policy implementation in 2004 signaled a clear break from past practices and, in particular, a
break from a 30-year history of uncontrolled booms and busts cycles caused b y o i l price fluctuations.
Macroeconomic policy implementation was commendable. For the first time, Nigeria successfully
implemented a fiscal rule de-linking the budget from current o i l prices. All three tiers o f government
prepared their budgets based on an o i l price o f US$25 a barrel, and in effect sterilized a significant
portion (about US$6 billion) o f the o i l windfall. Prudent fiscal policy, complemented b y tight
monetary policy, allowed the Government to achieve the key objectives o f i t s 2004 program, namely
to restore macroeconomic stability, enhance predictability and transparency o f policies and reduce the
economy’s vulnerability to o i l price shocks.
6.
Real GDP i s estimated to have grown about 6%, the consolidated government fiscal surplus
rose to 10% o f GDP on a cash basis, compared to balance in 2003, annual inflation decelerated
sharply from 24% at end 2003 to about 10% at end 2004, notwithstanding increases in prices of fuel
products following progress on deregulation and liberalization o f the downstream petroleum sector.

Country Partnership Strategy

-2-

Nigeria

Parallel improvement in Nigeria’s terms o f trade strengthened Nigeria’s external position:
international reserves rose to US$17 billion, equivalent to 6.5 months o f imports projected for 2005l.
7.
Nigeria has also made good progress in improving governance and transparency and fighting
corruption. First, the budget i s more transparent; allocations are widely published, so that citizens can
better hold officials accountable. Second, a “Due Process” Unit in the Presidency ensures that public
money cannot be disbursed for investment unless procurement procedures have been respected.
Third, the Government has made an impressive start on implementing the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), setting an example across Africa. Among other things, full audits o f
o i l sector accounts for the last three years would be available before end-2005. Fourth, the Economic
and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) i s successfully pursuing corrupt officials. Indeed, the
Government has begun 2005 with an intensified effort on the fight against corruption and two Federal
Ministers have recently been removed.
8.
The focus over the last 18 months has rightly been on macro-stabilization and better
governance. However the Government i s now paying more attention to structural constraints to
growth and social development. New initiatives in the social sectors in the Federal Government’s
2005 budget include: (i)increased funding for the Universal Basic Education program; (ii)a
a special program to encourage girl’s primary
nationwide feeding program in basic schools; (iii)
education; and, (iv) a new program for accelerated achievement o f Health MDGs. The President has
also launched a renewed effort on safe water. Actions to encourage private sector growth include: (i)
unbundling o f the power parastatal ahead o f divestiture, passing a landmark Power Bill to underpin
legislating to promote development o f the
and accelerate transformation o f the electricity sector; (ii)
domestic gas sector; (iii)liberalizing the downstream petroleum sector; (iv) re-starting the
privatization o f the telecommunications parastatal NITEL; and, (v) increasing funding to address key
infrastructure constraints.
Legislation i s being put in place to make reforms more difficult to reverse. Key elements
9.
include: a Fiscal Responsibility Bill for all tiers o f government that enshrines the oil-price based
fiscal rule and best practice in fiscal transparency, coordination and monitoring; a Procurement Bill to
make public procurement competitive and more open; and an EITI bill to maintain transparency o f o i l
revenues.

10.
Nigeria’s economic outlook in 2005 is, on balance, positive. On the macroeconomic front, if
the current pace o f reform i s maintained, real GDP i s projected to grow at about 7% on the basis of
higher crude o i l and gas production and non-oil GDP growth o f about 5%. The external current
account surplus i s expected to widen and gross intemational reserves t o increase b y about US$17
billion. There are nevertheless some short-term risks. O i l and gas output could be affected b y social
tensions and OPEC production quota cuts, while agricultural output remains vulnerable to climatic
conditions. In addition, implementing financial sector reforms, and particularly enforcing banks’ new
minimum capital requirement, w i l l need careful management to avoid loss o f confidence and undue
pressure on the financial system.
Fiscal risks also need to be carefully monitored. Full implementation o f the 2005
11.
appropriations act w i l l imply a significant increase in public spending in 2005 with a risk o f a return
to high inflation and macro-instability. Government recognizes those risks and intends to implement
a fiscal policy in line with macroeconomic stability, the NEEDS objectives and the country’s
absorptive capacity. I t intends to ensure that due process i s followed in capital spending, to continue
the effective work o f the cash management team in budget execution, and to ensure that the o i l

’ Eleven months of imports of goods in 2004.

Country Partnership Strategy

-3-

Nigeria

windfall i s calculated on the basis of total o i l production*. If these fiscal containment measures are
successfully implemented, primary Federal Government spending w i l l increase about 15% in real
terms. The consolidated non-oil primary deficit would increase by about 6 percentage points to 41%
o f non-oil GDP above 2004. This execution would be in line with macroeconomic stability but would
s t i l l place a burden on the central bank to implement a sufficiently tight monetary policy to contain
liquidity expansion and limit real exchange rate appreciation.

International Support, IDA Classification and Debt Reduction
12.
Nigeria’s reform efforts need international support. In the past, the perception o f o i l wealth
and o f entrenched corruption has tended to drive donors away. Today, Nigeria receives only US$2
per capita in ODA compared to the average for Africa o f US$28 per capita. I t i s regarded as seriousunderaided, an ‘aid ~ r p h a n ’ ~As
. a result, net transfers with the rest o f the world are negative and
average minus US$1.3 billion annually. On the other hand, o i l exports provide Nigeria with an
important source o f foreign exchange. Given that o i l prices are currently higher than ever and
expected to stay high for some time, Nigeria’s o i l revenues are projected to grow from an annual
average o f about US$15 billion between 2000-2003 to about US$36 billion annually between 2005
and 2008.
13.
Nigeria needs international financial support in spite o f rising o i l revenues for three reasons.
First, given the large population, pervasive poverty and the depth o f social and economic decay
resulting from years of mismanagement, Nigeria’s needs for development financing s t i l l far outstrip
i t s projected domestic financing potential. Additional foreign financing i s essential if the economy’s
enormous infrastructure needs are to be met and progress made in power, transport, education, health
and safe water. The macroeconomic analysis presented in the following section show that in order to
make adequate progress towards achieving the MDGs, Nigeria w i l l require additional external
financing averaging about US$6.4 billion annually between 2005 and 2008. Second, Nigeria’s
economy i s heavily dependant on oil, and i t would be dangerous for Nigeria’s policymakers to assume
that o i l prices w i l l remain at their current levels indefinitely. They simply cannot spend all o f the
windfall o i l revenue. They need to build reserves to avoid a huge contraction when o i l prices decline.
Nigeria’s large and increasing foreign reserves indicate good policy. The size o f donor programs in
infrastructure, health, education and rural development should be based on a medium-term vision o f
the country’s needs and not by short-term variations in o i l prices and the country’s reserves.
Naturally, this excludes the few donor programs that specifically aim at supporting stabilization, and
therefore should vary to offset swings in international prices. Third, the size o f donor financing
provides a signal o f support for reforms. Nigeria’s economic performance has improved significantly
over the last two years and merits strong support from the international community.
14.
Increasing support and external financing flows to Nigeria require action on at least three
increasing new financing from Nigeria’s external partners, including IDA and
interrelated fronts: (i)
DFID; (ii)
raising IDA country performance rating by sustaining the implementation o f governance
reducing Nigeria’s external debt burden.
reforms; and (iii)

As key external partners, IDA and DFID w i l l expand their financial support to Nigeria under
15.
the CPS. The indicative two-year IDA lending program (FY06 and FY07) includes frontloading o f
the resource envelope and i s set at US$500 million per year. Subsequent allocations w i l l be defined
based on further annual assessment o f policy performance and the mid-term review o f the CPS.
Nigeria i s also expected to benefit from additional donor resources, which would provide a window

* T h i s includes crude oil that i s allocated for domestic use.

V. Levin and D. Dollar (2004), The Forgotten States: Aid Volumes and Volatility in Difficult Partnership Countries.

Country Partnership Strategy

-4-

Nigeria

for increased support to countries at an upward turn in policy performance and with potential for great
impact on growth and development in Africa. DFID financing w i l l grow from 235 million in 2004 to
2100 million in 2007. IDA w i l l also continue to work hard with the Government to ensure that
disbursements on existing commitments improve. The international community can help b y
supporting federal and state governments to improve public expenditure management.
16.
Nigeria has been reclassified from a “blend” to an “IDA-only” country. Nigeria meets all
three criteria for IDA-only status: low GNI per capita, lack o f creditworthiness and a track record of
good policy performance. I t i s currently the poorest country in the world that i s not classified as IDAonly. I t s per capita income i s only US$350, considerably below the IDA-only cut-off level o f
US$895. Nigeria i s not creditworthy since it does not have the ability to service new external debt at
market interest rates over the long term. As a result, it cannot access private capital markets or IBRD
and has not borrowed from IBRD for over a decade.
17.
Nigeria has the potential to re-enter the group of middle-income countries (MICs) and regain
access to international financial markets. In the long run, it w i l l achieve this through sustained and
strengthened policy performance and increased external support. However, for the medium-term,
IDA-only status provides the appropriate framework to support Nigeria’s progress towards achieving
the MDGs. The Nigerian Government has requested this change in status for three reasons. First, i t
would provide a signal to donors and alert them o f the need for increased financial support. Second, it
sends a message within Nigeria that i t i s a very poor country - despite being o i l wealthy. This w i l l
help them in communicating the need o f reform and that Nigeria should avoid non-concessionary
lending or repeating the boom-bust mistakes o f the past. Third, i t has the advantage o f better terms o f
IDA credit.
18.
Nigeria’s total public debt, estimated at about 72% o f GDP at the end o f 2004, w i l l impede i t s
progress in attaining the MDGs. Domestic debt (about 22% o f the total) i s being addressed as part o f
the Government’s reforms. A solution i s needed for that owed to external creditors, mainly the Paris
Club4.
19.
Traditional Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) suggests that, at current o i l prices, neither
external nor fiscal sustainability i s an issue for Nigeria. However, this analysis i s extremely sensitive
to assumptions about future o i l prices. If o i l prices fall b y some US$4 per barrel below current
projections, Nigeria’s debt becomes unsustainable. Moreover, Nigeria cannot maintain external and
fiscal sustainability and make appreciable progress on the MDGs. Results o f a D S A incorporating the
additional government spending needed to reach key MDG goals show that even with outstanding
future economic performance and sustained high o i l prices, i t w i l l be virtually impossible for Nigeria
to meet the MDGs and simultaneously lower i t s indebtedness to sustainable levels (defined as
60% of GDP). On the fiscal front, although high o i l prices prevent the emergence o f a fiscal gap
before 2012, a significant gap with net present value of US$50 billion5 develops over the IO-year
MDG horizon, 2005-2015. Moreover, much larger fiscal gaps with net present value o f US$90
billion, appear as early as 2008, when o i l prices are lowered by one standard deviation o f historical o i l
prices. This shows that a negative price-shock could quickly trigger a debt and macroeconomic crisis
and deal a severe blow to reforms (see Annex 4).
20.
Reducing debt may also help to reduce capital flight. There i s evidence to suggest that
Nigerians are holding significant amounts o f money abroad. Attracting some o f this capital back to
Nigeria could have positive effects on investment, growth and employment creation. Empirical
Includes arrears.
At 5% discount rate used in Bank-FundDSF.

Country Partnership Strategy

-5-

Nigeria

evidence also indicates that, as the debt to GDP ratio rises above 60%, capital flight i s induced. This
implies that an agreement to reduce Nigeria’s debt would help to “crowd-in” repatriated capital, and
so have a larger effect on growth.

21.
A large debt burden gives the wrong signals to policy makers. Nigeria needs periodically to
save o i l windfalls - as i t i s doing right now - but the issue o f debt repayment can threaten t h i s
practice. When o i l prices are high, the debate about saving the windfall to cushion an eventual price
decline becomes confused b y the issue o f debt repayment. There i s a strong incentive t o policymakers
to spend rather than save windfalls, thus perpetuating the boom-bust cycles that have characterized
economic management in Nigeria for many years. Cleaning the slate would remove this source o f
macro-policy weakness.

22.
President Obasanjo has made debt reduction a key objective o f his administration. A positive
decision on debt relief would provide a strong signal of support for the reforms. I t would enhance the
reformers’ credibility and improve prospects for sustaining o f the reforms beyond the general
elections o f 2007. The Nigerian Government has made clear that it w i l l use any resources released
through debt relief to finance MDG-related expenditures.
23.
Two important issues are delaying a resolution o f Nigeria’s debt problem. First, Nigeria does
not have a formal program with the IMF, which i s usually required b y the Paris Club. Since early
2004, the Fund has monitored on a quarterly basis the Nigerian economic reform program. The
enhanced surveillance program has helped the Government to achieve commendable results in terms
o f monetary and fiscal stability. The Nigerian authorities have indicated their willingness to move to a
non-financial arrangement approved b y the Fund when such an arrangement becomes available.
Second, there i s concern that debt relief to Nigeria w i l l create a problem o f “moral hazard”. Nigeria
should aspire to becoming creditworthy because foreign savings w i l l be required to lift Nigeria to
middle-income status over the medium-term. Creditors worry that providing debt relief to Nigeria
today could influence future behavior, and promote a culture o f lack o f respect for honoring contracts.
In recognition o f this, Nigeria i s fully servicing i t s debt to the London Club as well as i t s multilateral
debt.
24.
Nigeria and i t s bilateral creditors and donors are discussing issues pertaining t o debt relief and
increased assistance. There are good prospects for increased support for Nigeria, especially since the
UK has made Africa a priority area for attention by the G8 and EU during i t s period o f leadership o f
both in 2005. The UK i s looking to work with other governments in focusing attention on Africa,
responding to recommendations o f the Commission for Africa and various new and creative initiatives
to help address key development challenges in Africa. Nigeria i s poised t o benefit from these
initiatives.

Country Partnership Strategy

-6-

Nigeria

11. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND PROSPECTS

25.
Africa w i l l fail to meet the MDGs if Nigeria fails, given that one in five Africans i s a
Nigerian. Achieving the poverty MDG w i l l require rapid and sustained growth o f the non-oil
economy, creating employment and opportunities for small businesses and improved livelihoods.
Achieving the health, HIV, water and education MDGs w i l l require resources to be reallocated to the
social sectors and demand created for quality services, which w i l l improve institutional capacity. This
i s no easy task. Nigeria’s history o f poor performance i s rooted in a complex and challenging political
and social context where traditional values have been damaged under the influence o f a “resource
curse”. Economic analysis indicates that Nigeria’s success w i l l depend upon continued reforms to
improve the investment climate and strengthen governance; as well as upon increased investments in
economic and social infrastructure.
Political Economy and Social Context

26.
The “oil curse” led to many years of political and economic destabilization, including
decades of military rule. This became the most significant factor underpinning Nigeria’s political,
social and economic development after independence. Both the NEEDS and the analysis o f Nigeria’s
political economy undertaken through the Drivers o f Change (DOC) initiative6 have identified three
fundamental and inter-related constraints that Nigeria must overcome if i t i s to meet the MDGs:
0

0

0

First, successive governments have institutionalized mismanagement of public revenue,
particularly from oil. This has seriously damaged the capacity to manage public expenditure
and develop i t further;
Secondly, years o f military rule, institutionalized corruption and weak formal accountability
have weakened the relationship between poor Nigerians and their government; and,
Thirdly, a combination o f ‘Dutch Disease’ and institutionalized rent-seeking behavior has
undermined activity in non-oil areas o f the economy (particularly agriculture and
manufacturing), reducing non-oil sector economic growth, fuelling unemployment and
exacerbating poverty and conflict.

27.
Successive Nigerian Governments federal, state, local - have systematically
mismanaged revenues from oil. This fuelled
corruption, undermined trust and ultimately held
development back. Corruption worsened in a
climate of weak transparency and accountability at
all levels o f government, and was reinforced b y
the values and behavior o f those outside
government. There has been little incentive for
budgetary allocations to be aligned with
development priorities. Financial management
systems became weak, often conveniently so, and
there was inadequate information for proper
resources management. Corruption related to
weak governance and patronage-based politics fuelled unproductive public investment, while an
unsustainable increase in external debt left the economy vulnerable to falling o i l prices. B y 1998,
6

C. Heymens and C. Pycroft, 2004. Summary Report of Drivers of Change, DFID, unpublishedreport.

Country Partnership Strategy

-7-

Nigeria

approximately 7 0 % of private wealth had been taken out o f Nigeria’. Conditions are now emerging in
Nigeria under which this wealth can begin to return.
28.
Mismanagement o f the country’s o i l resources also resulted in significant environmental
degradation and contributed to persisting social conflict. O i l spills, leakage through o l d and corrosive
pipelines, dumping o f o i l into the waterways, burning o f excess gases have all been extensive, often
poisoning drinking water, polluting the air, destroying vegetation, fisheries, land quality and
undermining the livelihoods o f people. Weak enforcement o f environmental laws, which draws
support from past political leadership, has exacerbated the problems. Activities relating to o i l
exploration and drilling in the context o f weak property rights regimes have also displaced indigenous
communities f r o m their homelands and fueled social protest and disruption.
Nigeria is large, diverse and complex. Nigeria’s constitutionally powerful executive i s
29.
constrained by the complexity o f Nigeria’s political system and the importance o f ensuring national
unity in a country with around 200 ethnic groups, 500 indigenous languages and two major religions
(Islam and Christianity).

30.
These potential cleavages in Nigerian society can be used for political ends. While there are
indications that communal conflicts have subsided somewhat in the last two years, Nigeria remains
vulnerable to resurgences o f conflict. The extraction o f o i l in the Niger Delta provides a particular
focus but there i s the potential for violence to flare almost anywhere in the country in response to
specific political, economic and social triggers. Violence deters economic activity, reduces
opportunities for non-oil sector growth, worsens unemployment and poverty and creates a stream o f
disaffected youth prone to manipulation into violence for political ends. The causes o f violent
conflict identified in the national Conflict Assessment in 2002-03 largely remain, and the run-up to
the 2007 elections w i l l provide many potential flashpoints. Despite this particular manifestation o f
the ‘resource curse’, the Nigerian federation i s unusual in managing to avoid major c i v i l unrest for
more than 25 years.
31.
The federal system has contributed to the survival o f Nigeria as a cohesive nation. The 36
states and their 774 local governments exercise considerable political and fiscal autonomy. They
control about 50% o f government resources and are responsible for primary education and health care.
The incentives for states - particularly the political leaders - to engage with a reform agenda have
been weak. Serious capacity constraints in several states and local governments also hamper their
ability to deliver on their mandate. Achieving reform at state level and introducing greater fiscal
discipline remain significant challenges. Nevertheless some states are making impressive progress in
fighting corruption, improving their public expenditure management and strengthening their capacity
to deliver services. Though conflicts can mar the federal-state relationship, the Federal Government
and some states are placing more attention on building consensus and coordination between the
different tiers. The Federal Government i s currently designing a system o f incentives and rewards
intended to challenge more states to improve performance. The fiscal responsibility legislation and
the SEEDS benchmarking process - a Govemment-led initiative to track state performance - are key
elements in building enhanced coordination.
32.
The relationship between the legislature and the executive, particularly at the federal level and
on matters relating to the budget and key pieces o f legislation, i s often difficult. Unlike other countries
in the region, Nigeria’s National Assembly has significant powers to remake budgets. This has
contributed to a conflictive relationship between the executive and the legislature on budget
preparation. As a result, budgeting has become lengthy and unpredictable, often with significant

’Estimates of Paul Collier.

-8-

Country Partnership Strategy

Nigeria

disagreements over fiscal policy and, more recently, on the benchmark price o f o i l to underpin
revenue forecasts. This conflictive relationship on a key policy instrument jeopardizes important
elements o f the reform agenda.
33.
Building voice and demand for change is critical. Support for the Government’s
implementation of the NEEDS and SEEDS i s important, but i s not sufficient to ensure the
achievement o f the MDGs. Strengthening the connection between Nigerians and their government i s
also important. Politics has been dominated by geopolitics and conflicts over the control o f resources.
Politicians have exploited ethnic and religious divisions to create powerful patron-client relationships
that undermine issues-based politics. The National Assembly has begun to play a more constructive
role in this area. Although the media, policy think-tanks, academic institutions, faith-based
organizations and trade unions all function, they have yet to play a critical role in reform.

Poverty in Nigeria
34.
Nigeria has the third highest number of poor
people in the world, after China and India. With annual
per capita income falling significantly to about US$350
between 1980 and 2003 (below the Sub-Saharan average o f
US$450), approximately 70 million of Nigeria’s 130 million
people are living on less than one dollar a day. An LSMSbased analysis which i s currently under way indicates that
low educational attainment and employment in farming are
among the most powerful correlates o f poverty. Also,
female-headed households tend to be poorer than those headed b y males.

Millennium Development Goal

Halve the number o f people living in extreme
poverty between 1990 and 2015
Halve the proportion of people suffering from
hunger
Ensure all children complete primary education of
adequate quality
Eliminate gender disparity in primary and
secondary education by 2005
Reduce child mortality by two thirds among
children under five
Reduce deaths o f mothers due to child bearing
- by75% between 1990 and 2015
Halt the spread o f AIDS
Halve the proportion o f people without safe
drinking water by 2015

Current Status in Nigeria

55% of Nigerians live on less than US$1 per day.

I 29% of children are underweight.

I
I

Less than 60% o f primary aged children attend school.
7 million primary-aged children are not in school.
The number o f girls enrolled in primary education i s
92% the number o f boys. In some states i t i s less than
40%, particularly in the north o f Nigeria.
One in five Nigerian children die before their fifth
birthday. Main causes are malaria (33%), VPD (22%),
diarrhea (19%) and acute respiratory infections (16%).
One birth in a hundred results in the death o f the
mother. Women in northern Nigeria have a one in
fifteen chance o f dying through a pregnancy related
cause.
5% o f Nigerians are infected with H I V - over 10% in
some states. Over 1 million children have already been
orphaned by AIDS.
Less than 50% o f the rural population has access to a
safe water source.

-9-

Country Partnership Strategy

Nigeria

Poverty in Nigeria has significant geographical disparities. Income poverty i s higher in rural
35.
areas (64%), where the majority o f the population lives, than in urban areas (35%). Most Nigerians

quickly and Lagos i s so large as to account for
There are
one in 25 of Nigeria’s poor.
significant linkages among rural and urban
areas* Many
depend On migration as
Dart o f their livelihood strategies. In addition.
poverty rates in the northem regions are
substantially higher than those in southem
regions (Figure 1).

Box 3: The poorest Nigerians depend heavily on
naturalrwourcw.

I

I

Over 80% of the rural population are employed in agriculture,
forestry, fisheries and H&ll-scale mining. Nigeria has underutilized cultivable land, land resources suited to cultivating a
wide variety of crops, a large coast and major lakes and rivers to
sustain fisheries as well as
livestock. Aericuiturai
performance directly affects poor &ph’s
livelihood;. Current
growth in agriculture will not be sustainable without a switch to
Droductivihr
poor
of
iesources inckases the vulnerabiky of the poor and further
reduces the incentives for investment.

> 65

-

5(3-65

< 50

Fig. 1: Income poverty levels by region, % of population (NLSS, 2004).

36.
Nigeria has poor human development indicators, with significant regional variations. In
2003, about 7.3 million school-age children did not attend primary schools and net primary school
attendance was only 60% (64% for boys versus 57% for girls). In the North-West Region the figures
are starker; only 34% o f girls attend school. For those children who do have access, the quality o f
education i s insufficient to provide them with basic life skills and knowledge. School infrastructure i s
poor; over 50% o f classrooms need extensive rehabilitation, according to a 1999 survey. Literacy i s
low; only 45% o f urban and 19% o f rural primary school age children are able to read part o f a simple
sentence. The quality o f schooling i s reduced b y large class size, limited pupil-teacher contact, high
pupilheacher ratios, lack o f teaching materials and equipment and widespread use o f unqualified
teachers. O f those students who do complete secondary education, only 11% are admitted into
tertiary education.
37.
Nigeria’s infant mortality rate i s among the highest in Africa - 10% o f live births (cf. Ghana
6%, Burkina Faso 8%, Benin 9%), with marked regional disparities (see Figure 2). The relatively less
poor Niger Delta has among the highest levels of infant mortality. Around one million Nigerian
children under the age of five died in 2004. Malaria i s the biggest killer o f under-fives in Nigeria.
Only 6% o f under-fives sleep under a mosquito net and less than one-third o f under-fives with fever
are treated with anti-malarials. Mortality rates among infants and children in the poorest 20% o f
households are more than 2.5 times as high as the rates in the richest 20%. Health outcomes are
worse than in similarly poor countries, and poor access to basic health services i s a significant factor.
The referral system i s fragmented and uncoordinated (primary, secondary, and tertiary services are the

Country Partnership Strategy

-10-

Nigeria

responsibilities of local, state and federal governments respectively), with insufficient public funding
for most basic services. Immunization coverage has fallen from around 30% in the early 1990s to
13% in 2003 - and i s as low as 4% in the North-West. Only one-third o f deliveries are assisted by a
skilled professional, and access to emergency obstetric care i s poor.

110+
90- 109

70-89

< 70
Fig. 2: Infant mortality according to region (DHS, 2003).

38.
Poor access to infrastructure also affects a large percentage o f the population. Less than half
o f all Nigerian households (42%) have access to safe drinking water. Estimates suggest that some
35,000 children under five die each year due to lack o f good water and sanitation. Access to allweather roads i s also limited. Only about one in three households in rural areas has electricity
compared to eight out o f ten urban households. However, even when electricity i s available, i t i s often
unreliable. Despite the recent growth in cellular subscribers, Nigeria’s teledensity remains low,
especially in rural areas.
High HZV prevalence w i l l devastate the
39.
social and economic landscapes. Nigeria has the
third largest number o f people living with HIV/Aids
after South Africa and India. An estimated 3.5
million people are living with HIV - 10% o f the
world’s total - and the national prevalence i s around
5%. Young people are the most vulnerable to
infection. The poorest are most vulnerable and are
the worst hit when the disease strikes. Addressing
HIV/Aids i s critical and must challenge denial,
cultural practices, stigmatization, limited access to
treatment and condoms and resistance, possibly due
to lack o f compliance with drug regimes.

Box 4: Impact of HIWAIDS on livelihoods.

Livelihood opportunities and security are at risk from
HIV/AIDS in Nigeria. A recent study in Benue State
highlights a high percent of chronic illness, much clearly
AIDS-related,
with severe household impacts
particularly affecting women and children.
The study found that 87% of household heads were
farmers who were often dependent on remittances from
ill or deceased family members. Social capital was by
far the most important asset for households coping with
the impact of AIDS. However, 50% of households had
gone into debt, mostly to informal credit associations,
following a death in the family. There is a dearth of
formal care and support options with a need to
strengthen local support networks.
H W A I D S lmnact Assessment. Benue State (2004)

A n Agenda to Achieve Non-Oil Growth
40.
Lasting poverty reduction and achievement of the MDGs requires sustained and rapid
growth in the non-oil sectors. Nigeria’s growth rate over the last two decades has been just 3.4%;
while population growth has been about 2.5%. Clearly, this GDP growth rate i s not enough to achieve
a rapid and significant reduction in poverty. T o cut poverty b y half b y 2015, growth needs t o rise to

Country Partnership Strategy

-11-

Nigeria

7-8% and stay at that level. Key non-oil sectors have performed significantly below their potential.
This i s particularly true o f agriculture, and sub-sectors such as cocoa, cotton and oil. Most non-oil
sectors have not succeeded in moving to higher value added activities. Furthermore, growth has
historically been too volatile. With low growth and inadequate diversification, i t i s not surprising that
unemployment remains high, estimated conservatively at about 10.8%’ but believed to be more
accurately in the range o f 40-50% in key urban centers and amongst new graduates.
4 1.
Competitiveness of Nigeria’s economy has declined steadily and, while Nigeria i s the second
largest economy in Sub Saharan Africa, it i s one o f the least competitive, ranking 93 out o f 104
countries on the global competitiveness indexg. This reflects four main constraints.
42.
First i s the real exchange rate appreciation over time”, or the “Dutch disease” phenomenon,
which has weakened the non-oil sectors. The mismanagement o f o i l revenues, and specifically the
adverse effects of large foreign exchange inflows during o i l price booms, has produced a historically
highly unstable and unpredictable macroeconomic environment.
43.
Second, Nigeria has a huge infrastructure deficit. Poor infrastructure has hindered non-oil
growth in many cases and significantly increased the costs o f doing business in Nigeria. In the power
sector, where this deficit i s perhaps the most binding on economic activity, per capita consumption i s
about 8 l k W h compared to 288kWh in Ghana and 355kWh in India. Businesses commonly report
output losses due to power deficiencies o f up to 30%. Similarly, poor road infrastructure i s estimated
to exact an annual cost o f about 3% o f GDP. Improving infrastructure i s critical for rapid growth o f
Nigeria’s economy, and therefore for achieving the income poverty MDG. I t i s also essential for
health and education services to be provided and accessed b y poor Nigerians and therefore for
achieving health and education MDGs. Reduction o f child mortality, for example, depends directly on
improvements in water supply and sanitation. Improvements in energy services also contribute
directly to reducing smoke-induced respiratory infections and to the time, effort and interest that
children can give to education. Over one-third o f rural educational and health establishments in
Nigeria do not have electrical connections.

44.
Third i s policy instability which, coupled with a burdensome and inadequately coordinated
regulatory and legal framework, has created a hostile business environment. The Government has
attempted unsuccessfully to compensate business operators for the lack o f competitiveness through
the use o f high tariff and non-tariff barriers to protect domestic industry. Weak governance further
compounds the effect o f these constraints on the economy’s competitiveness and secures
opportunities for rent-seeking behavior. Concerted action i s required on several fronts and through all
tiers o f government.
A fourth constraint i s inadequate access to medium- and long-term finance. Money and
45,
securities markets are underdeveloped, and the policy environment does not provide adequate
incentives for a strong intermediary function. More than 95% o f credit provided to the private sector
by financial institutions in Nigeria i s short-term, usually only suitable for quick turn-around trading
activities. Business operators and particularly small scale enterprises are starved o f funding for
medium and longer term productive investments.

* FOS Statistical Fact Sheet on Econ & Social Devt Sept 04.
WEF Competitivenessreport 2004-05.

lo
particularly during oil price booms.

-12-

Country Partnership Strategy

Nigeria

46.
The Government’s reform program i s beginning to tackle these underlying constraints to
competitiveness and building a foundation for sustainable growth and poverty reduction. In
particular, the Government is:
Continuingfiscal prudence and building a cushion o f reserves during periods o f high o i l
prices. This i s essential for maintaining a competitive and stable real exchange rate;
Accelerating i t s program o f investment in infrastructure, especially power, natural gas
and transport. This w i l l reduce the cost o f doing business and ensure that rural producers
are linked to markets. In parallel, Government i s putting in place policies and institutions
to ensure adequate maintenance o f infrastructure;
Strengthening govemance andfighting corruption, extending this to areas that directly
affect the country’s competitiveness - e.g. port concessioning and customs reforms;
Improving the business environment by reducing policy-related costs and risks such as
corruption, red-tape and administrative barriers, a weak legal system, inadequate
protection o f property rights, inadequate enforcement o f t a r i f f s and policy and other
uncertainties associated with exchange rate and other prices; and,
Reforming the financial sector such that it i s more stable and efficient. Simultaneously,
the Government i s piloting specific programs on: access to credit for small-scale,
environmentally sustainable infrastructure investments b y Fadama farmers; community
financing for small-scale mining activities in the solid minerals sector; and commercially
sustainable financial services to micro-, small- and medium-enterprises.

-

47.
Shared growth in Nigeria a role for agriculture. Unlocking the potential o f sectors (such
as agriculture) on which the poor depend i s crucial to achieving ‘shared growth’ in Nigeria.
Agriculture i s the mainstay o f the rural economy and, since most o f Nigeria’s poor live and work in
rural areas, the health o f the sector i s fundamental to poverty reduction. As a large economic sector
(some 30% o f GDP), agriculture affects growth o f output and the expenditure side o f the economy
through consumption (65%-70% o f GDP), providing part o f the incomes o f an estimated 75% o f the
population - particularly among the poor. Trading and processing produce also supports a significant
proportion o f the urban poor.
In the past, Nigerian agriculture has performed poorly as a result o f “resource curse’’ effects
48.
o f o i l and inappropriate policies and institutions. Since democracy returned, agriculture has
performed better. In the five years to 2003, the sector grew by 4.6% p.a. With limited technical
change, in an attempt to produce more and maintain living standards (as crop prices have not kept
pace with inflation) farmers have increased the cropped area. In the short- to medium-term, the
current growth in agriculture w i l l continue. But in the longer-term, declining land fertility due to
shorter fallow periods, low use o f productivity enhancing technology, labor shortages with rising
labor costs and ageing farmers w i l l present formidable barriers to growth o f output. Unsustainable
water use has also cost agriculture dearly; there were 26,000 sq. km o f degraded lands in 1993-95 - a
near nine-fold increase in 20 years.

49.
For bringing benefits to the poor and the broader economy, a turn-around in agricultural
productivity w i l l be necessary in Nigeria. Greater productivity can generate higher incomes for the
rural poor, reduce the cost o f consumption for the urban poor, stimulate industrialization through
reducing the cost o f raw materials andor increasing export led growth”.

~~

” For a cross-county analysis of the correlation between agricultural productivity and pro-poor growth, see Reaching the Millennium Development
Goals: How does agriculhld productivityreduce poverty?NomaanMajid, LO, 2004.

Country Partnership Strategy

-13-

Nigeria

Government has developed a three-pronged program to support increases in agricultural
50.
productivity, as follows:

0

0

Technical change. Increasing investment to strengthen agricultural research organizations,
improving the quantity and quality o f private sector-led, demand-driven technology transfer
services, and improving the policy environment. This should also encourage the private
sector to increase the supply o f agriculture inputs that are key for improved productivity:
fertilizers, seeds, agro-chemicals, farm tools and processing equipment;
Improving connectivity. Increasing investments in infrastructure (especially rural roads) so as
to significantly improve the links between rural producers and urban consumers.
Improvements in market access resulting from a strengthened rural transport network w i l l
strengthen demand for raw and processed agricultural commodities, improve the profitability
o f farming and post-harvest processing activities, increase incentives to adopt improved
production technologies, raise the incomes o f rural producers, and lower prices paid b y urban
consumers for food and other commodities; and,
Better water management. Working to unlock the potential productivity growth offered by
more complete, rational, and effective management and use o f Nigeria’s water resources,
especially for irrigation. In addition to the small-scale irrigation activities that are currently
under way, more emphasis w i l l be put on developing medium- and large-scale irrigation
systems that can help mitigate the weather risk associated with rain-fed agriculture.

5 1.
The regional context for growth. Nigeria can and should also play an important catalytic
role in the economic development o f the West African sub-region. I t i s a potential large market for i t s
much smaller neighbors, as well as a potential supplier o f goods and services for the sub-region. The
Government i s now focusing more on playing i t s natural lead role in economic integration o f the subregion. I t i s aligning i t s trade regime to regional agreements and international commitments through
the planned implementation o f the ECOWAS CET by mid-2005, and the phasing out o f all import
prohibitions by January 2007. I t i s also actively participating in the preparations o f a common
regional currency. I t s efforts at ports and customs modernization w i l l be beneficial not only to the
domestic but also to the sub-regional economy.
52.
Nigeria i s currently engaged in various regional infrastructure initiatives. The ongoing West
Africa Gas Pipeline project w i l l transport the country’s huge gas reserves to neighboring countries.
This project w i l l be an important source of national growth in Nigeria’s Niger Delta region and in the
beneficiary countries. The West Africa Power Pool w i l l provide a common legal and regulatory
framework favorable to private investment and therefore promote increased private sector
participation in the country’s power sector and availability o f affordable power supply both for
Nigeria and the sub-region if the ECOWAS Energy Protocol i s fully implemented. Nigeria i s also
working on several regional road initiatives. Beyond these regional investment initiatives, Nigeria
could play a stronger lead role in promoting harmonization and convergence o f economic and sectoral
policies across the sub-region.

Medium Term Economic Prospects
53.
Nigeria’s medium-term economic outlook i s positive. With recent reforms and projected oil
windfall, the economy has the potential to move to a much higher, more diversified, and stable growth
path. I t has a considerable resource base across almost all o f its non-oil sectors: agriculture, solid
minerals, manufacturing, and in services such as transport, communications, banking, ports, etc..
Each o f these i s a potential contributor to economic growth. The dynamism and the entrepreneurial
spirit o f Nigerians are widely acknowledged, yet presently underutilized.

Country Partnership Strategy

- 14-

Nigeria

54.
Agriculture i s critical to any sustained improvements in Nigeria’s growth performance.
Specific sources include revitalization and higher productivity in traditional areas such as cocoa, o i l
palm, cassava, ground nuts; as well as progress in newer areas such as high-value fruits and
vegetables, rice and agro-processing (including aqua-culture such as catfish and shrimp). In industry,
light manufacturing, leather products, food and beverages are areas for growth - i.e. many with
agriculture sector linkages to further increase demand. In addition, there i s good potential to develop
private provision of infrastructure and other services at urban, rural and community level, using
innovative “output-based aid” (OBA) methodologies. In the short- to medium-term, the principal
markets to be tapped for growth and employment opportunities w i l l be domestic and regional, except
for selected products where Nigeria has established global competitiveness (e.g. shrimps, leather).

55.
This strategy, and the implied need for higher levels o f support, i s developed around a
scenario in which Nigeria deepens and extends ongoing reforms. Nigeria can begin to harness more
o f i t s considerable resources to put the economy on the path towards attainment o f the MDGs.
Improvements in trade and exchange rate policy in particular, w i l l stimulate growth. Nigeria could
also become a growth pole for the West Africa sub-region and indeed for Sub-Saharan Africa. Under
this scenario, public investment would need to rise significantly in order to reduce Nigeria’s severe
economic infrastructure deficit, particularly in the power and roads sectors, and provide basis for
increased access t o basic social services. Public investments would also catalyze private investments
including in infrastructure. Public investment would average about 11% of GDP and private
investment about 14.5% of GDP annually over the period from 9.3% and 13.0% respectively in 2004.
At the same time, gross national savings would decline to about 20.9% o f GDP annually compared to
27.1% in 2004, in order to accommodate rising per capita consumption.
56.
W i t h public expenditures rising to make progress on the MDGs and more aid resource flows,
some degree o f real exchange rate appreciation can be expected. Continued prudent fiscal
management-in particular, adherence to the oil-price based fiscal rule, tight monetary policy, and
improved efficiency and quality o f spending-will
be critical for keeping this trend in check.
Experience from other large economies suggests that with vigorous reforms and progress on removing
constraints to non-oil growth, growth gains are s t i l l possible even with limited improvements in
external competitiveness. In particular, improvements in (input and output) marketing arrangements
can deliver a substantial agriculture growth dividend.
57.
Annual GDP growth would rise to an average o f 7.7% in the medium-term driven b y stronger
non-oil growth averaging about 7.0% annually. This would come from recovery in agricultural
productivity, from manufacturing activities such as cement, food processing, sugar-based industries
and leather products initially meeting the needs o f the large domestic market. Growth in construction
would continue to be strong. Services would benefit from growth in both agriculture and industry.
Macroeconomic stability would be maintained and inflation would be contained at about 10%
annually with continued prudent fiscal management. The non-oil primary deficit would rise to about
47% of GDP in 2005 and decline gradually to about 41.5% b y 2008 given the increased outlays
required for meeting the MDGs, which i s s t i l l consistent with maintaining macro-economic stability.

58.
Projected high o i l prices would significantly boost o i l revenues to about US$36 billion
annually over the period. At the same time, with high non-oil investment requirements including
import requirements, rising private per capita consumption and the need to build up reserves to reduce
the economy’s vulnerability to external shocks, considerable additional external inflows are needed to
realize this scenario. An external financing gap emerges in 2005, and grows rapidly, averaging about
US$6.4 billion annually (Table 2).

Country Partnership Strategy

-15-

Nigeria

59.
The argument for increased international support would be weaker if Nigeria does not
accelerate structural reforms and the pace o f investment in economic infrastructure and social sectors.
If the puce of reform is not accelerated signifwuntly, growth would pick up to about 6.5% over 20052008 due to double-digit growth in the o i l sector in 2005-2006, and marginal improvement in non-oil
sector growth to about 5% over the period (Table 2). Fiscal policy would continue to be prudent and
consistent with a non-oil primary deficit o f about 40% o f non-oil GDP. This deficit i s compatible
with a fiscal rule fixing the non-oil primary deficit at a reference o i l price o f US$25 per barrel in 2002
prices. As o i l prices are projected to remain higher than the reference price over the medium term,
such a policy would permit the accumulation o f substantial fiscal savings. The primary surplus could
strengthen to about 14.5% o f GDP in 2005, from 3.3% in 2003, stabilizing at around 10% o f GDP b y
2008. The external current account balance would swing to a surplus o f about 7.4% o f GDP b y 2008,
a significant improvement from a deficit o f nearly 11% o f GDP in 2002. While better than historical
trends, given the enormity o f the country’s growth and development challenge, this level o f
performance would not be sufficient to achieve the MDG targets by 2015. Growth in per capita
consumption and reduction in income poverty would be limited.
If the reform effort is weakened or stulled, there would be n o justification for increased
60.
assistance. Under such a scenario economic growth would average 5.3% annually over 2005-08,
largely reflecting the strength o f the o i l sector. However, growth in the non-oil sectors o f the
economy would probably drop to about 2.8 % p.a., from 4.4% in 2003, hampered by the delayed
structural reforms and other growth-oriented policies. The drop in the growth rate o f the non-oil
economy would translate in stagnant if not increasing income poverty, given Nigeria’ s population
growth rate o f 2.5 percent and the fact that the majority o f the population earns their living in the nono i l sectors. Public investment rates would stagnate, while private investment could decline to around
11% o f GDP. Inflation would remain high, averaging nearly 14% annually as fiscal reforms are
delayed in the face o f high public expenditures. Overall fiscal surplus would average about 7.0 % o f
GDP compared to 1~0.1%of GDP in the base case scenario.
61.

Nigeria’s positive medium-term economic prospects can be realized provided the government

i s able to sustain macroeconomic stability, including through strict implementation o f the oil-price
based fiscal rule and improved public expenditure management; and make further progress in key

structural areas, such as trade and exchange rate management. However, the Government’s reform
efforts while necessary w i l l not be sufficient, unless accompanied b y significantly increased external
financial support through a combination o f debt relief and higher ODA and FDI flows.

Country Partnership Strategy

-16-

Nigeria

Table 2 :Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework, 2005-08.
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

6.1

7.0

6.5

8.1

Oil

3.5

11.2

9.1
13.1

4.0

8.3

Non-oil

7.4

4.9
22.0

7.0
24.8

8.0
27.0

8.1
28.0

9.3
13.0

10.0

10.5

11.0

12.5

12.0

14.3

16.0

15.5

Gross National Savings (% GDP)

27.1

25.9

25.0

23.8

20.9

Total Revenue and Grants (% GDP)

43.1

46.3

46.1

43.0

40.0

35.7
-37.0

38.8
-47.1

39.9
-46.0

40.7
-42.2

40.8
-41.5

0.0
17.0

3.7

5.4

5.2

11.2

28.6

37.9

48.9

6.4

9.5

10.6

43.3
11.2

6.1

7.0

7.8

4.8

6.5

3.5
7.4
22.3
9.3

11.2

13.1

4.0

8.3

4.9

5.0

5.3

5.5

20.8

23.0

24.0

24.0

9.0

9.3

9.9

9.9

Sustained and Deepened Reform Scenario
GDP Growth (a,at 1990 factor costs)

Gross Investment (% GDP)
Public
Private

Total Expenditure and Net Lending (% GDP)
Non-oil Primary Balance (% Non-oil GDP)
External Financing Gap (US$ billion)
Gross internationalreserves (US$billion)
(months of imports)

Good Policy Scenario
GDP Growth (%, at 1990 factor costs)
Oil
Non-oil
Gross Investment (% GDP)
Public

22.3

10.8

13.0
27.1

11.8

13.7

14.2

14.1

Gross National Savings (% GDP)

30.1

33.4

31.5

31.5

Total Revenue and Grants (% GDP)

43.1

45.8

45.5

43.2

43.1

34.7
-40.0
1.3
55.9
19.5

Private

Total Expenditure and Net Lending (% GDP)
Non-oil Primary Balance (% Non-oil GDP)
External Financing Gap (US$ billion)
Gross internationalreserves (US$ billion)
(months of imports)

Non-Reform Scenario
GDP Growth (%, at 1990 factor costs)
Oil

35.7

34.5

33.2

-37.0

-40.8

0.0
17.0
6.4

2.2

-39.9
1.6

31.0
12.0

44.9
16.6

34.7
-40.0
0.6
67.0
22.2

5.9
11.2

6.4

3.9

5.1

13.1

4.0

8.3

2.8
18.9

2.8

22.3

2.8
19.9

2.8
20.0

9.3
13.0

9.0
10.9

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.9

10.2

11.0

Gross National Savings (% GDP)

27.1

29.1

26.6

Total Revenue and Grants (% GDP)

43.1

45.0

22.3
40.5

Total Expenditureand Net Lending (% GDP)

35.7

35.4
-43.6

44.6
35.3

22.7
41.4
36.4

36.2

-44.1

-44.1

-43.7

1.3

2.1

2.5

2.8

31.0

43.6

52.7

60.3

12.0

15.1

16.8

17.6

Non-oil
Gross Investment (% GDP)
Public
Private

Non-oil Primary Balance (% Non-oil GDP)
External Financing Gap (US$ billion)
Gross international reserves (US$billion)
(months of imports)
Source: World BanWIMF.

6.1
3.5
7.4

-37.0

0.0
17.0
6.4

19.2

Country Partnership Strategy

-17-

Nigeria

111. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT AGENDA: NEEDS AND SEEDS
A New Framework for Reform, Growth and Poverty Reduction
62.
The N E E D S and state-level SEEDSform the national framework of Nigeria’s home-grown
poverty reduction strategy. The development o f the NEEDS enjoyed strong ownership. It underscores
the Government’s commitment to an ambitious development agenda that aims to place Nigeria on a
path o f sustainable long-term growth and poverty reduction, through changing attitudes and behaviors
as well as policies and legislation. In May 2004, President Obasanjo officially launched the NEEDS,
although implementation o f key elements began in mid 2003. Most o f the 36 state governments have
prepared and are beginning to implement their SEEDS - though progress varies. The international
community recognizes that NEEDS and SEEDS present a significant shift in the country’s agenda and
a coherent framework for future increased engagement. It also provides a rallying point for donor
coordination and harmonization.
63.
The NEEDS honestly and self-critically assesses poverty and the lack o f growth in Nigeria,
their causes, and the challenges confronting the nation. While highlighting Nigeria’s potential,
NEEDS points out that Nigeria i s currently one o f the weakest economies in Africa (although the
second largest in sub-Saharan Africa), and one o f the poorest countries in the world. According to the
NEEDS, achieving the MDGs i s a critical challenge for Nigeria. Therefore, NEEDS places growth o f
the economy firmly at the centre o f i t s agenda. There i s a clear recognition that sustained poverty
reduction w i l l not be achieved without improved economic performance, particularly in the non-oil
economy in which most o f the poor participate.
NEEDS Vision. The NEEDS sets out a vision for wealth creation, employment generation,
64.
poverty reduction and value reorientation. NEEDS i s founded on three pillars: (i)
empowering people
and building a social contract; (ii)promoting private enterprise; and, (iii)changing the way
government works.
Empowenngpeople and building a social contract. NEEDS seeks improved access to health,
65.
basic education, safe water, welfare, employment and security through empowerment and
participation. I t proposes a social charter which recognizes the right o f Nigerians to government
services and accountability. In education, the policy thrust includes the provision o f unhindered access
to Universal Basic Education (UBE) to all children o f school-going age. I t seeks the establishment
and maintenance o f quality standards through appropriate curricula and quality control. NEEDS calls
for capacity building in post basic education and training for the knowledge economy. In health, key
elements include reducing the disease burden o f malaria, TB, W / A I D S and reproductive health
related illnesses. NEEDS calls for improved availability and management o f health resources
(financial, human etc). The Federal Government’s health reform program w i l l support the
development o f improved primary health care services at state level with a special emphasis on
routine immunization. NEEDS anticipates the preparation o f detailed sector strategies that w i l l
clearly delineate the roles and responsibilities o f the three tiers o f Government in service provision.
This should eliminate waste and duplication o f effort. Sector programs for these strategies are to be
prioritized and costed and public spending for services increasingly based on performance
benchmarks. This pillar recognizes that success in delivering the social charter w i l l depend on close
collaboration between all stakeholders: federal, state and local governments as well as the private
sector, NGOs and the international community. The NEEDS also envisages the creation o f a strong
safety net program for particularly vulnerable groups.

Country Partnership Strategy

-18-

Nigeria

66.
Promoting private enterprise to foster growth of the non-oil sector. The NEEDS prioritizes
improving performance in agriculture and SMEs in order to build a stronger connection between
growth, employment and poverty reduction. Private sector led growth and a sound macroeconomic
framework are considered key elements o f Nigeria’s economic transformation.
Speeding up
privatization, de-regulation and liberalization are important priorities. The NEEDS emphasizes the
importance o f a conducive business environment for formal and informal enterprises and outlines a
program o f institutional and administrative reforms to reduce the cost o f doing business in Nigeria.
These include: reform o f business regulation and registration processes, taxes, key trade facilitation
services including customs, ports administration, and related financial and service provisions. The
structure o f the tax system i s being simplified and appropriate incentives are being introduced to
encourage business activity. Tax administration i s being overhauled and modernized. In parallel,
Nigerian ports are being concessioned to increase their efficiency and reduce hidden costs to private
operators. Customs reforms are addressing corruption, addressing staff training needs and
modernizing operations.
67.
The NEEDS stresses the importance o f economic infrastructure - transport, power, and
telecommunications - which are the major bottlenecks for private sector led growth. Private
provision o f infrastructure and public private partnerships w i l l be encouraged. Laws t o improve
competition and protect consumer welfare in industries providing infrastructure services are to be
enforced. Improving rural infrastructure and programs o f rural access and mobility are assigned high
priority. The NEEDS stresses the importance o f a strong financial system, with bigger asset volume,
instrument diversity and an incentive structure in support o f growth in the real sector. The
government has raised the minimum capital requirements for banks from N 2 billion to N25 billion in
a major initiative to reduce risks posed to the system b y unsound banks. The NEEDS commits the
government to diversifying the economy away from oil, gradually liberalizing imports and
strengthening Nigeria’s participation in regional integration.
68.
Changing the way that government works. As part o f value reorientation, the NEEDS
emphasizes the break from “business as usual”. I t spells out an ambitious agenda for fighting
corruption and addressing the issues related to a large and under-performing public sector. The
NEEDS states clearly that government must change to allow space for the private sector to function
effectively and invest in people and in the delivery o f services. Government institutions are to be
restructured, right-sized and re-professionalized to improve their performance.
Enhancing
transparency and accountability in resource use and decision making are considered crucial in making
government perform. Under the Procurement Bill submitted to the National Assembly in January
2005, a Public Procurement Bureau i s to be established to oversee implementation o f new
procurement regulations that introduce open and competitive processes for public procurement.
Reforms o f justice administration and the police w i l l strengthen the work o f targeted anti-corruption
agencies such as the International Centre for the Prevention o f Crime (ICPC) and the Economic and
Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC). Economic Coordination w i l l be improved both across the
Federal Government and between the different tiers o f government. State governments are following
suit and are addressing the issues o f more effective government in their own SEEDS. Such
improvements in coordination and functioning w i l l call for stronger monitoring and evaluation
systems served by high-quality data that are generated, analyzed and disseminated through the tiers o f
government. Building greater fiscal responsibility, initially through a pact with all states, and through
a Bill to be passed in the National Assembly in 2005, w i l l provide a strong basis for strengthening
systems and coordination across tiers o f government.
69.
The Government has set up a Presidential Implementation Committee to take forward the
issues raised in a recent Conflict Assessment. I t has invited donors to contribute to working groups on
political and socio-economic conflict. EFCC investigations into crude o i l bunkering address a key

Country Partnership Strategy

-19-

Nigeria

driver o f violent conflict in the Delta, while the President’s suspension o f the Governor o f Plateau
State (albeit temporarily) sent a message that localized conflict should not be left unchecked or
manipulated for political ends.
Tangible Progress on Implementing the NEEDS and Improving Governance
70.
NEEDS accurately diagnoses the key development constraints facing Nigeria and proposes a
sound agenda to address them. Implementation nevertheless presents several challenges: weak
capacity, Nigeria’s history o f poor policy and strategy implementation and the resistance to reform
from vested interests. While reform implementation to date has been impressive, there have also been
set-backs. Taking a long-term perspective, continuing the process o f “value reorientation” and
embedding key reforms that can carry beyond the 2007 elections are essential if the constraints to
reform are to be overcome.
71.
Good progress has been made on several fronts
Box 5: Progress on implementation of NEEDS
and especially in the area o f governance. Public financial
A global leader on EITI
management processes and systems are being reformed
Due process in Federal Government procurement,
saving millions
to reduce their susceptibility to corruption. For the first
Piloting of public service reform
time, the Nigerian public has easy access to details o f o i l
Incremental progress on privatization
revenue flows to different tiers o f government with
Progress on liberalization, including in the
downstream oil sector and telecoms
regular publication o f this information in the national
Fiscal responsibilitypact and bill
newspapers.
Public procurement i s being made
Improved budget process, linkedto NEEDS priorities
competitive and transparent. A mechanism to provide
Building national consensus for reform and Snvice
delive-ry through the SEEDS process
greater oversight o f compliance with procurement
regulations has been successfully implemented and
saiings o f hundreds o f millions df doliars have been realized. Non-monetary benefits o f federal
employees - formerly a major source of corruption and abuse - are being monetized. Operational
reviews have been carried out for selected key Federal Government spending activities and steps have
been taken to address weaknesses and sources o f corruption. Government fiscal accounts have been
brought up to date and the Public Accounts Committee i s actively following up on cases o f misuse o f
public funds.
72.
Ghost workers, about 5000 to date,
are being flushed from the public payroll
through physical verification exercises and
modernization
of
human
resource
management systems. Land transactions in
the FCT, which were a major source o f
corruption and patronage, have been totally
revamped. The cadastral and Land Registry
has been computerized and a comprehensive
Abuja Geographic Information System
created. New certificates o f occupancy with
stronger security features are being issued.
Legal backing i s being provided for several
o f these policy, process, and systems
changes through enactment o f landmark
legislation.
In addition to process and
systems improvements, targeted anticorruption efforts have been stepped up with
the creation o f the EFCC.

Country Partnership Strategy

-20-

Nigeria

73.
There have been promising developments in the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter
Terrorist Financing (AMLKTF) environment in Nigeria. Most notably the Money Laundering
(Prohibition) A c t was passed in 2004. This has empowered the EFCC to investigate, prosecute and
penalize economic and financial crimes and to enforce the provisions o f other laws and regulations
relating to economic and financial crimes. The Nigerian Financial Intelligence Unit (NFIU) was
established to monitor suspicious transactions in support o f the EFCC's mandate. The EFCC i s
currently prosecuting several corruption cases, which include cases against high-ranking government
officials, some of whom have been relieved o f their duties and jailed. I t has also seized US$670
million in assets from corruption cases. The Government i s working towards Nigeria qualifying for
removal from the Financial Action Task Forces (FATF) l i s t o f "non-cooperative" countries. An
implementation plan was submitted to the FATF Review Committee in October 2004. An on-site
visit b y the Review team i s planned, the results o f which are expected to lead to de-listing o f Nigeria
from the FATF l i s t o f non-cooperative countries b y early 2006.
In parallel with economic and institutional reforms, Government plans to implement political
74.
reforms to strengthen the process o f democratization and address weaknesses in the current
constitution. Political reforms w i l l also help provide the enabling environment for economic reforms
to take root. A National Political Reform Conference has been convened that i s discussing a wide
range o f issues. These include electoral reform, federalism and decentralization, security, the police,
the public service and immunity from prosecution for some political office holders.

Country Partnership Strategy

-21-

Nigeria

-

IV. PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY A NEW WAY OF DOING BUSINESS

75.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Nigeria FY06-09 is a joint WB Group-DFID
approach for assisting Nigeria to implement its program to boost growth and achieve the MDGs. I t
takes as i t s starting point the vision o f wealth creation, value re-orientation and establishment o f a
social charter for human development and empowerment as outlined in Nigeria’s homegrown poverty
reduction strategy - the NEEDS.
76.
It i s essential that every aspect o f the CPS and each intervention internalize an understanding
o f the political economy and works to unblock the three underlying constraints highlighted earlier mismanagement o f o i l revenues, weak formal accountability and transparency, and poor non-oil
growth. The CPS w i l l be implemented during the political uncertainty o f general elections in 2007 in
which President Obasanjo w i l l not run. Hence, a key objective o f the CPS i s to support reform efforts
and ensure that they are sustainable over the medium term. The key objectives o f the reforms empowerment, growth and good governance - have broad support among the Nigerian population.
However, powerful interest groups are losing economically and politically and are resistant to change.
This resistance i s likely to increase during the election process. In view o f this, the Government, the
World Bank Group and DFID agreed on the following:
The World Bank Group and DFID should use the occasion o f this CPS to send a strong
signal o f support for Nigeria’s reforms;
The CPS should identify some early tangible results (“quick wins”), especially in the area
o f infrastructure, in order to help demonstrate benefits from reforms;
The strong partnership between Government, the World Bank and DFID should be
extended to include other members o f the international community’2, c i v i l society and
private sector groups. This w i l l create space for voices supportive o f moving Nigeria
forward in a way that benefits all Nigerians;
DFID - with other members o f the international community - w i l l support the election
process;
The CPS should identify performing states - lead states - and work closely with them, thus
helping spread the support for reforms beyond the Federal Government;
Partnership with the legislature should be strengthened (e.g. through WBI and DFID
programs); and,
A communications strategy should be an integral part o f the CPS.

77.
The political risks are high (see risk section), but the potential gains for Nigeria and the whole
region are also great. Therefore, the World Bank Group and DFID have agreed that the time i s right
to increase support for Nigeria. A mid-term review o f the CPS w i l l be carried out after two years o f
implementation, some months following the elections. This review, and the CPS progress report, w i l l
provide an opportunity to assess results and adjust the strategy in response to lessons learnt as well as
in response to economic and political developments.

’’

Other development partners - the UN and the ADB among others -have given strong support in response to the CPS for
moving towards a joint donor strategic framework in support of NEEDS and SEEDS and intensifying further on joint
programming (see Annex 7).

-22-

Country Partnership Strategy

Nigeria

-

Box 7: Partnershipfor Impact WB / DFID

Effective support for Nigeria's development agenda will benefit from working towards collaborative advantage among development
partners, based 011 comparative strengths. We recognize the following, though not necessarily exclusive, strengths:
World Bank Group global analytical capacity, informedby worldwide experience and lessons leamed, substantial financia
and staffresources; ccuvening power of a multilateral institution; and, direct engagement with organized p r i m sector (E).
DFID specialist country analyticalcapacity, including work on politicaleconomy issues; work on the demand-sideof rights and
governance with direct engagemeat with non-govemment stakeholders (parliamentarians,civil society, private sector); flexible
use of grant resources; rapid global access to expertise; readiness to test new ideas or ways of working; intanationalaccess 8s a
CWEU government agency; sustained field-level presence; and, experience of inter-sectoralanalysis and working.
These strengths are h i a y complementary and will be effectively inter-woven to deliver greater impact. I t i s anticipated that enhanced
development effectiveness will require continued joint analysis, maintaining a common understanding and prioritization in policy
dialogue with governments. We anticipate that the CPS will benefit from a combmtion of separate and joint products or forms of
support. In addition to enhanced impact at federal and state level, it is expected that this will reduce the transaction costs to
government of engaging with its development parmers.
The agencies will work together to build a stronger field presence for sustained policy dialogue and development effectiveness.
based on DFlD's existing redona1 presence. We will have a joint framework for engagement in up to six lead states over the CPS
period.

-

-

'Ihe two agencies will implement the joint strategy in support of the three common outcomes. This will involve agencies assuming
leadership on particularly secton, recognizing and supporting the comparative strength of other development partners in the process,
though this may involvejoint working. An indicative list includes:
World Bank Group- Public service reform, procurement reform, infrastructure, investment climate. education, urban water,
economic analysis and policy dialogue.
DFLD Health, HIVIAids, rural watcr, security, making markets work better for the poor, coalition building on key growth and
governance issues across government and non-government stakeholders, rapid response to TA requests from Federal
GoVCIUmUlt
We will continue to pmue greater convergence on seategy and joint working arrangements over the CPS period, a key role for joint
Outcome coordinators. Both agencies will seek to broaden the. parmership with other development partners under a govenuaeot-led
strategy building on the interested already shown by the UN, the ADB and others in response to consultation on the CPS.
Furthermorr,interventionsacrcss members of the World Bank Group - IDA, IFC. WBI, MIGA -have a CDmplemeatary role to play in
delivering the strategy.

-

-

-

Lessons from Joint Interim Strategy and DFID CSP

78.
The CPS builds upon an assessment o f implementation experience o f the World Bank Group
and DFID since 1999. A detailed account o f this assessment i s contained in the Interim Strategy
Completion Report (see Annex 2). The main lessons are summarized below:
In 1999 there was an overestimation of the scope for progress and a concomitant
underestimation of the political economy challenges in Nigeria. The political economy o f
Nigeria was not a central part o f the strategic analysis at the beginning o f the period o f
civilian rule. In particular, the ways in which established interests and relations o f power revolving mainly around the o i l economy but extending into the political sphere -have
historically impeded change and maintained and entrenched inequality were largely
overlooked. The degree o f institutional deterioration, the entrenchment of corrupt practices,
the lack o f accountability and transparency were greater than initially imagined. The World
Bank's absence affected i t s knowledge base and the portfolio contracted before 1999
providing very limited experience on how to engage on reform.
Strong ownership, a clear govemment agenda and commitment are prerequisites to effective
interventions and support. Supporting the Federal Government in areas where there i s high

level o f commitment brings results (e.g. the areas o f transparency, c i v i l service reform).
Experience at state level also strongly suggests that state government commitment and
capacity i s critical for successful projects and effective support.
The quality of policy dialogue and project preparation and implementation strongly depends
on the quality and scope of analytical work (AAA). Continued analytical work i s needed to
upgrade the quality o f the dialogue with the federal and state governments, especially
regarding the use o f the o i l resources (fiscal management and linkages w i t h domestic

-23-

Country Partnership Strategy

Nigeria

industry) and non-oil growth. AAA w i l l be particularly important in working directly with
states and in improving the relationship between the Federal Government and the states.
The large number of states (36), unclear division of responsibilities and poor relationships
across govemment tiers have afSected the quality and efectiveness of assistance. Attempts to
guarantee national coverage diluted the resources available for each state. This reduced
impact and leverage to seek significant institutional improvements. Fixed commitments per
state, per project, introduced rigidities and jeopardized implementation progress and lowered
disbursement ratios. Assistance for the delivery o f basic services was particularly affected.
The Govemment and the World Bank lacked the tools to manage the risks of the program.
Past experience shows that projects tend to stall, leaving substantial resources stranded.
Flexibility should allow the country team and Government to reallocate resources to
performing non-performing projects/states.
Few tangible results in the short-term limited the scope for reform. Focus on tangible results
has to drive the reform program, including results that can build momentum for a change in
political behaviors. This requires not to be hindered by the lack o f “modern” legislation.
Progress in procurement and energy has been possible even when modem legal frameworks
are lacking. Also, donor coordination i s required early on in diagnosis and design.

79.
In addition, the preparation
o f the CPS built on the lessons
learned from World Bank assistance
to other large federal countries, such
as Brazil, India (also drawing on
DFID’s
experiences),
Mexico,
to
Russia. Main lessons include: (i)
operate effectively in federal
structures
requires
clear
differentiation o f interventions and
expected outcome at Federal and
impact at the
state levels; and (ii)
state
level
requires
clear
commitment,
ownership
and
capacity.

-

Box 8: Development of the CPS A participatory approacb

The CPS supports the Government’s development agenda, as artidat& in the
NEEDS and SEEDS, which enjoy the strong support of the intanatioaal community.
The CPS builds on lessons h e d in the Joint IntgimStrategy and DFID’s Country
Assistance Plan, which is based on an inte.nsive analysis of the politicaleconomy of
Nigeria that involved a wide-range of Nigerianand internatid mperis.
The development of the CPS was a close collaboration among federal and state
governments with development parmers, particularly the World Bank and DmD.
The CPS was gradually defined over a series of intensive retreats and meetings. It
was further articulated by a CPS Core Team that included members from
Government, the World Bank Group and DFID. Thc team also benefited from
lesson learning from global experience of other World Bank CASs.
Strategic propositions were tested with a range “of stakeholdas from
govcmment, parliament, civil society, academia and private sector, at aational,
fedem1 and state levels. ’Ihc consultations helped to validate the overall strategic
focus of the CPS and helped the team to reflect on a number of key issues. Close
consultation on tbe development of the CPS was kept with Fedaal Ministers and a
number of state governors.

A Results Based Strategy

80.
Drawing from the above lessons, the
proposed strategy i s based on four
principles: (i)realism about opportunities
and scope for change; (ii)responsiveness
selectivity
and Government ownership; (iii)
for impact; and (iv) balancing a longer-term
transformational agenda with the need for
more direct, shorter-term impacts.
81.
Selectivity to create a visible and
early impact i s critical to the success o f the
strategy. The amount o f assistance, even
when the allocation i s increased, i s s t i l l
small relative to Nigeria’s population and
the challenges Nigeria faces in accelerating

Country Partnership Strategy

-24-

Nigeria

economic growth and meeting the MDGs. The CPS applies selectivity in four different ways: (i)
it
focuses on a sub-set o f issues in the three priority areas identified b y the NEEDS (see Figure 3), (ii)
it
defines outcomes and allocates assistance according to the level o f commitment, need and capacity at
in addressing MDGs, it focuses on a few key issues - for example, child
national and state level, (iii)
and maternal mortality, girls’ education, €€IV/AIDS, safe water - in areas where human development
indicators are at their worst; and (iv) it strengthens incentives for states to demonstrate their
commitment to accountability, transparency and service delivery. Thus, the strategy sees i t s impact in
helping to develop - and rewarding - a number o f ‘models’ o f development and growth in the lead
states, while addressing progress on the MDGs and public good issues nationwide. Furthermore, a
key element o f the strategy i s to lever improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency o f public
expenditure to broaden and sustain impact.

Fig. 3: Selectivity of CPS in relation to NEEDS Priorities
NEEDS Priorities

82.
Work with lead states. The CPS has defined the ‘lead state approach’ as a core principle for
work at the state level as a means to lever resources to increase impact, strengthen demand and
commitment for reform. This approach i s aligned and supports the NEEDS medium-term
transformational agenda o f value orientation and the Federal Government’s effort foster consensus
with state governments on moving Nigeria forward (see Annex 3).
83.
Two criteria w i l l influence the selection o f lead states: demand and performance. The
selection process w i l l be based on the government-led benchmarking o f state performance (SEEDS
Benchmarking which w i l l identify states that perform better and are interested in cooperating to
further improve performance in areas such as transparency, accountability, sound public resource
management and pursuit o f the MDGs). The SEEDS benchmarking exercise w i l l foster a competitive
approach that w i l l help to shift incentives towards reform. Where a group emerges in which all states
perform similarly, up to six states w i l l be selected according to their levels o f poverty and size o f
population. This i s intended to maximize impact o n shared growth and poverty reduction in the CPS
period. Progress on partnerships with lead states i s likely to be influenced b y their history of political
stability and o f positive cooperation with development partners. Unlike past partnerships which were

Country Partnership Strategy

-25-

Nigeria

forged to address project specific issues, these w i l l be long-term relationships based on a shared
strategic vision for growth and development and formed in alignment with the state SEEDS. Work in
lead states w i l l be coordinated with other development partners in order to develop a joint donor
approach to state-level work.

84.
Delivering on three outcomes, in support of NEEDS and SEEDS. The CPS i s a structured
program o f assistance that i s geared to achieving tangible results within i t s specific time frame o f
implementation. The CPS i s founded on three pillars o f the NEEDS (see paragraph 69) and i s
designed to impact the achievement of three outcomes: (i)
improved service delivery for human
development; (ii)improved environment and services for non-oil growth; and (iii)enhanced
transparency and accountability for better governance. Embedding reforms in Nigeria relies on
achieving early, tangible results. In support o f this, the World Bank-financed project portfolio in
Nigeria i s being restructured to align with the CPS to ensure quick gains (increased immunization
coverage, for instance). Furthermore, special focus i s placed on strengthening analytical work and
policy dialogue as key instruments for assisting the Government in formulating policies,
communicating and implementing reforms.
85.
The Table below shows a summary o f outcomes and indicators to track progress towards the
NEEDS and the CPS’ three outcomes. Annex 1 describes in more detail the results. framework
together with intermediate outcomes and milestones and World Bank-DFID interventions to support
the results. In addition, cross-cutting issues w i l l be mainstreamed across the outcomes and partner
interventions (see B o x 11).

Country Partnership Strategy

-26-

Nigeria

Box 11: Mainstreaming cross-cutting issues in interventions
Environmental Sustanubility: We will seek strategic opportunities to promote the wise use of natural resources and the delivery of

environmental services at federal and state level to support poverty reduction and promote sustainable economic growth.
Environmental degradation and impact will be monitored and tackled at the project level. In addition, Niger Delta analytical and
advisory work will help to address issues of social development and conflict and the environmental implications of oil explorations. It
will build a strong partnership with Government, oil companies, communities and donors for good environmental policies and
practices.
Conflict: Continued violent conflict will retard human development and deter investment and job creation. We will promote a multistakeholder approach to understanding and the causes of conflict. In the short-term we may engage in alternative dispute resolution,
community policing and provide further support for the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (Em.
H N a d AIDS: Action on HIV and AIDS will be built into all sectors and results.
Gender: We will work to ensure that effective approaches to promoting gender equity are built into the CPS.
CommuniratMn: Strategic communication throughout the CPS can help to promote the reform agenda and help structure the
government’s communication function. We will assist the Government and other stakeholders to identify communication needs and
suggest a suitable institutional arrangement and build capacity in this area. The CPS communication program would include
communication activities, channels and tools to raise awareness, build public consensus and identify ways of communicating more
effectively with stakeholders.
CapaCitr Building: We will provide assistance to build the capacity of the Government at the federal, state and local levels to develop
and implement policies, identify priorities and align them with necessary budget financing, prepare and implement projects and
improve public procurement and financial management. We will assist civil society organizations to establish dialogue with the
Government as a-means of increasingand maintaid;ng transparency and accountability of federal, state and local governme&.

Country Partnership Strategy

-27-

Nigeria

Table 3: Summary CPS Results-Based Framework
Longer Term Goals
MDGs and N E E D S

Shorter-term projected outcomes for the CPS period (2009)”

I.IMPROVED SERVICE D1 JVERY FOR H U M A N DEVELOPMENT
Empowering People

Reduced matemal and child
mortality rates
Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and
other diseases
Improved educational outcomes
Improved access to safe drinking
water

Secure Improvements in access and quality of basic services in health care,
HIV/AIDS, education, water and sanitation.
-Health services improved:
Full immunization coverage of children increased in lead states.
Increased use of formal health system by pregnant mothers.
-HIV/AIDS:
Increasedaccess to prevention, VCT, care and support services.
Family L i f e and HIV/AIDS cumculum implemented.
-Education services improved:
Increased girls’ primary and secondary enrolment.
Post-Basic Education Reform Strategy piloted.
-Water and sanitation services improved:
Increased access to reliable piped water in urban communities.
Increasedaccess to safe water in rural communities

11. IMPROVED ENVIRONM NT AND SERVICES FOR NON-OIL GROWTH

Support non-oil growth through improved productive infrastructure (power,
roads and telecom), improved regulatory business environment and
increased productivity in agricultural sector.
Reduction in income poverty
-Increased access to reliable, affordable energy:
through shared sustainable
economic growth of average 8%
Actual power generation increased, with reduced power outages.
in non-oil sector
-Increased access to improved transport system:
Federal highways increasingly under performance-based management,
increasing share rehabilitated, maintained.
-Increased competitiveness, improved legal and regulatory environment:
Reduced index of cost of doing business.
Increasedaccess to financial services.
-Improved investment climate and productivity in lead states: (illustrative)
Improved rural access, business environment
Access to improved agricultural technology and farm inputs
III.E N H A N C E D TRANSPARE1 :Y AND A C C O U N T A B I L I T Y FOR BETTER G O V E R N A N C E
Changing the Way Government Advance transparency, accountability and efficiency of government at all
levels, and create environment conducive for economic growth and social
Works
cohesion.
-Strengthened, transparent public expenditure management:
Government working effectively
Annual budgets aligned with NEEDS, with a medium term horizon.
and in partnershipwith civil
Oil Revenue Accounts (regularly) audited and disseminated.
society and the private sector
-Strengthened, efficient public administration & service delivery systems:
Public service reform program implemented.
-Improved accountability and oversight:
Improved professionalism in legislative oversight.
-Demand for change strengthened:
Nigerian coalitions formed around key development policy issues.
Strengthened capacity of media on economic & social issues.

Promoting Private Enterprise

l3Detailed outcomes,

indicators and interventions in Annex 1.

Country Partnership Strategy

-28-

Nigeria

Supporting Human Development

86.
In the area of Human Development, the World Bank and DFID propose to work at three
levels to strengthen progress on key MDGs and create a basis for sustainable development as follows:
0

0

0

At the federal level: (i)
analytical work to support developing national strategies and policies
financing
for human development, with specific reference to health and basic education; (ii)
o f a national H N / A I D S program to work with a range o f government and non-government
financing federal and lead state programs in education, including
stakeholders; and (iii)
capacity building in science and technology to promote the development o f a knowledge
economy.
In lead states the CPS w i l l finance state-specific education, health and water programs and
projects. A broad-based engagement - including on governance and growth - w i l l also lever
more efficient public expenditure on social service delivery.
Where human development indicators are at their worst: The World Bank and DFID w i l l help
states to address weak progress on many MDGs in ways that result in direct, shorter-term
impact. Outside lead states, programs w i l l work with a range o f stakeholders -cooperating
with UN agencies and others - on specific MDG-related issues such as girls’ education,
maternal health, routine immunization or access to safe water. This w i l l entail a CDD
approach to financing social infrastructure and engaging community participation in tackling
the MDGs. Under this CPS urban and rural C D D projects w i l l support local communities and
help to provide basic social services.

87.
In addition, support for federal and state level infrastructure (especially rural roads and
power) are expected to improve access to health and education services and thus contribute to moving
towards MDG targets.
88.
In education, the CPS will: (i)
work closely with other development partners to support the
implement the restructured Universal Basic
implementation o f state-specific EFA programs; (ii)
provide institutional capacity strengthening at federal level and in lead
Education (UBE) project; (iii)
states to improve management planning and monitoring capacity o f quality and effectiveness in
education; (iv) increase access to distance learning opportunities; (v) work w i t h UNICEF and others
to improve girls’ access to quality education in northern Nigeria, where the indicators are worst; and
(vi) provide support to the Government in promoting the knowledge economy through secondary and
tertiary education to further Nigeria’s role in African science and technological progress for economic
growth.
89.
In health, analytical work and policy dialogue w i l l continue at the national level to focus on
the Government’s Health Sector Reform Program. This w i l l consider a Country Status Report and
work on health insurance. One CPS focus w i l l be on routine immunization and i t s operational
capacity at state level. The World Bank has already followed up a successful intervention to fight
polio by extending support to the whole country. In the lead states, the CPS w i l l focus on improving
the availability, quality, demand, and utilization o f basic health services. I t w i l l work simultaneously
to remove structural bottlenecks relating to financing, management and integration o f the health
system. Where appropriate, the CPS w i l l collaborate with Government and other partners to develop
health SWAps in lead states - levering additional resources and improving the efficiency of public
expenditure. Under the CPS, the World Bank and DFID w i l l support a range o f health sector
programs at national, state and local levels, working with public and private sectors and with c i v i l
society on meeting the MDGs (addressing child and maternal mortality and malaria).

Country Partnership Strategy

-29-

Nigeria

90.
The CPS w i l l take advantage o f the malaria booster program for Africa, t o help tackle malaria
at the state level and help strengthen national-level efforts in cooperation with other donors. For
HIV/AIDS the CPS w i l l support a multisectoral AIDS strategy in which the “three ones” are
one agreed AIDS action framework that coordinates the efforts o f all partners, (ii)
implemented: (i)
one national A I D S coordinating authority with a broad-based, multisectoral mandate, and (iii)
one
agreed monitoring and evaluation system that operates at country level. The CPS will:
0

0

0
0
0

strengthen prevention strategies by raising awareness, particularly among women, youth and
groups most at risk;
provide medical care and support, including treatment o f opportunistic infections such as TB,
for people living with HIV;
enhance blood safety;
implement measures to mitigate the impact o f AIDS, including orphan support; and
support through collaboration with government ministries, c i v i l society groups and the
private sector a national social marketing network to distribute condoms.

91.
The experience gained during the past years of engagement serves as the basis for a greater
effort in delivering potable water. The primary instrument o f assistance w i l l be the World Bank’s First
National Water Project. This w i l l be complemented by the Second National Water project, presented
to the Board with this strategy. These w i l l concentrate o n rehabilitating basic infrastructure,
establishing financial sustainability o f service delivery and perfecting public/private partnerships. The
program i s intended to serve as a model to improve water management in other cities, with or without
World Bank support. DFID w i l l continue support for improving water delivery in rural areas, through
UNICEF. Further support for water services in small communities w i l l be provided through the CDD
operations. On sanitation, the World Bank w i l l initiate work on urban slum rehabilitation in Lagos.
Concerning solid waste and waste water, the World Bank w i l l respond to requests to work with lead
states to improve drainage and, in other states, do the same under CDD-type operations.
Supporting Growth

92.
In order to support shared growth, the strategy proposes that the W o r l d Bank Group - IDA,
IFC, MIGA - and DFID develop a joint framework on economic growth with a range o f stakeholders,
including other donors (UN, USAID, ADB, CIDA). This w i l l identify opportunities for triggering and
sustaining growth, shaping existing initiatives and guiding new investments and analysis at three
levels, as follows:
0

0

At thefederul level, the CPS focus i s on improving the business environment and removing
major infrastructure bottlenecks. This i s likely to entail large infrastructure programs in the
energy sector (electricity and gas), transport, and improvements in ports and customs services.
Analytical and advisory services w i l l assist the Government in identifying flaws in the
business climate, particularly concerning agriculture. Advisory work w i l l help to define
policies that encourage private sector development help monitor changes in the investment
climate annually. Support w i l l continue to ongoing initiatives for regional economic
integration such as the West Africa Gas Pipeline Project. The W o r l d Bank and DFID are also
supporting capacity building in ECOWAS to enhance i t s ability to articulate and implement
the regional integration agenda;
Work in the lead states w i l l initially focus on rural transport since access to markets i s a
major constraint to producers, but would expand to include state-specific growth platforms
based on a deeper state-specific analysis. The platform w i l l encompass a m i x o f advisory

Country Partnership Strategy

-30-

Nigeria

facilities and investments to boost non-oil growth, particularly in the agriculture sector and
rural economy with due attention to sustainable management o f natural resources;
At the sub-national level and outside lead states, there w i l l be two main initiatives: one on
investments in agriculture through a C D D project (Fadama) and the other o n demand for
change in the business environment.

93.
The World Bank Group (IDA, IFC) and DFID w i l l work at the federal and national levels,
when appropriate, by developing private-public partnerships, to improve the business environment
and the energy and transportation environment. IDA, IFC and DFID w i l l continue to coordinate
activities in the area o f privatization, building the capacity o f the Bureau o f Public Enterprises. A
significant increase in power generating capacity i s expected by the end o f the CPS. A better
functioning transmission and distribution systems should further contribute t o significantly reduced
power outages. The recently approved power bill facilitates the restructuring o f NEPA and the
engagement o f the private sector. The strategy w i l l assist the government in reforming the power
sector, particularly in developing a framework for off-grid projects (in both urban and rural areas).
The I F C w i l l support developing off-grid electricity projects to supply power to industrial users and
areas o f concentrated demand. The development o f the gas industry i s recognized as important in
boosting the domestic non-oil economy and improving poorer households’ access to cheaper, cleaner
energy. In telecommunications, the World Bank and I F C w i l l continue to provide TA to the sector
regulation and private operators.

94.
Under the CPS, IDA w i l l support the rehabilitation o f important federal roads and help to
develop a sustainable system for road maintenance. Improved transport, especially rural roads, w i l l
bring additional benefits o f increasing people’s access to basic health and education services and thus
contribute to achieving the MDGs. Significant advances in private sector participation in ports and
rails and the Abuja airport are foreseen and are supported b y IFC. MIGA w i l l also be interested in
supporting private-public partnerships in infrastructure projects through the provision o f political risk
guarantees to foreign investors.
95.
National efforts to fill the infrastructure gaps are being complemented by participation in
regional initiatives. In the energy sector, the active participation o f Nigeria in the West Africa Power
Pool implies a common legal and regulatory framework that i s favorable t o private investment,
increasing availability and security o f affordable power supply both for Nigeria and the sub-region. In
the telecoms sector, the World Bank w i l l support Nigeria’s participation in regional efforts to create a
regional market under the ECOWAS framework b y harmonizing the policy, legal and regulatory
frameworks, cross-border interconnectivity and regional roaming. In the transport sector, regional
initiatives seek to improve road infrastructure along the Abidjan-Lagos corridor, particularly between
Lagos and Cotonou.
96.
Past experience shows that pro-growth interventions often fail to generate synergy due to a
high level of geographical dispersion. Therefore, the CPS w i l l focus state-level interventions in lead
states to remove obstacles to sustainable growth in rural and urban environments. Lead state growth
platforms w i l l provide a critical mass of investment required to make major infrastructure
improvements - including through improving rural access. Such investments, coupled with
improvements in the business environment at the federal and state level, w i l l invigorate private sector
activity and ultimately increase employment, generate higher state revenues and help the state to
address public services and human development needs. Development o f lead state interventions w i l l
be preceded by an intensive policy dialogue and analytical work to help the states develop their
growth strategies and define the areas for investment. At the same time, the intensive work for
improvement o f business environment and financing o f infrastructure would provide opportunities for
other states to benefit, gradually turning the lead state ‘growth poles’ into growth corridors.

Country Partnership Strategy

-3 1-

Nigeria

97.
The World Bank Group and DFID w i l l support the vision o f NEEDS and many SEEDS for
private sector l e d growth in agriculture. This w i l l demonstrate how agricultural commodity and
related markets can better serve the poor. The CPS w i l l focus on raising agricultural and agri-related
productivity. Selected value chains - with work co-financed by C I D A and coordinated with U S A I D w i l l offer the potential to bridge the competitiveness gap and make a difference to the livelihoods o f
the poor, especially women, and would serve as a powerful demonstration. Investments in
infrastructure w i l l benefit growth in the agriculture sector. This could include investments in rural
access and mobility, irrigation and community level infrastructure, and work o n the business
environment, particularly in lead states where such work can be concentrated.

98.
Maintaining a policy dialogue at federal and state levels w i l l be critical for addressing
underlying public investment and institutional constraints on growth in agriculture - including in
public goods such as research. The CPS w i l l draw lessons from various interventions and i t s support
to Government for an Agriculture Policy Support Facility - led by CIDA, co-financed b y U S A I D and
coordinated with other donors. This Facility w i l l assist the Government in making agriculture the
basis o f rapid pro-poor growth through private sector development in agro-industry, building on
recent agriculture sector reviews and policy dialogue inputs. In developing this, understanding the
linkages between growth and natural resources - including water resources management - w i l l be an
important area for analytical work and policy dialogue.
99.
In the area o f S M E development, IDA and IFC w i l l provide lending (MSME project),
enhance policy dialogue at the federal and state level and (together with DFID) assist in establishing a
baseline to assess the cost o f doing business regularly. IFC w i l l provide financing and TA in
manufacturing and services in the corporate sector, strengthening those larger companies that are
often the customers o f SMEs.

100. Financial sector reforms w i l l be supported in close cooperation with the IMF. An FSAP
update w i l l provide the vehicle for strengthening dialogue on financial sector reform, banking sector
regulation, supervision and sustainability. Existing and planned work w i l l also concentrate on
establishing the legal and regulatory framework for robust financial markets that include provision o f
mortgage, insurance, pensions, SME- and microfinance. These efforts w i l l seek to strengthen not only
the access to financial services o f typically urban enterprises and sectors such as manufacturing,
construction, and services (including infrastructure), but w i l l also increase access on the part o f
traditionally underserved rural sector activities including input distribution, commercial farming, and
agricultural processing.
Supporting Good Governance

101. Governance work at federal and state levels w i l l strengthen systems o f and demand for
accountability and transparency, which w i l l lead to improved public resource management and service
delivery, as follows:
0

0

At thefederal level the CPS seeks to maintain the focus on budget preparation and
transparency, public financial management, procurement, and targeted efforts to fight
corruption. This w i l l be achieved partly through strengthening formal oversight institutions.
Similarly, the CPS provides for continued support for reform o f the public service. N e w
activities w i l l be started that seek to enhance the business climate b y addressing weak
governance and corruption in key trade facilitation services, such as ports and customs;
The focus at the state level w i l l be similar to the federal level, strengthening public
expenditure management systems in lead states; and,

Country Partnership Strategy

0

-32-

Nigeria

Both federal and state activities w i l l place greater emphasis on building demund for good
govemunce, supporting formal accountability mechanisms (e.g. the legislature and elections)
and supporting coordination between the tiers of government.

102. The CPS w i l l help achieve the objective o f changing the way government works b y
supporting ongoing reform and modernization o f budget and fiscal management; b y helping c i v i l
service reform; b y strengthening formal accountability mechanisms; and by building capacity o f nongovernment actors to understand and demand improvements in public resources management at
federal, state and local government levels. With the support o f DFID and IFC, the role o f the private
sector in promoting transparency and accountability w i l l also be strengthened, as w i l l their relations
with government. Sustainable growth and poverty reduction w i l l also require improved service
delivery for greater security o f life and property. DFID and other UK departments w i l l continue
support for reforms in the security sector, especially a community policing initiative that aims to
change the culture o f the Nigerian police force.
103. Three main lending activities in the governance area are: the recently approved Economic
Reform and Governance Project which w i l l be implemented over the CPS period; the Customs and
Ports Modernization Project at the federal level; and the States Governance Project. The state support
platforms in lead states w i l l also have a governance component tailored to the specific needs and
circumstances of the state and which will be broadly focused on budget, financial management and
procurement improvements and initiatives to build demand for better governance. The state selection
process itself will promote reform by rewarding those states that have demonstrated, through a
transparent benchmarking process, that they are committed to reform and greater openness. DFID
grants w i l l link to the lending operations to provide advisory support for improvements in the
functioning o f government systems, coordination across tiers o f government and building institutional
readiness, in order to foster progress towards using budget support. Joint analytical and advisory
activities include the Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review
(PEMFAR) (Public Expenditure Review (PER)+Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA)+ Country Procurement Assessment Report CPAR), the EITI Implementation Policy
Dialogue, natural resources assessments, annual Governance and Corruption Risk Survey to monitor
progress on these issues and a Niger Delta policy dialogue focused on issues o f social development,
participation and sustainable management o f resources.
104. NEEDS seeks to encourage demand for change. The CPS, with Government and other
stakeholders, w i l l support this aim in a number o f ways. Together with DFID, WBI w i l l continue to
strengthen the National Assembly’s oversight functions. Furthermore, the CPS w i l l back government
efforts to inform the public on priority programs, expected outputs and the basic reasoning underlying
policy initiatives, including the NEEDS. The CPS, in parallel, w i l l support public-private and social
dialogue and the growth o f coalitions around key issues - such as the management o f o i l resources
(including through EITI in Delta states), procurement, the business environment, market functioning,
service delivery, etc - and improving the analytical capacity o f the media. This w i l l be an important
area of DFID-WBI support, which w i l l have important ramifications, including: helping to build
momentum for greater external accountability and issues-based politics; and forging a social contract
which, together with a more transparent and robust electoral process can help sustain reforms beyond
2007. The CDD-type interventions in both lead and other states include activities which will enhance
the voice o f communities and their participation in making decisions on resource allocation and
service planning at local level.

Country Partnership Strategy

-33-

Nigeria

World Bank Group Lending, DFID Grants, and Non-lending Services
105. IDA allocations. IDA 14 country allocations for all countries are indicative and are made on
the basis o f country performance, the overall IDA14 envelope and lending terms. However, given the
rapid changes occurring in Nigeria and expectations o f continued improvements in performance, i t i s
difficult to set indicative IDA allocations for the entire four years o f the CPS. Instead, we have
developed an indicative two-year lending program, which also includes front-loading o f the resource
envelope and i s set at US$500 million per year. IDA financing covers all three CPS outcomes,
including state platforms in up to six lead states and federal-level investments in larger scale
infrastructure, as well as interventions in education, health and community development (see Table 4).
Indicative lending plans for the remaining two years o f the CPS w i l l be set at the time o f mid-term
review o f the strategy in 2007. In addition, IDA 14 rules require annual reviews o f performance, thus
providing the flexibility to define specific IDA allocations annually. In addition, Nigeria i s expected
to benefit from additional donor resources, which would provide a window for increased support to
countries at an upward turn in policy performance and with potential for great impact on growth and
development in Africa.

106. Access to a higher IDA envelope w i l l be determined annually on the basis o f the
performance-based allocation (PBA) system, which takes into account individual country
performance as well as the relative performance o f all other IDA borrowers, the total available IDA
envelope and country Iending terms. Key areas for improvement in policy performance include
sustained macroeconomic stability, improved service delivery, equity o f public resource use, trade
policy, transparency and accountability and quality o f public administration. An increased IDA
envelope w i l l cover increased financing under all three outcome packages and includes support to
development and growth in up to 10 lead states.
In case o f major deterioration o f policy performance, the IDA envelope w i l l be reduced
107.
significantly and financing w i l l be limited to only direct poverty/MDG impact assistance - basic
services and productive CDD-type operations and public goods interventions (such as H N / A I D S ,
immunization) nationwide.

108. The indicative two-year IDA lendingprogram for the CPS i s shown in Table 4. In the f i r s t
two years, support to communities through CDDs w i l l be for some US$lOO million o f which half i s
for rural development through the Fadama program. Financing for lead states i s expected to be about
US$200 million. Support to the Federal Government w i l l be for about US$700 million, with a focus
on infrastructure (energy and roads).

-34-

Country Partnership Strategy

Nigeria

Table 4: Indicative two-year I D A lending program (US$ millions)
Project

Federal I
National
Level

National Energy Project

172

Federal Roads

250

Customs and port
modemization
National Urban Water

Lead states
Direct
poverty I
MDG
impact

Post Basic Education
and Knowledge
Economv
State Platform
Envelopes

28
200

50
200

CDD Social

50

CDD Productive
(Fadama)

50

Total

innn

109. A distinctive featur- o f th CPS i s the array o f
instruments used to suit different outcomes and levels o f
intervention. Interventions at the federal level w i l l
continue to be predominantly Specific Investment Loan
(SIL) projects. Support in lead states w i l l be based on
their SEEDS, investing in their o w n growth and poverty
reduction agenda. Lead states w i l l be able to access a
“performance package”, a more programmatic, crosssectoral approach to both analytical work and financial
assistance, drawing on both IDA and DFID resources. I t
i s foreseen that SWAP-type operations w i l l emerge for
lead states. In other states, support w i l l aim to impact
directly on the lives o f poor people through nationally
designed CDD projects in the social and productive
sectors and MDG-related programming, particularly
through the UN, civil society and the private sector.

110. DFZD’s annual allocation for Nigeria will become three times that in the first Obasanjo
administrdwn - among the highest increases in the E ’ s global assistance portfolio. I t i s anticipated
that DFID w i l l contribute about E250 million in grant financing over the next three years. These
allocations are shown in Table 5. The focus o f the DFID support i s expected to vary according to
performance in line with any shift in IDA allocation. For example, in a scenario where performance
declines, a greater proportion o f resources w i l l flow to have direct impact on the MDGs through nongovernment agencies and building demand for change external to government.
Table 5: DFID Nigeria Resources (E million)
Program Resources

2005106

2006107

2007108

70

80

100

Anticipated allocation across the results packages:
Result 1 - Service Delivery for Human Development: 62%
Result 2 - Non-oil Growth: 19%
Result 3 - Better Governance: 19%

111. The ZFC’s engagement in Nigeria i s based on the IFC’s strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa,
(IFC/SECM2003-0049), which emphasizes fostering growth, particularly in the non-oil sector. Within
the CPS, the F C w i l l seek to maximize participation in private-sector projects that have a positive
development impact on the country and which are compatible with the IFC’s established investment
improve access t o finance; (ii)
assist in
criteria. In particular, the IFC w i l l seek investments that: (i)
removing infrastructure constraints; (iii)
assist in improving the competitiveness o f Nigerian industry;
(iv) assist in developing SMEs b y providing integrated support to such enterprises; or (v) have a
positive demonstration effect, particularly in the areas of structuring, corporate governance and good
social and environmental practices.

Country Partnership Strategy

-35-

Nigeria

112. The IFC w i l l seek appropriate investments in all sectors o f the economy, although i t i s likely
that investments w i l l be concentrated in the financial, manufacturing and infrastructure sectors. The
I F C w i l l selectively consider investments in the o i l and gas sector, particularly those which: (i)
promote the wider economy and i t s
development, including projects which w i l l
assist in the development o f the internal or
regional energy sector or which w i l l help to
strengthen domestic participation in this
sector; (ii)encourage the reduction of gas
flaring or increase gas utilization; and (iii)
are
deemed to be beneficial to the economy and
require IFC support for the implementation o f
unique financing structures.
Support for
projects in this sector w i l l be in accordance
with the outcome o f the World Bank Group’s
Extractive Industries Review.
113. The IFC w i l l also integrate technical
assistance activities more closely with i t s
investment work, emphasizing improving the
business environment. This w i l l be achieved
through the delivery o f targeted technical
assistance, investments with a positive
demonstration effect and b y working with
development partners. The I F C recently established the Private Enterprise Partnership for Africa (PEP
Africa) with the mandate to implement private sector development programs in collaboration with
various stakeholders. PEP Africa i s considering providing assistance to the Nigeria Bond Market
Development Program, a School Financing and Technical Assistance Facility for private schools and
the M S M E project (see Box 12). In addition, IFC w i l l continue to deploy i t s traditional technical
assistance activities, including the provision o f advice on privatization to the government and the use
o f trust funds to finance project-level technical assistance.
114. Nigeria i s currently the IFC’s largest portfolio country in Sub-Saharan Africa. The IFC’s total
committed portfolio €or Nigeria amounts to US$312 million, 20% o f the IFC’s total in Sub-Saharan
Africa. FYO4 was the IFC’s best year in Nigeria, with US$161 million o f new commitments.
Investments are concentrated in the telecommunications and financial sectors. US$140 million in
new investments, including projects in the building materials, microfinance and related sectors are in
the pipeline for FY05.
115. MZGA w i l l contribute to the CPS in two distinct areas, technical assistance and guarantees.
MIGA’s online services can assist the Bureau o f Public Enterprise (BPE) and line ministries to
disseminate information on privatizations and other information related to investment opportunities to
a wider network o f potential investors and lenders. MIGA guarantees can alter the risk perception o f
investors and realize projects b y making them more attractive, particularly since MIGA can cover
both sovereign and sub-sovereign risk.
116.
Since 2003, MIGA has witnessed an increase in demand from investors interested in
investment opportunities in Nigeria. MIGA i s ready to respond to increasing demand from foreign
investors seeking to contribute to Nigeria’s development strategy b y providing guarantees. MIGA
currently i s one o f the few political risk insurance providers that offer long-term coverage in Nigeria;
however, MIGA maintains a collaborative relationship with re-insurers that allow MIGA to undertake

Country Partnership Strategy

-36-

Nigeria

large transactions. Exposure in Nigeria has grown rapidly in the last two years. Currently, gross
exposure in Nigeria i s US$101.8 million (1.87% o f the portfolio), and i t s net exposure i s US$80.3
million. There are eleven contracts which have been issued for investors in Nigeria: two in the
services sector, four in the infrastructure sector (power and telecom), and five in the manufacturing
sector.
117.
Areas for potential further involvement include infrastructure, electricity, ports and gas.
MIGA would also consider supporting investments in the agribusiness, manufacturing and services
sectors, which tend to be dominated by S M E s and would contribute to non-oil private sector growth.
MIGA w i l l also be available to provide guarantees for foreign banks interested in entering into joint
ventures with Nigerian banks and/or establishing their own operations in Nigeria. Support for the
financial sector would improve S M E s access to medium- and long-term finance and contribute
towards raising the standards o f corporate governance. MIGA w i l l coordinate i t s involvement in
Nigeria with the World Bank and IFC, particularly in the infrastructure sector.
118. Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA). Recent experience in Nigeria has shown the
benefits o f analytical and advisory assistance in informing project design and helping the Government
to make significant policy achievements. A client survey also showed that World Bank advisory
services are very highly valued by Government counterparts. This also been a major and valued focus
o f support from DFID to Nigerian government, c i v i l society and private sector stakeholders.
Analytical work w i l l focus on identifying and prioritizing the constraints to growth, combined with
the analysis o f the social and poverty impact o f policy reforms and public actions designed to
overcome them. These would embody a multi-sectoral approach to identify policies, public
expenditures and investments needed to, for instance, achieve growth, strengthening the private
sector, and managing natural resources revenues. Monitoring and evaluation instruments w i l l also
receive special attention within the program o f AAA. Economic analysis and policy dialogue become
even more important as the CPS intensifies involvement, develops strategic relationships with lead
states and supports the creation o f models o f growth and development at state level. The CPS
therefore includes a program o f analytical and advisory work focused on the NEEDS pillars and the
CPS’s three outcomes. Table 6 presents the core program (see Annex 5 for details).
119.
Analytical and advisory activities w i l l underpin the work on each o f the three outcome
platforms. Poverty dialogue w i l l be maintained on an ongoing basis and, w i l l include a series o f
poverty assessments (FY06 and FY09), PSIA and poverty monitoring TA. This w i l l help to strengthen
Government capacity for poverty data collection and analysis, w i l l identify poverty correlates and
poverty dynamics and help policy makers define poverty reduction strategies and alleviation
programs. Health and Education country status reports (FY06, FY08) and sector reform TA w i l l
identify system flaws and options for program response to deteriorating service access and quality and
HD indicators.
120.
Analytical work w i l l be particularly robust in the area o f non-oil growth. In addition to the
core diagnostic (CEM FY06, FSAP update, FY06-07), formal and informal economic sector work and
TA w i l l enhance understanding o f growth factors and patterns. The CPS w i l l help the government to
develop sectoral strategies as part o f the NEEDS implementation process (e.g. National
Infrastructureflransport Strategymural water strategy etc. in FY07-09). Regular assessment o f the
businesshvestment environment at the Federal level and lead state level, as well as Labor Market
studies, w i l l help identify key constraints to private sector development and monitor progress
throughout the CPS implementation. Technical assistance activities in implementation of the EITI,
trade policy analysis, privatization and debt management w i l l be an important part o f the support for
strengthening government capacity in carrying out structural reforms.

Country Partnership Strategy

-37-

Nigeria

121. T o support the Government effort in improving transparency and accountability, the CPS
envisages regular assessment o f governance and corruption risks, including at state level. In addition,
the Public Expenditure Management and Financial Assessment (FY06) will focus on fiscal
decentralization to define options for efficient use of public resources. Emphasis on strengthening
demand for good governance i s at the core of analytical and technical assistance activities engaging
Government, Legislature, civil society, media etc. For example, DFID w i l l continue i t s ongoing effort
in strengthening parliamentary oversight and W B I w i l l enhance i t s program w i t h the media and the
academia.
122. Work at the lead state level w i l l require a state specific knowledge creation and policy
dialogue effort. Therefore, the CPS includes a state analytical and advisory service facility which
allows to define analytical areas and tools based on the specific needs and strategic priorities o f the
state as identified in their SEEDS. For example, depending on the state, this facility could be used to
analyze poverty or rural development, financial sector weaknesses or efficiency and equity o f public
resource use.
123. Within regional integration, the World Bank i s supporting efforts to reverse trends in land and
water degradation and to improve management o f Niger River Basin resources, o f which Nigeria i s
one o f the nine riparian countries and the main downstream beneficiary o f shared resources14.As part
o f this work, the World Bank i s providing assistance to Niger Basin Authority (NBA) t o modernize i t s
structures (both at the country and regional levels), develop multi-purposes water infrastructures,
strengthen its environmental planning and management capacity and further i t s efforts to reverse the
land and water degradation.
124.
In order to improve quality and ensure a stronger impact, nearly all AAA work w i l l be done in
partnership with state and federal stakeholders building on existing institutional capacity. For
example, the C E M which i s to focus on sources o f growth, trade policy issues and implications o f the
ECOWAS CET and planned trade liberalization on economic growth, w i l l be prepared jointly with
local think tanks; the Education Report w i l l be prepared in partnership with a group o f Vice
Chancellors o f Universities; and work on the Poverty Assessment i s being carried out in partnership
with the Federal Office o f Statistics. The CPS w i l l aim to carry out analytical work jointly with other
relevant development partners to arrive at a shared understanding and approach while reducing the
transaction costs for government and other partners. In addition, as part o f the NEEDS and the CPS
results orientation, instruments - such as investmenthusiness climate assessments, poverty surveys,
monitoring and others - w i l l be used to help the Government and other stakeholders monitor
developments and record improvements.

l4 In fact,

69% of the total land of Nigeria and 51% of its population belong to the Niger River Basin.

Country Partnership Strategy

-38-

Table 6: Four-year core non-lending program
Results Package
1 Non-lending activities

I -=

I

-

1 Poverty Assessment

',opment

liumanueve1

I

Healticountry Status Report
Education Reform Report
State-suecific analvtical work

I

Business Environment Assessments
Labor Market
State-specific analytical work

Non-oil Growth

I State-specific analytical work

Nigeria

II

Country Partnership Strategy

-39-

Nigeria

V. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
Portfolio Management

125. IDA Portfolio Management and Performance. Early results o f the strategy are likely to be
achieved mostly through the existing portfolio and non-lending activities. These w i l l be important in
helping to embed the gains o f key reforms made by Government. The current IDA portfolio for
Nigeria has 16 projects and a commitment value o f about US$1.48 billion. Of this amount, about
US$258 million has been disbursed as o f May 3, 2005. The disbursement ratio in FY04 increased to
about 13% f r o m about 3.5% in FY03 and i s estimated to be about 15% in FY05. Fiduciary
compliance in FY04 was 100%. Although the portfolio i s relatively young (average implementation
period i s 2.6 years), implementation has not met expectations. Six projects have an unsatisfactory DO
or IP rating. Portfolio analysis has identified five systemic factors that hamper implementation: (i)
complex project design, project management, and implementation procedures; (ii)
downstream delays
due to premature launch o f projects and consequent underestimation o f implementation capacity; (iii)
inadequateAate counterpart funding; (iv) weak results management, often due to inadequate
monitoring and evaluation systems and capacity; and (v) political interference, incentives issues, and
rigidities in applying performance-based principles (including implications for less well performing
states). Several projects have areas o f overlap (e.g. in states, similar activities, CDD) and, thus,
provide opportunities for harmonization, consolidation, more efficient implementation and lower
transaction costs.
126. Rigorous analysis and monitoring have been carried out since 2003, through semi-annual joint
CPPRs; the latest CPPR was in December 2004. These portfolio reviews have identified systemic and
project-specific issues and set strategic priorities and time-bound actions for sustained portfolio
performance improvement. Key among these actions are the portfolio restructuring, harmonization of
the C D D projects, and resolution o f systemic issues. Project-specific action plans have been devised
and implemented and have brought encouraging signals o f improved portfolio performance. To ensure
the portfolio’s continued improvement for future operations the systemic issues are being addressed
new operations w i l l strive for simplification, flexibility
through the following immediate steps: (i)
and implementation readiness (projects now use a readiness guide during preparation to ensure that
country financing
the project i s ready for implementation and to reduce effectiveness delays); (ii)
parameters (CFP) have been established to help harmonize and rationalize the financing o f the total
country program, especially when counterpart financing issues are acute and potential rewards are
high, e.g. social sector and C D D projects may be financed up to loo%, when appropriate, including
more flexible and simplified World
selected on-going projects for disbursements going forward (iii)
Bank procedures are being introduced, including disbursement simplification, increased procurement
thresholds for prior reviews and harmonized implementation arrangements; (iv) project monitoring
and evaluation systems are being strengthened; (v) capacity building and scaling up good practices are
enhanced; and (vi) projects w i l l continue to be reworked in alignment with the CPS, as needed.
127. The portfolio restructuring underway i s designed to improve performance o f problem projects
and other priority operations in full alignment with the objectives, principles and approaches of the
CPS and NEEDS. A total o f eight projects (about 54% o f total commitments) are being restructured
and another two operations based on the CDD approach are being harmonized and w i l l be adjusted
accordingly. The project revisions necessitate reallocation of resources within the project’s
development objectives rather than cancellation. The main thrusts o f portfolio improvement are as
follows:

Country Partnership Strategy

-40-

Nigeria

( i ) restructuring of priority projects, including non-pelforming projects (total US$803m).
Eight projects (private sector support, universal basic education, second health systems,
community-based urban development, and community based poverty reduction, HTV/AIDS,
Lagos urban transport and transmission development) are being restructured. The
restructuring entails: simplifying the project design, allowing greater flexibility in identifying
the activities to be financed at state level, strengthening community participation in decision
making on resource allocation, allowing greater flexibility in the use o f resources at the state
level and allocating more resources to states that perform well.
( i i ) harmonization and gradual consolidation of CDD-type operations (total US$430m). The
review of the five CDD-type operations showed a dispersion o f activities, uncoordinated
approaches and operational practices and a variety o f implementing arrangements with
different level o f effectiveness and efficiency. As a first step, the operational manuals o f the
projects are being harmonized to ensure a consistent approach, based on lessons learned about
best practice in Nigeria. A thorough evaluation o f the C D D operations w i l l be carried out in
FY06 and w i l l identify the performing aspects and approaches which w i l l form the basis for
the following consolidation. This consolidation w i l l allow greater efficiency and effectiveness
o f project management and improved service delivery to communities; and,
(iii) retrofitting monitoring and evaluation systems. The portfolio review included an in-depth

analysis of the M&E systems o f existing projects, which identified important gaps. M&E
systems and result framework o f specific projects are being strengthened and aligned to the
framework o f the CPS.

128. Short- and medium-term prospects for IDA portfolio improvements. As a result o f portfolio
reviews and the CPS preparation consultations, there are now encouraging signals that the portfolio i s
being repositioned in the context o f the NEEDS. The portfolio restructuring and improvement
measures are expected to trigger: (i)incremental improvements in the short term (e.g. faster
implementation, increased disbursements, better M&E, especially in the performance of well
positioned states and federal units); and (ii)visible and sustained gains in the medium term (e.g.
intermediate resultdquick wins, harmonization, program cohesion at Federal and State level and
further streamlining of the existing projects). As the restructured projects are relatively young and
have disbursed only a small percentage o f net commitments, they stand a good chance o f using
effectively the undisbursed credit balance. As a result, the outcomes o f the closing projects, as
evaluated by OED, also have a good chance to gradually improve and, thus, reverse Nigeria’s country
record on outcomes in the near future. Decentralization and staff organization around the CPS, as well
as the D F I D m o r l d Bank partnership, are essential factors for significantly improved portfolio
performance. The portfolio performance w i l l be monitored systematically with respect to the
aforementioned expectations.
129. DFZD Portfolio Management and Performance. DFID has managed i t s portfolio and
pipeline to align with the N E E D W E E D S agenda and to become more focused on joint working with
multilateral agencies. This included realigning its focal state approach in favor o f responding to a
country-led initiative, based on the SEEDS process that w i l l be amenable to a multi-donor approach.
The new focus has been described in the DFID Country Assistance Plan (CAP). The CAP became the
foundation for work in support o f Nigeria on a joint strategy with the World Bank Group (the CPS)
and building coherence with other development partners.
130. About 31% of the DFID budget i s focused o n addressing the income poverty MDG, 44% on
child and maternal mortality and 16% on W / A i d s and malaria. DFID has focused on human
development and governance for a number o f years, and i s now increasing emphasis o n supporting

Country Partnership Strategy

-41-

Nigeria

non-oil growth. In working towards delivering impact on the MDGs, DFID Nigeria had a portfolio
and pipeline o f 40 programs, totaling some ;E650 million towards the end o f 2004, with about 2250
million o f support for Nigeria over the first three years o f this CPS. A portfolio and pipeline review
in the last quarter o f 2004 was established to improve impact and manageability. During the life of
the CPS, DFID Nigeria w i l l move to fewer, larger programs and further increase financing through
multilaterals. Currently about 25% o f DFID Nigeria’s budget flows through multilaterals, including
the World Bank and UN agencies. This accounts for about 40% o f DFID’s support on human
development.

IDA Country Financing Parameters
131.
The country financing parameters for Nigeria have been prepared and agreed upon b y the
government (see Annex 6). With regard to cost sharing, given the Government’s strong commitment
to i t s development program, the World Bank may finance up to 100% o f project costs in Nigeria.
These funds w i l l be disbursed to projects selectively, on a case-by-case basis. The World Bank’s
financing share would be moderate in key economic infrastructure sectors for example in power,
roads and transport, and especially in projects involving commercial parastatals. Projects in other
sectors could be financed up to 100% depending on clear assessment and merit.

Recurrent Cost Financing. The World Bank w i l l also finance recurrent costs on projects.
132.
This w i l l be applied selectively in order not to compromise fiscal sustainability or the achievement o f
individual project development objectives. Given the World Bank’s small share o f total public
financing in Nigeria, this increased flexibility w i l l not compromise fiscal sustainability at the macro
level. The World Bank w i l l continue to monitor the fiscal and debt situation in states, and their
implications for recurrent costs financing. For individual projects, recurrent costs financing may be
allowed to defray the cost o f managing project implementation. The new approach in the CPS,
whereby the bulk of the World Bank’s assistance w i l l be to a few core states that meet certain criteria
and demonstrate prudent fiscal and budget management and attention to fiscaVdebt sustainability,
should provide additional safeguards.
133. Local Cost Financing. Nigeria’s financing requirements clearly exceed the country’s own
resources, even taking into account i t s domestic borrowing possibilities. While international o i l prices
have reached historic highs in the last four years, revenue receipts are outweighed b y the costs o f
financing development and the need to accumulate external reserves to cushion against future adverse
shocks to the economy. In addition, the financing o f only foreign expenditures w i l l not be sufficient
for the World Bank to provide the required resources to projects to meet their development objectives.
Several projects in the Nigeria portfolio are in the social sectors4ommunity development, agriculture
and urban development-where expenditures are largely local. I t i s also likely that the CPS’s pipeline
projects w i l l require substantial contracting o f local goods and services. Therefore the World Bank
w i l l finance local costs and foreign costs in any proportions needed and as appropriate for individual
projects .
134.
Taxes and Duties. Nigeria’s domestic tax rates are reasonable, tax administration i s being
strengthened and the federal Government plans to move to the ECOWAS CET which w i l l institute a
four band tariff structure (5, 10, 15 and 20). However, import duties on goods typically imported
under World Bank-financed projects are generally under 10%. Thus the W o r l d Bank may now
finance all taxes and duties15. The World Bank would, however, consider at the individual projectlevel whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share of project costs.

l5Except the

state sales tax, as in Lagos State, which amounts to double taxation to the Value Added Tax.

Country Partnership Strategy

-42-

Nigeria

Boosting Aid Effectiveness: Strengthening Donor Harmonization
135.
The NEEDS, SEEDS and
the new focus on MDGs in
Nigeria provide a strong countryled framework for harmonizing
donor assistance to Nigeria. The
CPS builds on this and i s a
platform for working with the
Government o f Nigeria and other
donors on the implementation o f
commitments adopted under The
Aid
Paris
Declaration
on
Effectiveness o f March 3, 2005.
The World Bank Group and DFID
have coordinated closely with
other donors in developing a new
strategic approach and vision o f
greater aid effectiveness. The UN
"

CPS (see Annex 7) and recognizes that the CPS presents an agenda for building closer relations
among donors. The ADB i s in strong agreement with the thrust o f the CPS and this i s reflected in its
own strategyI6.
136.
Donor co-ordination in Nigeria involves harmonization at both the federal and state levels. At
the federal level, bilateral donors are co-ordinated by the National Planning Commission (NPC), with
multilaterals working with the Federal Ministry o f Finance. Efforts are currently underway to bring
the international development partners together into a coordinated framework to back the NEEDS.
Working at state level i s an important aspect o f donor support in Nigeria. Several key donors are now
being selective in their strategies and interventions and plan to rely on the government-led SEEDS
benchmarking process, and are jointly supporting the implementation o f the benchmarking process.
Based on this, an important area o f work in the CPS w i l l be to work towards a coherent strategy for
support to SEEDS, including making progress towards joint donor SWAps and budget support.
137.
The partners w i l l monitor progress on aid effectiveness using the Paris Declaration and i t s
indicators as a starting point. A Results Framework on Partnership and Aid Effectiveness i s being
developed (see Annex 7) and i s supported by various pieces o f analytical work and capacity building.
The CPS i s perceived as a good basis for further harmonizing donors' activities and w i l l work with
the UN, ADB, the EC and other bilaterals to make progress. The prospects are now excellent for
making improvements in donor harmonization during the lifetime o f the CPS, given the small size o f
the donor community and indications o f support from key donors.
138.
The activities o f the main donor agencies involved in Nigeria are presented in Annex 7,
organized b y CPS outcomes. These programs are already well-aligned with proposed interventions
under the CPS. Priority areas o f donor interventions include maternal and child health, polio
immunization, malaria, HIV/AIDS, primary education, water and sanitation and environment. Donor
programs also support non-oil growth, especially in agriculture (e.g. CIDA, U S A I D ) and good
governance (e.g. EC, USAID).

" The ADB's CSP

- closely aligned to the CPS - i s currently under development, to be presented to their Board in 2005.

Country Partnership Strategy

-43-

Nigeria

139.
The World Bank and DFID w i l l be building on a number o f good examples o f fruitful
cooperation among themselves and with other donors. An emphasis on joint analysis and programs
w i l l be further strengthened during the CPS. The World Bank and DFID are co-financing the UBE
and the Federal Government Economic Reform and Governance Project, and jointly supporting the
privatization process. The African Development Bank in particular i s successfully co-financing four
operations with the World Bank - the Community Based Poverty Reduction Project, the second
Health Systems Development Project, the HIV/Aids project and the Fadama project. UNICEF i s
increasingly taking the lead on Health MDG interventions. DFID i s joining efforts with UNICEF in
the areas o f rural water supply and girls’ education. U S A I D - a strong bilateral partner - i s active in a
number o f areas where good cooperation has been established with the World Bank Group and DFID,
including on the financial sector, agriculture policy, HIV/AIDS and strengthening the National
Assembly. These collaborative efforts have also fostered a common position amongst donors on key
sector policy issues and challenges.

140. On macroeconomic policy, the World Bank i s working closely and effectively with the IMF.
Although Nigeria does not have a formal IMF agreement, the IMF i s providing close monitoring and
technical assistance within the framework o f an intensified surveillance program. This includes
quarterly staff visits and semi-annual reporting to the IMF Board o f Directors. Cooperation with the
World Bank i s very close in areas o f expenditure management and financial sector reform.
Outcome-based M o dtoring
141. In-country monitoring and evaluation capacity. Nigeria i s committed to strengthening i t s
monitoring and evaluation capacity to collect data and report on core indicators, to conduct impact
evaluations o f programs and to use M&E information in the management o f programs and projects.
With other development partners, the CPS will, therefore, support Nigeria’s overall capacity for
statistical data collection, processing, economic and poverty monitoring. The CPS w i l l continue to
provide support for the Federal Office o f Statistics (FOS), under the National Planning Commission
(NPC), and help with efforts towards comprehensive mid-term assessments o f NEEDS and SEEDS
(including through the SEEDS benchmarking exercise).
142.
The President has inaugurated a high-level MDG assessment and monitoring initiative in
early 2005, which w i l l be supported through the CPS. A high-level MDG Implementation
Committee, comprising representatives o f six key Ministries w i l l oversee and guide implementation
and monitoring efforts. I t w i l l help in coordination o f MDG tracking among line ministries and the
NPC, align MDG activities and budgetary priorities and track actual expenditure against MDG
budgeted activities and their ultimate impact on MDG targets. Increasingly c i v i l society’s role in the
national monitoring system i s being defined and strengthened. Special effort w i l l be made to help
lead states build their M&E systems, linked and coordinated with the national MDG M&E system.
The CPS w i l l assist in harmonizing donor M&E systems, building on Paris Declaration commitments.
143. Monitoring of CPS implementation. The Results Framework establishes the result chains for
the World Bank Group and DFID program and defines the performance indicators for monitoring
Partnership/Govemment progress vis-a-vis longer term strategic goals for the country (see Results
Framework in Annex 1). In most cases, intermediate indicators and milestones are quantified with
expected target ranges; in others, more qualitative information i s required. Where there are gaps in
information, the World Bank and DFID w i l l work with the Government in identifying specific
measurements during the first year o f CPS implementation.

Country Partnership Strategy

-44-

Nigeria

Box 14: Outcome-Based Management

There are three key features of the CPS which need to be reflected in the organization for implementation and monitoring team: (i)
the
DFID/WB Group partnership; (i
outcome
) focus; and (hi) lead states approach. A joint management arrangement will therefore be
established and will comprise a joint management team, joint outcome teams led by Outcome Coordinators, joint lead state teams and a
partnership coordinator. Although the detailed descriptions of the management arrangement are still in progress, the following are key
features:
The Outcome Team (OT) will be cross-sectoraland include WB Group and DFID staff relevant to the achievement of the
Outcomes. It i s conceivable that one person may be in more than one team.
The Outcome Coordinator (OC) will lead the Outcome Team. S h e may be a Program Coordinator or Team Leader in addition to
taking on the function of OC. There will be one OC for each Outcome Platformand s h e may come from either of the Partners.
S h e will ensure that the team shares a vision of the national strategic objectives and the alignment of the CPS with them,
coordinates monitoringof outcome/ milestones, ensures that the partnership between DFID and the World Bank (and other
donors) works effectively towards outcomes and that i t includes the sustained participation of the Government CPS counterpart
team.
Lead State Teams (UT)will be cross-sectoraland include relevant WB Group and DFID staff. The LST will be canying out the
policy dialogue in lead states, based on SEEDS and will identify investment gaps and activities.
The partnership coordinator will be responsible for coordinatingCPS activities with those of other donors and working to
facilitate donor harmonization. As the partnership broadens to include other donors, the outcome-based management
arrangements will also evolve. T h i s will need to be carefully managed and monitored, using the Paris Declarationcommitments
as guiding principles.

144. The CPS program effectiveness w i l l need to be assessed from the outset. There i s much to
learn. about which kinds o f outcomes create the best conditions for producing strategic results.
Because this cannot wait for ex post evaluation, intensive ex ante, self-evaluation methods w i l l need
to be used throughout the CPS period. The national MDG monitoring system i s unlikely to be fully
operational at the outset o f this CPS and, even when i t become operational, i t w i l l not monitor all CPS
performance indicators. The CPS w i l l therefore establish an initial M&E learning based system to
track progress and guide performance improvement in collaboration with Government counterparts.

145. Quarterly World Bank GroupDFID strategy meetings w i l l review program implementation
and progress towards achieving outcomes. Semi-annuallannual joint CPPR (World Bank/DFID/
Government) w i l l be aligned with the results framework, assessing progress in achieving CPS
outcomes, dealing with risks and problems that might hinder achievement, identifying systemic issues
that may affect portfolio performance and facilitating mutual accountability. At mid-term, the CPS
Progress Report w i l l draw on an in-depth examination o f the CPS outcomes and assess whether they
remain relevant to the longer-term objectives, given country conditions. A Completion Report w i l l be
completed at the end o f the CPS implementation to feed into the next CPS cycle.
Communications Strategy
146. The completion o f the CPS w i l l provide the foundation for an intensified communications
strategy in Nigeria. That strategy w i l l aim to communicate an accurate and up-to-date understanding
o f the World Bank and i t s role in Nigeria; while in parallel, building an understanding o f DFID and
the nature o f partnership for growth and poverty reduction. I t w i l l take forward the collaborative
relationship established with stakeholders during CPS consultations.

147. The CPS w i l l first be disseminated and discussed with opinion leaders from four key groups:
academics, the media, parliamentarians, and the private sector. Since the CPS i s necessarily a “living
strategy,’’ taking shape as it i s put into practice, these discussions w i l l continue so that key actors in
all four target groups are aware o f results on the ground and how the World Bank, DFID and their
partners are meeting emerging challenges. Meanwhile, an expanded network o f Public Information
Centers - in Abuja and in other key urban centers - i s to provide a platform for disseminating the CPS
and discussing i t s main elements.
148.
Broadly the three pillars o f the CPS - strengthening governance and transparency, advancing
growth in the non-oil economy and improving public service delivery for human development -

Countly Partnership Strategy

-45-

Nigeria

should become a focus for development debate in the country; team members should help to i n f o r m a
national dialogue on these crucial issues. An expanded communications effort should strengthen and
deepen understanding o f the development program in Nigeria, building a more conducive climate for
success.

149. This program promises high returns but i s not without risks. Five significant risks threaten the
success o f the program and The World Bank and DFID are committed to supporting Nigeria in
reducing them. First, domestic political support for reforms could evaporate, removing any possibility
that the momentum created by the Economic Team w i l l survive the 2007 presidential elections. The
helping the executive and legislature build consensus and
CPS tries to mitigate this risk by: (i)
translate reforms into legislation (e.g. procurement, EITI, and fiscal responsibility bills); (ii)
demonstrating the international community’s strong support for reforms, including through debt relief
and increased financial flows; (iii)providing on-going support to analytical work on debt, as
requested; (iv) restructuring the portfolio to achieve “quick wins”; and (v) helping to design and
implement a communications strategy to transform basic attitudes about the role o f government and
civic society and increasing the demand for outcomes. The CPS w i l l work to promote broad national
dialogue on key issues such as service delivery, the management o f o i l resources and non-oil growth.
This w i l l help to raise awareness among citizens o f their rights to oversee government commitments
in budgets and plans and to a quality o f services commensurate with the resources available.
150. Second, Nigeria’s great ethnic and religious diversity carries an inherent risk o f conflict that
has the potential to jeopardize development efforts. Conflicts in Nigeria are largely caused b y
competition for resources. For example, the conflict in the Niger Delta i s a reflection o f the desire
among Delta inhabitants to retain a larger share o f the o i l wealth produced in their region. The conflict
in Plateau State began as a result o f a dispute between pastoralists and farmers over access t o land.
Leaders often use ethnic and religious differences as a way o f justifying divisive actions and positions
which they see as furthering their objectives; these can exacerbate conflicts. Government and the
political leadership, starting with President Obasanjo, are mitigating this risk through political
reforms. Convening a National Council i s an important step in modernizing the constitution and the
legal system, and removing some o f the causes o f conflict. Strengthening democratic institutions i s
important in ensuring that different groups have voice and can influence political decisions without
resorting to violence. Bilateral donors are also active in the security sector, such as police reform.
The World Bank and DFID are increasingly introducing conflict avoidance and resolution
mechanisms in their projects. For example, the Fadama project includes specific mechanisms to
resolve conflicts over land use. At the same time, the World Bank i s supporting the efforts o f o i l
companies to establish outreach programs to benefit communities in oil-producing areas.
15 1.
Third i s the risk posed by weak institutions, poor governance and widespread conuption. The
Government’s recent and decisive actions against corruption, and i t s ongoing commitment to building
public support for i t s anti-corruption measures, have reduced this risk. At the same time, the CPS
wants to improve public administration at the federal and state levels and the capacity o f c i v i l society
and local communities to demand change. The selection o f lead states allows the CPS to build state
capacity, avoid dispersion and gain synergy across operations to produce irreversible results o n the
ground. B y the end o f the period the selected states would be assessed and are expected to become
eligible for budget financing. The experience o f the lead states would be transferred gradually to
other states. The strategy i s flexible in the allocation o f resources to accommodate the speed and
quality o f implementation in projects or states and/or any drastic shift in the basic economic
parameters.

Country Partnership Strategy

-46-

Nigeria

152.
Fourth, the incentives for states to engage with a reform agenda have been weak, with the
commitment to reform at state-level largely dependent on the predisposition o f the governor. This
inherent fragility may increase after the 2007 elections, when at least 20 new governors w i l l be
elected. Commitment to reform has already proved problematic with regard to W o r l d Bank and DFID
support to some states. The Government has recognized this as a risk to national development. I t s
work on ,political reform, the fiscal responsibility Bill and the SEEDS benchmarking process are
notable examples o f concrete steps i t has taken to ease this problem. The CPS will look to support
such initiatives wherever possible. While the political economy risk at state level remains high,
incentives w i l l be introduced to encourage state governors to build a constituency for improved
service delivery, transparency and accountability. The lead state approach, including the flexibility to
withdraw, w i l l contribute to mitigating this risk.

153. F@h, Nigeria’s economy remains vulnerable to oil price shocks. A sharp fall in o i l prices
would increase the financing gaps and make i t much more difficult to achieve the program objectives,
especially those relating to the MDGs. The Government, with technical support from the IMF, i s
addressing this b y developing a macro-economic framework that expressly takes into account o i l price
volatility. B y basing spending decisions on the long-run price o f oil, Nigeria i s building reserves
when market prices are high that w i l l be used when the prices fall. The W o r l d Bank and DFID are
also helping Government to reduce this risk by working with other donors to ensure that adequate and
flexible financing i s made available to the Nigeria program.
154.
Working in partnership i s not without i t s own peculiar risks. While both the W o r l d Bank
and DFID currently have excellent relations with the Government, there i s a risk that this may change,
particularly after 2007. The partners w i l l need to maintain positive engagement with this and any
future administration. Where this proves problematic, the World Bank w i l l minimize exposure b y
shifting to a low-case scenario which recovers much operational control o f resources from
government hands and shifts investment to non-government agencies doing community development
work towards MDGs. DFID would also review i t s allocation to consider whether it can continue to
demonstrate impact. As with the World Bank, i t w i l l shift resources from Government support to
securing more direct impacts through civil society organizations and the private sector, while
intensifying work on the demand side o f governance around key issues.

155.
During the CPS period, the World Bank and DFlD w i l l work to strengthen the partnership recognizing that this i s an area open to some risk given the differences in the t w o organizations, their
procedures and aid instruments. Joint implementation and monitoring team arrangements (see
B o x 14) has been defined and a Partnership Coordinator w i l l be assigned - using a Partnership
Results Framework guided by Paris Declaration indicators (see Annex 7) - t o manage this risk while
developing partnerships with the UN and others. Outcome Team charters cutting across partner
agencies w i l l be established to define the vision and norms for joint delivery of outcomes and further
developing joint programming. A newly established joint management team w i l l meet periodically
with the Government and convene regularly to monitor the delivery o f results and progress on the
partnership.
156. A mid-term review o f the CPS (by end o f FY07) w i l l allow the partners t o take stock o f the
progress made towards achieving the outcomes, propose appropriate revisions and introduce greater
detail into the second half o f the partnership.

0

.

-

.

0

0

0

a * . .

.

e . .

.

.

i

o

. .. ..
.a.

0

.

.

0

. .

rl

r 6 a

a

a

m

+ 5 a

a

w

B

4

a .

8 . .

a

a .

m

e!!

a

a

a

a m

e

a m

a

a m

a

a

d
9

z

u

9

a

a

a m

a m

c

a

f

.-Y

rl

n

BE

c

....

Q...

. . . . . .

42
u

0

.

.

3

n

0

.

0

0

s

a

.

v

.

.

.

.

3

H

4

a

42
u

.

a

.

Annex 2
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
STRATEGY COMPLETION REPORT
Country: Nigeria

Date of Country Strategy Note: May 21,2000
Date of Interim Country Assistance Strategy Update: M a y 21,2001
Date of Interim Strategy Update: February 13,2002
Date of Second Joint Interim Strategy Progress Report, M a y 20,2004

-

Period Covered by the Joint Interim Strategy: FY2000 2005
Strategy Completion Report prepared by:

Luis Alvaro Sanchez, Consultant
Galina Sotirova, Task Manager
Date: May 4,2005

Executive Summary
1.
This Completion Report (CR) takes stock o f the implementation o f the past Joint Interim
strategies for Nigeria. I t s assessment and conclusions have informed the preparation o f this Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS). When the Bank came back to Nigeria in 1999, as a democratically elected
lack o f
government took power, several factors handicapped the extent and quality of i t s support: (i)
quality analytical work, due to disengagement from the country; (ii)
broad and un-prioritized
significant institutional deterioration after two decades o f military
Government policy guidelines; (iii)
rule; and (iv) lack o f a comprehensive evaluation o f the previous Bank experience. Under these
circumstances, Bank assistance was often opportunistic, dispersed, and not structured around clearly
articulated monitorable objectives.

2.
W i t h time, however, and despite a relatively young portfolio, significant achievements have
been obtained and lessons learned. The stock o f knowledge has improved, especially in the areas of
public sector governance, the management o f o i l resources, poverty assessment, and the pre-requisites
for non-oil growth. Bank direct assistance has helped improve procurement practices and the
management o f the public resources b y the Federal Government. The assistance has also shown it
possible to involve communities in the allocation and use o f public resources, delivering a wide range
o f infrastructure works at competitive prices as well as community education a n d health services.
Advances have been made in setting the basis for improved services in telecommunications,
electricity and water. The fight against polio has been effective.

3.

However, attempts to assist a large number o f states within a single project for the delivery
social services have not worked well. Also, the Bank has yet to find effective ways t o conduct policy
dialogue in the absence o f adjustment lending in Nigeria. Lack o f adequate attention t o political
economy issues has handicapped project implementation. The Bank assistance could have placed
greater emphasis on o i l as a driver in the economic transformation o f the country through the various
backward and forward linkages that it can create in the economy. Some o f these issues remain
unexplored.

4.
With hindsight, the Bank should have moved earlier and more forcefully w i t h analytical
work, policy dialogue and technical assistance, trusting the leadership o f the government and i t s
commitment to reform. The Government has truly been the driving force, especially after the 2003
re-election. Greater emphasis should have been given to dissemination o f achievements both at home
and abroad. As o f today, Nigeria’s efforts and achievements have not led t o tumabout in the
commitment o f the international community to support the country. This lack o f support, as shown b y
Page 1 o f 23

Annex 2
the delays to address the international debt issue continues to be a politically sensitive issue in the
country.
Some key lessonshecommendations from the CR are:
At the Strategic Level:

0

0

Concentrate assistance in pockets o f high commitment like the Federal government and a few
selected states
Stress AAA as the basis for a scaled-up policy dialogue and improved project preparation.
Leverage Bank assistance against Government resources and those of other donors by
continued support for the improvement in the management of public resources
Use the opportunity o f a Country Partnership Strategy to develop realistic criteria to assess
progress in Nigeria.
Increase support to remove the barriers to economic growth as a means to reduce poverty
nationwide (infrastructure, macro-growth links)
Do not limit assistance to the management o f energy resources but rather explore the
potential direct contributions the energy sector can make to economic growth, as i t i s now
being explored in the case o f gas.
Maintain a productive engagement in the country and make sure that the interventions can
withstand the political and economic risk in the country.

At the Program Project Level:
Improved project design and implementation in the future w i l l require:
Mandatory inclusion o f realistic Monitoring and Evaluation systems;
0
Flexible designs that allow reallocation o f resources and avoid the accumulation o f unutilized
funds;
Taking account o f the political economy reality through stakeholder analysis (or other
methods) during design and implementation.

I.LONG-TERMSTRATEGIC GOALS-OUTCOMES
4.
The incoming civilian administration in 1999 sought a significant reversal o f fortunes in a
wide range o f fronts: higher economic growth, improved governance, arresting the deterioration o f
basic social indicators, and better management o f o i l resources. The progress has been slow due
mainly to the significant institutional deterioration that had taken place; however, positive changes
are clear and evident, especially after 2003, when the civilian government was reelected. Economic
growth has picked up; the macroeconomic situation has been stabilized; and, the stock o f international
reserves has increased. Most importantly, the Government o f Nigeria has produced a home-grown
development strategy (NEEDS) and has taken a forceful stance in fighting corruption and improving
governance. These developments are reported in greater detail in the main text o f the CPS.
11. INTERIM STRATEGY OUTCOMES

5.
This chapter evaluates the impact o f the Bank assistance from 1999 t o the present. The Bank
Board last discussed a CAS in April 1993. Since the democratically elected Obasanjo administration
took power in 1999, the Board considered an Interim Country Strategy Note dated M a y 11,2000. An

Page 2 o f 23

Annex 2
Interim County Assistance Update dated May 21, 2001 and an Interim Strategy Update dated
February 13,2002 followed. The Second Joint Interim Strategy Progress Report was considered by
the Board in June 2004.
The Interim Country Strategy Note and the follow-up updates targeted assistance to three objectives:
Improving governance and economic management
Supporting economic growth
Empowerment o f the population through better services.

6.
Moreover, the 2002 JIS mandated focused attention to Lagos. The following preliminary
observations provide a framework for understanding the achievements and limitations of assistance to
Nigeria during this period. They also illustrate the difficulties with assessing achievements and
impact in Nigeria.

7.
The Government’s Development Strategy has emerged more clearly only towards the end
of the period. After coming to power the civilian administration was not in a position to develop a
detailed development strategy; it lacked the supporting analytical work and the technical capacity to
do so. Furthermore, the Bank lacked analytical work to guide i t s own program and project designs.
NEEDS would not be developed until 2004. In the absence o f clearly defines specific objectives and
targets, i t has been difficult for the Bank to evaluate the effectiveness o f the program in the various
updates o f the Interim Strategy. The lack o f clear targets has led to subjective and negative
evaluations b y the donor community o f progress made in changing institutions in Nigeria. The donor
1
community placed too high expectations on what the civilian government could do.
8.
The Bank did not take stock of the lessonsfrom past involvements on a timely basis. The
Bank had been very active in Nigeria during the 1980s and early 1990s2, covering health, education,
roads, agriculture, electricity, water and sanitation. However, OED did not carry out a Country
Assistance Evaluation; therefore, a comprehensive review o f the previous Bank involvement was
a ~ a i l a b l e .The
~ available information suggests a limited impact with past interventions. 4Arguably,
the lack o f a proper evaluation work has hindered the effectiveness o f the current assistance. Some of
the past lessons had to be learned again.

9.

Very few resources have been disbursed. The Bank portfolio in Nigeria i s fairly young and
available resources have been disbursed slowly; therefore, i t i s too early to evaluate the full impact on
the ground o f these on-going interventions.

A. Improving Governance and Economic Management
After a decade o f arbitrary and corrupt military rule, the institutional decay in the public
10.
sector was pervasive. “Standard procedures in government that help ensure good policy formulation,
implementation and accountability have been ignored for so long that they have been largely

’ The IMF and DFID have made a similar point in the assessment of their own interventions.

In the 1980’s the lending portfolio stood at 1 billion dollars a year.
OED, however, evaluated 8 projects launched before the Bank suspended its program in 1995.
An internal study of 20 projects initiated between 1985 and 1992 found that 52% were unsatisfactory in terms
of impact andor sustainability and 85% of the projects reviewed had negative sustainability ratings.
Table 4 of the appendix shows that only 18 percent of the committed resources have been disbursed. In fact
only, two projects approved during this period will have been completed by the end of FY05.

Page 3 o f 23

Annex 2
forgotten.”6 Understandably, the Government gave early priority to improving governance and
reducing corruption. Donors, the Bank included’, have provided support through analytical work and
technical assistance. The progress has been significant since 1999. The government has been the
driving force behind these initiatives and has had full ownership. The following advances can be
noted:

11.
Public procurement shows results. Following the CPAR o f 2000, the Federal Government
has made progress in implementing procurement reform. The Budget Monitoring and Price
Intelligence Unit (BMPIU), which i s located in the Presidency, has instituted “due process” for all
contracts and generated significant savings to the budget. I t has issued circulars directing the creation
o f a procurement cadre and the establishment o f procurement units in each Ministry, Department or
Agency, effectively decentralizing procurement. A Procurement Bill has been submitted to the
National Assembly. Following enactment o f the Procurement Bill, a Bureau o f Public Procurement
w i l l be created which w i l l oversee procurement policy, ensure quality, launch a broad procurement
training program, and carry out procurement audits. A Lagos State Procurement Assessment Review
was carried out in 2003 and makes similar recommendations for procurement reform at the State
level. However, at this stage, implementation has been slow due to unavailability o f adequate funding
(e.g. IDA funding).
12.
Management of Oil resources is improving. Progress has been made in the management o f
o i l resources. A price o i l rule to smooth expenditure in the federal budget was introduced in 2004.
This decision represents a first step in what can be a more sophisticated macroeconomic management.
The country can move, for instance, to using the non-oil fiscal deficit as key criteria for
macroeconomic management. These efforts have to be extended to the state level for the approach to
be even more effective. The proposed Fiscal Responsibility Bill would allow the federal and the state
governments to coordinate fiscal and budgetary policy.
13.
The government has begun implementation o f the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative
(EITI.) Its effective implementation would put Nigeria at the forefront o f o i l countries in introducing
transparency to o i l resource flows. The approach seeks to involve civil society and build consensus on
how to manage and use o i l revenues. Hopefully, this approach w i l l help overcome the public’s
mistrust o f the government after decades o f military rule. EITI implementation will be arduous and
w i l l require the continued support o f the international community, the bank included.
Taking thefirst steps in budgetary management reform. Coordination among government
14.
agencies with fiscal responsibilities has improved.* The first federal budget utilizing a modem
budgetary classification was approved b y the legislature in 2004 for the 2005 federal budget. The
arrears o f government appropriation accounts and financial statements under the military have been
Interim CAS Note, 2000, page 13.

’Instruments to support governance. Bank support began with Country Procurement Assessment Review

(CPAR) (June 2000), and the Economic Management Capacity Building Project (EMCAP.)’ Other A A A at the
Federal level includes a Public Expenditure Review (FYO1) and a Country Financial Accountability Analysis
(CFAA) (September 2000). Also it can be mentioned the Capital Budget Review 2000; States Governance
Report 2002; and States Finances Report 2003; with the priority given to Lagos in the 2002 Update, a Lagos
State Procurement Assessment Report (November 2003), and a Lagos SFFA (March 2004) have been
undertaken. The Bank also undertook a review of the oil and gas sector in 2003. A recent petroleum review
considers the relationship between oil management and overall governance.

* These include the National Planning Commission, the Budget office and the expenditure ministries.

Specifically, the capacity of ministries to deal with expenditure and procurement responsibilities i s being
increased.

Page 4 o f 23

Annex 2
drastically reduced to two years. The treasury system i s under modernization and the communication
between the spending agencies and the Accountant General Office now takes place within the
mandated time limits. The 1958 Finance Management and Control Act i s under review to strengthen
and update financial management practices. Civil service in- kind benefits are being monetized to
bring greater transparency into public service pay and reduce the burden o f the c i v i l service on the
public purse. The Bank, DFID and the EU have been active supporters o f these efforts.
15.
External Control and accountability to Parliament. The federal government has brought i t s
fiscal accounts to date and several states are beginning to do the same. Audited financial statements
have been published. The Auditor General's office has made progress towards reporting to
parliament on budgetary performance within the mandatory nine months after the end o f the fiscal
year. The Audit Act i s under review. The Public Accounts Committees o f Parliament has been
reactivated, and plans are underway to create a budget and research office in the National Assembly.

Anti-Corruption. The Government has created the Independent Corrupt Practices and the
16.
Economic & Financial Crimes Commissions. These agencies are pursuing several cases in court.
Some 138 functional Anti-Corruption Units have been created in government agencies. Since 2003, a
large number o f highly placed government officials have been taken to court, including ministers,
parliamentarians, admirals, etc. However, only one conviction has been secured, which was later
overturned. The Public Accounts Committee o f the Legislature took its oversight responsibilities
more seriously in 2004 and held public hearings on the findings o f audited public accounts.
17.
Other efforts include some improvements in the production o f national statistics, and
nationwide consultations on specific proposals for a judicial reform. Despite all o f these efforts
Nigeria continues to be ranked low on governance and corruption in relationship to other countries,
including sub-Saharan countries. Aside from measurement lags, the l o w rankings reflect the
magnitude o f the challenge ahead for the Government, the country and the donor community, and the
need to monitor continuously the outcomes o f the interventions.

B. Supporting Economic Growth
17.
Growth o f the non-oil economy during the 1990s was around 3 % p.a., marginally above
population growth. In this decade, non-oil growth has increase to an average o f 4.7 % annually. The
new civilian government sought to move the country away from the previous strategy o f
industrialization based on direct state investments towards reliance on private sector initiative. The
Government and the Bank, lacking the supporting analytical background to design a detailed growth
strategy, proceeded tentatively, with emphasis on enterprise privatization, deregulation, and SOEs
restructuring. A more detail program has been unfolding overtime. With hindsight, the support for
economic growth could have benefited from earlier and more intensive sector work and a more active
dialogue with government on issues o f business environment and sources for growth.' Also, greater
attention should shave been given to energy resources as drivers o f economic change through forward
and backwards linkages. Only, gas received some attention towards the end o f the period.

18.
The understanding of how oil impacts economic growth has improved. The understanding
o f how o i l revenues flow into the economy has improved as a result o f joint analytical work between
the Bank and the Government." The use o f an oil-price-rule for the budget preparation follows from
38% in total commitments have been made to support economic growth. The percentage drops to 31% if the
Fadama project (based on a CDD approach) i s omitted.
loOil/Gas study and technical assistance, Petroleum Review (2004), Policy Options for Growth and stability
(2003) and Poverty and Vulnerability (2004).

Page 5 o f 23

Annex 2
the understanding that fluctuations in oil revenues have negative effects on economic growth. The
commitment to transparency in the flow of oil revenues highlights the importance of check and
balances to prevent opportunities for graft and misuse of resources. Also, there i s greater clarity about
the economic opportunities that derive from gas, and the current losses and environmental risks from
gas flaring. Moreover, the legal framework to allow private sector involvement in gas i s under
preparation. Despite some progress i t i s necessary to continue the work on the l i n k s between oil and
the economy, especially by bringing these issues into the national dialogue on development. I t i s also
worthwhile to explore opportunities that the oil industry directly provides for the development of
local industry. 11
19.
There is now a better understanding of the requirements for a high rate of sustained
growth. Through analysis, dialogue and surveys, the Government, the private sector and the donors
have an improved understanding of the barriers to growth, and a sense of policy priorities has been
emerging regarding infrastructure, the investment climate, trade and the overall determinants of
productivity growth.'* Regretfully, at the present moment there i s not enough of a track record with
surveys to know if the environment has been improving in recent years as a result of government
policy. However, the basis has been set to track this progress in the future. An up-coming Country
Economic Memorandum provides the opportunity to bring together the work that has been done on
the determinants of competitiveness in Nigeria. The Bank, jointly with DFID, has been supporting
private sector organizations to dialogue with Government on issues of investment climate. The
dialogue on growth needs to be scaled-up to motivate national wide debate on the barriers to growth.

20.
De-regulation of the telecommunications sector has been very effective. The
telecommunications sector has been liberalized, a regulator has been put in place, and tele-density has
increased from .4 percent in December 1999 to over 6.5 percent in December 2004. The regulatory
framework i s state-of-the art. The response of the private investors has been remarkable. Private
investments rose from $50 million at end-1999 to $5.4 billion at end-2004, so that the sector i s second
only to oil in FDI. This shows in equivocally that the private sector can play a positive role in the
economy. The IFC largest investment in Nigeria i s in telecommunications. The National Monopoly
(NITEL) i s being prepared for privatization now.

21.

Signifxant progress has been made to improve delivery of electricity services. Reportedly,
the quality of the electricity services i s the largest barrier to business in Nigeria. Some improvements
in service delivery have been made, through the restructuring of NEPA (the state electricity
monopoly)--its distribution sector being unbundled into 11 Distribution Business Units - DBUs (as of
Jan 1,2004) and the Transmission Business Unit has been set up on April 2,2004. Several initiatives
have been piloted under the Commercial Reorientation of the Electricity Toolkit (CREST) program.
Based on the success o f the pilots, a scale-up program in 8 of the 11 DBUs i s being undertaken. With
the passage of the Energy Bill (December, 2004), i t i s now possible to unbundle de facto the state
energy company (NEPA) and engage the private sector in the electricity sector. IFC has been actively
cooperating with the Bank in the reform of the electricity sector, including preparing the basis for
private sector off-grid investments. Rapid progress i s needed in improving the quality o f electricity
delivery and extending the coverage throughout the country.
Privatization has proceeded at a pace slower than initially expected. The Bank and the
22.
Government placed a high priority on privatization as part of a growth agenda, which emphasized
I' Past efforts in this area did not work satisfactorily. For instance, some of the refineries are not under operation
and the country imports gasoline.
l2The Bank has produced several private sector assessments and also i s now working on better understanding
the determinants of competitiveness, by focusing on value chains. This work i s expected to inform the CEM.

Page 6 o f 23

Annex 2
active private sector participation in the economy. Progress has been very slow. With hindsight, the
'~
reasonable,
slow progress in involving the private sector in infrastructure service p r o ~ i s i o nappears
given (a) the need to provide solid supporting regulatory frameworks upfront and (b) the weak
international market for basic network telecommunications companies. Slow progress in privatizing
companies in the productive sectors seems less reasonable, and i s probably due to entrenched interests
and lack of a strong government commitment. The Bank operation supporting privatization has been
restructured and lower goals were set. I t may well have been that the early emphasis on privatization
proved premature, and a better understanding of the political economy was necessary. As of recently,
the privatization drive has gained momentum. Progress has been made with preparing ports, airports
(starting with Abuja) and railway concessions. Also important assets in telecommunications and the
oil sector, including refineries, reportedly will be put up for sale.

The Bank returned to agriculture with a delay. Prior to 1999, the Bank had been actively
23.
involved in agriculture. After 1999,14 the Bank took the conscious decision not to lend for
investments in agriculture until fiduciary issues, related to previous Bank operations, were sorted out.
A t the same time, the Bank undertook Rural Sector Strategy Study and other analytical work;
regretfully, their impact on either policy or lending was very limited. A new agricultural sector review
i s under preparation. The return to lending under FADAMA-I1emphasizes a CDD approach to
address concerns from the previous FADAMA-Ioperation, as conflicts arose amongst different
beneficiaries at the community level. The CDD approach for the delivery o f agriculture services i s
experimental, and, henceforth, impact monitoring will be highly important.
24.
Also, it i s recommendable that FADAMA-I1concentrates on productive investments and
coordinates with efforts to improve rural roads. The previous FADAMA project succeeded in raising
yields, but products could not be taken to the market because of lack of transportation. With
hindsight, the Bank's support to agriculture could have been more forceful in (a) developing a more
precise diagnosis and priority actions for the sector, and (b) carrying out an effective policy dialogue
with the government. A more active dialogue could have encouraged the government to undertake
more determined actions to introduce some dynamism into agriculture. The Bank could have found an
alternative way to address the fiduciary concerns.

25.
Support Economic Growth through focus on Lagos State. Lagos concentrates a large share
of non-oil economic activity in Nigeria. Support for the development of Lagos has a national impact.
The 2002 JIS focused on Lagos. The ensuing support has provided the analytical basis to improve the
public expenditure and procurement practices. Lagos has increased collection of local taxes
significantly. The Bank i s also supporting improvements to the transport system, including roads and
the port. Regretfully, this assistance has been hindered by a failure of coordination between the
federal and the state authorities regarding roads under federal responsibility. Project design should
have taken into account of the possible consequence of the division of responsibilities o f the state and
federal government. The Bank i s likewise supporting the preparation of a Development and Poverty
Reduction Strategy. Lessons from the interventions in Lagos will need to be studied carefully as the
Bank moves to work more directly with other states.
The workings of the financial sector have improved, but access continues to be a problem.
26.
The Bank jointly with the IMF supported analytical work in the financial sector through FSAP. The
Central Bank has already begun implementation o f several of the FSAP recommendations, taking
steps to strengthen banking regulation. IFC has worked with six commercial Banks, committing term
The exception has been the water sector where the private sector has been engaged in the management of

l3

several water utilities.
l4See here OED evaluations.

Page 7 of 23

Annex 2
facilities totaling over $160 million. IFC i s expanding i t s relationships with lending banks to support
more small business financing options.

C. Empowerment
26.
The incoming Government found a disastrous situation: poor primary health care services;
the prevalence of communicable deceases; nutrition deficiencies; limited availability o f potable water;
and coverage o f primary education slightly above 60 percent b y the end o f the 1990s. HIV/AIDS was
on the rise and Nigeria was one o f the few countries in the world where polio was s t i l l present.15 Bank
assistance included health, education, polio, HIV/AIDS and, most importantly, it emphasized the role
o f the community in service delivery. This review focuses mostly o n the impact of the mature
operations and draws lessons for the delivery o f assistance in the area o f social services.16

27.
Learning to work with and through the communities. The emphasis o n Community Driven
Development (CDD) was new. Through this approach, the Government and the Bank have sought to
l7
(a) deliver outcomes on the ground, such as increases in incomes, poverty reduction and access to
basic services, and (b) create constituencies for the reform o f local governments. Lacking supporting
analytical work, the Bank relied on the lessons from other African countries. Project design has varied
across the CDD operations, which arguably has affected their effectiveness.
28.
Results from the Community Poverty Reduction Project (CPRP) l8
have shown that it i s
possible to work effectively through the community in the delivery o f basic services. Moreover, a
recent review o f the project showed that investments under the project have been less costly than
under alternative delivery schemes." A salient characteristic o f CPRP i s that work began first with
the communities and only gradually sought to engage local governments, which i t has done
successfully.20Later projects have faced implementation difficu1ties2l, possibly because o f more
complicated designs and different structures o f the relationship between the project, the community
and the local governments. The on-going review o f the CDD operations in Nigeria w i l l provide a
common framework from which to re-group current operations and design future interventions.

29.

Simple design and clearly targeted objectives paid-off in the fight against polio. A Bank
intervention to eradicate polio has proven highly effective (despite some early problems22), disbursing

l5See main body o f the CPS for details on social issues. Regretfully, polio i s s t i l l present and HIV/AIDS
continues to spread.
l651 % of total commitments are going to support empowerment pillar. 23% of commitments have been
disbursed so far.
l7Three operations were directly CDD: Community Based Poverty Reduction, Community Based Urban
Development, and Local Empowerment & Environmental Management. Besides, C D D has been an important
component of other operations-FADAMA 11, Small Towns Water and Sanitation LIL etc. The recently
completed PEP-I1 project also has a CDD component, as well as the recently approved operation on mining.
The operation will close within a year and i s yet to disburse around 50 percent of the resources.
Internal Project Report (2004.)
Additionally, CPPR has a fairly autonomous organization, which may provide flexibility and facilitate
implementation.
The implementation o f LEEMP and the Urban CDD i s below expectations and will most likely be
reprogrammed. A variety of factors have affected the development and implementation of these projects,
besides design issues. For instance, there were delays in taking these projects to the Board. Arguably, these
delays prevented an earlier and fuller implementation o f the CDD strategy.
22 Often, project implementation has had overcome political andor cultural barriers that arose. . In HIV/AIDS,
project implementation has been marred by conflicting perceptions o f how best to deliver public messages on

'*

Page 8 o f 23

Annex 2
on time and reaching i t s intended objectives. This operation was carried directly by the federal
government, the objectives were quite straightforward and the design simple. Reportedly, the OPV
for children under five has gone up from 83% in the base line to 91-95% now. However, WHO
provides much lower statistics, at 77-79% and further evaluation i s needed.
The progress made in improving the delivery of health and education services has been
30.
limited. I t i s difficult to track outcomes in education and health throughout the country due t o the
lack o f accurate statistics. However, the Primary Education Project I1(PEP-11) just completed
generated significant outputs on the ground (a) about 10,OOO primary schools benefited from grants
for self-help improvements based on development plans prepared with community participation; (b) a
school based model o f teacher professional support was developed; and (c) supplementary reading
materials, selected b y teachers, in around 1000 schools were provided. Thus, PEP-11success, after
restructuring in 2002, contributed to a bottom up approach to improving the educational system. T o
assure implementation o f the Primary Education Project-11 (PEP-11) i t was necessary t o simplify
design, skip state governments, and rely on direct transfers to schools and community participation. In
fact, the self-help component o f this operation was based on a CDD approach and the project was
managed at the federal level. However, efforts to improve the capacity o f the states to manage
education services have been less successful, as shown b y the performance o f the follow-up Universal
Basic Education Project (UBE.)

31.
The 1999 Constitution assigned to states responsibility for the delivery o f social services.
Hence, effective sustainable interventions to improve health and education have to strengthen the
institutional capacity o f the state governments to manage service delivery. Ideally, the Federal
Government should take the lead in developing broadly-owned sector strategies and in providing
technical assistance to the states for service delivery. However, the relations between the federal
government and the states are strained. The Bank’s attempt to work directly with many states proved
daunting, partly due to rigid and ineffective project designs.23Thus, for instance, the resources
allocated per state per year within a project (UBE) are often small and do not provide the necessary
leverage to induce the required institutional changes to improve service delivery. While the coverage
o f numerous states increased supervision effort and costs, implementation suffered because of the
unclear responsibility o f the federal and state level.
32.

With hindsight, an initial evaluation o f implementation risks would have pointed out: (a) that

i t i s very costly to assist many states within one project, and (b) that fundamental agreements

(possibly around a common strategy) between the federal and the state governments are needed to be
effective in delivering assistance for social services. For future effectiveness o f capacity building
efforts and institutional up-grading, the Bank should concentrate its work with committed states.
33.
Setting the basis for improved delivery of water services. Some Progress was made in
improving delivery o f potable water, but achievements on the ground have fallen short o f reaching
intended objectives. For instance, a recent ICR for the Small Towns Water Project highlighted the
fact that the original intent to involve communities in the management o f delivery o f water services
was not fully possible, because the federal government did not transfer ownership o f the assets t o the
local governmentskommunities. Reportedly, however, the government considers the effort quite
satisfactory and plans to continue on its own, which may prove the exercise not only effective but
sustainable. As to Bank interventions in large cities, the emphasis has been on involving the private

the urgency and threat of AIDS, while not alienating important constituencies sensitive to how the messages on
AIDS prevention are communicated.
23 Table 5 of the appendix shows that basic services operate in largest number of states.
Page 9 o f 23

Annex 2
sector in the management of water utilities and to achieve financial sustainability and quality of
services. The private sector i s already involved in the delivery of water in several cities. 24

111. M E A S U R I N G B A N K PERFORMANCE
The Bank supported the government to develop and implement i t s stated priorities. The Bank
34.
accelerated policy dialogue, AAA and lending as the Government’s reform effort picked up in 2003.
Overall, however, the Bank has been cautious in supporting the reform government, raising the
lending envelops to up to $500 million only with the 2004 Joint InterimUpdate. Also, the Bank could
have move faster and earlier to develop analytical work to support operations and policy dialogue. A
greater effort at dissemination of analytical work and government achievements was called for.
A. Quality o f Services

Lending Services. From a broad perspective, the Bank could have moved more forcefully
and quicker to support the reform-minded government of Nigeria. The Bank acted cautiously at the
beginning, perhaps because of previous experience. However, i t has been slow in picking up the pace
in view of the government’s open commitment to reform. The 2002 JISU update emphasized the
concept of a track record and set benchmarks that would eventually place the strategy in a low case
scenario. The 2004 JIT Update was conceived as transitory and did not depart significantly form the
past in evaluating the accomplishments and prospects in Nigeria. It did, however, upgrade the strategy
to the base case. One of the key problems that the Bank has faced in Nigeria has been the
development of clear benchmarks to assess performance under the present circumstances in Nigeria.
The tendency has been to expect too much, which may not be warranted on a weak institutional
environment. The consequence has been limited support to a government committed to reform.

35.

As was already pointed out, Bank lending services were dispersed and lacked synergy. This
36.
has been particularly true at the state level, as projects have followed their own guidelines in selecting
states to work with. Additionally, projects sometimes lacked clear and precise development
objectives, and often proper monitoring and evaluation systems.25The Bank team has moved to
address these flaws. This has meant, however, that projects have taken time to mature and often have
fallen into non-performing status. Some of the initiatives to improve lending services include:
(i)harmonization and consolidation of CDD operations;
(ii)retrofitting management and evaluation initiative;
(iii)
restructuring of non-performing projects; and
(iv) re-organization of projects.

37.

With hindsight, the Bank could have acted earlier and more forcefully to consolidate
interventions in the strategy and strengthen project design and M&E systems. Some timid initiatives
were undertaken. The 2002 Joint InterimStrategy Update identification of Lagos as a priority can be
seen as trying to concentrate efforts in one large and important state. The experience with this
initiative is that even in one state, efforts can end up being dispersed. Lagos has yet to develop a
comprehensive development strategy. Therefore, future targeted interventions at the state level have
to begin with development of vision for progress, which can be perfected overtime. The current
SEEDS initiative could well provide such platform. I t has become gradually clear to the Bank

The National Water Project under implementation seeks to involve the private sector in the delivery o f water
services.
25 Refer here to internal review of AFTOS.

Page 10 of 23

Annex 2
that to be effective in Nigeria interventions have to be selective, targeted, and, leveraging public
resources.
38.
AAA. The Bank sought to regain the lost ground and build an adequate knowledge base in
the country. The AAA has been rather effective in oil, gas, governance, and in identifying the
barriers to growth. With some additional efforts, i t should be possible to have more precise insights
into the question of how to improve the competitiveness o f the non-oil economy and upgrade the
national dialogue on growth, use o f o i l resources, and poverty alleviation. Slowly, the knowledge
base for service delivery in social sectors has improved, especially in education. There i s also an
improved understanding o f the poverty pattems in the country. Significant lacunae remain in: health,
agriculture, international trade, regional integration, infrastructure, the link between non-oil economy
and poverty reduction, political economy, the potential for the use energy resources for growth, etc.
The forthcoming CEM provides the opportunity to bring together under common analytical
framework efforts undertaken thus far.

39.
However, AAA has not always been available to support lending and policy dialogue. Partly,
this has been due to the time lag in generating knowledge and partly to the lack o f basic statistical
information. But also, the Bank has not actively sought to cooperate with other donors in
knowledge development and sharing. The Bank should have moved more aggressively not only in
the development of high quality analytical work, but in i t s dissemination. This includes presenting the
results to the general public, at home and abroad, with accurate and even-handed evaluations o f the
programs and achievements o f national initiatives. Lastly, i t i s important to highlight that the last
Client Survey identified analytical work as the major contribution the Bank could make to Nigeria.
40.
Country Dialogue. The dialogue with the government began with great expectations as the
first democratic government took over power. Then, the dialogue dwindled. However, the dialogue
picked up after the second election (2003.) There are at least two reasons that the policy dialogue i s
difficult in Nigeria. The lack o f background analytical work i s clearly a problem. Another problem
arises from the fact that the Bank often conducts policy dialogue in many countries, especially on
macro and growth issues, around adjustment operations. This i s not possible in Nigeria. The Bank has
been slow to find alternative avenues. Trying to induce policy dialogue and reforms through
investment operations i s difficult and, as intemational experience shows, often i t does not work well.
41.
InNigeria, the effectiveness o f the policy dialogue has been the highest in the areas o f high
political commitment-for instance, governance and management o f public resources. In other areas,
such as non-oil growth, where there may be a common understanding o f the need to improve the
business environment or the quality o f infrastructure, the barrier to effectiveness comes from
entrenched interests. The Bank could have focused more on helping government identify the political
barriers for change and build coalitions for change. This could have been an option in privatization.
Also, at the state level, a more concerted effort, perhaps with the concurrence o f other donors, could
have been made to strengthen the reliance on civil society organizations as key t o generate demand
for change at the local levels.

IV. LessondRecommendations
At the strategic Level:
42.
The Bank needs a strategy on how to calibrate assistance in a difficult or risky
environment like Nigeria while maintaining a productive engagement. The Nigeria experience
shows that total disengagement from 1995 to 1999 from Nigeria had negative consequences, as the
Page 11 o f 23

Annex 2
lack of updated analytical work and the lack of a thorough review of the past interventions reduced
the effectiveness of Bank assistance after re-engagement in 1999, leading to dispersed interventions
and unfocused objectives. Also, i t may have affected the ability of the Government to develop a more
targeted strategy, which the Bank could support. The future strategy needs to guarantee a continued
basic engagement (analytical work, possible CDD, etc.), even if the overall assistance were to be
downsized. Also, i t i s important to select sturdy and sustainable interventions that can withstand the
vagaries and risks of future implementation environments. This lesson i s also relevant as well for the
direct engagement with the states.

43.
The Bank should avoid scattered interventions all throughout the country and
concentrate in a few states to be truly effective In working with states, the Bank should
concentrate in a few states and develop modalities of intervention that assure both effective assistance
and building o f long-term institutions both to improve the quality o f public expenditure and facilitate
economic growth. In states with limited commitment or capacity, the Bank can build CDD
interventions, with simple designs, that work through autonomous management structures to deal
directly with the communities and bypass local and state bureaucracy.
44.
The Bank should target the bulk of its support to areas in which there i s high level of
government commitment and actions have been taken on the ground. This approach has proven
effective in the areas of public sector reform, where the analytical work and the technical assistance
have been effective. Currently, i t makes sense to support the Federal Government where a high level
of commitment resides. This includes support for critical infrastructure, the development of gas
resources, transportation, and regulatory and legal reform. Also, i t pays off to identify those states
where there i s commitment and experience and work directly with them and avoid dispersion like in
the past. Rebalancing of assistance towards supporting growth related activities seems should be a
priority.
45.
Greater stress should be given to AAA as the basis for policy dialogue and project
preparations. Continued analytical work i s needed to upgrade the quality of the dialogue regarding
how best to use the oil resources (fiscal management and linkages with domestic industry) and how to
facilitate non-oil growth especially in agriculture. AAA will be particular importance in working
directly with states and in improving the relationship between the federal government and the states.
I t i s important to include in this dialogue not just the government but the broad public opinion as well
The Bank should not shy away of assisting the government in exploring the direct use of
46.
its energy resources to support growth. Perhaps, because of past negative experience with direct
government in industrialization, the Bank has not examined the potential role on energy resources in
developing the country. Many other oil countries have benefited from the backward and forward
linkages energy provides. The Bank should assist Nigeria to explore these options.
The Bank should seek to leverage its assistance against the government’s resources and
47.
those of other donors. The resources the Bank provides are small by comparison to the budgets of
the federal and state governments. To have an impact, the Bank should continue helping the federal
government and a few selected states improve public expenditure management and service delivery,
bringing government and donor resources together.

48.
The Bank should use the opportunity of a results based Country Partnership Strategy
to develop criteria, corresponding to institutional capacity and political feasibility, to assess
progress in Nigeria. I t i s important to be realistic and not generate unreasonable expectations. A
realistic stance will allow more even-handed evaluations o f the advances made by the country to the
international community. The Bank should likewise not shy away from supporting the Government
Page 12 of 23

Annex 2
'

Nigeria with a domestic and international dissemination strategy that builds on the achievements
obtained. Hopefully, this will help induce the international community to re-engage in Nigeria. .

A t the Program Project Level:
Project design and implementation can be improved in the future through:

Mandatory inclusion of realistic Monitoring and Evaluation systems;
Flexible designs that allow reallocation of resources and avoid the accumulation of unutilized
funds;
Take account of the political economy reality through stakeholders' analysis (or other
methods) during design and implementationt

Page 13 of 23

ed

3

4

)

.9 5

3
9

v

0

0

0

%

9

0

B

3

L2

3

0

c

%

Annex 2

TABLE 2: PLANNED VS AC ‘UAL LENDING DELIVERABLES
CURR NT STATUS

FY

Project

status
IDA
5 .O

2000

Small Towns Water

2000

Economic Management Capacity
Building

20.0

2000

Second Primary Education

55.0

2000

Community Rural Development

60.0

2000

Balance of Payments Support
Operation

2001

PrivatizationT.A.

200 1

Microwatershed and Env.
(changed to Local Empowerment
and Environmental Management
FY03)

200 1

Community Urban Upgrading
(Changed to Community Based
Urban Development in FY2002)

200 1

Fadama I1(Changed to 2004)

70.0

Electric Power Transmission

100.0

2002

Health Systems Support

120.0

2002

Lagos Upgrading Project

100.0

2002
2002

CDD Umbrella
HIV

100.0
90.0

2002

Page 18 of 23

200.0 300.0
45.0
(increased to
115.0 )
100.0
(Changed to
107.0 )

60.0 (changed
to 10.0)

I

Small Towns Water
[Project approved in
FY2000 closed in
June, 2004)
Economic
Management Capacity
Building (Project
approved in FY2000)
Second Primary
Education (Project
approved in FY2000
was closed in
December, 2004)
Community Based
Poverty Reduction
(Project was approved
in FY 2001)
Balance of Payments
Support Operation was
dropped.
PrivatizationSupport
(Project was approved
in FY2001)
Local Empowerment
and Environmental
Management (Project
was approved in
FY2004)
Community Based
Urban Development
(Project was approved
in FY2002)
Second National
Fadama Development
(Project was approved
in FY2004)
Transmission
Development
(FY2002)
Second Health Systems
Development (Project
was approved in
FY2002)
Lagos Metropolitan
Development (Project
to be approved in
FY05
Project was dropped.
HIV/AIDS Program
Development (Project
was approved in

20.0

55.0

60.0

114.3
70.0

110.0

100.0

100.0
127.0

150.0

I
I

90.3

Annex 2

2004

State Governance

50.0

2004

Lagos Water Sector Restructuring
(changed to FY2006)

100.0

2005

Governance and Economic Sector
Reform

200.0

2005
2006

Youth and Urban Development
Sustainable Management o f
Mineral Resources (Reserve)

300.0
50.0

2006

Energy Project

200.0

Page 19 of 23

State Governance and
Capacity Building (to
be approved in
FY2005)
Second National Urban
Water (to be approved
in FY05)
Economic Reform and
Governance (Project
was approved in FY05)
Sustainable
Management o f
Mineral Resources
(Project approved in
FY05)
Being proposed for
FY06

200.0
140.0

120.0

9

E

B
E

$3
8

*
O

E

0

3

B

z

ri

m
el

*0
M

Annex 2
Table 5: Number of States per Results Package

Results Packages
Improved Basic Services for
Human Development

Project Name
Community Based
Poverty Reduction

0

7

Second Health Systems
Development

36

HIV/AIDS

36

Universal Basic Education
Local Empowerment and
Environmental Mgt.
0

Privatization Support
Transmission
Development
Lagos Urban Transport

MSME

0

Enhanced Transparency and
Accountability for Better
Governance

12 (8 states supported b y the 1
World Bank and 4 states
supported by AfDB)

Community Based Urban
Development

Polio Supplement

Improved Environment and
Services for Non-oil Growth

I Number of States

I

I

l1

lo

lo

I1
3

National Urban Water
Sector

3

Sustainable Management
o f Mineral Resources

7

Second National Fadama
Development

17 (11 states supported b y the
W o r l d Bank and 6 states
supported by AfDB)
0

Economic Reform and
Governance
EMCAP

0
I

Page 23 o f 23

36
16

Annex 3

Working with Lead States

-

A country-led process of transformation for growth and poverty reduction States matter !
Working at state-level is critical for growth and
poverty reduction. The average Nigeria state i s
larger than many African countries. The 36 states
together with their 774 local governments, exercise
considerable political and fiscal autonomy, control
some 50 percent of government resources and have
responsibility for primary education and health care.
Improvements in service delivery for human
development and growth at state and local
government levels w i l l drive achievement o f most
MDGs - effective state-level working i s key. This
w i l l touch the lives o f Nigerians in tangible ways
and further build support for reform. Yet, the
alignment o f state and local governments with
reforms at federal level cannot be taken for granted.
Working with states committed to reform i s a key aspect o f a medium-term transformational
agenda - o f value reorientation - as articulated in the NEEDS. The Federal Government i s
therefore exploring creative ways o f working with state governments for a consensus on moving
Nigeria forward. Alignment with the SEEDS framework i s part o f the Government’s initiative
for donor coordination and harmonization. The CPS w i l l support these efforts. The objective i s to
increase the capacity o f states to deliver services, b y increasing demand for reform, sharpening
incentives - for both public officials and civil society - and strengthening systems. The strategy
sees its impact in helping develop - and rewarding - a number o f ‘models’ o f development and
growth in the lead states, leveraging improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency o f public
expenditure to broaden and sustain impact.
The Bank has developed a sophisticated framework for providing assistance to countries in Africa
that have different qualities o f policies and institutions26. The same framework i s applicable to
working at state level in Nigeria, given their relative autonomy and range in government
performance (see Figure 1).

The challenge is great. Experience o f working at state level to date highlights the significant
challenge for supporting improved transparency, accountability and service delivery at state-level.
The incentives for states - particularly the political leaders - to engage with a reform agenda have
been weak. The resources (both financial and technical) that development partners’ engagement
has brought to the states have often been insufficient to compensate for the loss o f highly
personalized, discretionary use o f resources, that engagement with the reform agenda would
entail. Rent-seeking behavior that damages the business environment has been the norm. This i s
the ‘oil curse’ in action. Supporting transformation at the state level w i l l be critical for turning
around Nigeria’s three underlying constraints o f a history o f mismanagement of o i l revenues, lack
o f accountability and transparency, and poor non-oil growth. The NEEDS and SEEDS agendas
provide a more robust framework for reform, and, if implemented, w i l l begin to change the
26

Strategic Framework for IDA’SAssistance in Africa (2004).

Page 1 o f 5

Annex 3
political behaviors at state level, delivering services that can reduce poverty and create
opportunities for growth.

Fig 1: Emerging State-level Partnership Model: Forms of Support”
CPS

A transformational agenda - Working with a few, ‘lead’ States. Several state governments have

completed and are implementing their SEEDS, or are advanced in their preparation, which,
together with NEEDS form the national framework o f Nigeria’s home-grown poverty reduction
strategy. Some states are fighting corruption, strengthening their systems and improving service
delivery, often from a low base. The CPS w i l l work with a number o f these ‘lead’ states to
enable them to deepen reforms and make more rapid improvements in service delivery. A key
element o f the strategy i s to also leverage improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency o f
public expenditure to broaden and sustain impact. This focus and geographical selectivity i s a
radical departure in our way o f working, yet one that i s firmly country-led. Working with a few
reforming states was universally endorsed during the CPS consultations. State governors and
their officials in particular welcomed the focus on their plans and priorities, rather than their
being included in an externally-determined project over which they had limited control or
commitment.
The CPS aims to provide incentives for a set o f lead states that can demonstrate they are
committed to reforms and greater transparency. Thus, the strategy sees its impact in helping
develop - and rewarding - a number o f ‘models’ o f development and growth in the lead states.
The strategy in lead states w i l l also support states to work with local governments in developing
medium-term plans. B y working to strengthen accountability and efficiency o f public
expenditures across all levels o f government, i t i s expected that b y the end o f this CPS period, the
basis for using more flexible instruments for assistance, such as budget support, w i l l be
established for lead states. In this CPS, budget support w i l l not be provided, though support for
public expenditure management reform w i l l enable progress to be made. Where possible, IDA
and DFID w i l l use SWAPS to finance social sectors in lead states (where possible, in
collaboration with other development partners). State level engagement w i l l be intensified during
the CPS using state teams facilitated b y DFID’s existing regional office infrastructure.

27 Adapted from a SPIA presentation made by John Page, World Bank Chief Economist for Africa, during
the first partners’ workshop for the development of the CPS, September 2004.

Page 2 o f 5

Annex 3
Lead State Selection

Up to six lead states w i l l be selected for the CPS. States may be added each year for the CPS
period, depending on the resource envelope (including that which may be made available b y other
development partners as donor collaboration broadens).
T w o basic parameters are at the core o f selecting lead states: demand and performance (Fig. 2).
States w i l l need to express an interest in cooperation with the Bank and DFID based on
transparency, accountability, sound public resource management and pursuit of the MDGs. The
government-led SEEDS benchmarking w i l l indicate states that are committed to and demonstrate,
at a minimum, a satisfactory performance on good governance and service delivery. Given the
large number o f states involved (28), this process provides a competitive approach for selecting a
few states and can contribute to the incentives for reform. Making the SEEDS benchmarking an
annual event, where additional states can enter partnership, w i l l further strengthen incentives.

Fig 2: Annual Lead State Selection Process

SEEDS Benchmarking. The process i s
being managed b y the National Planning
Commission and overseen b y the National
Council on Development Planning and the
National Economic Council - as a consensus
instrument o f federal and state governments.
Participation in the SEEDS benchmarking
exercise, signaled in NEEDS as a mechanism for setting aspirational standards for public
management, i s entirely voluntary. In early 2005, some 28 States submitted themselves for the
first round o f SEEDS Benchmarking. The process i s backed b y the international community,
including DFID, UNDP, World Bank, EC, ADB, CIDA. Benchmarks w i l l provide a good
indicator o f the quality of public financial management and service delivery systems in a state.
Benchmarking w i l l be repeated within a year, to measure states’ trajectory o f reform and enable
others to come on board.
The four key areas for the benchmarks are:
0

e

Page 3 o f 5

Policy - ensuring that the state government develops, publishes and implements a
strategy that advances i t s policy targets;
Fiscal Management and the Budget Process - ensuring responsible and prudent
fiscal management that effectively contains the negative impacts o f revenue

Annex 3

0

0

fluctuation. This will also analyze the budget as a comprehensive, transparent and
binding tool for the implementation of government priorities;
Service Delivery - ensuring government strategies in place to improve service
delivery, both in terms of quality and reach;
Communication, Transparency and Corruption - to ascertain that policies are
planned and implemented in a transparent and accountable manner.

States which do not have satisfactory performance in the first year can take effective action to
raise performance to become eligible in later years, following subsequent rounds of
benchmarking. States on the shortlist that fall-short in the benchmarking exercise and who
demonstrate a clear willingness to improve performance may be eligible for technical assistance.
Where groups o f similar performing states emerge, up to six states will be selected on the basis of
their levels o f poverty and population size, in order to maximize impact on shared growth and
poverty reduction in the CPS period. Moving forward effectively with partnership in lead states
will require a history of political stability and of positive cooperation with development partners,
where there has been previous engagement.

State partnership process
The partnership with states will be driven by: (i)
building a long-term strategic partnership aligned to a common agenda of achieving the MDGs - as opposed to specific project financing;
(ii)
responding to States in support of their own strategies; (iii)
providing signficant resources
transfers, relative to a state budget, that can leverage change; (iv) working towards providing
budget support; and (v) supporting effective collaboration among tiers of govemment. In order
to make progress the partnership must develop and provide graduated support accordingly, and be
co-ordinated with other development partners who work at state-level.
Aligning support behind State-owned strategies. Based SEEDS, states and the Bank/DFID will
develop initial time-bound action plans for strengthening systems and delivering services28. In
addition, DFID will undertake a political economy evaluation of likely blockages to effective
SEEDS implementation that will be used to calibrate demand-side, coalition-building initiatives
in support of positive change. This will include an assessment of the relationship between the
state and local governments. W B D F I D will then work with government to develop
implementation plans and costs, etc., identifying financing and capacity gaps. The Bank and
DFID would align support behind these action plans and would provide technical assistance and
policy dialogue to enable lead states to move forward effectively.

A differentiated approach to assistance. Choice of Bank and DFID instruments would be guided

by the quality o f policies and institutions. To reduce transaction costs, a standard menu o f
assistance would develop over time, i.e. off-the-shelf choices for States29. In order to harmonize
support, the Bank and DFID will have a division of responsibilities with respect to the menu.
Assistance will follow state priorities and plans. The Bank has a number of instruments that can
be deployed, depending on the performance of a State. These include, a) diagnostic and
28

Action plans would bridge the gap (if any) between the strategic priorities o f SEEDS and details o f

s ecific activities required to guide Bank and DFID support.

"The menu could include: i)T A support (e.g. PEM, educationihealth systems), ii)demand side activities,
iii)SWAps, iv) PRSCPRBS (see Figure 1). The aim would be for States to graduate from TA and sector
investment instruments to SWAps to more programmatic forms o f donor support over time. The volume o f
assistance should also increase with performance to reinforce the incentives.

Page 4 of 5

Annex 3
assessment tools, and b) gradlending instruments - TA, SWAPS, PRSCs etc.. DFID has a
number of instruments that are not currently provided by the Bank; including promoting demand
for reform (with the possibility of more direct relations with civil society and the private sector),
flexible short-term advisory support and provision of grants. Other donors, such as the UN, EC
and ADB, have aid instruments that can be amenable to a similar approach to state level working.
DFID also has a network of regional offices that can facilitate state engagement.

Rigorous monitoring and evuhation. States’ progress against SEEDS targets and action plans
will be reviewed annually, including through repeat SEEDS Benchmarking exercises. An ongoing policy dialogue with states will be facilitated by joint regional offices. I t is anticipated that
continued performance by a state, based on annual assessments, will enable them to obtain further
Bank support to help deliver on their priorities, as a means to strengthen incentives. Flexibility
would be built into the engagement o f development partners with lead states, in order to manage
potential reversals in state performance and implement an exit strategy.
Graduation of performing States. During the end-term review of the CPS, the Bank and DFID
would review: a) State progress against SEEDS targets and action plans, and b) effectiveness of
support to partner States. For those States demonstrating sufficient commitment and progress,
consideration would be given to graduating them to more flexible instruments on the menu (e.g.
Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC)/Poverty Reduction Budget Support (PRBS); see
Figure 1). The Bank and DFID would then prepare to deliver this phase of State support, where
possible in close collaboration with other development partners.
Risks
Commitment to reform at state-level has been largely dependent on the predisposition of the
governor. This makes commitment to reform fragile in the light of the 2007 elections, with at
least 20 new governors. Variable commitment to reform has proved a problem with both Bank
and DFID support to some states. While the NEEDS and SEEDS provide a new framework,
establishing fundamental principles for government performance, commitment may be
ephemeral. The mid-term review towards the end of 2007 will be critical for establishing the
credibility of any particular state-level partnership. As part of the initial engagement process,
DFID will carry out a political economy assessment to more clearly help understand such risks.
Support to lead states will have flexibility. New commitments will be on the basis o f continued
and strengthened performance, highlighted through annual SEEDS benchmarking reviews and
other measures. The Bank will have a stronger field presence with more intensive management
of relations with states, jointly utilizing DFID’s existing regional office infrastructure. As part of
addressing political economy constraints, work on the demand-side o f good governance will
include building transparency, accountability and citizen voice at state-level. This can also
benefit from non-partisan support for greater focus on ‘issues’ in the 2007 election process from
DFID and others. While the political economy risk at state level remains high, progress will be
made to strengthen the incentives for state governors to build a constituency around service
delivery, transparency and accountability.

The federal-state relationship can be conflictive. More attention i s being given to building
consensus and coordination between the different tiers and the Federal Government i s designing a
system of incentives and rewards to challenge more states to improve their performance. The
fiscal responsibility legislation and the SEEDS benchmarking process are key elements in
building enhanced coordination. The Government i s introducing legislation to make reforms on

Page 5 of 5

Annex 3
coordination among tiers of government more difficult to reverse. The National Political
Conference i s a welcome development and can further contribute to change in political behaviors.

Page 6 of 5

Annex 4

Nigeria’s Opportunity of a Generation:
Meeting the MDGs, Reducing Indebtedness3’
1. This Annex assesses the resources and actions required to achieve the MDGs in
Nigeria, while at the same time reducing indebtedness to a manageable level. Poverty i s
deep and pervasive in Nigeria, and with about 57% of Nigeria’s 130 million people living
in absolute poverty only China and India have more poor people. Nigeria must overcome
enormous challenges in order to reach the internationally agreed Millennium
Development Goals; the resources and actions required are daunting, but the Nigerian
government i s showing determination and demonstrating results. However, excellent
performance and good luck - in the form of continued high o i l prices - w i l l not be
enough to achieve the MDGS without running up unsustainable debts. International
support - in the form of debt relief and new grants - i s necessary to sustain the momentum
o f reform and achieve the MDGs.
A.

Poverty, Aid and Public Debt

2. Nigeria the giant of sub-Saharan Africa, but it i s also desperately poor. I t has
second largest economy and the most number of people; just over a fifth o f the
continent’s total population. However, 75 million Nigerians live on less than $1 a day
and Nigeria has some of the worst social indicators in the world; one in five children die
before the age o f five, there are over a million AIDS orphans and in the poorest parts o f
the country one in fifteen mothers die during childbirth.
3. Net transfers to Nigeria have not just been small, they have been negative since
the 1990s. In 2003, net transfers per capita amounted to minus $1 1, well below the
average (minus $1.3) and median (approximately $1) levels for LICs excluding Nigeria.
The difference i s even more pronounced when grants are included. In 2003, net transfers
including grants per capita to Nigeria amounted to minus $9, compared to an average o f
$37 and $28 for the median LIC.
4. Meanwhile, Nigeria’s external public debt - at 50 percent of GDP at end-2004 is well in excess of the 30 percent threshold in the Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) for low-income countries (LICs). Adding domestic debt in the form o f
treasury bills and bonds, and domestic arrears to contractors and on wages and pensions,
pushes total public debt to over 80 percent of GDP at end-2004.

B.

Policy Performance and Challenges

5. Recent performance has been commendable. The National Economic
Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS) was launched in M a y 2004. This i s
a comprehensive, entirely homegrown, economic reform and poverty reduction strategy.

Annex i s a summary o f a report under the same title produced by a team led by Brian Pinto
(PRh4ED).

30 This

Page 1 o f 8

Annex 4
I t i s underpinned by State level strategies (SEEDS). I t i s strong on analysis, ownership,

stakeholder consultation and plans for monitoring and implementation.

6. Governance has improved. Macroeconomic stability has been restored. This has
been largely due to prudent fiscal policy, the implementation of an oil price based fiscal
rule and considerable savings in 2004 ($5.9bn). As a result, inflationary pressures
subsided and inflation fell to just under 10% at end-2004. Improved budget and
procedures - including an MTEF and procurement reforms - have been introduced to
improve the efficiency of expenditure. Moreover, the Obasanjo administration i s taking
courageous and decisive action against corruption; including some very high profile
prosecutions. Nigeria i s negotiating with the Swiss government to have illicitly acquired
state funds ($500m) returned. Nigeria i s also providing global leadership in the
Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI).
7. Conditions are also improving for growth and poverty reduction. There has been
a large increase in investment in infrastructure - notably power and roads. The
restructuring and privatization o f key utilities (power, telecommunications and ports) i s
accelerating. Nigeria i s committed to the ECOWAS common external tariff.

8. There i s an opportunity of a generation for Nigeria to convert its “oil curse” into
a blessing. The Obasanjo administration i s showing determination to implement
economic reforms and the oil windfall provides an opportunity for increasing spending on
the MDGs. Making visible progress towards MDGs in the most populous country o f
Sub-Saharan Africa i s o f significance for the whole region. The resources and actions are
daunting, and w i l l require careful balancing with a goal of reducing indebtedness. The
key challenges facing Nigeria are to: (i)
make more efficient use o f economic resources
and assets, (ii)
rejuvenate and sustain growth of the non-oil economy, and (iii)
seek
increased international assistance in the form o f debt relief and new grants.
C.

The Baseline Scenario

9. The baseline scenario underlying the debt sustainability analysis projects growth to
pick up to 7-8 percent in 2005-2006 and then stay at 5 percent after 2007 reflecting strong
non-oil sector growth31. As described above, the baseline scenario i s predicated on the
implementation of prudent macroeconomic policies, and reforms to ensure efficient use
o f economic resources and rejuvenate the non-oil economy. Other key assumptions are:
(i)
o i l prices peak at $46.5 per bbl in 2005, and then decline to $34 per bbl in 2015, (ii)
real exchange rate appreciates sharply in 2005 and then maintains a small depreciation
over the medium term, fiscal policy i s consistent with a non-oil primary deficit
trend, (iii)
of 40 percent o f non-oil GDP, and (iv) the authorities keep external debt service
payments at their current level, implying an annual addition to external arrears o f $1-1.5
billion at a penalty interest rate.

31 The Baseline scenario results were obtained using the joint Bank-Fund Low Income Country (LIC) Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF) template with a time horizon of 2025.

Page 2 o f 8

Annex 4

10. The Baseline scenario implies a gradual reduction in both total public debt and
external debt. The NPV of external debt falls from 38 percent of GDP in 2005 to 28
percent in 2010 and then to 8 percent by 2025. Similarly, the NPV of public debt falls
from 51 percent of GDP in 2005 to 39 percent by 2010 and 11percent by 2025.
11. However, this finding i s highly sensitive to oil prices, with o i l accounting for
80 percent of consolidated government revenues and 90 percent o f exports. Any oil price
decline greater than $4 per barrel -just half standard deviation - would derail debt
sustainabilit y.
D.

The MDG Scenario

12. Achieving the MDGs by 2015 is a costly task for Nigeria; estimates o f M D G related expenditures are summarized in Figure 1below. The Baseline corresponds to
levels of normal spending in line with progress towards the MDGs. The incremental
costs are those that need to be incurred over and above the Baseline in order to fully meet
the h4DGs set b y 201532. The average total cost i s $12.5bn per year; about $80 per
person.

Figure 1: Estimated Cost of MDGs, 2005-2015
25
20

-.-0

c 15

E

*

+Incremental
Baseline

10
5
0

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

13. Under the h4DG Scenario real non-oil GDP growth w i l l need to average 7-8 percent
per year - about 2-3 percent higher than in the Baseline - while o i l GDP growth i s the
same as in the Baseline. Investment, both public and private, w i l l need to rise
substantially to deliver such growth. I t i s assumed that the real exchange rate appreciates
at a much faster rate than in the Baseline, reflecting the much higher spending on MDGs.
The expectation i s that this w i l l increase productivity in the MDG Scenario, allowing the

The estimates provided below should be looked upon as rough numbers needed for further analysis of
macroeconomic implications of meeting MDGs and reducing indebtedness.
32

Page 3 of 8

Annex 4
non-oil sector to maintain international competitiveness. Together with faster growth this
w i l l erode the external debt-to-GDP ratio with the passage of time. The highlights of the
results are as follows:
Compared to the Baseline, the primary non-oil deficit i s higher 3-4 percentage
points o f GDP on average as a result of the incremental outlays required for fully
meeting the MDGs, but oil revenues are substantially lower as a share o f GDP
especially in the outer years because of faster growth and real appreciation.

The debt-to-GDP ratio falls by 13 percentage points o f GDP in 2005 as a result of
automatic debt dynamics. The surplus left over after o i l revenues are used to
finance the non-oil primary deficit i s added to the savings cushion (9.9 percentage
points) and to “top up” the savings inherited from the previous year.
Public debt falls below the 60 percent of GDP threshold in 2005 itself and
thereafter f a l l s rapidly until 2007. In 2008, i t reverses course and returns to the 60
percent threshold b y 201233.
0

Cumulative fiscal savings (the cushion) rise to the target of 20 percent o f GDP in
2006 and stay at that level with the help o f a small amount o f topping up.
An external financing gap appears immediately as savings fail to accommodate
higher private consumption and reserves are built up. On the public finances side,
from 2008 onwards, the non-oil primary deficit exceeds o i l revenues. Public debtto-GDP ratio starts rising the next year to finance the deficit until it reaches the
threshold o f 60 percent b y 2012, the first year in which a significant fiscal gap
appears34.
The fiscal gap grows rapidly until 2015. I t s net present value i s $50 billion at a
discount rate of 5 percent, the rate used in the Bank-Fund DSF, far in excess o f
Nigeria’s external public debt of $36 billion at end-2004.

~~~

~

The 60 percent public debt threshold i s based upon the 30 percent external public debt threshold in the
Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Framework (DSF) for low-income countries (LICs). I t i s assumed that
Nigeria can sustain a level of domestic public debt of 30%.
34 A fiscal gap would emerge much earlier if a lower public debt to GDP threshold closer to what would be
more acceptable in lower income countries was used for the analysis.
33

Page 4 o f 8

Annex 4
Figure 2: Debt, Savings and Fiscal Gap (9% of GDP) - MDGs Case

6
4
2
0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

mm Domestic Debt
-A-

Cumulatiw Fiscal Savings

Extemal Debt

+Fiscal Gap (right scale)

14. The projections exacerbate under the assumption of an oil price shock. Even
under the average difference of $6 pb, which i s a little less than the one standard
deviation o f $8 pb identified under the Baseline, the following observations indicate a
rapid deterioration in fiscal and debt outcomes compared to the high o i l price scenario:
0

0

0

While the debt-to-GDP ratio falls rapidly to below 60 percent in 2005 and 2006, i t
rises thereafter and reaches the binding indicative ceiling o f 60 percent by 2008.
The non-oil primary deficit exceeds o i l revenues by 2007. There i s not enough
leeway for cumulative savings to reach the 20 percent of GDP target; these level
o f f at 16 percent instead.

A fiscal gap appears as early as 2008, four years earlier than with high o i l prices.
I t grows rapidly and has a net present value o f close to $90 billion, more than
twice the amount of external debt at end-2004.
E.

Resources and Actions to achieve the MDGs

15. The analysis shows that excellent performance and good luck - in the form of
continued high oil prices - will not be enough to achieve the M D G S without running
up unsustainable debts. Further, any negative o i l price shock could quickly trigger a
debt and macroeconomic crisis that could setback reforms - as shown b y the rise in the
net present value o f the fiscal gap from $50 billion to $90 billion - when o i l prices fall
even b y a relatively modest amount.
0

Nigeria should continue with the break established in the 2004 Budget between
government spending and current o i l revenues while monitoring the non-oil
primary deficit, and building up a fiscal savings cushion against o i l price shocks.
With oil prices expected to be so high above trend for the next few years, the

Page 5 o f 8

Annex 4
Government’s approach o f devoting a portion of the oil price windfall to the
M D G s makes sense.
0

0

0

The government should continue to put in place systems and measures to ensure
that these resources as well as any additional resources made available b y the
donor community are used well. I t has taken several steps to bring greater
transparency into public expenditure and financial management.
Nigeria also needs to do more to rejuvenate the non-oil economy, including
continuing to scale up investment in roads, power, ports and water (especially in
rural areas), accelerating the privatization program (especially for utilities),
sustaining the financial sector reforms, and implementing the ECOWAS common
external tariff and removing other barriers to investment and trade.
Additional external funding and donor support w i l l be needed if Nigeria i s to
reduce both poverty and indebtedness. Finding affordable funding sources,
including through a higher grant financing and possible debt reduction, for
financing the MDGs and related infrastructure in power, transport and water and
sanitation, w i l l give Nigeria a chance to truly grow out of i t s debt problem over
the long run.

0

16. The present combination of a reformist government and high oil prices
represents the opportunity of a generation for Nigeria to embed systemic reforms and
instill greater transparency and accountability throughout government. The international
community should seize this opportunity to send a clear signal to Nigeria that i t supports
the reform program.

Page 6 o f 8

Annex 4

1. Public Sector Debt
Domestic Debt
Extemal Debt

Table 1 Fiscal and Public Debt Outcomes- MDGs Case
(% of GDP, unless indicated otherwise)
2004
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
72.0
58.7 51.2 48.0 48.1 50.7 52.9
22.1
19.2 14.7 13.5
16.3 20.9 25.4
27.5
49.9
39.5 36.5 34.5 31.8 29.7

2011
57.6
30.0
27.6

2012
60.0
30.0
30.0

2013
60.0
30.0
30.0

2014
60.0
30.0
30.0

2015
60.0
30.0
30.0

-13.3
-4.7
-0.8
-7.9

-2.5
-4.9
2.5
-0.1

-1.9
-3.1
1.6
-0.4

-2.9
-3.6
1.1
-0.4

-2.2
-2.9
1.2
-0.5

-2.7
-3.7
1.7
-0.7

-2.3
-3.1
1.8
-1.0

-2.9
-4.0
2.0
-0.9

-2.0
-3.4
2.3
-0.9

-2.6
-3.9
2.2
-0.9

-1.9
-3.4
2.4
-0.9

3. Oil Revenue

33.9

32.6

27.8

25.9

23.2

22.2

19.6

18.0

16.0

14.6

12.8

4. Non-Oil Primary Deficit
Non-Oil Primary Expenditure
Non-Oil Revenue

22.5
31.3
8.9

24.5
34.0
9.5

25.3
35.4
10.1

27.5
36.1
8.7

26.8
36.8
10.0

25.8
37.0
11.2

25.5
36.7
11.3

25.7
37.1
11.4

25.3
36.9
11.6

25.7
37.4
11.7

25.9
37.6
11.7

9.9
18.0
1.5

2.0
20.0
1.3

0.0
20.0
1.1

0.0
20.0
1.4

0.0
20.0
1.1

0.0
20.0
1.3

0.0
20.0
1.2

0.0
20.0
1.4

0.0
20.0
1.1

0.0
20.0
1.2

0.0
20.0
1.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

3.7
7.3

8.5
18.2

9.8
23.4

12.1
32.2

2. Auto Debt Dynamics
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real interest rate
Contribution from real exchange rate

5. Fiscal Savings
Cumulative
Topping up

6. Fiscal Gap
% o f GDP
$ Billion

8.1

A0 0

Page 7 of 8

Annex 4

-

1. Public Sector Debt
Domestic Debt
Extemal Debt

Table 2 MDG s Case With Oil Price Shock
(% of GDP, unless indicated otherwise)
2004
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
72.0
58.7 56.4 58.3
60.0 60.0
22.1
19.2 19.7 23.7 27.8 29.6
49 .9
39.5 36.7 34.6 32.2 30.4

2010
60.0
30.0
30.0

2011
60.0
30.0
30.0

2012
60.0
30.0
30.0

2013
60.0
30.0
30.0

2014
60.0
30.0
30.0

2015
60.0
30.0
30.0

-13.3
-4.7
-0.8
-7.9

-2.3
-4.9
2.7
-0.1

-1.9
-3.5
2.0
-0.4

-2.9
-4.4
1.8
-0.3

-2.1
-3.6
1.9
-0.5

-2.9
-4.4
2.1
-0.6

-2.4
-3.5
2.1
-0.9

-3.0
-4.2
2.1
-0.9

-2.0
-3.4
2.2
-0.9

-2.6
-3.9
2.2
-0.9

-1.9
-3.4
2.4
-0.9

3. Oil Revenue

30.7

26.9

22.4

20.8

18.4

17.2

15.9

15.2

14.1

13.4

12.4

4. Non-Oil Primary Deficit
Non-Oil Primary Expenditure
Non-Oil Revenue

22.5
31.3
8.9

24.5
34.0
9.5

25.3
35.4
10.1

27.5
36.1
8.7

26.8
36.8
10.0

25.8
37.0
11.2

25.5
36.7
11.3

25.7
37.1
11.4

25.3
36.9
11.6

25.7
37.4
11.7

25.9
37.6
11.7

6.7
14.9
1.5

1.4
16.2
1.1

0.0
16.2
0.9

0.0
16.2
1.1

0.0
16.2
0.9

0.0
16.2
1.1

0.0
16.2
1.0

0.0
16.2
1.1

0.0
16.2
0.9

0.0
16.2
1.0

0.0
16.2
0.8

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

3.1
4.0

7.2
10.1

6.8
10.7

8.2
14.3

8.6
16.8

10.1
21.8

10.7
25.7

12.4
33.0

2. Auto Debt Dynamics
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real interest rate
Contribution from real exchange rate

5. Fiscal Savings
Cumulative
Topping up
6. Fiscal Gap
% of GDP
$ Billion

Page 8 of 8

8.1

Annex 5

Analytical, Advisory and Capacity Building Activities by Outcomes

I

r-------r---------

1 Core Diagnostic

I Improved Service

I

Delivery for Human
Development

,
!
~

I

Poverty
AssessmenflSIA (+DFID
input) (FY06)
*Poverty
AssessmenflSIA (FY09)

~

~0r"alEsw
jonitoring
_____
1 *Health Country Status j1 HealthlEducation
1 Report (+DFID input)
1 (FY06)
Report
(secondary &
tertiary)(FY06)
j oHD CSR (FY08)
*state HD Platforms
! (FY06-09)

j

'

1 Reform TA (FY07-08)

Poverty Monitoring TA
(FY07-08)
Implementing "IFC
Against AIDS" programs
(IFC) (FY06-08)

,

1
j

i

.

1

EITI (DFID) (FY06)
EITI MgmtJOil and Gas
Sector Policy (FY06-08)
j Issues-baseddebate on
pro-poor growth (DFID)
I (FY06-09)
Financial Sector Policy
/ Dialogue (+DFID) (FY07)
i Trade Policy Analysis &
Dialogue (+DFID input)
(FY08-FY09)
Advisory services on
various PSP/privatization

1

i

CEM (focusing on
sources of growth, trade
etc.)(+DFID input) (FY06)
FSAP UpdatelBanking
Sector Reform (+DFID
input) (FY06)

Improved Environment
and Services for Non-Oil

Business environment
assessment (recurrent
survey, FY06-09)
Sub-nationalbusiness
environment survey
(DFID) (FY06-09)
Trade Policy Analysis &
Dialogue (+DFID input)
(FY07)
National Infrastructure
StrategylTransport,
including Rural Water
(+DFID input, +UNICEF)
(FY07)
Labor relations analysis
(DFID) (FY06)
Labor Market
Studylupdate (FY07)
State Growth Platforms
(FY06-09)

I

:

..

.... .._ .

PEMFA (including fiscal

1 input) (FY06)

1 decentralization) (+DFID
j

'

I

'

projects (IFC) (FY06-08)
TA on revitalization of
the Nigerian capital
1 market (IFC) (FY06-08)
Debt Management
(DFID) (FY06-09)
Supporting
NEEDSlSEEDS
1 Implementation(WBI)
i (FY06-09)
Information,
Govemance, and the
j Media (WBI) (FY06-09)
j 0 TA on IFC investment
projects (IFC) (FY06-08)
Private sector support
within IFC Africa
Strategy (IFC) (FY06-08)

1

1

1

1

...~
~

I

EnhancedTransparency
and Accountability for
Better Govemance

j

1

i

Ir.

i

CPARJCFAA (FY09)

Govemance and
corruption risk assessment
(+DFID input) (FY06)
Niger Delta Strategy
(DFID) (FY06)
Understandingcivil
society from a faith
perspective (DFID)
(FY06)

1

1
j

j

j
j
j

1

1
Page 1 of 2

Govemance and
corruption risk assessment
(recurrent, +DFID input)
(FY07-09)
Debt Management
(DFID) (FY06-09)
Communication
AdvicelDialogue (FY0609)
Coalition building and
public debate on key
issues (DFID) (FY06-09)

Annex 5

1

Outcomes

Note:

__.I-

_
l
_
"

.I"(_..-.. .

i Core Diagnostic

I

.I_--.

"

i FormaVLnformalESW

_
l
l

Fi/Monitoring
-Support on elections
(DFID) (FY06-09)
Support to census
(DFID) (FY09)
G8 Transparency
Initiative (DFID) (FY0607)
Strengthening
Parliament (DFID)
(FY06-09)
Support to National
Assembly (WBI) (FY0609)
Information,
Govemance, and the
Media (WBI) (FY06-09)
TA on corporate
governance (IFC) (FY0608)
Supporting
NEEDSlSEEDS
Implementation (WBI)
(FY06-09)

All three packages assume C D D Evaluation for Non-Core States.
There will be a Core State Analytical and Advisory Facility to support the World Bank/DFID
interventions in selected states.

Page 2 of 2

Annex 6
NIGERIA COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
Item

Parameter
up to 100%

Recurrent Cost Financing
Any limits that would apply
to the overall amount of
recurrent expenditures that
the Bank may finance

N o country-level

Cost Sharing
Limit on the proportion o f
individual project costs that
the Bank may finance

limit.

Yes
Local Cost Financing
Are the requirements for
Bank financing o f local
expenditures met, namely
that: (i)
financing
requirements for the
country’s development
program would exceed the
public sector’s own resources
(e.g., from taxation and other
revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii)
the financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in
the financing o f individual
projects
State sales tax for
Taxes and Duties
Are there any taxes and Lagos State
duties that the Bank would
not finance?

Page 1 of 1

RemarkdExplanation
100% or high share o f Bank financing i s expected to
be applied-selectively in individual projects on a
case-by-case basis. Bank financing share would be
moderate in key economic infrastructure sectors e.g.
power, roads and transport and especially in projects
involving commercial parastatals. Projects in all
other sectors could be financed up to 100%
depending on clear assessment of merit.
Recurrent cost financing will be used selectively in
order not to compromise risks to fiscal
sustainability, especially at the level of states. The
Bank will continue to monitor the fiscal and debt
situation in states, and i t s implications for recurrent
cost financing. In line with the proposed country
partnership strategy (CPS), the Bank will channel
the bulk o f i t s assistance to a few core states that
meet certain criteria including demonstrated prudent
fiscal and budget management, including attention
to fiscaVdebt sustainability; and limit interventions
in other states. This approach provides additional
safeguards against any risks to fiscal sustainability
at the state level from implementation o f this new
policy.
In individual projects, recurrent cos1
financing will be applied on a careful case-by-case
assessment of merit taking into account sector and
project sustainability issues.
Nigeria meets requirements for local cost financing
The Bank can finance local costs in any proportions
required by individual projects.

The Bank may finance the costs o f taxes and duties
associated with project expenditures, other than the
state sales tax for Lagos state, since these have been
judged to be reasonable and non-discriminatory. At
the project-level, the Bank would consider whether
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share
of project costs.

Annex 7

-

N I G E R I A Donor Activities and Aid Effectiveness

1. CPS Aid Effectiveness and Partnership Results Matrix
2. UNDP Response to CPS

3. Donor Activities Matrix

Page 1 of 11

c

t
a

3

8

P

B

L

2

Annex 7
2. UNDP Response to Joint WBDFID Country Partnership Strategy
The Joint WBDFID Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) provides a common platform for assistance
to the Government of Nigeria’s development and reform efforts because i t i s strategically linked to
Promoting private enterprise; and (iii)
three key NEED priorities: (i)Empowering people; (ii)
Changing the way government works. In the same way UNDP’s country programme has been
formulated to support NEEDS in four thematic areas including Governance and Human Rights,
Poverty Reduction, Energy and the Environment, and HIV and AIDS. Thus there i s considerable
scope for partnership that i s explored in this note.

Analytical work in the areas of Human Development, Non-oil Growth and Governance.
The CPS includes significant analysis in support of the three NEEDS pillars in partnership
with Nigerian institutions and other development partners (poverty assessment, Health country
status report, Education Report, State Specific Analytical Work, Labor Market, Financial
sector analysis, Source of growth etc). UNDP has produced several useful analytical tools that
can be useful in enriching these studies (Private Sector Development, Millennium Project,
various Global and National Human Development Reports);
Increased resource flows: The strategy i s based on an increased IDA envelope and DFID
grant assistance. Previous portfolio reviews have identified significant capacity constraints
especially at the state level. UNDP through i t s past and ongoing activities has gained extensive
experience in capacity development at decentralized levels. This provides a golden
opportunity for partnership in improving strategic planning, transparency and accountability at
federal and state levels and better implementation of projects and programs;
Alignment with NEEDS and SEEDS and MDGs: Aimed at embedding the gains of key
reforms made by government, this strong country-led framework i s useful for harmonization
of donor assistance to Nigeria. In addition there i s a newly invigorated focus on MDGs in
Nigeria and the opportunity to build a global partnership for growth and poverty reduction.
UNDP has an important role as the coordinator of the MDGs in the UN System, which
provides a platform for strong collaboration in advocacy and the implementation of projects
and programs targeted at the achievement of the MDGs.
Increased aid to performing states: In responding to country-led transformation at the state
level based on a multi-donor scaling up of aid to performing (lead) states, WB and DFID are
laying the groundwork for pilot interventions that can be replicated. A concentration of
resources in performing states demands a high degree of coherence for enhanced impact.
UNDP i s willing to work together with the W B and DFID in states where i t i s present and will
extend technical support to non-performing to improve performance;
Increased partnership with multilaterals: UNDP fully supports the CPS focus on joint
working with multilaterals and increased coherence with other development partners. As the
focus shifts to fewer, bigger programs and further increase financing through multilaterals,
UNDP will seek to provide opportunities for partnership in support of human development
through the implementation of i t s innovative poverty reducing interventions as well as
implementing World Bank funded projects;
Increased focus on support to non-oil growth by fostering private sector development.
Private sector development i s one of UNDP’s core poverty alleviation strategies. Existing
interventions for informal sector development and proposed UNDP/UNIDO partnership could
be explored for joint programming.

Page 3 of 11

Annex 7
(vii)

Capacity development through a series of NEEDS Implementation workshops: Topics
include costing and implementation in a federal system; federal-state relationship for
implementation and coordination; expenditure tracking and citizens report cards; developing
and instituting a national M&E system; MTEF. UNDP can contribute constructively to the
design and enhanced participation by CSOs in workshops;

(viii)

Strengthening donor coordination mechanisms: UNDP i s committed to working with the
Bank and DFlD to strengthen the existing donor coordination mechanisms and to promote a
more strategic approach.

(ix)

Strengthening the monitoring of NEEDS and SEEDS: Support to Nigeria’s high-level
MDG assessment and monitoring initiative and the enhancement of Nigeria’s monitoring and
evaluation capacity through improved data collection and reporting which i s envisaged in the
CPS i s a fruitful area for partnership. UNDP i s already involved in capacity strengthening and
building o f in-country monitoring and evaluation capacity. Thus the opportunity exists for
greater collaboration to ensure consistency and sustainability of MDG based monitoring.

Table 1 outlines some opportunities for partnership including:

(i)

Strengthening service delivery in health, HIV/AIDS through the advocacy and capacitybuilding work in the Leadership Development Programme;

(ii) Collaborating in improving environment and strengthening services for non-oil growth
including provision of power generation infrastructure through mini/micro hydro generation;
and
(iii) Enhanced transparency and accountability for better governance especially in reforming legal,
tax and regulatory frameworks, anti-corruption efforts, elections, establishment of a poverty
monitoring and tracking system and poverty assessments.

Page 4 of 11

e

e

.

e

.

06

.

Annex 7

s. uonor ACI
Donor

-

ities Matrix Classified by N€
NEEDS Pillar I.
CPS Outcome I
:
Improved Service Delivery for Human
Development

Qfrican
Development
Bank (AfDB)

Health:
Health Systems Development (Health
IV)
Community Development:
Community Based Poverty Reduction
(co-financedwith the World Bank)
Water and Sanitation:
lbadan Emergency Water Supply
Multi-State Water Supply
SociallEnvironment:
Niger Delta Social and Environment
Study

Canadian
[nternational
Development
Agency ( C I W

Health:
Polio Eradication Phase I11
School of Health Technology and
Primary Health Care
Tentative and Planned Health Initiatives
for 2005:
Routine Immunization Initiative
Safe MotherhoodInitiative
National Primary Health Care Personnel
Audit
Strengthening Primary Health Care
HIVIAIDS:
Support to UNICEF HIV-AIDS
Nigeria AIDS Responsive Fund
(NARF)
Environment:
Cross River Environment Project
(CREP)
Strengthening Parliamentary Capacity
in Environment
Canada-Nigeria Environment Program
(CNEP)
Health:
Partnership for Transforming Health
Services (PATHS)
Health Commodities
HERFON (former Health Change
Agents Programme)

Department for
InternatiOnal
Development

(DFm(VK)

Planned Health Initiatives for 2005, 2006:
Health MDG's UN Support (2005)
Malaria (2005)
SEEDS: Health Component (2006)
HIVIAIDS:
Promoting Sexual and Reproductive
Health for HIVIAIDS Reduction
(PSRHH)
Strengthening Nigeria's Response to
HIVIAIDS
HIV/BBC World Services Trust

Page 8 of 11

)utcome
CPS Outcome D[:
Improved Environment
and Services for Non-oil
Growth

*PrOpCom Special
Activities Fund (SAF)
Agriculture:
*African Stockpiles
Program
*Agriculture Policy
Support Facility

Economic Infrastructure:
*Ekiti Rural Access
Programme
*Joint Wetlands
Livelihoods Programme
(JWL)
Enabling Business
Environment:
.Policy and Knowledge
Facility
*Pro-poor Financial
Services
Privatization:
*Privatization
Agriculture,
Manufacturing,
Industry:
*Promoting Pro-poor

E E D S Pillar I
I
I
.
CPS
lutcome m:
Cnhanced
rransparency and
Lccountability for
Setter Governance
jovemance:
1 Institutional Support
'roject for Govemance,
:apacity Building and
'overty Reduction

SEEDSFund

Public Sector Reform:
Public Sector Reform
Govemance:
Support to the
Legislature
State andhcal
Govemment Programme
(SLGP)
Service Delivery:
Service Delivery
Initiative
State Performance
Programme (planned)
Macroeconomic
Management:
Economic
Management and
Capacity Building

c
Embassy of
JapanI Japan
Agency (JICA)

European
Commisslon
(EC)

Page 9 of 11

Annex 7
NEEDS wlar I.
CPS Outcome I:
Improved Service Delivery for Human
Development
Planned HIVlAIDS Initiatives 2005:
HIV Health SectorMulti Sector
Response
Education:
Universal Basic Education (UBE)
Programme for the Advancement of
Girls’ Education
Water and Sanitation:
Water and Sanitation Programme
(WATSAN)
Jigawa Urban Water Supply and
Sanitation
Rights, Participation, Democracy, Peace
and Conflict Prevention:
Security, Justice & Growth (SLG)
Voices
Support to the 2007 Elections
Drivers of Change
Conflict Prevention
Joint Wetlands Livelihoods Programme
(JWL)
Planned in 2005:
Demanding Change
Health:
EnvironmentalSanitation and Malaria
Control
Malaria Control with an Emphasis on
Insecticide Treated Bednets (ITNs) and
HouseholdManagement of Malaria by
Mothers
Infectious Disease Preventionfor
Children
EnhancingCapacity for the Prevention
and Treatment of Obstetric Fistula
Women’s Initiative for Sex Education
and Economic Empowerment
HIVIAIDS:
EnhancingHuman Security through
Gender Equality in the Context of
HIVlAIDS
Education:
Construction of Additional Classrooms
of Primary School (also planned in 2005
and 2006)
Nigeria Education Sector Analysis
Health:
PRIME - Partnership to Reinforce
Immunization Efficiency (Routine
Immunization Component)
Micro-projects:
MPP3 Micro-projects programme in
three states: Rivers, Bayelsa, Delta
MPP6 Micro-projects programme in six
states: Edo, Imo, Akwa-Ibom, Ondo,

NEEDS Pillar m. CPS
WEDS Pillar IL
Outcome IIk
3 s Outcome 11:
hproved Environment Enhanced
md Services for Non-oil Transparency and
Accountab
3rowth
Better Governance
Opportunities from
Debt Management
Commodity and Service Transparency:
Markets
Extractive Industries
Planned Agriculture,
Transparency Initiative
Manufacturing, Industry ’rogramme
Initiative for 2005:
Security &Justice:
,Shared Growth
1 Security, Justice &
Programme
3rowth (SLG)
statistics:
1 Supportto2005
:ensus
Zlections:
Support to Elections
1007

Governance:
SPSA Support to
Parliament and State
Assemblies
Public Financial
Management,
Macroeconomic
Management:
BMPBudget

Annex 7

CPS Outcome I:
Improved Service Delivery for Human
Development
Cross River, Abia
Water and Sanitation:
Water Supply and Sanitation State
Reform Programme (WSSSRP)
Small Towns Water Supply and
Sanitation Programme (STWSSP)
HIVIAIDS:
Response to Fight HIV/AIDS
Rights, Participation, Democracy, Peace
and Conflict Prevention:
Democratic Govemance

United Nations
Development
Programme
(UNDP)
-see also UNDP
Response to
CPS
United Nations
Children’s Fund
(UNICEF)

United States
Agency for
International
Development
(USAW
World Bank
Group (WBG)

Page 10 of 11

I
I

I
1

Health:
Matemal, Infant & U5 Mortality
Reduction
Immunization Plus
Early Child Nutrition and Care
HIVIAIDS:
HIVIAIDS Prevention and Care
Education:
Learning/Girls Education
Planning and Communication
Programme:
Communication and Alliance Building
Community DevelopmentProgramme:
AFO
BFO
CFO
DFO
Water and Sanitation/Environment:
Water and EnvironmentalSanitation
Rights, Participation, Democracy, Peace
and Conflict Prevention:
Rights, Legislation and Protection
Services
Adolescent Health, Participationand
Gender Empowerment
Emergency Preparedness and Response
SO 13: Increased Use of Social Sector
Services
HIVIAIDS:
SO 14: Reduced Impact of HIVIAIDS
in Selected States
Health:
Second Health Systems Development
Polio Eradication
Polio Eradication Supplemental
HIVIAIDS:
HIVIAIDS Programme Development
Education:
Universal Basic Education
Planned Education Initiative in 2007:
Post Basic Education & Knowledge

NEEDS Pillar I
I
.
CPS Outcome Ik
Improved Environment
and Services for Non-oil
Growth

EDS pillar I
I
I
.
CPS
come m.
Enhanced
Transparency an
Accountability for
Better Governance

Monitoring Project with
Coalition of NGOs
EnhancingCivil
Society’s Role in Public
Budgets

*Poverty Eradication
Programme
Energy:
*Energy and
Environment
Programme

*S012: Improved
Livelihoods in Selected
Areas

Govemance:
SO11: Strengthened
Foundations for
Democratic Govemance

Energy:
*Transmission
Development
*IFC off grid electricity
projects
Planned Energy Initiative
in 2007:
*National Energy
Economic Infrastructure:
*Lagos Urban Transport

Govemance:
Economic Reform
and Govemance
Information,
Govemance and the
Media (WBI)
Supporting NEEDS
Implementation (WBI)
Planned Govemance
Initiative in 2005:

Annex 7
Donor

Page 11of 11

NEEDS Pillar L
CPS Outcome I:
Improved Service Delivery for Human
Development

W E D S Pillar IL
EPS Outcome Ik
hproved Environment
md Services for Non-oil
Srowth

WEDS Pillar IaCPS

Economy
Community Development:
Community Based Poverty Reduction
Community Based Urban Development
Project
Local Empowerment and
Environmental Management
Planned Community Development
Initiative in 2006:
CDD Social
Water and Sanitation:
National Urban Water Sector Reform
Planned Water and SanitationInitiative in
2006:
Second National Urban Water Sector

?lannedEconomic
Infrastructure Initiative
in 2006:
,Lagos Metropolitan
Development (2006)
,Federal Roads (2006)
Mining:
,Sustainable
Management of Mineral
Resources
Enabling Business
Environment:
,MSME
BIFCSupport for Private
Sector Participation
mIFC financing and TA
in manufacturing and
services
Telecoms:
DIFCFinancing Support
to Mobile Telecoms
*IFC Advisory Services
to the Privatization of
NITEL
Privatization:
.Privatization Project
.Advisory services on
PSP
Planned IFC
Privatization Initiative
in FY06-08:
.Advisory Services on
PSPPrivatization
projects
Agriculture:
.FADAMA I1
Planned Agriculture
Initiative in 2007:
*CDD Productive
(FADAMA)
Planned Trade Initiative
in 2006:
Customs and Port
Modemization

State Govemance and
Capacity Building
Supporting SEEDS
[mplementation (WBI)
Macroeconomic
Management:
Economic
Management and
Capacity Building

Fransparency and
Accountability for
Better Governance

Annex 8
Nigeria: Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) - Participation and Consultation with
Stakeholders
December 2004 - April 2005
(Summary)
1. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) presents the joint World Bank Group and DFID36
support over the coming four years to Nigeria’s development agenda - the NEEDS and
SEEDS37 and Nigeria’s progress towards achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in Nigeria. This note describes the participatory and process followed during
the preparation of the strategy. I t also summarizes the feedback received through the stakeholder consultations, which provided invaluable insights and helped strengthen the strategy.
2. Partnership with Government. At the outset of strategy discussions, a CPS Core Team was
formed, which included members of the World Bank and DFID teams and government
officials from the key government agencies. The Core Team worked between September
2004 and April 2005, holding two team retreats to develop the concept o f the strategy, agree
on principles and approaches and through regular (bi-weekly) video conferences where the
details around expected outcomes and the program of support were elaborated. Nigeria’s
home-grown poverty reduction strategy -the NEEDS and SEEDS - was the starting point for
deliberations on the strategy and a reference point through the preparation.

3. Stakeholder consultcrtions. A two round consultation with broader Federal and State
Government, the Legislature, civil society, academia, the private sector, and media took place
during December 2004 - April 2005. This built on earlier strategy consultations undertaken
by DFID on i t s Country Assistance Plan from May - August 2004.
4. I n the period December 2004-February 2005, the CPS team held a first round of
consultations. Meetings were held with stakeholders in Abuja and Lagos. State level
consultations were hosted by 4 states Imo, Bauchi, Kebbi and Ogun, where stakeholders from
all 36 neighboring states were invited. Thus, the consultation process involved more than 500
people from more than 12 states. The participants included representatives from key
ministries and agencies of the Federal Government, the National Assembly, six State
Governors, two Deputy Governors, the Speaker of the House o f Assembly, Commissioners,
senior government officials, academia and more than 300 representatives of civil society
organizations at the federal, state and local levels. Discussions were very productive,
thoughtful and creative; contributions were made on the overall CSP content, the preparation
process as well as specific areas of focus. In addition, there was strong interest among
participants in further contributing to CPS preparation, as well as in i t s implementation, and
monitoring and evaluation.
5. The discussions were organized around the key CPS focus areas which were based on the
NEEDS three pillars: (i)
improved service delivery for human development; (ii)
improved
environment and services for non-oil growth; and (iii)enhanced transparency and
accountability for better governance. Participants were asked to provide overall comments on
the proposed strategy framework, approach and to discuss particular issues, such as priority
36 In Nigeria the World Bank Group comprises the International Development Association (IDA), the
International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and the
World Bank Institute (WBI). DFID i s the UK Government’s Department for International Development.
37 NEEDS i s the National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy launched in May 2004, and
SEEDS i s the state equivalent. Together they comprise Nigeria’s development agenda.

Page 1 of 10

Annex 8
issues to be addressed, selectivity (focusing on a few states and thematic areas of
intervention), and state selection approaches. Participants were also asked to discuss how to
build coalitions and partnerships to achieve results.

6. The first round o f consultations gave the CPS strong support with five main points emerging:
confirmation and elaboration on the fundamental constraints facing Nigeria, on
mismanagement o f public resources, lack o f accountability and transparency and poor
non-oil growth;
affirmation that the CPS team i s on the right track in selecting priority issues and areas
for intervention based o n the NEEDS, though minor adjustments could be made;
focusing on a few states and responding to their own plans and priorities t o strengthen
impact i s appropriate. State performance and capacity should be used as criteria for the
selection o f states, with clear indicators, but geographical balance should also be
considered;
availability and quality o f information (federal and state levels) deserves special
attention; and,
strong c i v i l society engagement in the CPS preparation, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation i s important for success.

7. Specific feedback on imuroved service deliverv for human develoument included: the human
development agenda with i t s “focus on children”, and HIV and AIDS should be strengthened

to include attention to youth issues, maternal mortality and malaria, basic and tertiary
education. Poverty, education and health matters can successfully be dealt with if addressed
in a multi-sectoral manner (e.g. waste disposal in the case o f health).

8. Specific feedback on imuroved environment and services for non-oil growth included:
focusing o n non-oil growth i s critical for wealth creation and increased employment.
Agriculture and SMEs deserve particular attention; the major impediments to non-oil growth
are poor infrastructure (mainly roads & power) and limited access to financial services.
Organized private sector could demand government make changes in business environment,
minimization o f discretionary powers etc.

9. Specific feedback on enhanced transuarencv and accountability for better govemance
included: good governance i s based on transparency and accountability, which could be
achieved through improved budget preparation and implementation, transparent procurement
and civil society engagement in monitoring and evaluation o f public sector performance.
Strengthening local communities i s crucial for creating demand for better governance and
accountability at the grassroots level. There i s also an urgent need for legal and judicial
reform which i s among the key obstacles to Nigeria’s development.

10. A second round of discussions with stakeholders in Nigeria took place at the end of March
2005 (and early April with Nigeria’s Economic Management Team) when a draft document
and feedback from the first round o f consultations was circulated. The discussions confirmed
strong support for the key principles and approaches o f the joint WB/DFID Strategy, namely,
selectivity, targeting for results and alignment with NEEDS/SEEDS. Participants made
valuable suggestions on the criteria and process for selection o f states, result-based
framework, the program o f interventions, potential risks, M&E arrangements and the role of
the CSO. A special topic for discussion was implementation o f the strategy and the role o f

Page 2 o f 10

Annex 8
different stakeholders. Stakeholders were encouraged to send in any further written
comments at their earliest convenience to help shape a final draft of the CPS.

11. The following key concerns emerged at this stage o f consultations: (i)
poor coordination and
institutional capacity o f the Government at all levels creates risks for the implementation o f
the CPS, (ii)
a stronger public informatiodeducation strategy around M D G N E D S B E E D S
would help develop public support and understanding o f Government’s intentions and
weak capacity o f the CSOs, absence o f coalitions deprives them from
achievements, (iii)
becoming a strong partner in the development process, from playing an important advocacy
role, carrying out independent assessment o f government performance and disseminating
information to the public, (iv) huge debt burden remains one o f the key unresolved issues that
jeopardizes the ability o f the country to move towards achieving MDGs, (v) the role o f media
in M&E i s indispensable and should be strengthened.

Page 3 o f 10

00

E

4

I t i

9
m

00

8E

-I-

4

rr

9

a

I I

I 12

bl

%
.

us

h

VJ

E

3

a

Qo

T

00

L

-

00

Y

Annex 9

CAS ANNEXES

Annex A2

Nigeria at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Aflas method, US$)
GNI (Aflas method, US$ billions)

Nlgerla

SubSaharan
Africa

LowIncome

136.5
350
47.6

705
500
351

2,312
440
1,021

2.4
2.5

2.3
2.4

1.9
2.3

5117/05

Development diamond'
Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national p o v e q line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulafion)
illiteracy (% ofpopulafionage 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-agepopulation)
Male
Female

Gross
primary

capita
47
47
98
29
60
33

58
35
87
94
80

30
58
80
44
75
39
92
99
85

36
46
101

1
.

Access to improved water source

-

Nigeria

..~.~~~~..
Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERMTRENDS
1984

1994

2003

2004

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports Of goods and seNicedGDP
Gross domestic savingdGDP
Gross national savingdGDP

28.2
14.9
11.4
8.2

23.7
19.6
41 .8
20.6
12.8

58.3
23.8
49.7
32.4
21.5

72.0
22.3
54.6
39.7
27.1

Current account balanceIGDP
Interest paymentdGDP
Total &bffGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports

-3.8
4.4
63.1
32.7

-8.8
4.5
139.6
19.5

-2.4
2.7
60.0
5.7

4.8

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

2004-08

5.0
2.0
3.9

3.4
0.9
1.6

10.9
8.4
31.9

6.1
3.7
3.1

7.4
4.6
7.0

1984

1994

2003

2004

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

37.8
27.8
7.8
34.4

28.6
50.2
4.9
21.2

26.4
49.4
4.0
24.2

16.6
56.9

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and setvices

70.9
17.6
13.0

65.1
14.3
40.8

43.9
23.7
41.2

38.1
22.2
37.2

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

4.5
3.6
4.7
7.4

4.3
2.2
2.9
3.6

6.5
22.4
6.2
1.2

6.5
4.6

-2.0
4.0
13.4
-3.2

-5.9
16.2
12.5
8.8

-20.1
14.9
-7.0
11.6

6.6
3.3
10.6
2.3

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
ExDorts of goods and SeNiCBS
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)

(average annual growth)
AgriCUltUre
Industry
ManUfactUrhg
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
imports of goods and setvices

Page 1 of 2

Economic ratios.
Trade

49.8

Indebtedness

-

Nigeria
Low-income group

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
BOT

26.5

8.1

-20

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
4o

1;

-10
-20

-

Eworts

+Imports

Annex A2

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1984

1994

2003

2004

39.6
16.9

57.0
27.8

14.0
20.8

15.0
19.9

20

1.5

18.5
8.7
1.9

37.1
4.2
-1.3

43.1
14.0
7.4

-io

1984

1994

2003

2004

11,891
11,568

9,415
9,171

9,839
1,442
153

47
7,162
738
86

27,250
24,648
1,867
90
18,816
2,444
7,552

37,297
33,357
3,063
110
21,018
2,742
8,928

167
61
273

91
92
99

161
100
161

212
109
194

1984

1994

2003

2004

12,324
10,749
1,575

9,533
9,298
235

28,629
23,700
4,929

38,968
26,544
12,424

Net income
Net current transfers

-2,309

-2,353
500

-8,388
1,657

-11,727
1,860

Current account balance

-1,066

-1,618

-1,373

3,448

5

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

1,541
-475

1,617
1

1,160
213

6,039
-9,487

-10

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, iocaVUS$)

1,486
2.3

1,409
52.3

7,468
129.2

16,955
132.9

1984

1994

2003

2004

17,770
900
36

33,092
3,286
181

34,963
1,201
787

35,900
1,027
967

4,064
111
1

1,872
645
2

1,636
265
22

265
25

305
-409
0

168
-316
588
17

-788
-248
2,891

4,409

163
261
38
223
74
149

318
385
-67
262
-329

0

231
63
220
-157
67
-224

380
155
235
-80
55
-135

Domestic prices
(% Change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(56 of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpluddeficit
TRADE

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Fuel
Liquified Natural Gas
Manufactures
Total imports (cifl
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)
E q " of goods and sewices
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ milions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Page 2 of 2

io
0

-

GDP deflator

I

'O'CPI

Export and Import levels ( U S mill.)

111

25,m

m,m

1.5.m
1o.m
5,m
0

I

Current account balance to GDP (K)
10

T

5
0

-15

Composltlon of 2003 debt ( U S mlll.)
F: 2,385

A - IBRD
6 - IDA

C .IMF

A 1,201
8 : 787

D Other mitilateral
~

E - Bilateral
F Private
0 -Short-term

.

5/17/05

Annex B2

Page 1 of 1

-

Nigeria Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

As of Date: 05/17/2005
2002

2003

2004

2005

9

12

15

16

Number of Projects Under Implementation'
Average Implementation Period (years)

1.2

1.8

2.2

2.6

Percent o f Problem Projects by Number ,'

11.1

41.7

33.3

37.5

Percent o f Problem Projects by Amount

8.1

45.1

40.3

40.1

Percent o f Projects at Risk by Number ,'

88.9

75.0

53.3

43.8

Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amount ,'

81.4

79.3

66.4

42.2

5.5

3.5

12.8

12.3

No
845,000
94,000

Yes
1,359,000
123,000

Since FY 80
83
5,641.5
55.4
53.1

Last Five FYs
3
355.6
100.0
100.0

Disbursement Ratio (percent) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
Percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
Percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

'

Yes
Yes
1,826,000 1,769,000
130,000 104,000

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the year. Investmentprojects
only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exceptionof Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 2

-

Nigeria Proposed IBRDDDA Program Summary FYO5-09

As of Date: 05/17/2005

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementationb
Risks (HIMIL)

H

M

28.0

H

M

National Energy

172.0

H

M

Second Natl. Urban Water

200.0

H

H

State Platforms

100.0

H

M

Result

500.0
50.0

M

H

CDD SociaVFADAMA

100.0

M

H

State Platforms (2)

100.0

H

M

Federal Roads

250.0

M

H

Result

500.0

Health MDGs

TBD

H

M

National Energy II

TBD

H

M

CDD Productive(FADAMA)

TBD

H

M

State Platforms (2)

TBD

H

M

Result

TBD

State Platforms (2)

TBD

H

M

CDD Social

TBD

H

M

Governance II

TBD

H

M

Federal Roads II

TBD

M

H

Result

TBD

Fiscal Year

Proj ID

2005

State Governance & Cp Bldg

18.1

Result

18.1

Customs and Port Modernization

2006

2007

2008

2009

Overall Result

Post Basic Educ. & Knowl. Econ.

US$(M)

TBD

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next four fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or
low (L).

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

-

Nigeria IFC and M I G A Program, FY 2002-2005
(As o f Date: May 17,2005)

IFC approvals (US$ mil)

2002

2003

2004

2005

130.00

25.00

31.00

86.89

Sector (percent)

35

Accommodation & Tourism
Finance & Insurance

23

Information

77

65

48
52

100

Oil, Gas and Mining

100

100

100

100

Loans

58

100

100

86

Equity

19

Total
Investment instrument (percent)

9
5

Quasi-Equity
Other

23

Total

100

100

100

100

100.00

199.54

112.84

0.00

MIGA guarantees (US$ mil)

Annex B4

Nigeria
Product

- Summary of Nonlending Services
As of May 17,2005

CompL I n FY

Cost (US$OOO)

Audience'

Objectiveb

Recent completions
Social Risk Assessment

NO2

66.3

KG,PS

Private Sector Assessment

NO2

407.4

KG,PS

States Public Finances Study

NO3

221

KG,PS

Environmenfloverty

NO3

156.8

KG,PS

Strategic Conflict Assessment

NO3

179.2

KG,PS

Service Delivery Survey

NO4

128.3

KG,PS

Macro & Growth

NO4

124.1

KG,PS

Education CSR

NO4

49.7

KG,PS

Lagos SPAR

NO4

82.3

KG,PS

Lagos CFAR

NO4

68.0

KG,PS

Pensions Reform Dialogue

FY04

114.5

KG,PS

Risk and Vulnerability

NO4

28.5

KG,PS

Anticorruption

NO4

62.9

PS

Power Sector Policy

FYO4

75

KG,PS

EFA Preparation Support Strategy
Country Gender Assessment

NO4
NO5

200
76

KG,PS
KG,PS

Basic Agricultural Services for Poor Farmers

FYO5

156

KG,PS

Forestry Review

FY05

140

KG,PS

Underway
NO5

309

KG,PS

N05,NO6

250

KG,PS

Lagos Strategy for Economic Development

NO5

397

KG,PS

CPPR

NO5

107

PS

Agriculture Sector Review

NO5

87

KG,PS

LSMS

NOS

115

KG

Debt Management

FYOS

220

KG,PS

Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)

NO6

200

PS

Oil Revenues Management
Health CSR

Planned
FSAP UpdatdBanking Sector Reform

NO6

150

KG,PS

CDD Evaluation

NO6

100

KG,PS

Poverty AssessmenflSIA

FYO6

100

KG,PS

Education Report

NO6

80

KG,PS

FY06

250

KG,PS

Govemance and Corruption Risk Assessment

FYO6-09

240

KG,PS

Business Environment

FYO6-09

50

KG,PS

National InfrastructureStrategymransport

FY07

19

KG,PS

Human Development CSR

NO8

100

KG.PS

PEMFA

a. Government (G),Donor (D), Bank (B), Public Dissemination(PD).
b. Knowledge generation,public debate, problem-solving.

Page 1 of 1

Annex B5

Nigeria Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (“7’0 of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionhncome group

1975-80

1985-90

1997-2003

subSaharan
Africa

71.1
3.0
26.9
6.9

96.2
2.9
35.0
6.5

136.5
2.5
46.6
5.6

704.5
2.3
36.5
5.2

231 1.9
1.9
30.4
3.7

350
269
239

500

440

2.6
3.3

1.5
3.2

POVERTY
(“hof population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

LowIncome

43.0
31.7
49.5

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

780
2
2

270
14
15

INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

50.6
4.4
55.7

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(“h of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(“h of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(“A of children ages 12-23months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(yea@
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,OOO live births)
Under 5 (per 1,OOO live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1 ,OOO population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)
~~~

1.2

60
67
53
49
78
33

60
72
49

58
82
46

75
89
70

54
56
35

35
25
29

61
59

65
67
44

45
43
47

49
48
51

45
44
45

46
45
46

58
57
59

108
216

115
235

98
198

101
171

80
123

535
453

476
401

443
393
800
35

519
461
916
39

319
268
689
38

31
~

77
82
72

~

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
2005 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Page 1 of 1

Annex B6

-

Nigeria Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Actual
2001

2000

2002

2003

Estimate
2004

2005

Projected
2006
2007

2008

100
29
44
28

100
31
48
22

100
31
44
25

100
26
49
24

100
17
57
26

100
17
59
24

100
18
57
25

100
19
55
26

100
20
54
27

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

67
18
9
8

68
23
12
11

74
26
10
16

68
24
10
14

60
22
9
13

64
22
10
12

66
25
11
14

69
27
11
16

72
28
13
16

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

53
38

43
34

41
41

50
41

55
37

53
38

50
41

45
40

43
42

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings"

33
27

32
25

26
15

32
22

40
27

36
26

34
25

31
24

28
21

42078

47841

46548

58304

72047

94370

105115

128228

128228

260

300

300

350

390

3.3

1.4

10.9

6.1

7 .O

9.1

6.5

8.1

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.1
0.9
-0.7
Total consumption
2.0
16.9
15.8
Private consumption
-16.5
11.9
49.8

8.4
-9.2
-22.3

3.7
2.9
4.4

4.3
6.0
4.5

6.1
4.3
4.5

4.2
4.8
5 .O

5.4
5.5
5.5

Memorandunz items

Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at factor cost
5.6

Balance of Payments (US$ )
~xports(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items

Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

22363
21395
15777
11068
6586
1568
4173

20592
19598
16356
11482
4236
1278
1256

18692
17672
18798
13342
-106
1399
-5108

28629
27250
23700
16997
4929
1657
-1373

38968
37297
26544
18986
12424
1860
3448

49586
47743
35965
27636
13621
2896
3690

52703
50761
42824
34297
9880
2983
240

51580
49569
46392
37459
5188
3072
-3706

54695
52562
54435
45052
259
3164
-9157

1502
-1570
-146
-3959

2051
-1643
-641
-1023

2481
-1267
1152
2742

2891
-1292
-439
213

4409
-1286
2916
-9487

5167
21 14
626
-11598

4285
4168
63 1
-9324

4199
4179
755
-5426

3865
10018
870
-5596

15.7

8.9

-0.2

8.5

17.2

14.4

9.4

4.0

0.2

19.4
4.3

-4.7
12.6

-12.0
12.8

33.5
13.6

3.7
2.0

6.2
13.0

12.8
19.3

4.0
9.5

9.0
11.8

(Continued)

Page 1 of 2

Annex B6

-

Nigeria Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)
Actual
2001

2002

2003

Estimate
2004

2005

Projected
2006
2007

2008

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
45.0
Current expenditures
32.2
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
12.8
Capital expenditure
6.4
-3.7
Foreign financing

42.1
34.6
7.5
12.4
-3.4

36.2
34.1
2.1
7.4
-2.8

37.1
32.9
4.2
5.5
-2.3

43.1
29.0
14.0
6.6
-2.1

46.3
28.1
18.1
10.7
-1.7

46.1
28.4
17.7
11.5
-1.2

43.0
28.6
14.3
12.1
-0.9

40.0
27.7
12.3
13.1
-1.6

Monetary indicators
MZGDP
Growth of M2 (%)

24.2
48.3

24.6
27.2

28.4
21.5

26.4
24.1

23.6
14.0

23.8
32.0

23.8
13.4

23.8
10.3

23.8
13.4

157.4
125.8
125.2

136.2
115.9
117.6

139.6
119.3
117.0

161.2
133.9
120.4

212.7
146.6
145.1

256.5
192.4
133.3

241.8
200.1
120.8

227.0
199.7
113.7

220.9
214.8
102.9

6.9
27.9

18.9
10.8

13.7
3.9

14.0
20.8

15.0
19.9

21.2

4.1

3.0

4.8

Indicator

Price indices( yR87 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (8 change)
a.
b.
c.
d.

2000

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services.''
Includesnet unrequitedtransfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Page 2 of 2

Annex B7

-

Nigeria Key Exposure Indicators
~~~~~~~~~

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"

2000

Actual
2001
2002

Estimate
2004

2003

31355

31042

30476

34963

32700

Net disbursements (US$m)"

-696

-1497

-1501

-1089

-1476

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)"

1845

2543

1490

1636

138.5

148.7

160.5

125.1

8.1
4.6

12.2
4.3

7.8
4.8

5.9
43.7

21.8
34.4

11.6
18.8

17.4
31.4

16.3
30.0

1.7
1625

1.4
1337

1.3
1275

0.9
1201

1
644

1
621

1
676

1

1

787

967

8
9

35
8

78
8

100
9

SO

69

Debt and debt service indicators

(a)

TDOIXGS~
TDOIGDP
TDSXGS
Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DSXGS
IBRD TDO (US$mld
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (us$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

88.5

0.7
1027

MIGA

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferredcreditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Page 1 of 1

Annex BS
Page 2 of 2

-

NIGERIA Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Amounts in US Dollar Millions
As of April 30,2005
Held

Fiscal Year
Approval

Company

1998

AEF Ansbby

1999

AEF Global Fabri

1999

AEF Hercules

1999

AEF Hygeia

2000

Disbursed

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.1

0

0

0

0.1

0

0

0

0.32

0

0

0

0.32

0

0

0

1.3

0

0

0

1.3

0

0

0

0

0.1

0

0

0

0.1

0

0

AEF Oha Motors

0.84

0

0

0

0.84

0

0

0

2000

AEF SafetyCenter

0.5

0

0

0

0.5

0

0

0

1997

AEF Telipoint

0.08

0

0

0

0.08

0

0

0

1995

AEF Vinfesen

1

0

1994

Abuja Int'l

2005

0

0

1

0

0

0

1.75

0

0

0

1.75

0

0

0

Accion Nigeria

0

1.89

0

0

0

0.41

0

0

2003

Adamac

0

0

25

15

0

0

11.56

6.94

2005

Africa Re

0

0

10.4

0

0

0

10.4

0

2000

CAPE FUND

0

6.44

0

0

0

6.03

0

0

2001

Delta Contractor

0

0

15

0

0

0.2

2000

Diamond Bank

0

0

8

0

0

8

2000

FSB

7.35

0

9.75

7.35

0

5.25
0

1992

FSDH

0

0.86

0

0

0.86

2000/04

GTB

20

0

0

20

0

0

2000

IBTC

20

0

0

20

0

0

1981/88

Ikeja Hotel

0

0.01

0

0

0.01

0

2002

NTEF

20

0

0

0

0

0

2001

UBA

0

0

10

0

0

0

2004

UPDC Hotels Ltd

11

0

0

0

0

0

0

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

30

6

4

0

30

6

4

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

2005
Total Pending
Commitment:

Zenith Bank

0

