Public Disclosure Authorized

OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IDA/R2005-0191/3
IFC/R2005-0215/3
October 26,2005

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FROM: V i c e President and Corporate Secretary
Georgia: Country Partnership Strategy
Final Text for Disclosure
The Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic o f Georgia was discussed at the meeting o f
1.
Executive Directors on September 15,2005 (IDNR2005-0191). This report will be made publicly
available after November 2,2005. The full text o f the report i s available o n eboard only.
M i n o r changes have been made to the text following the Board discussion, and revised pages are
2.
attached. They include:
0
Executive Summary: page vi - IDA and the U S Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) have
agreed to an innovative arrangement whereby IDA will assist in the supervision o f M C C
financing o f municipal infrastructure to be implemented in collaboration with the Municipal
Development Fund (MDF).
0
Page 22-23: paragraph 47, Approximately US$28 million in IDA disbursements plus a potential
US$50 million through a new IBRD-enclave project i s projected over the CPS period.
0
Page 28,29: paragraph 62, IDA has also agreed to help M C C supervise significant forthcoming
funding o f municipal infrastructure through the regional infrastructure development facility, to
be implemented in collaboration with the MDF.
0
Page 36: paragraphs 77 and 78, Japan has also financed significant infrastructure investment and
IDA will ensure close collaboration.
0
IDA and M C C have agreed to an innovative arrangement whereby the Bank w i l l assist in superv
ising M C C financing o f municipal infrastructure through the regional infrastructure development
facility, to be implemented in collaboration with the MDF.
0
IDA w i l l also build o n prior work funded by Canada in the health sector, trade policy, and public
administration reform.
3.

Questions on these documents should be referred to Mr. Petersen (ext. 33965).

Distribution:
Executive Directors and Alternates
President
B a n k Group Senior Management
V i c e Presidents, Bank, IFC and MIGA
Directors and Department Heads, Bank, IFC and MIGA
Secretary, IMF

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties. Its content:
may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group authorization.

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report Number 33295-GE

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
GEORGIA

October 12,2005

South Caucasus Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
The World Bank
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. I t s contents may not other wise be disclosed without World Bank Authorization.

I F C w i l l complement the IDA program by continuing to provide investments and technical
assistance (TA) to financial institutions in order to deepen the financial sector and expand the
range of and access to financial products. I F C will also consider direct investments in agribusiness; tourism and related sectors; transport; logistics; retail services; private companies
engaged in infrastructure and the provision of social services; and companies engaged in
manufacturing or developing natural resources for export markets. I F C T A w i l l aim to help
reduce barriers to business. MIGA is presently discussing provision of political risk
guarantees and T A on investment promotion.
The CPS w i l l seek to both catalyze and complement efsorts of other donors. The
proposed PSRSP, for example, w i l l catalyze twice as many funds from other donors, and IDA
support for the transit corridor will help attract both donor and private sector financing. IDA
and the US Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) have agreed to an innovative
arrangement whereby IDA w i l l assist in the supervision of M C C financing of municipal
infrastructure to be implemented in collaboration with the Municipal Development Fund
(MDF). A proposed Carbon Fund operation will also complement M C C financing of vital
repair of a major gas pipeline.

The FY06 envelope for new IDA funding w i l l be SDR 22.6 million (approximately
US$33 million), of which about US$15 million w i l l be available as grants. The indicated
level of IDA financing over the four year CPS period is US$143 million. However, actual
allocations w i l l be established annually by the I D A performance-based allocation formula. If
additional funding becomes available due to improved performance, the size of activities may
be increased and possible projects in health or other infrastructure areas w i l l be considered.
While Georgia’s debt situation is improving, it still faces a moderate risk of worsening
that w i l l likely preclude normal IBRD lending during this CPS period. Georgia’s debt burden
is still vulnerable to adverse extemal and domestic developments that can be mitigated by
continued implementation of measures to increase foreign direct investment and enhance
export pegormance. Throughout the CPS period, IDA w i l l work closely with the Govemment
to strengthen Georgia’s eventual creditworthiness for non-concessional borrowing.
I D A w i l l closely monitor conditions that could undermine achievement of CPS
objectives. These include: ( i ) a potential weakening of the political w i l l to overcome vested
interests; ( i i ) inadequate progress on strengthening expenditure management and reducing
fiduciary risks; ( i i i ) an exacerbation of civil conflict; (iv) extemal shocks on a relatively
undiversified economy; and (v) natural disasters. The IDA program w i l l help mitigate these
risks by supporting efsorts to eliminate corruption; improve expenditure management and
fiduciary controls; enhance regional development; broaden the sources of growth; and
mitigate potential damage from natural disasters.
Executive Directors may wish to consider the following questions:
Does the CPS provide a well focused and balanced set of activities, both ongoing and
new, in support of Georgia’s development strategy, given the IDA envelope?
Does the CPS establish a good foundation for partnership with the Govemment, civil
society, and other donors?
vi

administrative requirements continue to deter investment and add to the cost o f doing
business. The Government i s fully aware o f the need to reduce administrative barriers and
has begun a range o f relevant initiatives. The new tax code and improvement in tax
administration, in particular, are expected to reduce the tax burden on businesses. Efforts to
stabilize internal security have improved personal safety, reduced extortion, and improved the
prospects of viable economic activity. Notwithstanding these achievements, further efforts
are required to consolidate progress and realize an overall improvement in the business
climate. For example, while steps have been taken to improve inspections on businesses
premises there i s s t i l l a problem o f overlapping responsibilities and lack o f public awareness
of rights during inspection. Further measures needed to improve customs and border
processing include improving valuation procedures and addressing the monopoly of customs
brokers. A range o f goods i s s t i l l subject to mandatory certification and obsolete Soviet
standards and certificates are used.

46.
The CPS aims to reduce barriers to establishing and operating businesses. The
P R S O program w i l l support improvements in: (i)
inspection processes, permits and licensing
requirements; (ii)
customs border processing; and (iii)
standardization. The on-going Judicial
Reform Project i s helping realize a more independent, professional, and efficient judiciary to
improve the functioning of the commercial litigation system. IFC TA through the Private
Enterprise Partnership (PEP) w i l l support improvements in license, permit, and inspection
procedures on the basis o f a recently completed survey. Additional surveys w i l l be undertaken
to identify future areas o f work. PEP may also undertake work to promote alternative dispute
resolution and F I A S may undertake work on the registration o f businesses. IFC w i l l also
support an investor conference in N e w Y o r k in 2006 and MIGA i s discussing provision of
TA for investment promotion, including support to the Georgia National Investment and
Export Promotion Agency. The on-going Enterprise Rehabilitation Project i s helping
strengthen management o f privatized enterprises as well as pre-privatization restructuring of
state-owned enterprises. Other donors are complementing Bank Group assistance: EBRD i s
assisting in investment promotion; EU i s helping reform business licensing; U S A I D i s helping
establish the one stop shop concept for business licenses and permits; and IMF i s supporting
tax and customs administration reform.
Improved electricity and gas infrastructure
Georgia’s energy infrastructure is among the worst in the FSU and the risk of
catastrophic failure is high. Unreliable energy supply remains a key obstacle to private sector

47.

growth, a drain on public finances, and a source o f hardship for the population. The energy
sector i s financially bankrupt due to high levels o f non-payments and accumulated debts,
theft, and possible remaining corruption in the sector. The Government has taken steps to
remedy the debt situation, improve collections, and rehabilitate generation and transmission
systems. Some results, such as improved collections by the distribution utility outside Tbilisi
are already visible. Yet, much remains to be done to establish a reliable and financially viable
energy sector. The Government recognizes that in the medium-term, this involves improved
performance among sector entities, improved cash flows, and investment to reduce the risk of
systemic collapse. In the longer term, changes in the underlying power sector structure and
systems are required. Over the next five to seven years, investments o f US$350 million are
estimated to be required in the electricity sector and about US$50 million for essential firstphase repair o f the gas transmission system. Approximately US$28 million in IDA
22

disbursements plus a potential U S 5 0 million through a new ZBRD-enclave project i s
projected over the CPS period. In addition, there are on-going projects from U S A l D (US$21
million), Germany (€20 million), EBRD (US$50 million), and JBIC (US$45 million) that are
expected to continue over the next two to three years. The M C C has also earmarked US$44.5
million for the rehabilitation of the Gas Pipeline from Russia, and US$5 million for energy
strategy advisory services over the next five years.
IDA assistance w i l l aim to substantially improve service levels in the power sector.
48.
IDA w i l l complement and help coordinate the efforts o f other partners in the energy sector.
The P R S O program w i l l focus on: (i)
debt resolution and payment collection to improve the
a holistic energy sector action plan to gradually
financial viability o f entities in the sector; (ii)
improve the underlying structure and systems; and (iii)
increasing competition and flexibility
in gas supply options. The on-going Electricity M a r k e t Support Project i s helping improve
financial and corporate management in the wholesale electricity market. Under the possible
IBRD-enclave Energy Project, development o f a new hydropower resource at Khudoni
could generate more than 10 percent o f annual consumption and about 20 percent o f current
hydropower production, improving the security o f Georgia’s energy supply. The project
would be structured as an export-oriented sale o f power to neighboring countries and enhance
Georgia’s role in the regional energy trade. A further possibility i s a Carbon Financing
project to support the rehabilitation o f the gas pipeline from Russia to Georgia and on to
Armenia. Other projects under the Carbon Financing Facility w i l l also be ~0nsidered.l~
Feasibility studies and preparation work for these and other infrastructure investments w i l l be
conducted under the Pre-Investment Infrastructure Facility.
Improved highway infrastructure

49.

Limited transportation infrastructure is a major constraint to economic activities and
exploitation of the transport corridor. The poor state of the highway network constrains the
movement o f goods and people between Georgia’s cities, ports, and rural areas; and through
Georgia, along the transit corridor. As previously discussed, large segments o f the population
are effectively l e f t out of the economy due to limited connectivity to major urban centers and
transport facilities. L e s s than five percent o f the road network supports the transit economy
and foreign trade, and many segments require rehabilitation. The long transit times, despite
the relatively short distance and poor road conditions add to transport costs and deter usage of
the Georgian transit route. In i t s present state, limited capacity on the highway network i s a
binding constraint to Georgia’s ability to exploit increasing transport volumes arising from
rapidly rising wealth and economic activity in the Caucasus and Central Asia.

IDA w i l l take the lead in helping develop the main highway network. At present,
there are no other external development partners engaged in developing the main highway
network. IDA assistance in highways supports the medium-term goal o f enhanced investment
in agro-processing, tourism, and other commercial activities and a significant increase in
transit trade, including increased flows to and from Central Asia. IDA interventions w i l l help
reduce transit times and costs; enable Georgia to handle significantly increased traffic flows;
and ensure sustainable maintenance o f the highway network. Approximately US$84 million
in IDA disbursements and new commitments are expected over the CPS period toward these

50.

13. Funding for Georgia under the Carbon Financing Facility would be in addition to the IDA envelope and would likely be
disbursed to Georgia over a 10 year period, with amounts of up to $5 million per year.

23

ends. The ongoing Roads Project and proposed series of Roadsmransit Corridor Projects
w i l l develop sections of the highway network as well as help ensure a steady and adequate
level o f funding for road maintenance based on charges related to road use and road access.
The Government has strong ownership in developing the highway network and specifically
requested IDA partnership, given IDA’S prior experience in this sector in Georgia and i t s
capacity to attract other sources of finance - possibly through public-private partnerships
supported by partial risk guarantees. The proposed Pre-Investment Infrastructure Facility
w i l l be used to explore such prospects. Over the forthcoming CPS period, the M C C i s
expected to complement IDA work by financing a US$lOO-125 million project to rehabilitate
a highway f r o m Tbilisi to the isolated region o f Samtskhe-Javakheti in Southern Georgia.
Development o f the transit corridor in Georgia i s also complemented b y parallel investments
in the transit corridor in Azerbaijan, also supported b y the Bank.
Improved access to rural infrastructure and services

A range of constraints inhibits increased incomes and economic activities in rural
areas. Constraints to greater value-added commercial activities in rural areas include limited
connectivity to markets and information; poor public services (such as research and veterinary
services; and standards, certification, and inspection systems); limited access to rural credit;
and deteriorating irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Lack o f transport options, in
particular, isolates rural families from the national economy and has resulted in a high level of
subsistence farming. A close correlation between poverty in rural households and the extent
to which they are linked to markets exists and studies have shown that local-level road
projects generate clear economic benefits for communities.

51.

IDA assistance in rural infrastructure w i l l complement main road development to
improve the environment for commercial activity in rural areas. Demand for agricultural
products i s expected to be stimulated through improved access to markets and an increase in
agro-processing. The on-going Secondary and Local Roads project aims to develop a cost

52.

effective and sustainable secondary and local road network to link interior areas with the main
highway network. The ongoing Agricultural Research Extension and Training and Rural
Development Projects (RDP) aim to: (i)
increase access to finance through establishment of
improve access to know-how and technologies by building
a viable rural banking system; (ii)
more effective agricultural knowledge systems; and (iii)
enhance farmer incomes and access
to markets through producer groups and cooperatives. The ongoing Irrigation Drainage
Community Development Project i s raising the productivity of land for high-value crops in
targeted areas through rehabilitation o f main irrigation and drainage infrastructure. I t w i l l
also help restore irrigation infrastructure and river embankments damaged in the recent floods
and strengthen longer-term flood protection measures. During the CPS period, IDA w i l l aim
to make substantial contributions to the knowledge base on rural development through the
CEM, the rural infrastructure study, and possibly an agriculture sector update. IDA
expects to disburse approximately US$50 million over the four year CPS period to support
rural development. In parallel, IFC w i l l consider investment in agro-processing industries.
This i s being complemented b y investment financing from several partners. FAD (US$lO
million) and Japan (US$5 million) have teamed with IDA in the RDP to provide rural credit
and TA for market development. U S A I D has a US$20 million project to improve export
market linkages for agricultural products. M C C w i l l provide US$32 million for equity
investments in rural and tourism enterprises and US$15 million for agricultural business
24

prevented adequate investments in quality improvements. A comprehensive reform program
to improve the structure and financing of the education system has been initiated IDA i s
supporting these changes through the P R S O program and the ongoing Education System
Alignment and Strengthening Project, which provides policy and investment support to
improve the information base for policy making. Approximately US$26 million in IDA
disbursements and new commitments are expected over the CPS period. Specific assistance
objectives are: (i)strengthened management capacity at central and local levels; (ii)
merit
based recruitment, objective performance evaluation, and revised and transparent pay for
education sector public employees; (iii)
improved capacity to monitor and evaluate the quality
of education services and student outcomes; and (iv) an outcome-based national curriculum
for primary and general secondary education in place. An Education Sector Note will be
developed potentially within the Programmatic PER to inform the policy dialogue and a
follow-on Education Project i s planned for FY06. IDA efforts at the secondary education
level are complemented by a US$12 million USAID project. The Open Society-Georgia
Foundation i s also supporting implementation of the new Law on Secondary Education and
the E C i s working closely with the Ministry to reform vocational education and training.
Improved level and targeting of social protection

61.
IDA analytical and advisory services support improvements in the targeting and
eficiency of social protection systems. Social protection faces a number o f structural,
institutional, financial, and implementation weaknesses that need to be addressed, if Georgia
i s to have an affordable and effective social risk management system. In the past, poor
administration has resulted in wastage, over-coverage o f non-needy, and under-coverage o f
needy. The pension system has suffered from accumulation o f arrears, a real decline in
pension amounts, and a declining proportion o f employed persons to pensioners. The
Government has taken steps to address both these areas, paying social transfers on time,
doubling pensions and clearing a large part o f the arrears. However, benefit programs remain
thinly spread over many fragmented programs, record keeping i s poor, and transfers are s t i l l
insufficient to move households out o f poverty. As a next step, the Government i s planning to
consolidate i t s programs into a single cash poverty benefit targeted at the poorest in order to
maximize the impact of social transfers. In pensions, the Government has recognized the
need to develop a pension system that i s both affordable and able to protect the elderly against
poverty and a comprehensive pension reform strategy i s being planned. Through the P R S O
program, Programmatic Poverty Assessments, and policy notes, IDA w i l l support these
efforts to increase coverage o f social transfers among the poorest, reduce leakage to the nonpoor, and implement an appropriate pension reform.
Strengthened municipal and community delivery o f infrastructure and services

62.
IDA interventions to strengthen municipal and community-based service delivery aim
to broaden access to essential basic infrastructure and services. Under the Second
IDA
, i s financing the
Municipal Development and Decentralization Project (MDDP II)
Municipal Development Fund (MDF), which aims to improve Local Government Unit (LGU)
effectiveness in identifying, designing, and implementing investment projects for local
infrastructure and utility services, with adequate cost recovery. IDA i s expected to disburse
approximately US$17 million through the MDF over the CPS period. IDA has also agreed to
help M C C supervise significant forthcoming funding o f municipal infrastructure through the
28

regional infrastructure development facility, to be implemented in collaboration with the
MDF. Possible TA in the housing sector w i l l support improvements in urban housing
management. Vulnerable and remote groups have limited access to both national and LGU
service delivery and infrastructure provision. The on-going Second Georgia Social
Investment Fund (GSIF) project i s mobilizing public and private funds for communitydriven basic infrastructure projects in poor communities and strengthening community level
capacity to prepare and implement investment projects. Approximately US$16 million will
be disbursed through GSIF b y IDA over the CPS period. KfW i s also funding GSIF and
U S A I D i s supporting community involvement in the provision and maintenance of
infrastructure through i t s Community Mobilization Project.

e. Improving Efficiency in Public Services
63.
To support achievement of the above objectives, the CPS w i l l help build capacity for
efJicient and accountable public services. The EDPRP and i t s Annual Progress Report noted
many weaknesses in Georgia’s public sector management and the Government has identified
priority areas to enhance public sector accountability and efficiency that are consistent with
Bank analyses in the PER, CPAR, and CFAA. The main goal supported b y the CPS i s to
promote good, clean economic management, policy, and investment and thereby enable the
public sector to effectively support economic growth, employment generation, and delivery of
institutionalizing the antisocial services. Key intermediate steps toward this end are: (i)
corruption effort to ensure i t s sustainability; (ii)
improving public budgeting and expenditure
management; (iii)strengthening procurement and financial management; (iv) enhancing
intergovernmental fiscal relations; and (v) improving management, organization, and
motivation in the civil service to both enhance the delivery o f public services and reduce the
incentives for bribery and corruption. Each IDA project contains capacity-building elements
that are reinforced through AAA and policy dialogue.
Of the on-going portfolio,
approximately $25 million i s earmarked for capacity-building across the public sector.

Addressing governance and corruption issues
64.
All aspects of the CPS support for improved eflciency in public services address
corruption and govemance issues. A June 30, 2005, Presidential Decree on the National
Anti-Corruption Strategy defines the Government’s anti-corruption agenda. To consolidate
the anti-corruption efforts in individual ministries, the Government has created the Anticorruption Policy Coordination Department (ACPCD). While the on-going anti-corruption
effort continues to receive high-level commitment and i s progressing with significant
momentum, the present challenge i s to institutionalize the effort to ensure i t s sustainability
and effectiveness in preventing corruption in the future. The CPS w i l l fully support the
Government’s program through the proposed sequence o f PRSOs and the PSRSP as well as
Programmatic Public Expenditure Reviews (PPERs); CPAR and C F A A updates in a
Public Financial Management Performance Report; and inclusion o f govemance and
transparency issues in each lending operation. A key goal i s to ensure the anti-corruption
program’s resilience to a changing political environment. T o this end, along with
strengthening country fiduciary systems as described below, the CPS w i l l help strengthen key
anti-corruption institutions. The Chamber o f Control (CoC) w i l l be converted into a supreme
29

investments rather than TA. An agreement was recently reached with Russia to remove the
remaining two military bases from Georgia by 2008. Russia’s role with Abkhazia and South
Ossetia, as w e l l as i t s role as a major energy supplier and significant trading partner for
Georgia, remain pivotal for future development o f the region.

77.
Efforts to coordinate external assistance with the Govemment ’s priority investment
areas are being strengthened. Regular donor meetings facilitate coordination and alignment

with the Government’s strategic priorities. The Bank, together with UNDP, coordinates the
Donor Framework Group, which aims to ensure coordinated development assistance and
includes the IMF, EU, US, UK, France, Sweden, Netherlands, and Germany. Annex VIII
illustrates the main areas of engagement o f each donor. The Government has identified
transport, power, health, education, social protection as priority areas for investing i t s own
resources. Areas of IDA funding are policy support; rural development; transport; power;
education; health; environment; municipal development; and community development. The
U S (through U S A I D and MCC) i s the largest bilateral donor and plans large disbursements in
agriculture, energy, transport, the social sectors and municipal development. EBRD i s
tripling i t s activities in the Caucasus and w i l l provide significant support for financial sector
and S M E development, where IDA does not have direct engagement. IDA w i l l collaborate
with MCC, KfW, Kuwait Fund, and EBRD in the roads sector. In energy, the close
partnerships o f the past w i l l be sustained, particularly with USAID and KfW. Japan has also
financed significant infrastructure investment and IDA w i l l ensure close collaboration.
Bank Group activities w i l l leverage financial assistance and complement programs of
78.
other extemal partners. The proposed PSRSP w i l l catalyze twice as many funds from other
donors to support civil service reform, budget planning, accounting and transparency in fiscal

management. IDA and M C C have agreed to an innovative arrangement whereby the Bank
w i l l assist in supervising M C C financing o f municipal infrastructure through the regional
infrastructure development facility, to be implemented in collaboration with the MDF. M C C
i s also expected to finance rehabilitation o f the North-South gas pipeline, where IDA would
arrange for Carbon Facility financing. Forthcoming IDA assistance to improve the
environment for agro-processing aims to stimulate the demand for agricultural products thus
complementing activities addressing supply-side constraints to agricultural production,
including those of USAID, EU, EBRD, Japan, and IFAD. IDA w i l l also build on prior work
funded by Canada in the health sector, trade policy, and public administration reform.

79.

The IMF plays a leading role in helping improve macroeconomic stability and fiscal
management. A three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility was approved in June
2004 and the second review was completed in July 2005. The IMF program focuses on

improving revenue collections and expenditure rationalization, strengthening monetary and
financial sector performance, improving governance and the business climate, and promoting
trade liberalization. TA has been provided to the Ministry o f Finance, NBG, SDS, and the
Tax Inspectorate of Georgia. The IMF collaborates closely with NJ3G in the design and
implementation of a monetary program aimed at rebuilding international reserves, keeping
inflation low, and remonetizing the economy. The IMF’s focus on prudent fiscal policy has
served as an important framework for IDA’Swork on public expenditure management. The
IMF i s also taking the lead in tax policy and tax and customs administration reform. In the
energy sector, the IMF has been providing advice on reducing quasi-fiscal losses, particularly
through improved bill collection.

36

P

*

.
I
.
I

Y

s
V

i

B

Y

L

k

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report Number 33295-GE

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
GEORGIA

October 12,2005

South Caucasus Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
The World Bank
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation

I

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. I t s contents mav not other wise be disclosed without World Bank Authorization.

1

DATE OF LAST CAS FOR GEORGIA
September 22, 1997

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
1 U S Dollar = 1.84 Georgian Lari (as of August 1,2005)

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
APL
ACPCD
AML
CAS
CASCR
CEM
CFP
CPS
CFAA
CIS
COC
CPIA
CPAR
DFID
DSA
EBRD
EDPRP
EU
FDI
FIAS
FSAP
FSU
FY
GDP
GEF
GEL
GNI
GoG
GTZ
GNIEPA
HIPC
IBRD
IDA
IDF
IFC
IFAD

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Adaptable Program Loan
Anti-Corruption Policy Coordination Dept.
Anti-Money Laundering
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assist. Strategy Completion Report
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financing Parameters
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Commonwealth of Independent States
Chamber of Control
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Dept. for Intemational Development (UK)
Debt Sustainability Analysis
European Bank for Reconstruction & Dev
Economic Dev & Poverty Reduction Program
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Former Soviet Union
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Georgian Lari
Gross National Income
Govemment of Georgia
German Technical Cooperation
Georgia National Investment & Export
Promotion Agency
Heavily IndebtedPoor Country
Int’l Bank for Reconstruction & Develop.
Intemational Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
InternationalFinance Corporation
Int’l Fund for Agricultural Development

IMF
JBIC
JSAN
KfW
LGU
MIGA
MCC
MDF
MDDP
MDG
MTEF
NBG
NGO
OECD
PEP
PPER
PIU
PPP
PRGF
PRSP
PSD
PRSO
PSRSP
RDP
SAC
SDS
SEC
SIDA
SIF
SME
SRS

Intemational Monetary Fund
Japan Bank for Intemational Cooperation
Joint Staff Advisory Note
German Development Bank
Local Govemment Unit
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Municipal Development Fund
Municipal Development & Decentralization Project
Millennium Development Goal
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Bank of Georgia
Non-GovemmentalOrganization
Org. for Economic Cooperation & Development
Private Enterprise Partnership
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review
Project ImplementationUnit
PurchasingPower Parity
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Poverty Reduction Support Operation
Public Sector Reform Support Program
Rural Development Project
Structural Adjustment Credit
State Department of Statistics
Security and Exchange Commission
Swedish International Development Agency
Social Investment Fund
Small and Medium Enterprise
Structural Reform Support Project

TA
TACK
UNDP
USAID
WBG
WTO

Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance of the CIS
United Nations Development Program
US Agency for Intemational Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization

~~

IDA

The World Bank Group Team

Vice President:
Shigeo Katsu
Country Director: Donna M. Dowsett-Coirolo
Team Leader:
Christian Petersen

E

Vice President:
Assaad Jabre
Country Director: Edward Nassim
Team Leader:
Lisa Kaestner
..

11

GEORGIA

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
T a b l e of Contents

Executive Summary

..................................................................................................................

v

......................................................................................................................
Country Context ...........................................................................................................
I 1.
.

I

1

Introduction

a.
b.

.
d.
e.
f.

C

g

.

2
Background .................................................................................................................. 2
Economic Developments ............................................................................................. 3
6
Governance and Public Sector Capacity Constraints ...................................................
Poverty and Inequality ................................................................................................. 8
Human Development and Prospects for Meeting the MDGs ...................................... 9
Employment. Wages. and Potential Sources of Growth ............................................ 11
Constraints to Employment and Growth .................................................................... 13

.....................................................................

I11
a.
b.

Georgia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy
Key Elements of the EDPRP .....................................................................................
The Evolving Framework ..........................................................................................

15
15
15

IV
a.
b.

Bank Group Partnership Strategy
Past Experience and Portfolio Performance ...............................................................
World Bank Group Partnership Strategy for FY06-09 ..............................................
Enabling Income- and Employment-Generating Growth ..........................................
Human Development and Social Protection ..............................................................
Improving Efficiency in Public Services ...................................................................
Analytical and Advisory Services ..............................................................................
Scenarios and Rules o f Engagement ..........................................................................
External Partnerships .................................................................................................
Consultations ..............................................................................................................
Monitoring and Evaluation ........................................................................................

16
16
18
21
26
29
33
33
35
37
39

.

.
d.
e.
C

f.
€5
h.
i.
j

V

.

............................................................................

.................................................................................................................................

Risks

39

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties I t s contents may not other wise be disclosed without W o r l d Bank Authorization

.

.

...

111

Tables

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators .............................................................................................
Table 2: Overall and Extreme Poverty Incidence.......................................................................
Table 3: Lessons and Implications from the Past .....................................................................
Table 4: Expected Disbursement from Ongoing Projects (US$m) ..........................................
Table 5: Proposed Analytical and Advisory Activities ............................................................
Table 6: Proposed New IDA Financing FY06-09....................................................................
Areas for Improvement ..........................................
Table 7: IDA Performance Assessment .
Table 8: Summary of CPS Objectives and Monitoring Indicators...........................................

5
9
17
18
33
34
35
38

Figures

Figure 1: Sectoral Development. Index 1996=1.........................................................................
Figure 2: CPS Objectives and Development Outcomes Sought ..............................................

4
20

CPS Annexes
CPS Results Matrix ................................................................................... 41
CAS Completion Report for Georgia, 1998-2005 .................................... 50
CPS Consultations .....................................................................................
96
Potential Sources of Employment and Growth in Georgia .......................
97
External Debt Sustainability Analysis .....................................................
106
Status of Millennium Development Goals ..............................................
117
Country Financing Parameters ................................................................
118
Partnership in the Country Development Framework 2005-2009.........119
Standard CPS Tables ............................................................................... 120
Table A2: Georgia at a Glance
Table B2 Selected Portfolio Indicators
Table B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Table B3: IFC and MIGA program Summary
Table B4: Summary of Non-Lending Services
Table B5: Social Development Indicators
Table B6: Key Economic Indicators
Table B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Table B8: Operations Portfolio
Table B8b: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Map of Georgia...................................................................................................................... 130

Annex I.
Annex I1
Annex I11.
Annex I V
Annex V .
Annex V I.
Annex VI1.
Annex VI11
Annex I X

.

iv

GEORGIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I n November 2003, Georgia underwent the “Rose Revolution”, a peacefil uprising
that was spurred by years of rampant corruption and a failing state. I n its first 18 months in
ofice, the new Govemment has focused on uprooting corruption, stabilizing the economy,
and bringing order to fiscal management. The Govemment has also initiated sweeping
reforms in the education system, reduced red tape for businesses, and begun to address longstanding issues in the energy sector.
Building on these accomplishments, the Govemment is now entering a second phase
of reforms, focusing on deeper institutional change, enhanced social protection, and essential
infrastructure needed to enable economic growth, j o b creation, and a reduction in poverty.
With the recent Progress Report on the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction
Program (EDPRP), the Govemment has reafirmed its commitment to improving: ( i )
governance; ( i i ) macroeconomic policies, particularly in the fiscal area; ( i i i ) the business
environment; (iv) human development; (v) the safety net; (vi) priority sectors of the economy energy, transport, communications, tourism, agriculture; and (vii) environmental protection.
The new World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY06-09 is
designed to assist Georgia implement this second phase of reforms. The CPS builds on the
EDPRP, as well as emerging Govemment strategic thinking on the development framework.
I n doing so, it targets several goals:
e

Generating growth and job creation by removing barriers to private sector
development and improving infrastructure, finance and markets.

a

Enhancing human development and social protection through improved education,
health, social protection, and community services

0

Strengthening public sector management and budgetary processes to enable
Georgia to better plan and meet its own development goals.

A key component of the CPS w i l l be a series of Poverty Reduction Support Operations,
complemented by a Public Sector Reform Support Program (PSRSP). These operations w i l l
engage in critical reform issues, in a manner that matches improvements in Govemment
capacity. The Bank Group w i l l also support new investments in infrastructure, particularly in
transport and energy. These activities aim to improve the environment for private investment,
strengthen Georgia’s role as a transit economy, and help unify Georgia’s regions. The Bank
w i l l also stay engaged in education by financing a follow-on education project and w i l l
considerfirther investment in the health sector should the I D A envelope allow. The Bank
w i l l also explore the potential for an export-oriented IBRD enclave project in the energy
sector. These goals are also supported by 18 ongoing operations in a range of sectors.

V

IFC will complement the IDA program by continuing to provide investments and technical
assistance (TA) to financial institutions in order to deepen the financial sector and expand the
range of and access to financial products. I F C will also consider direct investments in agribusiness; tourism and related sectors; transport; logistics; retail services; private companies
engaged in infrastructure and the provision of social services; and companies engaged in
manufacturing or developing natural resources for export markets. I F C T A w i l l aim to help
reduce barriers to business. MIGA is presently discussing provision of political risk
guarantees and TA on investment promotion.
The CPS w i l l seek to both catalyze and complement efsorts of other donors. The
proposed PSRSP, for example, w i l l catalyze twice as many funds from other donors, and IDA
support for the transit corridor w i l l help attract both donor and private sector financing. I D A
and the US Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) have agreed to an innovative
arrangement whereby IDA will assist in the supervision of M C C financing of municipal
infrastructure to be implemented in collaboration with the Municipal Development Fund
(MDF). A proposed Carbon Fund operation w i l l also complement M C C financing of vital
repair of a major gas pipeline.
The FY06 envelope for new I D A funding w i l l be SDR 22.6 million (approximately
US$33 million), of which about US$15 million w i l l be available as grants. The indicated
level of I D A financing over the four year CPS period is US$143 million. However, actual
allocations will be established annually by the IDA pe$ormance-based allocation formula. If
additional funding becomes available due to improved pe$ormance, the size of activities may
be increased and possible projects in health or other infrastructure areas w i l l be considered.
While Georgia’s debt situation is improving, it still faces a moderate risk of worsening
that w i l l likely preclude normal IBRD lending during this CPS period. Georgia’s debt burden
is still vulnerable to adverse extemal and domestic developments that can be mitigated by
continued implementation of measures to increase foreign direct investment and enhance
export pe$ormance. Throughout the CPS period, I D A w i l l work closely with the Govemment
to strengthen Georgia’s eventual creditworthiness for non-concessional borrowing.
I D A will closely monitor conditions that could undermine achievement of CPS
objectives. These include: ( i ) a potential weakening of the political w i l l to overcome vested
interests; ( i i ) inadequate progress on strengthening expenditure management and reducing
fiduciary risks; ( i i i ) an exacerbation of civil conflict; (iv) extemal shocks on a relatively
undiversified economy; and (v) natural disasters. The IDA program w i l l help mitigate these
risks by supporting efsorts to eliminate corruption; improve expenditure management and
fiduciary controls; enhance regional development; broaden the sources of growth; and
mitigate potential damage from natural disasters.
~~

Executive Directors may wish to consider the following questions:
Does the CPS provide a well focused and balanced set of activities, both ongoing and
new, in support of Georgia’s development strategy, given the IDA envelope?
Does the CPS establish a good foundation for partnership with the Govemment, civil
society, and other donors?
vi

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
GEORGIA

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This joint IDALIFC Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Georgia covers a four
year period from FY06 though FY09. The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
Georgia (Report 17000-GE) was discussed by the Executive Directors in October 1997 and
covered the period FY98-00. F o r several reasons, a CAS has not been discussed by the Board
since then. A strategy drafted in FYOl was withheld as Georgia began work on i t s Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). A further strategy drafted in F Y 0 2 was withheld over
concerns that sweeping changes in the cabinet would result in shifts in policy directions. In
FY03, the Government completed i t s PRSP, known as the Economic Development and
Poverty Reduction Program (EDPRP) and a draft strategy to support this program was
distributed to the Board in early November 2003. That document was withdrawn before
discussion, however, following the “Rose Revolution” in late November 2003 and subsequent
change in Government. The new Government subsequently began a process o f developing a
strategic framework, building on the EDPRP. An understanding was reached that a new
strategy would be prepared once the Government completed this process. An EDPRP
Progress Report, which defined the Government’s medium-term goals and priorities, was
issued in March 2005 and forms the basis o f this CPS.
Georgia has made significant progress in establishing an enabling market-oriented
2.
economic environment, but several critical constraints persist. Wide ranging reforms have
been completed since independence, including trade liberalization, privatization o f small and
medium enterprises, banking reform, elimination o f most subsidies and price controls, land
privatization, and passage o f laws supportive o f a market economy. Yet, much remains to be
done for Georgia to achieve broad-based economic growth, reduce poverty, and increase
living standards. BanWIFC assessments and surveys have consistently identified three sets o f
continuing constraints to growth, employment, and poverty reduction: (i)
corruption and
poor governance, including impediments in the regulatory environment for business and
inadequate education, health and social protection
lack o f confidence in the rule of law; (ii)
systems; and (iii)poor infrastructure, including roads, electricity, gas, and water. The
Government has recognized the binding nature o f these constraints and undertaken a range o f
initiatives to address them. While the Government, with IDA support, i s vigorously driving
-the agenda on- corruption, regulations, social services, and rule o f law, it has explicitly
requested IDA to also focus on infrastructure during the FY06-09 CPS, as well as education
and fundamental public sector and administrative reforms.

11.

COUNTRYCONTEXT

a. Background
3.
The Rose Revolution was a defining moment for Georgia. Following independence in
1991, the Government under President Shevardnadze (1992-2003) implemented a range of
political and economic reforms to advance the transition toward democracy and a market
economy. However, by the early 2000s, power had fragmented among competing groups;
law and order had deteriorated; corruption was widespread; public salaries, pensions, and
social transfers were in arrears; and the political w i l l for reforms had slackened. These factors
led to growing public dissatisfaction that culminated in the Rose Revolution and resignation
of President Shevardnadze in November 2003. In January 2004, President Saakashvili won a
five-year term with 96 percent o f the vote, in elections that were considered largely free and
fair by observers. The aftermath o f the Rose Revolution has been a time o f hope for Georgia.
The incoming Government comprised a group o f young reformers who quickly embarked on
an ambitious program to stabilize the economy, curb corruption, and advance social and
economic reforms. The untimely death o f Prime Minister Zhvania, who was a major driver o f
the reform effort, in February 2005, was a severe setback. Nonetheless, the Government's
commitment to rapid transformation o f Georgian society remains strong.

4.

Georgia emerged from Soviet rule as a fractured nation and the challenging process
of nation-building has yet to be completed. Shortly after independence, armed conflict broke
out as the Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions sought independence f r o m Georgia. The
conflicts took their toll, with some 300,000 people displaced, much physical capital
destroyed, important trade routes disrupted, the new state's authority undermined in large
segments of the country, and an increased perception o f instability and risk associated with
Georgia. Since the Rose Revolution, efforts have accelerated to engage in peace talks,
although to date, the disputes over both Abkhazia and South Ossetia remain unresolved. The
protracted conflict in Chechnya has also weakened Georgia's control o f the Pankisi Gorge
area, where smuggling, extortion and kidnapping have taken place in the past. In the Adjara
region, an economically significant area bordering Turkey and the Black Sea, an autocratic
and corrupt local leader, who was at odds with the central Government, governed for many
years. In the spring o f 2004, the Government managed to effect a peaceful change in regime
and the Adjara region has since been fully reintegrated. At present, approximately 20 percent
of the country remains outside the Government's control.

Moreover, overcoming the legacy of 70 years of communist rule and natural
5.
challenges remain formidable tasks. Behaviors entrenched during the years o f communism
have proven difficult to change. The business culture that arose, for example, involved
minimizing visibility to the Government; ignoring formal rules; and operating on the basis o f
personal connections. A deep public distrust o f state institutions also developed. Widespread
tax evasion, a substantial informal economy, and corruption resulted in very l o w public
revenue collection that has been a major constraint to public investment since independence.
Strong vested interests in the status quo have proved a significant obstacle to change. Rugged
terrain in many parts o f the country has also made provision and maintenance of social and
economic infrastructure difficult and costly. Moreover, Georgia has been particularly
vulnerable to natural disasters, such as the 2002 earthquake; periodic droughts; and the severe

2

floods in 2005, which caused large-scale damage to waterworks, housing and public
infrastructure across the country.
6.

The Government now faces the challenge of sustaining the reform momentum and
delivering results. Since coming into office, the ruling coalition has held a large majority in
Parliament and continues to enjoy broad-based support in the country. However, while recent

public opinion polls confirm continued public support, they also reveal a population restive
for change and for tangible improvements in the economy and employment generation.
Georgians are eager to see results in improving the deplorable condition o f infrastructure roads, electricity, and water. They also want peaceful progress in resolving the conflict with
the breakaway provinces of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The Government i s therefore under
increasing pressure to move as quickly as possible on a broad range of reform issues.

6. Economic Developments
7.

GDP fell sharply after independence but has since recovered and sustained growth
has been seen since 2001. Following independence, the loss of planned production to Soviet
markets, the end o f large budget transfers from Moscow, and the impact of civil war all
resulted in a 70 percent drop in output. A stabilization and structural reform program aimed
at stimulating market-driven, private sector production led to a rebound in GDP in the mid1990s, although further shocks from the 1998 Russia crisis and severe droughts in 1998 and
2000 caused GDP growth to slow between 1998-2000. In 2001 strong growth resumed once

again, with the o i l transit industry, communications, financial services, and trade driving
average annual GDP growth to 6.8 percent between 2001-04.’ Agriculture, manufacturing,
and tourism, however, Georgia’s major sources o f exports and employment in the Soviet
period, have made only modest recoveries (see Figure 1).

8.
At present, agriculture remains the largest sector of the economy. While agriculture
dropped from 30 percent of GDP in 1996 to 16 percent in 2004, i t remains the largest sector
o f the economy and accounts for 52 percent o f employment. Trade i s the second largest
sector, accounting for 13 percent of GDP and 11 percent of employment, while manufacturing
accounts for 9 percent of GDP and 5 percent o f employment. T w o of the fastest growing
sectors have been transport and communications, which together tripled from 4.6 percent of
GDP in 1996 to 14 percent in 2004. The main exports in recent years have been iron and steel
scrap, aircraft, wine, and ferroalloys.2 A significant “shadow economy” also exists,
accounting for one third of total output, according to some estimates. Private remittances,
equivalent to more that 25 percent o f exports during 2000-2004, also play a significant role in
the economy. Economic activities are concentrated around Tbilisi and the capital city’s
population has risen to over 1.5 million people (33 percent of the national population).
R e c e n t Economic Developments and Macroeconomic Outlook
9.
Growth Performance.
Georgia’s current prudent macroeconomic policies and
structural reform programs are expected to bolster its growth prospects. Strong growth was
The higher growth rate also reflects inclusion o f previously unrecorded activities in Georgia’s national accounts statistics
The privatized T b i l i s i Aerospace Manufacturing Company manufactures a military aircraft and overhauls other aircraft.

3

seen in 2003, driven by construction o f the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan o i l pipeline (see Table 1).
Economic activity remained strong in 2004 with GDP growth o f 6.2 percent, although another
bad harvest suppressed agricultural output. Reform in the public sector, strengthening state
institutions, improved governance and anti-corruption efforts along with investments in
infrastructure and improvements in the regulatory environment, are expected to enhance
private sector growth. Real GDP i s projected to grow by 8.5 percent in 2005 and by a
conservative average o f about 5 percent during 2006-08.3 In the medium-term, the spill-over
effects of o i l and gas pipeline construction w i l l help sustain Georgia’s growth. In the longerterm, expected sources o f growth include agro-processing and small manufacturing; tourism;
transit trade activities; and mineral extraction and processing (see Annex IV).
Figure 1: Sectoral Development, Index 1996=1
+Agriculture,

forestry,

gk?acturing industry
Construction
-).(-T
.rade
+Hotels

and resturants

+Transport
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2001

+Communication
-GDP

0.0

10.
Fiscal Stance. The Govemment has taken prompt action to address the underlying
revenue problems of corruption and poor tax administration. Despite relatively robust
economic growth between 2001-2003, tax revenues remained very l o w at 14.5 percent of
GDP, reflecting high corruption, tax evasion and smuggling. The l o w revenue base, along
with poor budget preparation and execution, resulted in accumulation o f large expenditure
arrears of about 4.5 percent o f GDP by the end o f 2003. Since the current Government took
office, significant progress has been made in tax collections, which rose to 18.2 percent in
2004. In addition, there was a one-off surge in non-tax revenue (partly stemming from funds
collected from former officials and businesses suspected o f corruption) raising total revenues
excluding grants to 20.6 percent o f GDP and resulting in a total fiscal surplus including nontax revenue, o f 2.3 percent o f GDP in 2004. The strengthened revenue position allowed the
Government to start clearing arrears by an estimated 2.6 percent o f GDP. In 2005, further
measures are envisaged to enhance the legal and institutional framework for tax and customs
administration as well as public expenditure management in order to clear the remaining
expenditure arrears. The newly approved tax code, which became effective in January 2005,
has simplified the tax system and i s expected to broaden i t s base and minimize rent-seeking.
_Tax revenues are projected at 18 percent o f GDP in 2005 and to increase by an additional half
a percent o f GDP each year during 2006-08. Proceeds from the on-going privatization
program are budgeted for clearance o f expenditure arrears and supplementary increases in
capital spending on infrastructure development.
GDP growth i s estimated at 7.3 percent in the first quarter o f 2005. However, the heavy flooding in April-June 2005 in
many parts o f Georgia may depress agricultural output in the remainder o f 2005.

4

Monetary Policy and Inflation. With IMF support, the Govemment has adopted a
conservative monetary policy. Between 2001-2003, prudent monetary policy kept inflation
l o w at around 5 percent on average and the exchange rate remained stable. However,
inflation rose in the second half o f 2004, from 3.6 percent in June 2004 to just over 9.7
percent in M a r c h 2005. Contributing factors included an easing o f liquidity conditions (partly
due to a sharp increase in government spending), weather-related increases in food prices, a
sharp rise in excise tax rates, and the rise in international o i l prices. Moreover, large capital
inflows, due to BTC pipeline construction and privatization, contributed to a 13.5 percent
appreciation o f the L a r i in 2004. While additional capital repatriation may be expected as
confidence in the economy grows and legalization o f the informal economy continues, the
National Bank of Georgia (NBG) plans to limit foreign exchange interventions to smoothing
fluctuations.
Given the planned large increase in Government spending, inflationary
pressures remain o f concern. Nevertheless, a large part o f these additional expenditures are
imports o f capital goods and would have limited effect on macroeconomic stability.
According to the program agreed with the IMF, reserve money growth has been targeted at 26
percent in 2005. Inflation i s targeted at 7 percent by end-2005 before declining to an average
o f 4 percent in the medium term.

11.

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators

I

2005

2006

2007

2008

5,183
6.2
1,020
26.6
37.8
51.2
-7.6
383
18.2
-0.2
503
5.7
2,024

6,303
8.5
1,220
28.9
34.0
52.6
-11.8
493
18.1
-4.8
731
9.4
2,079

7,137
5.0
1,420
26.3.
32.6
45.7
-7.0
525
18.6
-3.7
350
6.0
2,189

7,638
5 .O
1,600
24.6.
32.9
42.6
-3.5
580
19.1
-1.2
171
4.0
2,311

8,176
5.0
1,740
24.6.
32.8
42.3
-3.3
645
19.6
-0.9
188
4.0
2,421

39.0

33.0

30.7

30.2

29.6

Item

2002

2003

2004

GDP (US$m)
Real GDP growth (%)
Atlas GNI per capita (US$)
Gross Dom. Investment (% o f GDP)
Exports of goods & services (% of GDP)
Imports of goods & services (% of GDP)
Current account balance (% of GDP)
Reserves (gross, US$m)
Tax revenues (% of GDP)
Overall Fiscal Balance (% o f GDP)
Foreign direct investment (US$m)
CPI period average (%)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
(US$m)
Total debt/GDP (%)

3,392
5.5
720
22.1
30.2
40.1
-5.8
198
14.4
-1.9
122
5.6
1,839

3,984
11.1
840
24.5
33.2
45.6
-7.2
191
14.5
-1.3
335
4.8
1,935

54.2

48.6

ro..

proj.

proj.

proj.

Note: Debt data includes public, publicly guaranteed and private non-guaranteed debt. Exports include goods, services, income,
and workers remittances. Source: Bank and Fund staff estimates.

External Sector. The current account deficit is expected to decline in the medium12.
term. The external current account deficit narrowed to an average o f 6.5 percent o f GDP
during 2001-03, as compared to an average o f 10 percent in the late 1990s. The lower deficit
was partly due to an increase in registered exports, owing to improved data reporting, and
partly to the reduction in large capital imports as the construction o f the Supsa o i l pipeline
was completed. Exports benefited from strong demand from Turkey and Russia (Georgia’s
m a i n trading partners) and buoyant metal prices in 20044. As the construction o f the BakuTbilisi-Ceyhan and the South Caucasus Gas pipelines are expected to be completed in the
second half o f 2005 and mid-2007 respectively, imports of capital goods should remain high
through 2007 and moderate rapidly thereafter. The current account deficit i s thus projected to
peak at about 12 percent of GDP in 2005 and then decline progressively to about 3-4 percent
In 2004, the price o f copper rose by 60 percent, steel by 50 percent, and gold by 13 percent.

5

in the medium term. Non-pipeline imports w i l l continue to be dominated b y Georgia’s energy
needs. Exports are expected to remain dominated by scrap metal, raw materials, and wine in
the near term, while Government efforts to improve the business environment w i l l help
promote export diversification. In addition, Georgia i s projected to receive revenues o f around
1 percent of GDP from the transport of oil and gas via the B T C and SCP pipelines starting
from the second half of 2005.
Georgia’s extemal financing requirements for 2005 are estimated at around US$950
13.
million. Of this amount, US$730 million i s assumed to be financed through foreign direct
investment (FDI) and US$220 million through multilateral and bilateral support.
Disbursements b y IDA in FY06 are expected to be US$75 million, including US$20 million
through the proposed Poverty Reduction Support Operation (PRSO). External financing
needs are projected at US$468 million annually during 2006-08, with FDI covering only an
average of US$236 million as the construction of the pipelines ends. The residual financing
needs are assumed to be met b y an equal m i x of public and private borrowings, including
continued support from the Bank Group and the IMF.

14.
Debt sustainability. Georgia’s extemal debt position has improved since 2004, but
it still faces a moderate risk of worsening. In early 2004, the stock o f total external debt was
equivalent to 49 percent of GDP and principal arrears along with debt service due in 2004 was
equivalent to almost half the country’s gross reserves. In July 2004, an agreement was
reached with the Paris Club, which rescheduled payments due to Paris Club creditor^.^ The
debt service to exports ratio declined to 18 percent and with robust growth and restrained net
borrowing, the external debt stock also decreased to 37 percent of GDP at the end o f 2004.
However, stress tests indicate that Georgia’s debt burden i s vulnerable to a deterioration in the
external current account deficit; the volume and terms of future capital flows; and a negative
export growth shock. These r i s k s can be mitigated b y continued implementation o f measures
to improve the business environment to encourage foreign direct investment and strengthen
export performance. Under the baseline scenario o f the debt sustainability analysis, external
debt service i s projected to decline to about 6-7 percent of exports in 2008. Given the much
stronger revenue performance, the Government’s liquidity position should also improve
rapidly, with the ratio of debt service payments to total government revenues falling from
about 17 percent in 2004 to less than 7 percent in 2008. A detailed debt sustainability
analysis i s provided in Annex V.

e. Governance and Public Sector Capacity Constraints
Since early 2004, an aggressive war against corruption has been underway. Prior to
15.
the Rose Revolution, Georgia regularly ranked as one o f the most corrupt countries in the
world. Surveys and studies revealed that corruption wasted public resources, reduced public
-revenues, underminedpublic investment, interfered with the delivery o f public social services,
acted as an additional tax on commercial activity, distorted market signals, and undermined
The rescheduling was structured on Houston terms. Official Development Loans (ODA) will be repaid over 20 years,
including 10 years grace at concessional terms. Guaranteed commercial credits and 50 percent of arrears will be repaid over
20 years with 5 years grace at interest rates to be set no higher than in previous bilateral agreements. The remaining arrears
will be repaid over three years starting December 2004.

6

the rule o f law. Public revulsion with the extent of corruption was one o f the driving forces
behind the Rose Revolution. Since then, a range o f hard-hitting steps have been taken to flush
out corruption, including arresting and prosecuting notoriously corrupt officials, strengthening
legislation, reorganizing key institutions (such as Chamber o f Control, State Security,
Customs Administration, and Financial Police), and replacing the “traffic police” with a
modern and better paid patrol police. The sharp increase in tax revenues i s one clear
indication o f the effectiveness o f these measures. Anecdotal reports also indicate that the
Government’s efforts to improve internal security have reduced extortion and improved the
prospects of viable economic activity.6 In education, significant reforms to combat corruption
at the higher education level are being put in place, including introduction o f an institutional
accreditation process, initial audits of institutions (which l e d to closure o f some poor quality
institutions), introduction o f unified entrance examinations, and a new national assessment
and examination system, as well as building teacher training capacity.

16.
The anti-corruption effort has strong ownership at the highest levels of Government.
Clear messages have been conveyed to the public and the international community o f the
Government’s intention t o improve governance systems and processes. Ministers have been
given the authority and responsibility to eradicate corruption in their ministries and are being
held accountable for results. As an exampIe, in July 2005, the Finance Minister resigned,
following a case of corruption in the tax office. While the Minister was not personally
implicated, he assumed responsibility for not having maintained enough control. The
President has also recently approved a National Anti-corruption Strategy prepared by a task
force representing Government and civil society. The strategy introduces comprehensive
measures for prevention and elimination o f corruption: (i)civil service reform; (ii)
strengthening o f principles o f accountability and public disclosure, including facilitation of
public feedback mechanisms; (iii)strengthening the rule o f law; (iv) strengthening control
bodies o f all three branches o f authority and monitoring by society; (v) facilitation of
competitive business sector development; and (vi) international integration. The Decree
assigns a period o f t w o months to develop and adopt an Action Plan o f Strategy
Implementation, which shall include all major state agencies (ministries, sub-departmental
agencies, regulating bodies, legal entities o f public law functioning in the field of education).
17.

Weaknesses in the civil service hamper public economic management, investment, and
service delivery. While capacity prevails at the highest levels of the Government, decisionmaking has not been delegated downward and mid-levels o f the civil service remain underempowered, poorly remunerated and unmotivated, undermining the effectiveness o f the
public sector. Surveys indicate that l o w civil servant salaries along with l o w security of
tenure, lack o f meritocracy, and poor examples for leaders are perceived as the most
significant cause o f corruption. Initial civil service reforms including substantial restructuring
among state agencies prompted by the L a w on Government Functions and Structure have
helped streamline some functions o f the central administration. Salary revisions have also
-taken place at higher levels o f the c i v i l service. Further analysis remains to be done, however,
to appraise the actual impact o f the first generation reforms on reducing duplication and
clarifying mandates among as well as within the state bodies. With increased external aid
flows expected over the next few years, strengthening Georgia’s capacity to absorb and
For example, there are reports that farmers can now get a fairer price for hazelnuts, whose prices were previously controlled
by organized armed groups.

7

effectively utilize these resources will be critical. IDA assistance in the forthcoming CPS
period will support the civil service reform and capacity building agenda, through the PRSO
program, the FY06 Public Sector Reform Support Program (PSRSP), and capacity building
components o f investment projects. Integration o f the project implementation units (PIUS) o f
IDA projects i n t o regular line Ministries, as discussed below, w i l l also strengthen project
implementation capacity in the Government.

d. Poverty and Inequality
18.

Despite economic growth, poverty levels remain high and have increased in rural
areas. F r o m 1994 to 2004, GNI per capita rose from US$480 to US$1020. Despite solid

economic growth, overall poverty has remained high affecting more than 50 percent o f the
population, while the extreme poverty incidence increased to 17.4 percent in 2004, up from
15.1 percent in 2002, according to State Department o f Statistics (SDS) data.7 Income and
consumption inequality are also relatively high, with Gini coefficients hovering around 0.35
for consumption and 0.45 for incomes. Rural poverty has seen an increase vis-a-vis urban
poverty: while urban poverty declined from 56 percent o f the total in 1996 to 5 1 percent in
2004, rural poverty increased from 47 percent to 53 percent. The relative incidence o f
extreme poverty in rural areas doubled from 10 percent o f the total in 1996 to 20 percent in
2004. Households with a larger share o f children and elderly, or with a l o w educated or
disabled head o f household, were more likely to be poor. There are also wide regional
differences in living standards. The capital city o f Tbilisi fares better than other regions,
while the highest overall incidence o f poverty i s in secondary cities.
19.
Reasons for continued widespread poverty, despite economic growth, include limited
job creation, stagnant agricultural production, and low social transfer levels. Stagnant
agricultural growth, l o w productivity, underemployment, labor shedding in public and
privatized entities, and lack o f access to land and livestock are significant factors in increasing
poverty risk. The SDS poverty estimates find that families with unemployed members; rural
families with no land or small lots o f land and with few or n o cattle; families with three or
more children; and single parent families with children are more likely to be poor. These
findings and prior Bank analyses indicate that labor market status, assets ownership and
household composition are key determinants o f poverty. As discussed below, key growth
sectors have generated limited employment and areas with the greatest potential j o b creation
have stagnated. Social transfers have also been at very l o w levels and inadequate to meet
basic needs. Moreover, the previous Government regularly failed to meet social transfer
obligations and public sector salary payments, which exacerbated the poverty situation. This
situation i s likely to improve in the near future, with recent initiatives that have doubled
pension levels, cleared a significant proportion o f arrears, ensured timely payment o f social
transfers, and plans to introduce a cash family poverty benefit targeted at the extreme poor.
A n on-going IDA Programmatic Poverty Assessment w i l l continue to support efforts to
strengthen poverty monitoring and analysis during the CPS period.

’

State Dept o f Statistics and Govemment o f Georgia, EDPRP Progress Report, June 2005. Poverty estimates are based on
household integrated survey (HIS) data. The Survey has been conducted since 1996. Due to changes in HIS in 2002, the
data sets as of 2002 are not comparable to the previous H I S rounds.

8

Table 2: Overall and Extreme Povertv Incidence (as calculated bv SDS)
Overall poverty incidence
(Percent o f total population; official
line)

2002
2003
2004*

5.5
11.1
6.2

125.3
130.7
135.0

55.4
52.7
51.3

48.5
56.2
53.4

Poverty lines in current GEL per adult equivalent.

52.1
54.5
52.3

Extreme poverty incidence
(Percent o f total population; alternative line)

60.3
63.1
67.1

15.3
15.2
15.0

15.0
18.0
19.8

15.1
16.6
17.4

* Covers January-September 2004.

e. Human Development and Prospects for Meeting the MDGs
20.

Non-income poverty indicators have shown little improvement so far, but Georgia can
potentially achieve most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. From a

relatively high base inherited from Soviet times, social outcomes have been under pressure
due to l o w public expenditure, ineffective social service delivery structures, and the high level
of income poverty. Health outcomes, in particular, have not exhibited a positive trend. The
under-five mortality rate, for example, worsened from 29 per 1000 live births in 2001 to 33
per 1000 in 2004, while the maternal mortality rate increased from 47 per 100,000 live births
in 2000 to 51 in 2003.* In education, access to quality education for the poorest and minority
groups remains an issue and there has apparently been slippage on the MDG o f the retention
rate of children to the end o f primary schooling. Nevertheless, with adequate reforms and
investment, Georgia has the potential to achieve many o f the MDGs. School enrollment rates
are s t i l l high and education goals can be met if current plans for upgrading the education
system are implemented. In health, given recent increased expenditure allocations and plans
for significant restructuring in the sector, targets may be met, although this will require
sustained commitment and effective implementation of reforms. On the other hand, halving
the proportion o f people in rural areas without access to improved sources o f water supply b y
2015 i s a serious challenge. Adequate integration o f sustainable natural resource use policies
i s also unlikely to be achieved in the absence o f a significant increase in political commitment
to the reform agenda. An overall concern moreover, i s that limited availability and reliability
-ef data in Georgia undermine the monitoring and evaluation o f progress toward MDGs. The
status o f MDGs in Georgia i s summarized in Annex VI.
2 1.

A range of steps are planned to address serious structural problems in the health care
system. Deteriorating health outcomes are partly attributed to l o w utilization rates, high outs See Govemment of GeorgidUNDP, Millennium Development Goals in Georgia, 2004

9

of-pocket payments, and a weak primary health care system. Georgia has the lowest health
service utilization in Europe and Central Asia, with less than t w o outpatient visits per capita
and less than five inpatient visits per 100 people. High out o f pocket expenses place a severe
burden on the poor, with some studies indicating that nearly 10 percent o f individuals fall
below the poverty line after incurring hospitalization expenditure. For some groups among the
poor, rural, and mountain populations, access to quality primary health care i s a severe
problem. Annual public spending on heath i s less than one percent of the GDP. Underfinancing of the sector i s compounded by inefficient resource management and structural
deficiencies. The high number o f both primary and hospital level providers spreads the budget
thinly and leads to high fixed costs. There i s excessive hospital infrastructure of deteriorating
buildings and equipment. Human resource supply i s unbalanced, with an over-supply o f
doctors, too many narrow specialists, and too few general practitioners and nurses. The
Government i s planning a range o f steps to enhance access to high quality essential healthcare
a sustainable increase
services, especially for the poor. This i s to be achieved by ensuring: (i)
in public financing; (ii)
health care affordability to the public; (iii)
intra-sectoral reallocation
of resources towards more cost-effective care modalities; and (iv) optimizing the structure o f
the healthcare system.
Reforms are underway to address declining quality and relevance in the public
22.
education system. While Georgia has maintained universal adult literacy and reasonable
access to primary education, the system i s under stress due to decreasing quality and limited
capacity to meet the demands o f a dynamic labor market. General education spending i s only
1.8 percent o f GDP, with most o f the budget absorbed by staff salaries, leaving little room for
quality enhancement. The teaching force i s aging and learning materials, curriculum, and
teaching methods are outdated, contributing to poor scholastic achievement, inefficient use of
teachers and increasing dropout rates. Corruption has been a major issue in higher education,
with outright buying o f university places and degrees. Data collection in the education has
been particularly poor. The Government has begun to address issues plaguing the sector.
New laws on general and tertiary education were passed, improving the structure and
financing o f the system. At the general education level, changes include development o f new
curriculum and introduction o f per capita financing to schools with decentralized
management. Major efforts to combat corruption in higher education are being implemented.
The Government has also signed the Bologna declaration to make tertiary education
compatible with other European university standards. While good progress i s being made on
systemic and institutional reforms, however, further attention i s needed to address the needs
of the poorest at the general education level to ensure that there i s n o further slippage in
achieving basic education-for-all goals. Further efforts are also needed to improve the
conditions under which existing schools operate.
The Government faces considerable challenges in improving social protection systems
23.
that have suffered from poor targeting, low levels of benefits, and ineficient administration.
Social protection systems in Georgia comprise: (i)pensions; (ii)transfers to internally
displaced persons; and (iii)
a poverty benefit program; and account for some 4.2 percent o f
GDP and 20 percent o f total public spending. Since coming to office, the Government has
begun to pay social transfers on time, doubled pension levels, and cleared most inherited
arrears. Yet, in real terms pensions are barely higher than in 1998 and are s t i l l at least onefourth below the food poverty line. In the medium-term, challenges facing the state pension
system include paying pensions on time; increasing pensions to about 25-30 percent of the

10

average wage; and improving pension administration. In the longer term, there i s a need to
formulate a pension system development strategy to establish an affordable, fiscally
sustainable, diversified pension system, which w i l l protect the elderly against poverty and
provide for consumption smoothing. Resources spent on social assistance programs have also
been insufficient to make a real difference for the poor. They have been spread thinly over
numerous fragmented programs and targeted mostly on status rather than income (i,e.
internally displaced persons, veterans, disabled, orphans, elderly). Hence, leakage to the nonpoor has been inevitable. Administration o f transfer programs i s weak, with staff poorly
trained and paid; record keeping outdated; and monitoring and evaluation barely existing.

f. Employment, Wages, and Potential Sources of Growth
24.
Despite economic growth since 2000, employment has not been increasing. While
GDP has grown an average of 6 percent a year since 2000, total employment declined by 3
percent, including a 2 percent decline in wage employment.’ This partly reflects continued
restructuring and reductions in public sector employment. Retrenchments have been
particularly large in public administratioddefense, where employment dropped by 22 percent.
Health sector employment also decreased by 39 percent, following measures to license and
certify providers and hospital sector restructuring. In education, on the other hand,
employment rose by 11 percent, reflecting increased employment in both public and
especially private sector schools. The decline in total employment also reflects some j o b
shedding in the manufacturing sector, as employers absorbed the slack resulting from
underemployment and previous employment hording, while also shedding excess labor. Thus
while manufacturing grew by an average o f 10 percent a year since 2000, employment in the
sector declined by 17 percent over the period.
25.

Key growth sectors have not shown significant employment-generating capacity and
wages remain low in the sectors with the highest employment. Since independence, the bulk
o f j o b creation has been in self-employment, primarily in agriculture as well as small-scale
trading and service activities. The high levels of self-employment reflect limited employmentgenerating capacity in the main growth sectors to replace collapsed Soviet-era production
systems. F o r example, while strong growth was seen in transport and communications,
employment in these sectors showed a decline o f 1.7 percent since 2000. SMEs, which tend
to be more labor-intensive, saw only 2 percent growth from 2002 to 2004. Meanwhile wages
remain l o w in the sectors with the highest employment. While the 2004 average wage rate
across all sectors was GEL118 (or US$60) per month, wages in agriculture, education, and
health, which account for 33 percent o f total wage employment, averaged only GEL74-84 per
month. The highest wages are in mining, finance, and construction, although these sectors
account for only 7 percent o f wage employment. Self-employment (non-wage) activities in
agriculture, small-scale trading, and services are characterized by l o w earnings that often
fluctuate by season and generally offer little potential for long term earnings growth.
Compa?isons
with poverty data suggest that only workers in construction, hotelshestaurants,

Source: SDS. T h e reliability of wage and employment data i s uncertain and should be treated with caution. No reliable
data exists on the actual size of civil service both prior and after reorganization.

11

transport, communications, and real estate can keep four person households with a single
source o f income above the poverty line."
26.
Improving employment opportunities and incomes w i l l require reallocation of labor
toward higher value-added activities. Improving incomes and employment i s likely to
reallocation of labor from lowrequire: (i)increased returns to smallholder farming; (ii)
productivity self-employment into higher value-added activities in commercial agriculture,
processing, trade, and services; and (iii)
increased productivity in processing activities and a
gradual rise in formal wages. A s agriculture i s relatively satiated w i t h labor, increasing
returns to farmers are likely to occur through more use o f capital and increased productivity.
Job creation in agro-processing and small manufacturing w i l l likely have the largest impact as
i t can attract many poor, unslulled, and self-employed workers. Earnings in manufacturing
are 70 percent higher than in farming and shifting jobs to processing would thus imply a
significant increase in cash income and household welfare. Similarly, wages in hotels and
transportation are double earnings in agriculture, and j o b creation in these sectors w i l l lead to
significantly improved standards o f living. As discussed below, reallocating labor toward
high-value addition activities w i l l require removing administrative bottlenecks, improving
infrastructure, and eliminating corruption in order to improve the environment for investment
and growth o f businesses.
27.
A range of natural endowments ofSer strong potential for labor-intensive export
oriented growth. Georgia's l o w income level and small population suggest that export
markets w i l l have to drive economic growth. Georgia has a range o f attributes that suggest
good growth potential in export-oriented activities that are likely to increase the demand for
labor and broaden the base o f asset-ownership. Georgia has a relatively open trade regime;
joined the WTO in 2000; has free trade agreements with Russia and other CIS countries; and
has recently been granted preferential access to EU markets. I t has an educated, relatively
cheap labor force and a long tradition o f entrepreneurship. Fertile land and favorable climates
enable production o f diverse agricultural produce. Georgia has a comparative advantage in
export-oriented agro-processing areas, such as wine, hazelnut, and fruit and vegetable
processing, which are significant potential sources o f employment as w e l l as market growth
for farm products. Dense forests cover one third o f the country and good potential for laborintensive export-oriented wood processing exists, if a sustainable forestry regime can be
developed. Georgia also has numerous mineral resources that promise some employment
creation. While low wage rates in Georgia give i t a competitive edge in labor-intensive
manufacturing, some o f this i s advantage lost by l o w productivity and higher costs associated
with poor public infrastructure. Studies indicate that f i r m s with foreign collaboration have
achieved significantly higher productivity than local f i r m s , due to economies o f scale, better
management techniques, and greater market knowledge and access. A key means to increase
growth and productivity in processing activities i s thus through attracting greater foreign
direct investment into these sectors.
Improving conditions in the region suggest an opportunity to expand transit-economy
28.
and tourism activities. Georgia i s located on the shortest route between Europe and
Azerbaijan, Armenia and the Central Asian Republics through i t s Black Sea ports and also
lo
Georgia has core labor standards that broadly conform to international norms, protecting against forced labor,
employment of children under 16 years old, discrimination in employment, and allowing freedom of association and the right
to collective bargaining.

12

links Russia and Turkey. Georgia also maintains good relations with all o f i t s neighbors,
making i t a natural conduit in an otherwise volatile region. However, while Armenian and
Azeri traffic presently use the Georgian route, Central Asian countries tend to use alternate
longer routes due to high transit times, poor road conditions, and multiple borders crossings
on the Georgian route. Meanwhile, Georgia’s scenic mountain regions, Black Sea beaches,
and rich historical and cultural heritage offer strong tourist potential. Bank analyses suggest
that Georgia’s potential in tourism lies in the creation o f niche markets, such as eco-tourism,
winter sports, adventure tourism, and cultural toursim. With the improving, law and order
situation, rising incomes in the region, and greater interregional connectivity through the
transit corridor, Georgia has an opportunity to revive i t s tourist industry for the CIS market as
well as niche markets in Europe and the Far East. Annex I V provides a more detailed review
of potential sources o f employment-generating growth in Georgia. The FY06 Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM) w i l l also focus on growth and employment issues.

g. Constraints to Employment and Growth
29.
Corruption has significantly added to the cost of doing business. Past surveys indicate
that corruption has significantly interfered with private business development. One study
indicated that the average firm in Georgia paid 9 percent of revenues in bribes, with customs
being the largest recipient.
SMEs, which are more likely to provide employment
opportunities, have faced a higher incidence o f day-to-day bribery requirements - while 14
percent of large enterprises reported paying bribes, 35 percent of medium and 46 percent o f
small enterprises reported paying bribes. Corruption in the traffic police and lack o f law and
order discouraged the emergence o f marketing channels for agricultural produce, such as
intermediate agents between producers and markets, transporters, and wholesalers. One
survey indicated that almost 40 percent o f rural households paid bribes, many to traffic police
who extracted payments on goods traveling to markets. As discussed above, the Government
has launched a full-fledged effort to address corruption.
A range of reforms have been initiated to reduce administrative barriers to private
sector development. While Georgia has been establishing a largely appropriate legal and
regulatory regime on paper, inconsistent implementation and enforcement of the regime has
undermined the business environment. A range o f administrative impediments has increased
transaction costs, including excessive licensing requirements, less than transparent business
inspections; obsolete certifications systems; a complex customs code; and cumbersome border
procedures. Since coming into office, the Government has introduced a range of reforms to
ease the costs o f starting and doing business. Property registration has been simplified. A
new tax code, effective from January 2005, simplifies the tax system, broadens the tax base,
lowers some rates to facilitate compliance, and minimizes rent seeking. The Government also
aims to reduce the number o f licenses and permits (which are slated to go from over 900 to
about 160 with a pending legislative change), improve customs administration, and introduce
a one-stop shop system for investors.

30.

3 1.
The poor state of infrastructure, particularly energy supply, continues to have a broad
detrimental impact on the economy and public welfare. Despite significant investment since
the mid-l990s, incomplete reforms in energy have left the sector financially unviable and a
13

continued drain on public finances and service provision remains unreliable. A 2004 IFC
survey indicated that SMEs see infrastructure among the top barriers to business development,
with 68 percent identifying i t as a major or serious obstacle. The cost o f energy, in particular,
was identified as the third most serious obstacle, following political instability and unstable
regulation. According to a 2002 IFC investment climate assessment, Georgia had 63 days o f
electrical outages a year, worse than any other country in the region. To address the energy
issue, the Government i s formulating a strategy o f gradual privatization concurrent with
structural improvements in the sector. The initial focus i s on rehabilitating generation and
transmission systems and on metering and improved tariff collection. Yet, progress i s slow
and the system remains at risk o f collapse. The gas system i s also in severe disrepair and
large amounts of methane are leaking into the atmosphere. Deteriorating water infrastructure
i s of increasing concern, particularly given the impact o f recent floods. The water sector
remains highly inefficient and large arrears among the water utilities partly account for the
debt crisis in the energy sector.
Limited transport infrastructure adds to the cost of doing business and leaves much of
32.
the population out of the national economy. In transport, deteriorating infrastructure adds to
the cost o f doing business, deters foreign investment, adds time and costs to the transit
corridor, and leaves large segments o f the population out o f mainstream economic activities.
Analyses show a close correlation between poverty in rural households and the extent to
which they are linked to markets." Rural families are isolated from the national economy due
to lack of means of transport or satisfactory roads to reach markets. Some 60 percent o f the
rural population lives in areas where the main road i s in a bad or very bad state, while 92
percent lives in areas where secondary feeder roads are bad or very bad. Less than 30 percent
o f local (tertiary) roads are paved and travel in many parts can only be achieved during certain
seasons and then with considerable delays. The recent heavy rains also show that many roads
are prone to severe flood damage. Poor transport infrastructure partly explains why almost
two thirds of rural household agricultural production i s for self-subsistence and that about 20
percent o f rural households do not trade at all. Poor connectivity has also contributed to the
weak linkages between farmers and agro-processors as few intermediate agents, wholesalers,
or farmer-based organizations exist. A Bank study indicated that local level road and bridge
rehabilitation projects generate clear economic benefits at the community level, decreasing
the importance o f barter trade and increasing the number o f SMEs.12 Inadequate transport
infrastructure also deters investment in Georgia's potential growth sectors and undermines the
transit economy. L o n g transit times from points within as well as through Georgia, despite
the relatively short distances, add to the cost o f inventory for goods in transit. Currently, less
than five percent o f the road network supports the transit economy and foreign trade and these
segments require rehabilitation and improved connection to local roads.

lo
Expressed

as a percentage of households without a single sale of agricultural products during a year.
12 See Michael Lokshin and Ruslan Yemtsov, Evaluating the Impact of Infrastructure Rehabilitation Projects
on Household Welfare in Rural Georgia, WB Policy Research Working Paper, Oct. 2003

14

111. GEORGIA’SPOVERTY
REDUCTIONSTRATEGY
a. Key Elements of the EDPRP
33.
The July 2003 Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Program (EDPRP)
presented a comprehensive strategy for poverty reduction in Georgia. EDPRP preparation
took three years and involved extensive consultations with Georgian civil society, NGOs, and
the international donor community. The EDPRP’s two main goals are: (i)rapid and
sustainable economic development, with a target o f 5-8 percent GDP growth a year; and (ii)
reduced extreme poverty, with a target decline from 14 percent to 4-5 percent by 2015, and a
reduction in overall poverty, from 52 percent to 20-25 percent b y 2015. T o meet these goals,
the EDPRP prioritized improving: (i)
governance; (ii)
macroeconomic policies, particularly in
the fiscal area; (iii)
the business environment; (iv) human capital; (v) the safety net for the
poor; (vi) priority sectors o f the economy - energy, transport, communications, tourism and
agriculture; and (vii) protection of the natural environment. The elevation of governance as
the country’s highest priority objective was a direct result of the extensive consultations with
representatives of civil society. The EDPRP i s well aligned with the MDGs and i t s timespan, goals, and objectives are concurrent with MDG targets. The current Government has
asserted i t s commitment to the Millenium Declaration and a Governmental Commission on
Realization o f MDGs was reconstituted after the Rose Revolution. Country-specific targets
adjust the international targets to reflect conditions in Georgia and add a target on socioeconomic rehabilitation o f people displaced by conflicts and natural calamities.
34.
The EDPRP remains the foundation of the current Govemment’s poverty reduction
strategy. In the EDPRP Progress report o f March 2005, the current Government reaffirmed
i t s commitment to implementing the EDPRP. The Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN)
concluded that progress in implementing the strategy over the past year had been successful,
due in large part to the impressive improvement in public finances. The Government had
acted boldly to tackle corruption, in keeping with i t s intention to consolidate democracy and
improve the business climate. As the Government strengthens the strategic focus and
implementation of the EDPRP, there are four challenges: (i)the links between the strategy
and annual Government budgets need to be strengthened b y developing a MTEF aligned with
the strategy and b y ensuring that the Ministry o f Finance has a key role in implementing and
further developing the strategy (a concern also noted in the original JSAN); (ii)
areas that
need strengthening include ensuring reliable electricity supply to all regions, transparent and
fair privatization, adequate resources for health and education; and rapid progress with a
targeted social safety net; and (iv) governance and public service delivery need to be
improved along with further empowerment o f civil society.

b. The Evolving Framework
35.
I n line with the EDPRP, the Govemment has established employment-generating
growth along with human resource development and protection of the vulnerable as its key
development objectives. Key measures for employment-generating growth are: (i)
eradication
privatization of state assets and improved management of assets under state
of corruption; (ii)
15

control; (iii)liberalized transport policies, broadened transport network, and improved
standards and maintenance in the road sector; (iv) improved reliability and viability o f the
energy system; (v) optimized customs, tax, and financial control; and (vi) better business
licensing, standardization, metrology, accreditation, and market supervision systems. Sectors
targeted for specific interventions are: tourism, agriculture, and agro-processing. In human
development, k e y objectives are: (i)improved efficiency o f health services and expanded
access to health care for the poor and vulnerable; (ii)improved quality and coverage o f
education and (iii)
improved targeting and efficiency o f social protection measures, including
those for internally displaced persons. A three-year action plan presented in the EDPRP
Progress Report identifies broad investment and policy actions required to implement this
agenda. In addition, the Government i s presently developing detailed sector strategies that
identify key objectives for each sectoral ministry and spell out priority investment and action
plans to achieve them. Links between the priority setting exercise and the MTEF have been
established so that agreed priorities will be reflected in the budget allocation process. A good
example o f the process i s in the education sector, where priority reforms are being carried out
in both basic and higher education that w i l l be backed by substantially increased allocations in
the 2006 budget.

IV. BANKGROUPPARTNERSHIP
STRATEGY
a. Past Experience and Portfolio Performance
36.
The outcome of Bank Group assistance to Georgia since 1997 was moderately
satisfactory. Since Georgia joined the W o r l d Bank in 1992, IDA has made 39 credits and one
grant for a total committed principal o f US$796 million as o f June 30, 2005. Georgia joined
I F C in 1995, and since 1997 IFC has invested US$127 million in 21 projects with 10 clients
in finance, power, o i l transport, and manufacturing. Georgia undertook initial reforms with
some success, particularly in privatization o f SMEs, trade liberalization, and the establishment
of the basic legal framework for a market economy. IDA played a useful role in supporting
this reform process, including through four structural adjustment credits and one o f IFC’s
largest investments was in the main electricity distribution company serving Tbilisi.
However, poor governance and corruption emerged as critical problems that adversely
affected all aspects o f the economy, as well as IDA and I F C programs. Progress slowed in
most areas, including privatization of larger enterprises, fiscal management, energy, and
decentralization. Only after the Rose Revolution did reforms accelerate once again and good
progress was seen toward CAS objectives. A Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
_CCASCR) evaluates Bank Group assistance to Georgia since 1997. The main lessons o f this
experience are summarized in Table 3 and Annex I1contains the full CASCR report.
The current IDA portfolio is fully satisfactory as of the beginning of FY06. The
37.
current IDA portfolio has 19 active credits for 17 investment projects, with total commitments
of US$309 million, o f which about US$187 million i s undisbursed as o f July 1, 2005. The
average age of the current portfolio i s about 4.2 years. There are also eight active Trust Fund

16

operations (being executed b y the Government) with a total value of US$20 million, out o f
which US$15 i s undisbursed as of July 1, 2005. The active portfolio w i l l reduce significantly,
with about 7-10 projects due to close over the next two years (see Table 4). At the end o f
FY05, there were no projects at risk in the portfolio. The disbursement ratio for FY05 was 20
percent (compared to 17.8 percent for FY04) with total disbursements of US$43 million.

Table 3: Lessons and Implicationsfrom the Past
Lessons Learned

Implications

IDA resources were scattered thinly across a broad
front and only partial progress was seen in most areas.

Narrow focus and concentrate resources toward a
few critical areas that can have broad implications
for the rest o f the economy.

An unempowered and poorly motivated civil service
has been a major constraint to policy and project
implementation, and the delivery o f public services.

Reforms to empower, motivate and rationalize the
civil service are a priority for improved public
investment and policy implementation capacity.

Inadequate dissemination of IDA activities undermined
wider understanding and participation.
In the context o f very poor governance and an

unmotivated civil service, too much emphasis was
placed on TA that had limited longer-term impact.

A consistent public information strategy should be
maintained. Focus groups can enhance the
monitoring and evaluation process and increase
pressure to sustain the reform agenda.
TA for long-term capacity-building in a poorly
motivated and remunerated civil service should be
used cautiously. Reforms to address fundamental
weaknesses in the civil service should take

38.
IFC’s active portfolio comprises projects with 6 clients for US$53 million. Four I F C
clients are in the financial sector and IFC has been proactive in providing advisory services to
support institutional strengthening and introduction o f new products, such as housing finance
and leasing. An advisory project in the leasing sector recently concluded with an investment
in TBC Leasing in June 2005. IFC i s also an investor in the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline
and i s supporting S M E advisory activities around this project. Finally, IFC has a project with
the Mina Glass bottle factory in Ksani. IFC i s also engaged in TA through the Foreign
Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) and the Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) for
improved business climate and corporate governance.

~

Over the forthcoming CPS period, PIUs w i l l be gradually integrated into line
39.
ministries. The Government has decided to more fully integrate existing PIUs into line
ministries, so that Ministry staff take over responsibility for day-to-day project management.
PIUs were established under the former Government for most IDA projects in response to
lack of capacity in line ministries and poor governance issues. They emerged as autonomous
bodies with highly qualified and well paid staff and proved effective in implementing
projects, but to some extent undermined Government ownership of the projects they
supported. With changes now underway to improve capacity and salaries in the civil service,
the rationale for maintaining autonomous bodies for project implementation i s not as strong.
IDA and the Government have agreed to review project implementation arrangements on a
case-by-case basis. Each ministry w i l l work with relevant project teams to determine what
changes are needed to make line ministries directly responsible for project implementation

17

and develop an action plan that allows changes to be implemented over time without undue
disruptions to project activities. The PIU integration process w i l l be closely monitored to
ensure that key staff are retained and that financial management and procurement
arrangements are fully satisfactory. The move towards PIU integration w i l l be coordinated
with other donors to ensure consistency and greater aid harmonization of procedures. These
efforts w i l l complement work on expenditure management, transparency, and budgeting to
strengthen country systems and enhance Georgia’s capacity to absorb and properly utilize the
increased aid flows, privatization receipts, and fiscal revenues that are expected in the future.

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09

55

70

60

15

Fund Iincl earthquake

Education AFL
’ I

Electricity Market Support
Project

Roads Project

Agricultural Research
Extension & Training

Judicial Reform

Enterprise Rehabilitation

Integrated Coastal
Management

Irrigation and Drainage
Community Development

Structural Reform Support

Social Investment Fund I1

GEF Protected Areas
Development

MDDP I1

Health I1

Forests Development
Secondary and Local
Roads
Rural Development

Energy Transit Institution
Building

b. World Bank Group Partnership Strategy for FY06-09
40.

Georgia’s present challenge is to broaden the sources of growth and enhance
investment in the social sectors in order to reduce poverty and attain the MDGs. As indicated
above, Georgia’s recent growth has been concentrated in a small number o f sectors that have
had limited impact on employment. Moreover, the Government’s poor revenue performance
undermined social protection and investments in health and education. These factors
combined to inhibit poverty reduction and adequate progress toward the MDGs. Meanwhile,
Georgia’s significant economic development potential offered b y agriculture, agroprocessing, transit-economy activities, small-scale manufacturing, and tourism remains
largely untapped. Rural poverty, moreover, has risen disproportionately and access to basic
social and economic services outside Tbilisi remains limited.

To help enhance Georgia’s prospects for poverty reduction and attainment of MDGs,
41.
-the overarching objectives of the FY06-09 CPS are:
0

Enabling Income- and Employment-Generating Growth. Employment-generating
growth implies improving the environment for foreign and domestic private investment
and operation of businesses, particularly those that utilize Georgia’s natural resources
and labor for export markets; that exploit i t s transit economy potential; that have spill-

18

over effects supporting growth businesses, such as the financial, logistics and retail
sectors; and that develop i t s tourism potential. K e y objectives toward this end are:
9 Addressing corruption and governance issues;
9 Removal o f administrative barriers to private sector development;
9 Improved electricity and gas infrastructure;
9 Improved highway infrastructure;
9 Improved access to rural infrastructure and services;
9 Sustainable use o f forestry and other natural resources.
0

0

Human Development and Social Protection. After years o f neglect the Government
i s attaching high priority to basic public services such as health, education, social
protection, and pensions, as well as basic municipal and rural infrastructure. K e y
objectives are:
9 Addressing corruption and governance issues;
9 Improved access, affordability, and quality of essential health services;
9 Improved access and quality o f general education;
9 Improved level and targeting o f social protection;
9 Improved management o f the pension system;
9 Strengthened municipal and community service delivery.

Improving Efficiency in Public Services. Attaining the above objectives requires
building capacity for efficient, effective, accountable, and trustworthy public institutions
and processes. In the past, poor governance and ineffective public institutions crippled
policymaking and public service delivery. K e y objectives are:
9 Addressing corruption and governance issues;
9 Improved public budgeting and expenditure management;
9 Effective local governance and inter-governmental fiscal relations;
9 Transparent procurement and financial management;
9 Modernization o f the judiciary;
9 Better civil service management;
9 Strengthened monitoring and evaluation capacity.

Addressing corruption is a crosscutting development goal of the CPS. The CPS
42.
supports the Government’s anti-corruption agenda on several fronts. K e y objectives are to
strengthen anti-corruption efforts in areas that most affect the business climate and delivery of
social services; reduce opportunities for high-level corruption; and institutionalize the anticorruption effort to ensure i t s resilience over time. T o improve the business environment,
measures are supported that reduce opportunities for corruption at points of service such as
customs, inspections, licensing, taxation, and the court system. T o improve access to social
services, measures are supported that reduce opportunities for corruption at points of public
education and health service delivery, which raise the cost o f or discourage the use o f these
services, particularly among the poor. T o reduce the opportunities for high-level corruption
and ensure the integrity o f public resource management, a strong emphasis i s being placed on
transparent public budgeting and expenditure control; building effective country financial
management systems; strengthening country project implementation capacity through
improved procurement systems and integration o f PIUs; and developing effective expenditure

19

Lo

0
e,

.-

e

c

e
e,

and financial management systems in local governments. To promote the resilience o f the
anti-corruption effort over time, core fiduciary and oversight institutions w i l l be strengthened,
including the supreme audit institution; parliamentary oversight committees; and the
judiciary. Mechanisms to promote civil society voice and participation in the anti-conuption
effort w i l l also be developed. Support i s also being provided to strengthen corporate
governance and key public regulatory bodies. Finally, reforms to improve remuneration and
management in the civil service w i l l help reduce the incentives for bribery and corruption.

c. Enabling Income- and Employment-Generating Growth
43.

I n order to support sustainable growth and employment in Georgia, Bank Group
interventions w i l l aim to reduce obstacles to doing business imposed by corruption,
regulatory issues, and key infrastructure bottlenecks. The medium-term goal i s to facilitate
an enabling environment for private investment in the potential growth sectors. In the longerterm, investment and growth in these sectors w i l l help increase employment and incomes for
the poor in Georgia as well as make economic opportunities more equitable for regions
outside Tbilisi. As discussed above, the Government has acknowledged the broad range o f

policy, institutional, and physical constraints to greater employment-generating activities, and
initiated a range of measures to address them. Over the forthcoming CPS period, the Bank
Group w i l l support the Government’s efforts in the areas discussed below.
Addressing corruption and governance issues
The PRSO program and TA from IFC will emphasize reducing corruption at points
of service that afSect the operation of businesses. Corruption has significantly undermined the

44.

business environment in the past, adding to the cost of doing business, distorting market
signals, increasing the cost of transport, and undermining the rule of law. SMEs, in particular,
have borne the burden o f these costs. Points where corruption has particularly undermined
investment and the operation of businesses include business licensing and permits,
inspections, customs, tax administration, and police. Measures under P R S O I to reduce
opportunities for corruption at these points include re-organizing and re-staffing the traffic
police function and initiating broad-based anti-corruption monitoring through public official
and user surveys. P R S O I1 w i l l see development o f monitoring and voice mechanisms for
customs and licensing and under P R S O 111, service performance and informal payment
monitoring w i l l be extended to tax administration. TA to support the PRSO program w i l l be
financed under the Public Sector Reform Support Program (PSRSP). IFC’s two future
S M E surveys w i l l provide feedback to the Government on how the business environment i s
improving and where additional efforts are s t i l l needed, including on issues o f corruption, and
I F C w i l l work with the Government on improvements in targeted areas, such as licenses,
permits, and inspections. Other bilateral donors, including DFID, the Netherlands, and SIDA
have expressed interest in pooling resources o f up to $10 million over the next four years to
help implement the program.
Removal of administrative barriers to private sector development

45.

While laws and regulations to create an environment conducive to doing business
have been largely adopted, they have been poorly implemented and enforced. Cumbersome

21

administrative requirements continue to deter investment and add to the cost o f doing
business. The Government i s fully aware o f the need to reduce administrative barriers and
has begun a range o f relevant initiatives. The new tax code and improvement in tax
administration, in particular, are expected to reduce the tax burden on businesses. Efforts to
stabilize internal security have improved personal safety, reduced extortion, and improved the
prospects o f viable economic activity. Notwithstanding these achievements, further efforts
are required to consolidate progress and realize an overall improvement in the business
climate. For example, while steps have been taken to improve inspections on businesses
premises there i s s t i l l a problem o f overlapping responsibilities and lack o f public awareness
o f rights during inspection. Further measures needed to improve customs and border
processing include improving valuation procedures and addressing the monopoly o f customs
brokers. A range o f goods i s still subject to mandatory certification and obsolete Soviet
standards and certificates are used.

46.
The CPS aims to reduce barriers to establishing and operating businesses. The
P R S O program w i l l support improvements in: (i)
inspection processes, permits and licensing
requirements; (ii)
customs border processing; and (iii)
standardization. The on-going Judicial
Reform Project i s helping realize a more independent, professional, and efficient judiciary to
improve the functioning of the commercial litigation system. IFC TA through the Private
Enterprise Partnership (PEP) will support improvements in license, permit, and inspection
procedures on the basis o f a recently completed survey. Additional surveys w i l l be undertaken
to identify future areas o f work. PEP may also undertake work to promote alternative dispute
resolution and F I A S may undertake work on the registration o f businesses. IFC will also
support an investor conference in New York in 2006 and MIGA i s discussing provision o f
TA for investment promotion, including support to the Georgia National Investment and
Export Promotion Agency. The on-going Enterprise Rehabilitation Project i s helping
strengthen management o f privatized enterprises as well as pre-privatization restructuring o f
state-owned enterprises. Other donors are complementing Bank Group assistance: EBRD i s
assisting in investment promotion; EU i s helping reform business licensing; U SAID i s helping
establish the one stop shop concept for business licenses and permits; and lMF i s supporting
tax and customs administration reform.
Improved electricity and gas infrastructure

47.

Georgia’s energy infrastructure is among the worst in the FSU and the risk of
catastrophic failure is high. Unreliable energy supply remains a key obstacle to private sector
growth, a drain on public finances, and a source o f hardship for the population. The energy
sector i s financially bankrupt due to high levels o f non-payments and accumulated debts,
theft, and possible remaining corruption in the sector. The Government has taken steps to
remedy the debt situation, improve collections, and rehabilitate generation and transmission
systems. Some results, such as improved collections by the distribution utility outside Tbilisi
-are already visible. Yet, much remains to be done to establish a reliable and financially viable
energy sector. The Government recognizes that in the medium-term, this involves improved
performance among sector entities, improved cash flows, and investment to reduce the risk o f
systemic collapse. In the longer term, changes in the underlying power sector structure and
systems are required. Over the next five to seven years, investments o f US$350 million are
estimated to be required in the electricity sector and about US$50 million for essential firstphase repair o f the gas transmission system. Approximately US$28 million in IDA

22

disbursements plus a potential US$50 million through a new IBRD-enclave project i s
projected over the CPS period. In addition, there are on-going projects from USAID (US$21
million), Germany (€20 million), EBRD (US$50 million), and JBIC (US$45 million) that are
expected to continue over the next two to three years. The M C C has also earmarked US$44.5
million for the rehabilitation o f the Gas Pipeline from Russia, and US$5 million for energy
strategy advisory services over the next five years.
48.
IDA assistance w i l l aim to substantially improve sewice levels in the power sector.
IDA w i l l complement and help coordinate the efforts of other partners in the energy sector.
debt resolution and payment collection to improve the
The P R S O program w i l l focus on: (i)
financial viability o f entities in the sector; (ii)
a holistic energy sector action plan to gradually
increasing competition and flexibility
improve the underlying structure and systems; and (iii)
in gas supply options. The on-going Electricity M a r k e t Support Project i s helping improve
financial and corporate management in the wholesale electricity market. Under the possible
IBRD-enclave Energy Project, development of a new hydropower resource at Khudoni
could generate more than 10 percent o f annual consumption and about 20 percent of current
hydropower production, improving the security of Georgia’s energy supply. The project
would be structured as an export-oriented sale of power to neighboring countries and enhance
Georgia’s role in the regional energy trade. A further possibility i s a Carbon Financing
project to support the rehabilitation of the gas pipeline from Russia to Georgia and on to
Armenia. Other projects under the Carbon Financing Facility w i l l also be ~0nsidered.l~
Feasibility studies and preparation work for these and other infrastructure investments w i l l be
conducted under the Pre-Investment Infrastructure Facility.
Improved highway infrastructure

49.

Limited transportation infrastructure is a major constraint to economic activities and
exploitation of the transport corridor. The poor state o f the highway network constrains the
movement o f goods and people between Georgia’s cities, ports, and rural areas; and through
Georgia, along the transit corridor. As previously discussed, large segments of the population
are effectively left out o f the economy due to limited connectivity to major urban centers and
transport facilities. Less than five percent of the road network supports the transit economy
and foreign trade, and many segments require rehabilitation. The long transit times, despite

the relatively short distance and poor road conditions add to transport costs and deter usage o f
the Georgian transit route. In i t s present state, limited capacity on the highway network i s a
binding constraint to Georgia’s ability to exploit increasing transport volumes arising from
rapidly rising wealth and economic activity in the Caucasus and Central Asia.

IDA w i l l take the lead in helping develop the main highway network. At present,
50.
there are no other external development partners engaged in developing the main highway
network. IDA assistance in highways supports the medium-term goal o f enhanced investment
in agro-processing, tourism, and other commercial activities and a significant increase in
transit trade, including increased flows to and from Central Asia. IDA interventions w i l l help
reduce transit times and costs; enable Georgia to handle significantly increased traffic flows;
and ensure sustainable maintenance o f the highway network. Approximately US$84 million
in IDA disbursements and new commitments are expected over the CPS period toward these
13. Funding for Georgia under the Carbon Financing Facility would be in addition to the IDA envelope and would likely be
disbursed to Georgia over a 10 year period, with amounts of up to $5 million per year.

23

ends. The ongoing Roads Project and proposed series o f RoadsA’ransit Corridor Projects
w i l l develop sections of the highway network as well as help ensure a steady and adequate
level o f funding for road maintenance based on charges related to road use and road access.
The Government has strong ownership in developing the highway network and specifically
requested I D A partnership, given IDA’S prior experience in this sector in Georgia and i t s
capacity to attract other sources o f finance - possibly through public-private partnerships
supported b y partial risk guarantees. The proposed Pre-Investment Infrastructure Facility
w i l l be used to explore such prospects. Over the forthcoming CPS period, the M C C i s
expected to complement IDA work b y financing a US$lOO-125 million project to rehabilitate
a highway from Tbilisi to the isolated region of Samtskhe-Javakheti in Southern Georgia.
Development o f the transit corridor in Georgia i s also complemented b y parallel investments
in the transit corridor in Azerbaijan, also supported b y the Bank.
Improved access to rural infrastructure and services

5 1.

A range of constraints inhibits increased incomes and economic activities in rural
areas. Constraints to greater value-added commercial activities in rural areas include limited
connectivity to markets and information; poor public services (such as research and veterinary
services; and standards, certification, and inspection systems); limited access to rural credit;
and deteriorating irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Lack of transport options, in
particular, isolates rural families from the national economy and has resulted in a high level o f
subsistence farming. A close correlation between poverty in rural households and the extent
to which they are linked to markets exists and studies have shown that local-level road
projects generate clear economic benefits for communities.

52.

IDA assistance in rural infrastructure w i l l complement main road development to
improve the environment for commercial activity in rural areas. Demand for agricultural
products i s expected to be stimulated through improved access to markets and an increase in
agro-processing. The on-going Secondary and Local Roads project aims to develop a cost
effective and sustainable secondary and local road network to link interior areas with the main
highway network. The ongoing Agricultural Research Extension and Training and Rural
Development Projects (RDP) aim to: (i)
increase access to finance through establishment o f
a viable rural banking system; (ii)
improve access to know-how and technologies b y building
more effective agricultural knowledge systems; and (iii)
enhance farmer incomes and access
to markets through producer groups and cooperatives. The ongoing Irrigation Drainage
Community Development Project i s raising the productivity o f land for high-value crops in

targeted areas through rehabilitation o f main irrigation and drainage infrastructure. I t w i l l
also help restore irrigation infrastructure and river embankments damaged in the recent floods
and strengthen longer-term flood protection measures. During the CPS period, IDA w i l l aim
to make substantial contributions to the knowledge base on rural development through the
CEM, the rural infrastructure study, and possibly an agriculture sector update. IDA
expects to disburse approximately US$50 million over the four year CPS period to support
rural development. In parallel, IFC w i l l consider investment in agro-processing industries.
This i s being complemented by investment financing from several partners. IFAD (US$lO
million) and Japan (US$5 million) have teamed with IDA in the RDP to provide rural credit
and TA for market development. USAID has a US$20 million project to improve export
market linkages for agricultural products. M C C w i l l provide US$32 million for equity
investments in rural and tourism enterprises and US$15 million for agricultural business
24

advisory services. The EU also provides ongoing budget support, largely based on reforms in
agriculture and some TA for the Ministry o f Agriculture.
Increased access to financial services

53.
IFC will continue to seek investments that broaden and deepen the financial sector.
While the banking sector has grown impressively, longer term credit i s s t i l l scarce and
collateral requirements are high. Companies have inadequate financial disclosure and
corporate governance practices to attract direct investment. In addition to IDA work in the
rural banking sector mentioned above, IFC w i l l seek further investment opportunities and
provide TA to financial institutions (banks, leasing companies, and perhaps other non-bank
financial institutions) to deepen the financial sector and expand the range o f financial products
available. IDNIMF w i l l also undertake a Financial Sector Assessment Program Update to
help diagnose potential vulnerabilities and map a transition to a more diversified and
competitive financial sector. Further grant support for Anti-Money Laundering efforts w i l l
also be considered as needed.14 Complementing Bank Group interventions are ERBD lines of
credit of US$40 million through the banking sector, and USAID involvement in micro credit
schemes, including teaming with the Development Credit Authority to provide US$13 million
in guarantees for micro credit financial institutions and S M E credit lines.
Improved use of forestry and other natural resources

54.
IDA projects aim to help ensure environmentally sustainable commercial use of
natural resources. Weak forest management systems have on the one hand caused excessive
deforestation in some areas, and on the other led to unreliable supply o f raw materials for
commercial activities such as furniture manufacturing, which offer high potential for
economic growth and employment creation. The on-going Forestry Project i s helping
develop an enabling environment for the sustainable use o f forestry resources through

regulatory, financial, and institutional reforms. Forest protection and reforestation regimes
are also being established in selected areas. Through the on-going GEF Protected Areas
Project, IDA i s helping enhance Georgia’s tourism potential and biodiversity conservation by
creating three ecologically and socially sustainable protected forest areas. Over the past
decades, high levels of pollution, coastal erosion, over-fishing, and offshore dumping have
overwhelmed the Black Sea and i t s littoral zone. Sustainable development of the many
productive sectors o f the Black Sea coast (including fisheries, marine transport, o i l
production, tourism, agriculture and forestry) w i l l require integrated management of these
resources in a way that does not diminish long-term productivity. The Integrated Coastal
Management Project i s helping strengthen management of Georgia’s Black Sea coastal
resources. A total of US$24 million in IDA credits and GEF grants i s expected to be
disbursed over the CPS period in support o f each of these objectives.

l4 Georgia has made sound recent progress on anti-money laundering (AML): the A M L law has been strengthened; a
financial intelligence unit (FIU) was established and has been admitted as a full member in the Egmont Group of FIUs; 12
convictions have been made for money laundering; and Georgia has ratified the Palermo Convention (on Transnational
Organized Crime) and the Strasburg Convention on Legalization of Criminal Proceeds. Since 2003, I D A has financed TA to
the FIU and NBG on AML issues to support these efforts.

25

Direct IFC support in potential growth sectors

55.

I n addition to investments in the financial sector, which benefit smaller businesses,

IFC w i l l consider direct investment in export-oriented companies or those providing services
that support overall private sector development. Sectors o f interest include agribusiness,
tourism, and related sectors; transport, logistics, and retail services; social services and
infrastructure in cases o f private participation; manufacturing and the development o f natural
resources. IFC TA w i l l also help further private direct investment in Georgia, including work
to strengthen corporate governance practices, which increases the investment attractiveness o f
the beneficiary companies. IFC will continue to consider requests f r o m the Government for
advisory support to introduce private participation in key sectors and will support such
initiatives at the investment conference being arranged in N e w Y o r k in March 2006.

MIGA support to private sector investment
M E A w i l l partner with IDA, IFC, and FIAS to facilitate FDI through TA and political
risk mitigation products. MIGA i s open for opportunities to support foreign investment in
Georgia, consistent with the CPS, through the provision o f political risk guarantees. A joint
event with the Government i s being planned to promote MIGA guarantees to investors.
MIGA will also support "Invest in Georgia" events organized abroad by the Georgia National

56.

Investment and Export Promotion Agency (GNIEPA) to encourage interest from potential
investors. MIGA has an outstanding Contract o f Guarantee in the financial sector, signed in
FY97, for a gross and net exposure o f US$2.1 million. On the TA side, MIGA will
coordinate a joint Bank-Group effort to improve institutional arrangements for the promotion
of FDI and seek donor funding for a TA program to improve the effectiveness o f GNIEPA.
In the meantime MIGA will support GNIEPA through its own resources by sharing best
practices through www.fdipromotion.com; help disseminate investor information through
www.ipanet.com; and provide capacity building and one-on-one support. Furthermore, MIGA
w i l l include GNIEPA in i t s annual benchmarking survey o f the investor handling capabilities
of investment promotion agencies around the world.

d. Human Development and Social Protection
To reduce the pressure on social indicators, IDA w i l l support structural improvements
in the health, education, and social protection systems. In the long-term, IDA assistance in
human development seeks to realize: (i)improved health and education outcomes; (ii)
improved protection of the poor and vulnerable through an efficient and effective targeted

57.

social assistance system; and (iii)establishment o f a sustainable solution for protection
against poverty in old age. M e d i u m term objectives include an increase in the quantity and
quality o f public expenditure in the social sectors; an improvement in access to high quality
and affordable public social services; and improved targeting o f social protection benefits.
I D A assistance over the forthcoming CPS period toward these objectives i s discussed below,
Addressing corruption and governance issues

58.
The CPS w i l l support elimination of corruption at key points of social service delivery.
Well-documented evidence has pointed to significant problems with corruption at points o f
26

public social service delivery, which particularly burden the poor. Corruption has been
particularly blatant in education, with outright buying o f university places and degrees. The
PRSO program w i l l place emphasis on combating corruption in key areas o f social service
delivery, including health and education. A broad survey of public officials and service users
w i l l take place, based on a survey instrument agreed with civil society, and the results w i l l be
made public. Schools in Tbilisi are targeted for initial monitoring actions under PRSO Iand
subsequent PRSOs will expand coverage to include all medical service centers and schools in
Georgia. The approach can be illustrated by the example o f hospital services, where: (i)
citizens w i l l b e able to see what to expect in the Basic Benefits Package and what they should
pay for services beyond this package (as this information will be published on notice boards
outside hospitals); (ii)
user surveys will be conducted regularly to assess whether services are
being delivered as published and whether informal payments are being requested for services;
(iii)
users o f the hospital services will have access to a complaint line where they can register
concerns about the quality of services provided, and/or of bribes requested for services; and
(iv) results o f the user surveys and complaints w i l l be published annually so that the
Government and public can monitor progress in curtailing informal payments and improving
service delivery.
Improved access, affordability, and quality of health services
Several IDA interventions w i l l help address major structural weaknesses in the health
care delivery system. The health care delivery system i s inefficient and fragmented; yields
deficient coverage of primary health care services and high out of pocket expenses to meet

59.

health care needs; contains excessive hospital infrastructure; and has an unbalanced human
resource supply o f too many specialists and not enough general practitioners and nurses. IDA
assistance aims to: (i)
strengthen policy-making and regulatory capacity; (ii)
increase resource
mobilization from public and private sources and improve allocation and management o f
public spending on health; and (iii)continue restructuring o f service delivery through
rightsizing the provider network at both the primary and hospital level; and (iv) further
improve sector governance and management, including through better human resource
management. IDA i s currently supporting these objectives through intensive dialogue and
investment under the on-going Primary Health Care Project, SRS Hospital Restructuring
Component, the JSDF Grant for Community Health Insurance, and the PRSO program.
Approximately US$23 million i s expected to be disbursed by IDA in the health sector over
the CPS period. I f increased IDA allocations are available, a follow-on Health Project w i l l
also be considered. IDA work will be complemented by US$7 million in TA f r o m U S A I D
through i t s CoReform Project to strengthen sector policy and improve resource allocation and
management; EU financing of PHC reform in Kakheti (€5 million), improved sector financing
(€2 million) and strengthened purchasing capacity (€2 million); and DFID aid o f about US$8
million to improve the sector’s organizational structure, strengthen policy making, and
improve health workforce planning and development.

-

Improved access and quality of general education

60.
The CPS w i l l help improve the quality and relevance of the public education system.
While Georgia has enjoyed universal adult literacy and access to basic education, declining
quality in the education system and i t s questionable capacity to meet the needs o f a dynamic
labor market are o f concern. Insufficient resources at both national and local levels have

27

prevented adequate investments in quality improvements. A comprehensive reform program
to improve the structure and financing of the education system has been initiated IDA i s
supporting these changes through the P R S O program and the ongoing Education System
Alignment and Strengthening Project, which provides policy and investment support to
improve the information base for policy making. Approximately US$26 million in IDA
disbursements and new commitments are expected over the CPS period. Specific assistance
objectives are: (i)strengthened management capacity at central and local levels; (ii)merit
based recruitment, objective performance evaluation, and revised and transparent pay for
improved capacity to monitor and evaluate the quality
education sector public employees; (iii)
of education services and student outcomes; and (iv) an outcome-based national curriculum
for primary and general secondary education in place. An Education Sector Note w i l l be
developed potentially within the Programmatic PER to inform the policy dialogue and a
follow-on Education Project i s planned for FY06. IDA efforts at the secondary education
level are complemented b y a US$12 million USAID project. The Open Society-Georgia
Foundation i s also supporting implementation o f the new Law on Secondary Education and
the E C i s working closely with the Ministry to reform vocational education and training.
Improved level and targeting of social protection

61.
IDA analytical and advisory services support improvements in the targeting and
efJiciency of social protection systems. Social protection faces a number o f structural,
institutional, financial, and implementation weaknesses that need to be addressed, if Georgia
i s to have an affordable and effective social risk management system. In the past, poor
administration has resulted in wastage, over-coverage of non-needy, and under-coverage o f
needy. The pension system has suffered from accumulation of arrears, a real decline in
pension amounts, and a declining proportion of employed persons to pensioners. The
Government has taken steps to address both these areas, paying social transfers on time,
doubling pensions and clearing a large part o f the arrears. However, benefit programs remain
thinly spread over many fragmented programs, record keeping i s poor, and transfers are s t i l l
insufficient to move households out of poverty. As a next step, the Government i s planning to
consolidate i t s programs into a single cash poverty benefit targeted at the poorest in order to
maximize the impact of social transfers. In pensions, the Government has recognized the
need to develop a pension system that i s both affordable and able to protect the elderly against
poverty and a comprehensive pension reform strategy i s being planned. Through the P R S O
program, Programmatic Poverty Assessments, and policy notes, IDA w i l l support these
efforts to increase coverage of social transfers among the poorest, reduce leakage to the nonpoor, and implement an appropriate pension reform.
Strengthened municipal and community delivery of infrastructure and services

62.
IDA interventions to strengthen municipal and community-based service delivery aim
to broaden access to essential basic infrastructure and services. Under the Second
IDA
, i s financing the
Municipal Development and Decentralization Project (MDDP II)
Municipal Development Fund (MDF), which aims to improve Local Government Unit (LGU)
effectiveness in identifying, designing, and implementing investment projects for local
infrastructure and utility services, with adequate cost recovery. IDA i s expected to disburse
approximately US$17 million through the MDF over the CPS period. IDA has also agreed to
help M C C supervise significant forthcoming funding of municipal infrastructure through the
28

regional infrastructure development facility, to be implemented in collaboration with the
MDF. Possible TA in the housing sector w i l l support improvements in urban housing
management. Vulnerable and remote groups have limited access to both national and LGU
service delivery and infrastructure provision. The on-going Second Georgia Social
Investment Fund (GSIF) project i s mobilizing public and private funds for communitydriven basic infrastructure projects in poor communities and strengthening community level
capacity to prepare and implement investment projects. Approximately US$16 million will
be disbursed through GSIF by IDA over the CPS period. KfW i s also funding GSIF and
U S A I D i s supporting community involvement in the provision and maintenance o f
infrastructure through i t s Community Mobilization Project.

e. Improving Efficiency in Public Services
63.

To support achievement of the above objectives, the CPS w i l l help build capacity for
efJicient and accountable public services. The EDPRP and i t s Annual Progress Report noted
many weaknesses in Georgia’s public sector management and the Government has identified
priority areas to enhance public sector accountability and efficiency that are consistent with
Bank analyses in the PER, CPAR, and CFAA. The main goal supported by the CPS i s to
promote good, clean economic management, policy, and investment and thereby enable the
public sector to effectively support economic growth, employment generation, and delivery of
social services. K e y intermediate steps toward this end are: (i)institutionalizing the anticorruption effort to ensure i t s sustainability; (ii)
improving public budgeting and expenditure
management; (iii)strengthening procurement and financial management; (iv) enhancing
intergovernmental fiscal relations; and (v) improving management, organization, and
motivation in the c i v i l service to both enhance the delivery o f public services and reduce the
incentives for bribery and corruption. Each IDA project contains capacity-building elements
that are reinforced through AAA and policy dialogue.
Of the on-going portfolio,
approximately $25 million i s earmarked for capacity-building across the public sector.

Addressing governance and corruption issues

~

64.
All aspects of the CPS support for improved efJiciency in public services address
corruption and govemance issues. A June 30, 2005, Presidential Decree on the National
Anti-Corruption Strategy defines the Government’s anti-corruption agenda. T o consolidate
the anti-corruption efforts in individual ministries, the Government has created the Anticorruption Policy Coordination Department (ACPCD). While the on-going anti-corruption
effort continues to receive high-level commitment and i s progressing with significant
momentum, the present challenge i s to institutionalize the effort to ensure i t s sustainability
and effectiveness in preventing corruption in the future. The CPS w i l l fully support the
Government’s program through the proposed sequence o f PRSOs and the PSRSP as well as
Programmatic Public Expenditure Reviews (PPERs); CPAR and C F A A updates in a
Public Financial Management Performance Report; and inclusion o f governance and
transparency issues in each lending operation. A key goal i s to ensure the anti-corruption
program’s resilience to a changing political environment. T o this end, along with
strengthening country fiduciary systems as described below, the CPS w i l l help strengthen key
anti-corruption institutions. The Chamber o f Control (CoC) w i l l be converted into a supreme
29

independent external audit agency that conforms to internationally accepted standards.
Training will b e provided to members o f the Parliamentary Finance Committee and Budget
Office to strengthen Parliamentary oversight. The PSRSP will also develop tools to enhance
interaction and accountability between the Government and civil society and training w i l l be
provided to strengthen civil society voice and participation in the anti-conuption agenda.
Improved public budgeting and expenditure management
The CPS places a strong emphasis on ensuring the eflectiveness, sustainabibity, and
The Government has made substantial progress in
integrity of public expenditure.

65.

establishing basic public expenditure management institutions. However, several issues
remain to be addressed, including lack o f strategic planning, which impedes reforms and
prevents an adequate link between expenditures and sector objectives and policies; poor
budget execution due to weak cash-flow management, which has consistently caused
spending to deviate from the budget plan; weak tax administration, which has led to unstable
tax policies and inadequate revenue mobilization; and l o w allocations in priority sectors, such
as health, education, and social protection. Measures supported by the PRSO, PSRSP, and
PPER include: (i)managing aggregate expenditures and external debt to avoid macroimbalances; (ii)
introducing a rolling three-year MTEF, starting in 2006 to improve allocative
efficiency; (iii)establishing stronger links between allocation decisions and operational
outcomes to improve operational efficiency; (iv) identifying priorities across sectors on a
three-year horizon using results information; and (v) reducing divergences between budget
outtums and budget plans, including commitment controls and quarterly reporting to
Parliament on budget execution. TA under the PSRSP and from DFID w i l l support
implementation o f these measures. The IMF i s also providing TA for treasury reform within
the Ministry o f Finance.
Transparent financial management and procurement systems

66.

Weak country public procurement and financial management systems in the past have
created high fiduciary risks. The 2003 C F A A found that the overall fiduciary r i s k o f the

Government’s public expenditure management framework was high. K e y reasons included:
a wide range o f extra-budgetary funds that remained outside Treasury spending controls;
weak budget planning and execution frameworks in LGUs, which spent a large proportion of
the budget; a plethora o f contradictory, incomplete, actual or proposed legislation
undermining the internal financial control system; and internal audit systems that were barely
existent. While the CoC performed certain oversight and directive functions that to some
extent compensated for lack o f internal auditing, it was not fully compliant with international
standards. The 2003 CPAR, meanwhile, found that Georgia’s public procurement system was
undermined by Ministerial interference in procurement decision-malung; inadequate
procurement agency budgets; l o w levels o f public awareness o f legal and regulatory
-provisions; and the persistence of traditional patterns o f patronage that were nourished by and
perpetuated non-competitive procurement practices. The Government has fully recognized
these weaknesses and following the recommendations o f the CPAR and CFAA, has
undertaken initial steps to strengthen financial management and enhance transparency and
efficiency in public procurement.

30

67.
The CPS w i l l emphasize strengthening fiduciary safeguards in country systems. The
P R S O and Public Financial Management Performance Review (including CPAWCFAA
updates) will support these reforms. A new State Procurement L a w that comes into effect on
January 1, 2006 will provide for broad dissemination o f procurement information through a
web site. However, further reform o f the legislative framework i s needed t o focus on
implementing regulations, standard bidding documents and developing a national training
strategy. Also, the State Procurement Agency needs to be further strengthened to ensure i t s
autonomy and independence. To exercise better control over budget execution and cash
management, the Government has already integrated most extra-budgetary funds into the
Treasury Single Account. Nevertheless, other quasi-public entities, in the form o f Legal
Entities o f Public L a w continue to exist outside the budgetary framework. A more efficient
financial reporting system i s also needed to match the reforms on the MTEF and on budget
execution. Reform o f the CoC has been important in fighting corruption, particularly in the
absence o f effective internal audit mechanisms. The PRSO, PSRSP, and TA from MF,
TACIS and GTZ are supporting a three-pronged strategy to improve financial management.
I t w i l l (i)
ensure that financial accountability mechanisms exist in all public and quasi-public
entities; (ii)
strengthen the role and capacity o f the CoC and its conversion into a Supreme
Audit Institution using accepted international standards; and (iii)further reform Treasury
operations and introduce international accounting standards.
Effective inter-governmental fiscal relations
The CPS w i l l support improved intergovemmental transfer systems and strengthened
accountability at local govemment levels. The functions and responsibilities o f the central
government versus L G U s are inadequately defined and LGUs lack sufficient fiscal
independence to enhance their delivery o f services. LGUs presently suffer from: (i)

68.

fragmented administration and weak implementation capacity; (ii)
excessive allegiance to the
center, which undermines accountability; (iii)unclear assignment o f responsibilities and
resources, which are still carried out on the basis of ad hoc negotiations; (iv) increasing
disparities in spending and revenue capacities; and (v) unstable rights to public assets and lack
o f access to capital markets. As a result, unfunded mandates have proliferated and n o
uniformity exists in LGU budgets. Local budgets also lack predictability and have faulty
reporting systems, negatively impacting on fiscal autonomy, transparency and accountability.
T o improve the situation, a special Presidential Commission has been appointed to review the
legislative basis for consolidation o f LGUs, propose a re-mapping o f the territorialadministrative structure, formulate a fiscal decentralization strategy, and implement an
effective local governance framework. The P R S O and on-going MDDP I1 support this
agenda, including introduction o f a new L a w on Local Self-Government Budgets, and a
transparent intergovernmental fiscal relations system in the budget process, with transfer
mechanisms based on the new legal provisions and formulae.

-Modernization of the judiciary

69.

IDA is helping strengthen the judiciary to support the anti-corruption agenda and
improvements in the business environment. Past public surveys have consistently revealed
that Georgians have very little faith in the legal system, which i s perceived as corrupt,
dishonest, and lacking in independence. Views among private enterprises were that judges
were either incompetent or unfair, that the court system entailed excessive delays, and that

31

enforcement was ineffective. In support o f a Government strategy to modernize and improve
the effectiveness o f the judicial system, the Judicial Reform Project has been helping
develop new court administration and case management procedures, rehabilitate and construct
courthouses, and establish a computerized network system. Assistance i s also being provided
for judicial training, and a public outreach effort to inform citizens about their rights and the
Government’s reform efforts. A complementary high-visibility reform supported by the
PRSO i s the re-organization and re-staffing o f the traffic police. IDA efforts are augmented
by funds from the EU TACIS program (about €16 million in the ongoing 2004 program) to
support legal reform, including prison reform, strengthening o f the prosecutor’s office, and
improving the rule o f law. U S A I D is also providing support for legal system and criminal
justice reform and UNDP i s assisting with prison reform.

Better civil service management
70.
Strengthening the civil service is essential for effective implementation of public
policies and improved service delivery. Under the FY04 Reform Support Credit, the
Government initiated reforms to establish a professional public sector and reduce institutional
sources o f corruption. K e y reform objectives are: (i)elaboration o f a comprehensive c i v i l
service reform strategy, including relevant progress indicators; (ii)
adoption o f new legislation
to address current shortcomings such as lack o f a clear delineation between political and
adoption o f a Code o f Ethics and Discipline for the civil service
nonpolitical positions; (iii)
and a new pay and incentive system within an agreed fiscal framework; (iv) development and
implementation o f a Human Resources Management and Information System (HRMIS); (v)
introduction and enforcement o f competitive, merit-based recruitment regulations and
measures to address civil servant training and career development needs. Through the newly
established Government Commission on Reform, the Government i s taking steps to formulate
a cohesive approach to reforms across ministries. In an iterative process with each ministry,
the Commission i s reviewing functions, organization structures, and human resource
management practices. After discussion and approval by Cabinet, this w i l l form the
foundation for a medium term strategy. The PRSO will support the Government in
developing this new program and the instruments to implement i t (including functional
reviews and HRMIS), while the PSRSP w i l l provide direct implementation support.

Strengthened monitoring and evaluation capacity

7 1.
The PSRSP w i l l assist in strengthening in-country oversight and evaluation through
broad participation and disclosure. IMF technical assistance has been conducive to
improvements in national accounts, price, monetary and government financial statistics. The
IDF grant on Statistical Capacity Building w i l l build on the recommendations o f IMF TA to
strengthen the quality o f national accounts statistics.
Training for Members o f the
Parliamentary Finance Committee and the Parliamentary Budget Office and relevant c i v i l
society groups w i l l also be financed under the PSRSP. M o s t ministries already have Public
Councils with representatives from civil society that act as a communication channel between
the Government and the public, and provide recommendations about planning, budgeting and
service delivery. The PSRSP w i l l help strengthen these Councils and reinforce interaction
between the Government and the public, and work with ministries to review the performance
of their business processes so as to improve service delivery. The project w i l l also help

32

provide information to citizens through supplier and user surveys, and development of voice
mechanisms in key service areas.

f. Analytical and Advisory Services
72.
An enhanced program of AAA w i l l support knowledge generation, policy dialogue,
and new lending. IDA w i l l continue to enhance i t s non-lending activities to support the CPS
objectives. IDA w i l l also increase public outreach and dissemination activities and encourage
broader public discussion on i t s analytical work in order to reach a wider audience in Georgia.
The main vehicle to deepen knowledge and develop the dialogue on employment and growth
w i l l be the FY06 CEM. This study w i l l aim to fully develop the linkages between poverty,
labor markets and Georgia’s sources o f growth, and endeavor to identify binding constraints
to growth that warrant priority attention. A joint BanWIMF Financial Sector Assessment
Program w i l l identify priority areas for further deepening the financial sector. The Rural
Infrastructure study w i l l help further understand constraints to productivity and growth in
agriculture and agro-processing. I F C w i l l continue to provide TA and advisory services to
improve the business-enabling environment, including through FIAS and PEP. Analytical
work in energy w i l l underpin potential new lending in this area. In the social sectors, the ongoing Programmatic Poverty Assessment w i l l be the main vehicle for strengthening
understanding o f inequality in income distribution and supporting Government initiatives to
enhance social protection and insurance programs. TA w i l l also be undertaken in the water
sector. An Education Sector Note, potentially part of the PER, w i l l inform policy dialogue
and underpin the second phase o f the Education APL. T o support improvements in
transparency, budgeting, and expenditure management, a multi-year Programmatic Public
Expenditure Review w i l l be undertaken and a Public Financial Management Performance
Report w i l l be prepared that w i l l encompass CPAR and C F A A updates.

FY06

FY07

FY08

CEM - Employment and
Growth
Financial Sector Assessment
Program

Agriculture Sector
Update

Rural Infrastructure Study

Education Sector Note

FY09
CEM

Energy Sector Update

Water Resource & Risk Mgt TA
Kolkheti National Park TA
Programmatic PER
PFM Performance Report (incl. CFANCPAR updates)

Programmatic PER

g. Scenarios and Rules of Engagement
The IDA allocation for FY06 is SDR22.6 million (about US$33 million) of which
73.
about US$I5 million is grants. An indicative base level o f US$143 million over the four

33

years o f the CPS i s provided, based on extrapolations from current levels. However, actual
allocations for FY07-08 will be decided each year based on the IDA-14 performance-based
allocation system. FY09 allocations w i l l be determined by the formula to be adopted under
the next IDA replenishment. In FY06, the level of Georgia’s debt allows i t to obtain slightly
less than half i t s allocation as grants. However, Georgia’s debt situation i s improving and
therefore i t w i l l likely move from a mixed grantkredit recipient to a credit-only borrower
after the first or second year o f the CPS. Although Georgia’s current creditworthiness
considerations may preclude normal IBRD borrowing for the CPS period, the Bank w i l l
explore the potential for IBRD enclave financing in an export oriented energy sector project.
The project would have the special characteristics o f enclave financing, including, (a) exports
that generate sufficient foreign exchange to service the loan, (b) additional guarantees from
creditworthy entities, and (c) creation o f financial structures such as offshore escrow accounts
to secure IBRD debt service payments. The option of guarantees would also be considered.
Through the PRSO program and AAA support, a close dialogue w i l l also be maintained on
issues that improve Georgia’s eventual eligibility for non-concessional borrowing.

Table 6: ProDosed New IDA Financing, FY06-09 (US$ Million)

I

CPS Objective
Overall Policy
Support and
Efficiency of Public
Resources
Growth and
Employment
Human
Development
Total

I

FY06
PRSO I

20

65

PSRSP
Infrastructure
Pre-Invest.

3

15

Education APL

15

63

143

I

FY07

I

FY08

PRSOII

20

PRSOIII

20

Transit
Corridor1

2o

Transit
Corridor11

2o

40

43

40

I

FY09

Infrastru
cture

20

20

IDA funding i s available through the performance-based allocation framework, higher allocations for the Transit Corridor
and support in the health sector will be considered. (c) The FY09 “Infrastructure Project” could support roads, railways,
energy, irrigation, or rural infrastructure. (d) The FY06 total i s the allocated US$33 million plus 30 percent frontloading.

~

74.
Georgia’s policy and institutional environment (as evidenced through its CPIA rating)
has improved dramatically since 2003 and as a result, IDA allocations also increased.
However, the IDA allocation formula also takes into consideration the health of the IDA
portfolio. When the project portfolio ratings were reported in 2004, Georgia s t i l l had three
projects in unsatisfactory or at risk status. This was largely related to the time needed for the
new authorities to become familiar with the portfolio and in some cases, to a shift in project
emphasis to better reflect emerging priorities. Since that time all projects have reverted to
satisfactory status. Subject to continued improvements in the CPIA and portfolio
performance, IDA allocations could increase further. Depending on the amount of increase,
additional funding could be directed to the Transit Corridor projects, and/or a follow-on
Health Project. On the downside, deterioration in CPIA ratings would signal economic or
governance difficulties and would lead to a lower allocation. At lower levels, the PRSO
program and size of the Transit Corridor projects w i l l be reconsidered. The main
performance criteria affecting IDA allocations are listed in Table 7.

75.

IDAfinancing w i l l be guided by the new Country Financing Parameters (CFPs) for
Georgia. The CFPs, which were recently established in consultation with the Government,

34

provide for added flexibility in allowing IDA financing of up to 100 percent and recurrent
cost financing on a selective basis; IDA financing of local and foreign costs in any proportion;
and IDA financing of local taxes and duties. The additional flexibility i s fully consistent with
the approach o f the CPS in emphasizing Government ownership o f the underlying project
objectives and target results agreed (see Annex VI1 for details).

Table 7: IDA PE Formance Assessment - Areas for Improvement

Economic Management

Continue to increase revenues and reduce the fiscal deficit.
Reduce the current account deficit as a percent o f GDP.
0
- Continue to reduce the debt to GDP ratio.
0
Strengthen regulation and reduce quasi-fiscal deficit in energy
sector.
0
Improve transparency and reduce complexity in customs and taxes.
0
Increase banking sector efficiency, depth, and reach.
0
Strengthen other financial mechanisms incl. insurance & leasing.
0
Streamline the registration process for moveable assets.
0
Strengthen commercial litigation system and contract enforcement.
0
Continue to remove administrative impediments to business.
0
Divest agricultural land still held b y the state.
0
Clear all arrears and increase spending in education, health, and
social protection.
0
Make structural and resource allocation improvements in the health,
education, and social protection systems.
0
Improve employment opportunities and services.
0
Make substantial improvements in the management o f solid waste,
transport, and industrial pollution.
0
Adopt and apply international standards o f procurement and
financial management in both public and private institutions.
0
Further improve civil service accountability and strengthen
transparency in civil service hiring and training.
0
Continue to reduce corruption and increase accountability in public
service.
0
No projects with unsatisfactory ratings.
0
Satisfactory compliance with auditing and procurement.
0
0

Structural Policies

Policies for Social Inclusion and
Equality

Public Sector Management and
Institutions

Portfolio Performance

h. External Partnerships
76.

Georgia’s promising recent perj4ormance has gained strong financial support from the
intemational community. The June 2004 donors’ conference in Brussels generated some
US$1.1 billion in aid pledges for the period FY05-07, two-thirds of which are to be grants. In
addition, the MCC i s planning to grant about US$295 million over the next five years for
infrastructure and rural development. A close relationship with the U S has developed, based
on Georgia’s strategic location as an o i l and gas conduit as well as i t s participation in the

-global war on terror. The U S has provided significant aid to Georgia since 1992, and Georgia
has regularly ranked among the largest recipients o f U S aid in per capita terms. Georgia also
has aspirations of strengthening i t s integration with N A T O and the EU. At present the EU
and Georgia are developing an Action Plan under the European Neighborhood Policy
framework. This plan w i l l define a l i s t o f priority actions to be implemented over a 3-5 year
period that w i l l be linked to a program o f enhanced aid, trade, and political ties and i s
expected to provide strong incentives for policy reform as well as focus more EU funds on

35

investments rather than TA. An agreement was recently reached with Russia to remove the
remaining two military bases from Georgia by 2008. Russia’s role with Abkhazia and South
Ossetia, as w e l l as i t s role as a major energy supplier and significant trading partner for
Georgia, remain pivotal for future development o f the region.

11.

Efforts to coordinate extemal assistance with the Govemment ’s priority investment
areas are being strengthened. Regular donor meetings facilitate coordination and alignment

with the Government’s strategic priorities. The Bank, together with UNDP, coordinates the
Donor Framework Group, which aims to ensure coordinated development assistance and
includes the IMF, EU, US, UK, France, Sweden, Netherlands, and Germany. Annex VI11
illustrates the main areas o f engagement o f each donor. The Government has identified
transport, power, health, education, social protection as priority areas for investing i t s own
resources. Areas o f IDA funding are policy support; rural development; transport; power;
education; health; environment; municipal development; and community development. The
U S (through U S A I D and M C C ) i s the largest bilateral donor and plans large disbursements in
agriculture, energy, transport, the social sectors and municipal development. EBRD i s
tripling its activities in the Caucasus and w i l l provide significant support for financial sector
and Sh4E development, where IDA does not have direct engagement. IDA w i l l collaborate
with MCC, KfW, Kuwait Fund, and EBRD in the roads sector. In energy, the close
partnerships of the past will be sustained, particularly with U S A I D and KfW. Japan has also
financed significant infrastructure investment and IDA will ensure close collaboration.
18.

Bank Group activities will leverage financial assistance and complement programs of
other extemal partners. The proposed PSRSP w i l l catalyze twice as many funds f r o m other
donors to support civil service reform, budget planning, accounting and transparency in fiscal
management. IDA and M C C have agreed to an innovative arrangement whereby the Bank
w i l l assist in supervising M C C financing o f municipal infrastructure through the regional
infrastructure development facility, to be implemented in collaboration with the MDF. M C C
i s also expected to finance rehabilitation o f the North-South gas pipeline, where IDA would
arrange for Carbon Facility financing. Forthcoming IDA assistance to improve the
environment for agro-processing aims to stimulate the demand for agricultural products thus
complementing activities addressing supply-side constraints to agricultural production,

including those o f USAID, EU, EBRD, Japan, and IFAD. IDA w i l l also build on prior work
funded by Canada in the health sector, trade policy, and public administration reform.

The IMF plays a leading role in helping improve macroeconomic stability and fiscal
management. A three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility was approved in June
2004 and the second review was completed in July 2005. The IMF program focuses on

19.

improving revenue collections and expenditure rationalization, strengthening monetary and
financial sector performance, improving governance and the business climate, and promoting
trade liberalization. TA has been provided to the Ministry o f Finance, NBG, SDS, and the
-Tax Inspectorate o f Georgia, T h d M F collaborates closely with NBG in the design and
implementation o f a monetary program aimed at rebuilding international reserves, keeping
inflation low, and remonetizing the economy. The IMF’s focus on prudent fiscal policy has
served as an important framework for IDA’Swork on public expenditure management. The
IMF i s also taking the lead in tax policy and tax and customs administration reform. In the
energy sector, the IMF has been providing advice o n reducing quasi-fiscal losses, particularly
through improved bill collection.
36

i. Consultations
80.

The Bank and I F C held a wide range of consultations with civil society in the
development of the CPS. These included extensive discussions in March 2005 around the
CAS Completion Report to gather lessons learned; roundtables in April and M a y to gather
early input into the CPS; and a larger roundtable in July to discuss likely activities. IDA
supplemented this with an anonymous client survey o f 122 stakeholders in May, and the I F C
and F I A S held a roundtable with private sector representatives in M a y to help prioritize
efforts to support the private sector. Consultations also included a roundtable with “youth
voices” who in turn had held focus groups on Bank activities with a wider range o f
participants. IDA w i l l continue to work closely with civil society and business organizations
to implement the CPS and enhance the prospects o f progress on reforms and institutional
development. IDA w i l l also seek to enhance the dialogue between the Government and civil
society on specific issues, such as education and pension reform.

8 1.
Civil society groups expressed broad agreement with the priorities of the Govemment
and approach of the CPS. Civil society groups consulted b y IDA agreed that the Government
had made important progress on reducing corruption, on education and health reform, and on
improving public sector institutions and budgeting. At the same time, they indicated a desire
for stronger consultations between Government and civil society. They also pointed to
employment as the number one issue and viewed improvements in the business climate for
SMEs, as well as labor market flexibility as keys to improving employment opportunities.
Judicial reform and agricultural development were seen as two further important elements.
Another important issue was seen to be decentralization and i t was argued that more decisionmaking and funding should be entrusted to the regions. Development o f infrastructure (roads,
energy) was seen as important both for job creation and for regional integration. C i v i l society
representatives were concerned as to how Govemment and IDA programs would be
monitored and requested that IDA continue i t s consultations with civil society on the
monitoring and evaluation o f the CPS. Annex I11provides further details.

82.
The May 2005 World Bank Georgia Client Survey indicated that high priority areas
are education, the economy, and the unresolved regional conflicts. While in the last client
survey a majority o f stakeholders reported that the biggest challenge was corruption, this year,
no respondent identified corruption as the greatest challenge and only 8 percent identified i t as
the second greatest challenge. The Bank scored well on treating clients with respect, and in
collaborating with other donors, but less well on building capacity o f Government officials or
at the local level. While the Bank was seen as responsive to the public, respondents
overwhelmingly said that more informatiodawareness i s needed about the Bank in Georgia.
One of the biggest changes in the survey relates to views of IDA’S work in education.
Whereas in the last survey feducation’receiyed one o f the lowest effectiveness ratings, this
year IDA’Swork in education received the highest effectiveness rating. The Bank was also
cited as particularly effective in monitoring poverty and in strengthening the financial system.
Resolving the regional conflicts was also seen as a major priority. While IDA assistance has
not directly addressed the regional conflicts, i t s assistance in the forthcoming CPS period in
developing road and power infrastructure aims to promote regional development and growth.
IDA support in education, moreover, pays particular attention to schools in minority areas and
37

areas affected by the conflicts. IDA also stands ready to consider post-conflict reconstruction
grant assistance in the event o f permanent resolution of the c i v i l conflicts.

Table 8: Summary of CPS Objectives and Monitoring

rhis table summarizes the outcomes that the Bank Group expects to help achieve over the CPS period and
iescribes progress indicators to be used to gauge progress. A full description of country goals, CPS
iutcomes, and monitoring indicators i s presented in the Results Matrix in Annex I.

Expected CPS Results

Progress Zndicators

Goal 1: Income- and Employment Generating Growth
4ddressing corruption and governance issues: Decline in
incidence of bribery in licensing, tax, and customs services.
lemoving administrative barriers to private sector
levelopment: Reduction in costs of starting and doing business
Increasing access to financial services: Increased availability
Jf financial products (IFC).
mproving electricity and gas infrastructure: Improved
eliability and financially viability of entities in the energy
ector.
mproving transport infrastructure and services: Improved
ccess along and to Georgia's major traffic corridors.
mproving access to rural infrastructure and services:
ncreased commercial activity in rural areas.
{nabling sustainable use of forestry and other natural resources:
ncreased contribution of forests and natural resources to
sconomc growth on an environmentally sustainable basis

Progress against baseline corruption surveys.
Doing Business indicators and SME survey results.
Increased loans and deposits as a percentage of GDP;
increase in the volume of leasing
Financial viability of entities in the power sector;
level of service interruption; gas supply options.

I

Transport time and costs on main highway network;
sustainable secondary road network in target areas.
Farm incomes; extent of irrigatioddrainage systems
rehabilitated; availability of financial services.
Contribution of forestry to growth; sustainable
deforestation rate; existence of integrated coastal
management frameuork.

Goal 2: H u m a n Development and Social Protection.
Addressing corruption and govemance issues: Decline in
incidence of bribery at key points of social service delivery.
Improving management of the education system:
Improvementsin quality and relevance of education system.
Improving management of the health sector: Improved
affordability and quality of essential health services.
Improving management of pensions and social security
systems: Improved targeting accuracy of social transfers;
steady or reduced poverty among elderly compared to 2004.
Improving municipal and community provision of
infrastructure and services: Improved basic infrastructure and

anti-corruption institutions: civil society voice and
participation; parliamentary oversight functions; ACPD.
Modemizing the judiciary: Improved public trust of legal
system
Improving public expenditure management: Improved
effectiveness, sustainability, and integrity of budgeting process.
Improving country financial management and procurement
systems: Improved country financial management and
procurement systems.
Strengthening local govemance and intergovemmental fiscal
relations: New transparent inter-governmentalfiscal relation
system in budget process in operation.
Improving management of the civil service: Improved
remunerationand management within budget envelope.

38

Progress against baseline corruption surveys.
Measures of education quality and student outcomes;
per capita education financing.
Proportion of licensed providers; # public hospitals;
PHC utilization among lowest income groups.
Percent of target group covered; percent of non-needy
covered; sustainable increase in pension levels.
Survey indicators in target areas.

Survey of focus group survey against 2002 baseline.
Deviations between actual and budgeted expenditure;
level of allocations to priority sectors.
Reduced fiduciary risk (CFAA); percent of
procurement contracts awarded on open competition.
State and local govemment budgets show explicit
transfers reflecting new legislation and formulae.
Narrower gap between public sector and private
sector employment conditions

j . Monitoring and Evaluation
83.
IDA w i l l engage the Govemment and civil society in systematic monitoring and
evaluation of the CPS. In addition to monitoring and evaluation procedures within each
project, the CPS includes a Results Matrix, which identifies outcomes that the Bank Group
expects to help achieve over the four-year CPS period. This i s provided in full in Annex One
and summarized in Table 8. Intermediate qualitative and quantitative milestones associated
with each outcome have been identified and w i l l be monitored to determine whether the
partnership strategy i s on track. The PRSO program supports several surveys to establish
baselines and measure progress that w i l l play a central role in monitoring overall results. In
addition, IDA plans a range o f AAA to help assess results, including updates o f the
procurement and financial management assessments, the programmatic PER, and the
programmatic Poverty Assessment. The C E M in FY06 w i l l provide an important instrument
to assess overall country progress, including on growth, trade, and labor markets. Annual
business environment surveys (Le the Doing Business survey and PEP’SS M E report) will be
conducted and the results discussed with the Government and business groups. I t i s expected
that the Results Matrix w i l l be regularly reviewed with the Govemment and civil society and
w i l l be updated as an iterative process during the CPS period. A mid-term CPS Progress
Report w i l l be prepared at the end o f FY07 or early FY08. The Progress Report w i l l review
the relevance of the strategy outlined in the CPS, report on progress toward achieving CPS
objectives and outcomes, and introduce changes to the CPS program as necessary.

v.

RISKS

84.
The Bank Group CPS for Georgia faces several risks. These risks are considered
moderate given the strong commitment to reform within the Government, the improving fiscal
situation, and the mitigating factors o f the CPS. They include:
Reforms could slow due to lack of political w i l l to overcome vested interests or
political instability. In the past, a weakening political will to pursue difficult reforms
and overcome vested interests undermined reforms. This risk i s now reduced by the
broad popular support o f the current Government and i t s demonstrated w i l l to rapidly
advance the reform agenda. Nevertheless, the Government’s reform effort remains at
a fragile stage and a decline in momentum due to political exigencies remains a risk.
Public support has declined from the high levels following the revolution, as postrevolution realities become apparent. With the CPS, the Bank Group together with
other donors supports rapid progress on the reform agenda to enable an environment
of economic growth, employment creation, solution to essential infrastructure
problems, and improvements in public service delivery, which are the main sources of
public concern.
The fiduciary risk of the Govemment’s expenditure management framework has been
high in the past. The risk o f corruption undermining the use of public resources i s
presently mitigated by the Government’s sweeping anti-corruption effort, which has
broad popular support and high level ownership. Notwithstanding this effort,

39

however, corruption w i l l not be eradicated overnight. In collaboration with other
major external partners, the Bank Group i s providing strong support to consolidate and
advance the anti-corruption agenda to help ensure i t s long-term effectiveness and
resilience to changes in the political environment.
Key measures include
institutionalizing transparent budget procedures; strengthening country financial
management and procurement systems; enhancing country project implementation
capacity through integration of PIUs into line ministries; strengthening key institutions
such as CoC and ACPCD; promoting the oversight functions o f Parliamentary and
civil society groups; and improving remuneration and management in the c i v i l service
to reduce incentives for corruption.
Georgia could face an exacerbation of civil conflict.
The possibility o f an
intensification o f the civil conflicts has been reduced b y the Government’s
commitment to a negotiated settlement and international efforts to help bring about a
peaceful resolution. Nevertheless, tensions continue and until a permanent resolution
to the crisis i s reached, a degree of uncertainty w i l l exist, with consequent implications
for the welfare of affected people as well as the investment environment and private
sector development.
Bank Group involvement in regional development and
infrastructure may help to strengthen the benefits to cooperation.
e

Georgia could face deterioration in the external environment. Georgia i s in a volatile
region and subject to external shocks. For example, a collapse o f markets in Turkey
and Russia, or an interruption of oil, gas, or power supply would significantly affect
Georgia’s medium-term economic prospects. While debt indicators are improving,
such shocks, particularly to exports, could reverse this trend. Key objectives o f the
CPS are to help broaden sources o f growth and increase Georgia’s linkages to
neighboring countries, and thereby diversify vulnerability to external shocks.

e

Georgia is particularly susceptible to natural calamities. Georgia has been prone to
natural calamities, such as the severe droughts in 1998 and 2000, the 2002 earthquake,
and the 2005 floods that have set back progress toward development goals. IDA i s
active in helping to manage these internal environmental shocks, including, for
example, through flood emergency support to strengthen levies and embankments in
order to reduce damage in the event o f a recurrence o f major flooding.

Paul Wolfowitz
President
Assaad J. Jabre
Executive Vice President (Acting)

Shengman Zhang
-Managing Director
Washington, DC,
August 18,2005

40

... . .
.

. . .

.a
0
6

E

$
2
a

e,
d

Y

8

a,

2
3
Y

a

2
0

Y

e,
0

e,
.-m
.->
Y

.-

2
Y

a

v,

E

.

m

x

F
a,

5
0

A

0

5

e

a,
L

s

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.Y

b

3

m

Y

a

a

a

a

a

v,
d

a

a

a

;

Y

8

a

5

kiJ
E:
a

Y

a

0
cn

E

B
~,

z

a

x

d
d

a

M
E
a

3

a

2

a

a

5

a"

a

a

a

a

a

.Y

s

b

a

0
I

m

.3
Y

Gs

e,

;1.
d
d

3

Lo

s

w

L

P

e

.

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

0

e

e

e

e

e

Georgia CASCR

ANNEX I1
GEORGIA:
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY COMPLETION REPORT
Country: Georgia
Date of Last CAS: September 22, 1997
Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: FY98-FY05
CAS Completion Report prepared by: Asita D e Silva

Executive Summary
The Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) evaluates the
effectiveness of World Bank assistance to Georgia between FY98-05. Due to political
changes and an extensive PRSP preparation process between 2000-2003, the last CAS for
Georgia discussed by the Executive Directors was in October 1997.

A formidable array of challenges has faced Georgia since 1997, including
consolidating the democratic process; resolving the civil conflicts; maintaining
macroeconomic stability; raising tax revenues and expenditure on the social sectors from
levels below those in much of the developing world; preventing the disintegration and
collapse of essential public infrastructure services particularly energy; and further building
institutions, strengthening policies, and enticing the behavioral changes required for
sustainable, market-driven economic growth.
The Bank’s overall goal during the seven-year period was to support per capita
income growth, poverty reduction, and improved living standards. A broad range of
intermediate objectives were supported toward this goal: ( i ) strengthened fiscal management
and maintenance of macroeconomic stability; ( i i ) removal of obstacles to market-oriented,
private sector growth; ( i i i ) enhancement of human development and a strengthened social
safety net; (iv) sustainable natural resource management; and (v) improved public
administration and govemance. The Bank’s program was broad between FY98-00, when it
approved fourteen projects for US$300 million in a range of sectors. As the govemance
-situation deteriorated, adjustment lending was suspended and the Bank’s overall lending
signiJicantly reduced. Eight projects for US$l65 million were approved between FYOl-03,
concentrated in the social sectors, rural areas, and through autonomous institutions. Since
the Rose Revolution, Bank lending has comprised a quick-disbursing Reform Support Credit
and investments in energy, a secondary and local roads project, and a rural development
project

50

Georgia CASCR
The goals supported by the Bank remain highly relevant to poverty reduction and
improved living standards in Georgia. While significant steps were taken toward each goal,
much remains to be done before they are fully realized, however. While monetary
management has been sound, fiscal management has been erratic, significantly undermining
public investment and service delivery. Public social service delivery and social transfers
have been under strain due to low levels of funding and persistent ineficiencies. Much
remains to be done to improve environmental protection and sustainable resource
management. While there have been sound recent steps against corruption, the pervasiveness
of the problem indicates that sustained progress over time is required. Likewise, while recent
progress has been made, much remains to be done to improve the capacity to effectively and
eficiently deliver public services. A range of obstacles continue to impede private sector
development, including poor infrastructure, inconsistent implementation of the legal and
regulatory framework, and lack of law and order. Thus, while Georgia has seen significant
growth, it has been concentrated in the oil transit sector and not generated significant
employment and the full development potential of Georgia’s broad range of natural resources
remains unrealized. With only partial progress toward Georgia’s intermediate goals, poverty
has not yet been reduced
The outcome of Bank assistance since 1997 is rated as moderately satisfactory. The
Bank’s objectives were relevant and it helped achieve some progress toward each key
objective in the very dificult govemance environment in Georgia. Its operations were seen
as “islands of effectiveness and purity” in a sea of corruption and waste. Of the twelve
completed projects since 1997, OED rated ten or 83 percent as satisfactory, compared to an
ECA region average of 81 percent satisfactory. Of six I F C projects, OEG rated IFC
effectiveness satisfactory or better 83 percent of the time. Fifteen projects received QAG
quality at entry assessments and all were rated satisfactory. Bank projects also had positive
sustainable impact, with 92 percent being rated as likely to sustainable (compared to a Bankwide average of 66 percent). I t s projects also had substantial institutional development
impact, with 62 percent being rated as “substantial”, compared to a 45 percent Bank-wide
average during the same period.
Since the Rose Revolution, strong govemment commitment to rapidly advancing the
economic and social reform agenda has yielded positive results. While good initial progress
was made under the previous regime, a deteriorating governance environment in the early
2000s undermined policy implementation, new institutions, investment projects, and private
sector activity. Limited capacity and decision-making authority at mid-levels of the civil
service undermined policy and project implementation. I n some areas, there was also
inadequate political w i l l to overcome vested interests and incur short-term costs, despite an
expressed desire to pursue reforms. On the part of the Bank, it adopted an appropriately
cautious approach in the face of a deteriorating governance environment. I t s projects aimed
to achieve dificult policy and structural reforms and not just physical investments. The Bank
t o o k an early lead and was initially the only donor in several important areas, such as
targeting access to the poorest; utilization of social funds to reach local communities;
decentralization; and civil service reform. On the other hand, the Bank could have spent
more time raising ownership at the implementing agency level, rather than over-relying on
high level champions to get things done; frequent changes in TTLs undermined
implementation; and overly ambitious timeframes were consistently set.

51

Georgia CASCR

Lessons and implications of this experience are summarized in Table I :

I

1

Table 1: Summarv of Lessons Learned and Imdications
Key Lessons

Implications

IDA resources were scattered thinly across a broad
front and only partial progress was seen in most
areas.

Narrow focus and concentrate resources toward a
few critical areas that can have broad implications
for the rest o f the economy.

An unempowered and poorly motivated civil service
has been a major constraint to policy and project
implementation, and the delivery o f public services.

Reforms to empower, motivate and rationalize the
civil service warrant high priority and can have
broad implications for improving public investment
and policy implementation capacity.

Inadequate dissemination o f IDA activities
undermined wider understanding and participation.

A consistent public information strategy should be
maintained. Focus groups from civil society can
enhance the monitoring and evaluation process and
increase Dressure to sustain the reform agenda.

In the context, o f very poor governance and an
unmotivated civil service, too much emphasis was
placed o n technical assistance, with limited tangible
results.

TA for capacity-building in a poorly motivated and
remunerated civil service should be used cautiously.
Reforms to address fundamental weaknesses in the
civil service should take precedence.

Adjustment lending did not prove to be an effective
means o f helping advance the policy agenda in an
environment o f deteriorating governance and
commitment to reforms.

The Bank should be cautious in i t s use of
adjustment
lending
in
poor
governance
environments and rigorous in enforcing i t s
underlying conditions.

The Bank’s instruments were able to keep the
governance reform agenda o n the table, but were
unable in themselves to overcome lack o f political
w i l l and tolerance o f corruption.

Critical indicators o f governance should be built
into the strategy and an appropriate low-case
engagement be reverted to in a timely manner in the
event o f deteriorating conditions.

Political factors and vested interests overwhelmed
some intermediate development objectives.

Political factors in Georgia must be given full
weight in designing programs and the most difficult
reforms should be accompanied b y measures to
mitigate short-term politically-sensitive costs and
tackle vested interests.

Results to date have fallen short, in part due to
overly high initial expectations

Accept that transition in Georgia w i l l be a timeconsuming process. In defining objectives and
time-frames, due attention should be paid to the
realities o f administrative constraints, political
exigencies, and the underlying challenge of
changing well-established behaviors.

Past Bank and other donor efforts were not fully
successful in helping decentralize government
functions, in part due to perceptions of
inconsistencies between the over-riding objective of
ensuring territorial integrity and decentralization.

M o r e political consensus-building i s required tc
advance decentralization efforts.

~

52

Georgia CASCR

1. Introduction
1.
The Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) evaluates the
effectiveness of World Bank assistance to Georgia between FY98-05. The last Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Georgia was discussed by the Executive Directors in October
1997 and covered the period FY98-00. For various reasons, a C A S has not been discussed by
the Board since then. Preparation o f a CAS in FYOl was postponed as Georgia had begun
work on i t s PRSP, known as the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Program
(EDPRP). In FY02, C A S preparations were suspended over concerns that sweeping changes
in the cabinet at the time would yield shifts in policy directions. In FY03, the government
issued i t s final EDPRP and a draft strategy to support this program was prepared and
distributed to the Executive Directors in early November 2003. This document was shortly
withdrawn, before being discussed, due to the change in government following the “Rose
Revolution” in late November 2003. The Bank subsequently engaged in shorter-term
transitional support activities on the understanding that a new C A S would be prepared after
the Government issued a PRSP progress report in early 2005. In March 2005, the Progress
Report was issued, which defined the Government’s medium-term goals and priorities and
forms the basis o f the FY06-09 Country Partnership Strategy.

2. Longer T e r m Strategic Goals Supported by the W o r l d Bank
2.
A formidable array of challenges has faced Georgia since 1997. These include,
consolidating the democratic process; resolving the civil conflicts; maintaining
macroeconomic stability; and further building institutions, strengthening policies, and enticing
the behavioral changes required for sustainable, market-driven economic growth. By 1997,
Georgia’s economy had stabilized following the turmoil o f the initial post-independence years
and an initial economic recovery was underway. A wide range o f reforms had been
undertaken to create an enabling environment for private sector development, including, the
elimination o f subsidies; liberalization o f prices and trade; downsizing o f public sector
employment; rapid small and medium scale privatization; establishment o f the basic legal
framework; land reform; and initial banking and energy sector reforms. Yet, Georgia
remained at a very fragile state and the political, economic, and social recovery was far from
complete. Tax revenues, which had virtually disappeared after independence, remained
extremely low. Expenditure on health and education were well below regional averages and
below levels seen in much o f the developing world. Very l o w maintenance expenditures were
causing essential public infrastructure to disintegrate and the threat o f a collapse in service
delivery loomed in some sectors, including energy. Deteriorating infrastructure and
unreliable utility provision were major obstacles to private sector activity. The “independent
-~
regions” o f Abkhazia and South Ossetia were sources o f smuggling and fiscal instability as
well as governance concerns and troubles in neighboring Dagestan and Chechnya further
impeded Georgia’s recovery.
3.
Georgia has developed a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. When the F Y 9 8
CAS was prepared, medium-term goals defined by the government were to: (i)strengthen
fiscal management; (ii)promote private sector growth, by rehabilitating infrastructure,
53

Georgia CASCR

increasing financial intermediation, accelerating privatization, and building legal and judicial
institutions; (iii)ensure sustainable management o f Georgia’s rich biodiversity and natural
resources, particularly forests and water; and (iv) deepen reforms in health, education, and
social assistance to improve the efficiency and equity o f these services. In December 2000,
the government produced an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy paper that enhanced the
existing strategy with a fifth major thrust: (v) public administration reform and combating
corruption. An increased priority, moreover, was placed on achieving progress in the social
sectors, Following an extensive consultative process, a final EDPRP was issued in June 2003.
The EDPRP endorsed the five major elements o f Georgia’s strategy since 1997, prioritizing
governance, macroeconomic management, and structural reforms. Further goals established
were (vi) rehabilitating post-conflict zones and (vii) developing science and information
technologies. In the aftermath o f the Rose Revolution, the new government endorsed the
broad goals o f the EDPRP, but shifted priorities in several areas and accelerated the pace o f
change. Areas of emphasis were improving revenue collections and clearing arrears, an anticorruption drive, civil service reform, and an ambitious privatization plan. The government
also enhanced the social protection reform agenda, with plans to increase the minimum wage
and pensions; replace in-kind transfers with cash transfers; and introduce a targeted poverty
benefit for those in extreme poverty.
Box 1. Summary of Georgia’s longer-term strategic goals supported by the Bank
between FY98-05:
Overall Goal:

Per capita income growth, poverty reduction, and improved living standards.
Medium-Term Strategic Goals:

i)Strengthened fiscal management and maintenance o f macroeconomic stability.
ii)Removal o f obstacles to market-oriented, private sector growth.
iii)Enhancement o f human development and a strengthened social safety net.
iv) Sustainable natural resource management.
v) Improved public administration and governance.

~

4.
While Georgia’s goals remain relevant, progress toward them has been partial. The
long-term goals adopted by Georgia and supported by the Bank since 1997 remain relevant to
reducing poverty and improving living standards in the country. Progress toward them has
been only partial, however. While a range o f positive, sustained steps have been taken toward
each goal, much remains to be done before they are fully realized. While monetary
management has been sound, fiscal management has been previously erratic, significantly
undermining public investment and service delivery. A range of obstacles continued to
impede private sector development, including poor infrastructure, inconsistent
implementation o f the legal and regulatory framework, and policy instability. Public social

54

Georgia CASCR

service delivery and social transfers have been under strain due to low levels of public
funding and persistent inefficiencies in the system. Much remains to be done to improve
environmental protection and sustainable management of Georgia’s natural resources. While
there have been sound recent steps against corruption, the pervasiveness of the problems
indicates that an institutionalization of the process and sustained progress over time w i l l be
required before clear benefits are seen. Likewise, while sound recent improvements have
been made, much remains to be done to improve the ability o f Georgia’s public sector to
effectively and efficiently deliver public services.
5.
With only partial progress toward Georgia’s intermediate goals, poverty in Georgia
has not yet been reduced. While Georgia’s social indicators s t i l l compare favorably with
those o f countries with similar per capita incomes, income poverty in the country i s high.

Between 1998-2004, GNI per capita rose from US$790 to US$1030. However, according to
government data, the proportion o f people living below the poverty line was 51.4 percent in
2004, compared to 52.1 percent in 1996. The proportion living in extreme poverty, moreover,
had increased from 14 percent in 1996 to 17.1 percent in 2004.’ Principal growth sectors
have been o i l transit, communications, and financial services, all of which have had only
limited impact on employment (accounting for only five percent of total employment).
Unemployment rose from 11.4 percent in 1997 to 15 percent in 2004. Agriculture, which
accounts for some 56 percent o f the labor force, declined from 31 percent o f GDP in 1997 to
18 percent in 2003 and poverty in rural areas has seen a sharp increase from 11 percent in
1998 to over 19 percent in 2004. Meanwhile, until 2004, the government regularly failed to
meet social transfer obligations and public sector wages, exacerbating poverty, particularly in
rural areas.

3. Bank Assistance Instruments

~~

6.
FY98-00: During FY98-00, Bank assistance covered a broad range of sectors. The
Bank provided assistance toward each o f the Government’s four major goals:
(i)
strengthening public finance b y helping increase revenues and improve expenditure
management and allocation; (ii)deepening and diversifying sources of growth through
support for privatization, rehabilitating basic infrastructure, putting in place an appropriate
regulatory framework, and strengthening the financial sector and the legal and judiciary
framework; (iii)
introducing the institutional and policy reforms needed to protect Georgia’s
environmental and natural resources; and (iv) improving social service delivery b y fostering
reallocation of public expenditures toward social sectors, improving targeting o f benefits and
pension reforms, and building institutional capacity to change the role o f the state in the
provision and financing o f social services. Fourteen projects for US$300 million were
approved during this period. Lending sectors were structural adjustment, urban development,
transport, energy, agriculture, judicial reform, cultural heritage, coastal management,
economic management TA, and a social fund. Three formal ESW reports were produced in
power, judicial reform, and a poverty assessment. Informal ESW included an education
sector note, a civil service assessment, a forestry study, and a study on corruption. IDF grants
Govemment of Georgia, Draft EDPRP Progress Report, December 2004. Poverty developments and characteristics
discussed above should be taken as tentative. There are a number of technical issues concerning the household budget survey
(HBS) data sets and poverty measurement methodology employed by SDS that need to be clarified prior to reaching any firm
conclusions about poverty levels and trends and embarking on an analysis of the poverty profile in Georgia.

55

Georgia CASCR

supported strengthening public procurement, the State Chancellery, and the civil service
bureau. IFC opened a small office in the Tbilisi during this period and began seeking
investment opportunities proactively, having previously made only one investment in the
country. Multiple investments were subsequently made with seven new clients, including
four banks (primarily S M E and mortgage finance), an o i l pipeline project, an electricity
distribution company, and a glass bottle producer.

FY01-02: After FYOI, Bank lending was significantly reduced i n the worsening
During FYO1-02, following issuance o f the I-PRSP, the Bank
continued support toward each o f the four major goals, while introducing several new
elements: governance and anti-corruption, civil service reform, and building a greater role for
civil society. N o structural adjustment loans were made in the deteriorating governance
environment. N e w lending comprised four projects for US$95 million in o i l transit, energy,
education, and irrigation, each approved in FYOl. A GEF grant was also approved in FYOl to
support protected area development. No Bank loans were made in FY02. Formal ESW during
the period included a poverty update, a public expenditure review, and a country procurement
assessment. Other activities included a joint BanWIMF Financial Sector Assessment
Program; an IDF grant to support statistical capacity building; a F I A S administrative barriers
study; and a cost-of-doing-business survey. During this period, IFC investment activity also
slowed down, with only a few follow-up investments in existing client banks. IFC advisory
services were also engaged by the Government to facilitate private participation in the energy
sector.

7.

govemance environment.

FY03-FY04 (pre Rose Revolution): I n 2003, govemance was elevated as the
8.
Bank’s highest priority objective and lending was confined to the social sectors. With the
government’s presentation o f i t s EDPRP in 2003, an independent portfolio review in early

FY03, and the continuing poor governance environment, the Bank made several further
adjustments in i t s strategy. Governance and anti-conuption were elevated as the Bank’s
highest priority objectives. Emphasis was also placed on poverty and development issues
outside Tbilisi; on Georgia’s role as a transit economy within the private sector development
framework; and on strengthening project implementation mechanisms and institutional
capacity outside central government agencies. Bank lending approvals during this period
comprised four projects for US$70 million in the social sectors and environment, two o f
which were through autonomous institutions: health, municipal development, forestry, and a
second social fund project. A supplemental credit under the social fund project was also
provided in response to the 2002 earthquake. Formal E S W comprised a trade development
study and a country financial accountability assessment. Other activities included further
cost-of-doing-business and administrative barriers work; a review o f lessons in the energy
sector; a higher education note; and an assessment o f HIV/Aids in Georgia. I F C invested in
the B T C o i l pipeline and continued to do repeat business with client banks. I t also launched a
TA program to support the development o f financial leasing, introduce good corporate
governance practices, and improve the enabling environment for SMEs.

FY04-FY05 (post-Rose Revolution): An interim strategy has been in place since
the Rose Revolution. In the immediate aftermath o f the Rose Revolution and withdrawal o f

9.

the draft strategy, the Bank engaged in several shorter-term transitional support activities. An
understanding was reached that a new C A S would be prepared after the government issued a
PRSP progress report in early 2005. In the meantime, Bank assistance comprised: (i)
a quick56

Georgia CASCR

disbursing Reform Support Credit (approved in June 2004) aimed at improved
governance/anti-corruption efforts; strengthened public finance management; and reforms in
the energy sector; (ii)
co-chairing a donors’ meeting to discuss international support for postinvestment lending comprising supplemental financing for the
revolution Georgia; and (iii)
on-going energy project, a secondary and local roads projects, and a rural development
project. Enhanced AAA work included constraints to rural growth study; on-going business
environment TA; programmatic poverty assessment work; a case study on operationalizing
MDGs; a private sector participation in the water sector study; and IDF grants for postconflict preparation and agriculture program monitoring. IFC provided a currencyhnterest
rate swap product and subordinated debt to T B C bank, introducing these products to the
Georgian market for the first time. B y the end o f 2004, the government had begun to move
out i t s “revolutionary mode” and shifted i t s focus toward longer-term goals and strategies.
The EDPRP Progress Report was issued in January 2005 and forms the basis for the Bank
CPS scheduled for Board discussion in September 2005.

4. Achievement of CAS Outcomes, FY98-05
A. Improving Fiscal Management and MaintainingMacroeconomic Stability.
Revenue performance
10.
After positive early gains, revenue performance stagnated between 1999-2004. L o w
tax revenues have been a critical obstacle to fiscal sustainability and to increased social and
infrastructure expenditures and the Bank placed an emphasis on helping improve revenue
performance between 1997-2002. Through several operations, including SATAC Z, SAC ZZ,
SATAC ZZ, and SAC ZZZ the Bank helped develop new Tax and Custom codes, operationalize
ASYCUDA at the airport and Tbilisi customs terminal, develop anti-smuggling measures,
computerize the Customs and Tax Administration and other agencies, and reorganize the Tax
Department, including creating a Large Taxpayer Unit. These measures contributed to an
improvement in tax revenue from 10.6 percent o f GDP in 1996 to 14 percent in 1999.
However, revenue growth stagnated between 1999 and 2003 due to the inability to enforce tax
laws, amendments to the tax law that created a range o f exemptions, large scale tax evasion,
corruption, and smuggling. Lack o f growth in revenues had significant adverse effects,
including high levels o f payment arrears in health, education, and pensions. Following the
Rose Revolution, the intensive anti-corruption drive along with improved revenue collection
led to a sharp increase in revenues, to a projected 17.6 percent of GDP in 2004. This in turn
has enabled the government to clear the bulk o f domestic wage and pension arrears ahead of
schedule. Parliament recently passed a tax reform bill aimed at simplifying the tax regime
and eliminating nuisance taxes. Despite these achievements, Georgia’s tax revenues are s t i l l
-well below the transition country average-of 30 percent to GDP.
Expenditure management

11.
Public expenditure control has been erratic. Georgia’s expenditure management has
shown weaknesses for much of the period under review and expenditure levels have been low
57

Georgia CASCR

by regional standards. The Bank placed a consistent priority on helping strengthen
expenditure management in each CAS period since 1997. Each o f the four structural
adjustment operations since FY97 as well as several TA operations had significant
components aimed at strengthening expenditure management. Public Expenditure Reviews
were completed in 1998 and 2002. These measures contributed to periodic improvements in
Georgia’s expenditure management, although by and large control has been erratic and an
adequate degree o f prioritization has not occurred. Obstacles to better outcomes have
included a range o f “protected items” under the 1996 budget law that inhibited reallocation;
over-optimistic assumptions on revenues and grants; weak strategic planning; absence of a
single treasury account; lack o f commitment controls; pressure from the energy sector; and a
range o f extra-budgetary funds. In addition, pre-election spending accounted for sharp
expenditure increases, including during Presidential elections in late 1999 and the run-up to
the November 2003 parliamentary elections. Significant improvements have been seen since
the Rose Revolution. The government has started linking i t s budget formulation to policy
priorities as defined in the EDPRP, and a medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) i s
being phased in. A financial management system has been introduced to ensure that incurred
expenditures are consistent with the approved budget; that budgeted revenues are achieved;
and that aggregate fiscal control i s maintained. The Government has also reduced the number
of extra-budgetary funds and improved i t s fiscal reporting system.
Monetary policy
12.
A consistently prudent monetary framework was maintained. The erratic expenditure
performance was countered by a sound monetary framework since 1997 to yield a relatively
stable macroeconomic environment. The Bank’s FY98 C A S and draft strategy in FY04 both
included prudent monetary policy as an objective. Bank conditionality in its policy-based
credits relating to strengthening the monetary framework supported the I M F ’ s leading role in
this area. During the 1990s, the National Bank o f Georgia (Central Bank) emerged as a
relatively strong and independent institution. Prudent monetary policy helped keep inflation
to single digits since 1997. The exchange rate regime was fully liberalized and other than for
some sharp movements following the 1998 Russian crisis, the real effective exchange rate has
remained relatively stable.

B. Removing Obstacles to Market-Oriented, Private Sector Driven Growth
Privatization

13.
Following rapid initial progress, privatization stalled after 2001. By 1997,
-privatization o f small and medium enterprises was nearly complete and the emerging
challenge was to extend the process to larger enterprises. The Bank provided extensive
support in this area between 1997-2002 and IFC was also active through several investments
in privatized f i r m s and advisory services. The Bank-financed SATAC Z (FY96-99) helped
continue the mass privatization campaign, including through development o f a public
information campaign that played an important role in generating and maintaining public
58

Georgia CASCR

support for the privatization effort. Under SAC I Z (FY98-99) the elimination o f floor selling
prices helped divest firms in cement, tobacco, textiles, construction and mining. The
Enterprise Rehabilitation Project (ERP) (FY99-06) financed technical assistance to privatized
enterprises to help in restructuring and business development. IFC investments in the Bank o f
Georgia, M i n a Glass, and Borjomi Mineral Water contributed to the expansion and increased
efficiency o f these formerly state-owned companies. IFC’s most visible investment was its
loan to AES-Telasi, the first large scale electricity privatization in Georgia. The initial
success o f this effort helped demonstrate the viability o f foreign participation in Georgia’s
privatization program. As discussed below, however, this experience was not sustained and
AES withdrew from Georgia in 2004. SAC ZZZ (FY99-03) aimed to help further the largescale privatization effort, although i t was not successful and the pace o f privatization slowed
considerably after 2001. With little further progress, the government retained control over a
range of large commercial enterprises including those in chemicals, mining, water, power,
telecom, ports, and railways. Since early 2004, the government has embarked on an
accelerated program to divest or liquidate remaining public enterprises in 2005-2006.
Legal and regulatory framework for private sector activity
14.
A favorable legal and regulatory framework was created, although this has been
undermined by inconsistent implementation. A range of laws and regulations adopted in the
mid-1990s created, on paper, a largely favorable enabling environment for market-driven,
private sector activity. Contributions o f the Bank and IFC included policy conditionalities
and TA in areas such as business licensing and land reform; a comprehensive F I A S
assessment o f administrative barriers to business in 2001; and cost o f doing business surveys
in 2000 and 2002. The Bank made an important contribution to land market development by
helping amend a law to allow privatization o f non-agricultural, state-owned land that resulted
in full use o f previously under-utilized urban land. However, the business environment has
been undermined by difficulties in implementing the new regime, particularly in areas such as
licensing, tax collection, the bankruptcy law, the anti-monopoly law, and enforcement o f
contracts. For example, following the 1999 passage o f a law simplifying business licensing,
local agencies proceeded to reintroduce many of the cancelled license requirements, requiring
an amendment to the law in 2002. A 2002 survey o f investors indicated that the
administrative and regulatory environment, issues relating to the judiciary, policy instability,
lack of enforcement o f intellectual property rights, and corruption added significantly to
investment risk and were key obstacles to more investment in the country. Over the last year,
there have been some positive recent changes. Under the RSC, the government established a
cross-ministerial commission with representatives from the private sector mandated to
Recent surveys indicate that
promote improvements in the business environment.
simplification o f the tax and customs administrations have had significant positive impacts on
existing businesses. Moreover, i t now takes 25 days to register a new business, compared to
42 day in 2002 and the cost o f registration has almost halved.
Oil transit sector

15.
The BanWIFC helped encourage investment in the oil transport sector, which has
been the fastest growing sector in Georgia since 1997. In 1996, the Georgian International
59

Georgia CASCR

Oil Company (GIOC) was created to facilitate o i l pipeline projects and i t s mandate was
extended to cover gas transit pipelines in 2001. The Bank-funded Oil Znstitution Building
Project (FY97-00) helped significantly enhance the negotiating capacity of GIOC at a time
when the country had very little exposure to the o i l industry and the international private
sector in general. The follow-on Energy Transit Institution Building (FYO1-05) helped build
capacity to minimize adverse social and environmental impacts o f pipeline construction. In
July 1998, IFC’s Board approved a US$200 million loan (including $100 million in
syndications) for the Early Oil Project, which included the construction o f terminals and a
pipeline f r o m Baku to Supsa. The project represented the largest foreign investment in
Georgia at the time and has generated some US$6-7 million per annum in transit fees since
the project’s completion in April 2000. The project also helped demonstrate the
competitiveness and reliability of a Georgian transit route and contributed to the decision to
build two additional transit pipelines. In November 2003, IFC’s Board approved a US$250
million investment (including $125 million in syndications) in the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
(BTC) pipeline project, whose construction i s expected to be complete in the second half o f
2005. A recent IMF report estimates that annual revenues from transit fees w i l l increase from
US$17.5 million in 2006 to US$50 million in 2011. The construction phase o f the BTC
project also generated significant temporary employment, engaging over four thousand
workers (as of the second quarter 2004). IFC engagement in the sector also helped
incorporate environmental concerns in pipeline projects.

Power sector

16.
By the mid-l990s, the power sector was close to collapse. Reform in the power
sector has been a major priority o f Bank assistance in Georgia since 1997 due to the sector’s
broad implications for social welfare, commercial activity, and fiscal sustainability. In the
mid-l990s, the power sector played a substantially greater macroeconomic role than did the
government budget. Use o f the power sector as a social safety net and macroeconomic policy
tool (particularly when fiscal and monetary policies were being tightened to combat inflation)
led to non-payments and l o w tariffs, which yielded a quasi-fiscal deficit in the sector o f some
5-8 percent of GDP. This, in turn, had led to accumulation o f about US$ 1.1 billion in
debvarrears to cover the operating deficit alone (mainly to import fuel and electricity) and
also led to an extreme neglect o f maintenance. The tolerance o f non-payments and the
repression o f electricity tariffs also enabled the postponement o f structural adjustment in the
enterprise sector. As such, the power system was on the verge o f collapse and electricity
could be provided for only a few hours a day; Georgia was accumulating significant arrears to
external energy suppliers; and under pricing and consequent electricity shortages exacerbated
corruption already endemic in the sector.
The Bank Group financed significant investment in the sector. In this context, in
17.
1996, with close BanWIFC assistance, the government launched a major reform effort in the
power sector aimed at demonopolization, commercialization, and privatization. The Bank
provided direct financial support o f $110 million (representing 22 percent o f Bank investment
lending to Georgia since 1997) through the Power Rehabilitation Project (FY97-Ol), ESAC
(FY99-02), and EMSP (FY01-08). In addition, SATAC Z (FY96-99), SAC ZZ (FY98-99),
SATAC ZZ (FY98-OO), and RSC (FY04-05) each had significant components aimed at the
power sector. Bank analytical work in the sector comprised the Energy Update (99); a

60

Georgia CASCR
Private Participation in Znfrastructure study (98), and the Rural Infrastructure study (04).
F C was also actively engaged in the sector through a US$30 million loan to AES Telasi in
December 1999 and through IFC’s Advisory Services Department, which had four
assignments regarding private sector participation: (i)a management contract for the
wholesale electricity market; (ii)
a management contract for the transmission company; (iii)
a
privatizatiodmanagement contract for electricity distribution outside Tbilisi (now UDC); and
(iv) privatization of five hydroelectric plants.

18.
Bank Group assistance helped prevent a collapse in the power supply, but was not
able to help establish a sustainable and financially viable sector. Initial reforms included
establishing an independent regulatory body; unbundling and corporatizing power generation,
transmission, and distribution functions; and commencing privatization o f generation and
distribution entities. In 1998, Telasi, the distribution company in Tbilisi, was sold to A E S
Corporation, and in 2000, the bulk o f Georgia’s thermal generation capacity was also sold to
AES. In 1999, a Georgia Wholesale Electricity Market (GWEM) was created to manage the
flow of payments among sector enterprises. Following considerable initial difficulties,
GWEM i s presently successfully managed b y a private consortium, under a management
contract achieved with IFC support. In 2002, with BanWIFC assistance, the distribution
companies outside Tbilisi were consolidated into one company, whose management was
contracted out in 2003. These measures helped prevent a collapse in the sector and resulted in
some improvements in the reliability and efficiency of power supply. However, an adequate
degree o f service and reliability has not been reached, with continuing power outages and the
system remains financially unviable. L o w collections from both household and commercial
consumers continue to yield inadequate funds flowing to power generators, suppressing
power generation and limiting the availability o f funds for imports. In 2003, AES sold i t s
holdings in Georgia, to RAO UES, a Russian concern, citing operational difficulties both in
Georgia and overseas and in July 2004, Georgian State Energosystema (GSE), the
transmission company sub-borrower under the Bank-funded EMSP filed for bankruptcy
protection. Meanwhile, government subsidies to consumers escalated in the early 2000s, with
increasing concerns as to over-coverage and wastage. Since the Rose Revolution, the
government has set an ambitious 2 year horizon within which to ensure 24-hour coverage and
financial viability in the sector and i s developing a strategic action plan. A Debt
Restructuring Agency (DRA) was created to recover energy sector debts and collection rates
increased from an average o f 28 percent in 2003 to 40 percent in 2004.
19.
A range of factors inhibited a better outcome in the power sector. Despite the Bank’s
significant investment, close coordination with other donors, and positive institutional
changes in the sector, poor sector performance continues to have a broad detrimental impact
on the economy. Factors that inhibited a better outcome include political pressure in the
operation of energy companies to provide electricity at any costs; strong vested interests to
maintain the status quo; theft; corruption; political tolerance o f non-payments; lack o f
incentives on the part of corporate management to resist political pressure and vested
interests; and weak enforcement of laws and regulations. At one point, AES reported that 40
percent o f the electricity i t provided was stolen and could not be billed. The AES Telasi story
(which i s featured in a documentary film, “Power Trip”) illustrates the myriad difficulties in
turning around a former state-owned utility in an environment o f weak political w i l l on the
part of the government, corruption, and a culture of non-payment. As government subsidies
ceased upon privatization, AES essentially had to bear the burden o f the 5 percent o f GDP

61

Georgia CASCR

subsidy being transferred from the energy sector to consumers. In retrospect, reform in the
sector could be only partly implemented, preventing the benefits o f the difficult process from
being realized. Initial government commitment could not overcome vested interests and the
political w i l l to sustain the momentum dissipated. One lesson was that management contracts
for public f i r m s can be a moderately effective interim solution until the environment for
private equity participation improves. The power sector showed significant progress in 200405 due largely t o the work o f management contractors.
Transport
20.
The Bank made a useful contribution in the road sector. Transport has been a Bank
priority in Georgia since 1995. The Transport Rehabilitation Project (FY96-99) helped
initiate policy reform and institutional strengthening in the sector. TA under the project
resulted in a 1997 Presidential decree on “The Conception o f Transport Policy”. The project
also introduced competitive bidding and privatization of road maintenance and construction
activities. In railways, the project initiated restructuring o f Georgian Railways and drafted a
Railway Law. The follow-on Restructuring of the Ministry of Transport Project (FY99-03)
helped transform the “traditional-style” ministry into a policy and regulation-making body
with oversight functions only and no operational or executing functions. The motor transport
companies were privatized and regulatory agencies for maritime transport, aviation, motor
transport, and communications were established. The reorganization created a model of
reform in the midst o f continuing centralized management systems and was subsequently used
as a model in other public sector reforms. The Roads Project (FY00-06) i s helping improve
the main road network, through improved allocation of available road resources among all
roads, and improved institutional capacity for maintaining and modernizing the road network.
A 2002 study on South Caucasus Trade and Transport Facilitation (TTF) was followed b y a
TTF Policy Note, which was intended to form the basis for a proposed Trade and Transit
Facilitation project. The Secondary and Local Roads Project (FY04- 10) i s helping address
transport bottlenecks to rural development. Notwithstanding these contributions, inadequate
road transportation continues to be a key development constraint in many parts of Georgia.
Continuing issues include improving road administration, including the establishment o f
regional offices; securing adequate resources in the sector; changing inefficient and costly
Soviet-era design and construction standards; improving planning and road management
systems; and involving more stakeholders in the planning and development process.
Water supply
21.
Bank contributions in the water sector were limited to small-scale investment
projects. Lack of clear government commitment to reforms led to limited Bank involvement
in the water sector. The dropped Water and Sanitation Project (planned for FY99) had
-intended to address institutional reforms and immediate investment needs in the water sector
in Tbilisi. A study on strategy, regulation, and private sector participation in the water sector
was financed under PPIAF and KfW i s currently tahng this sector further with the
Government. No reforms have been implemented to date, however, and water systems
throughout Georgia have continued to deteriorate. The Bank was able to make a sound
contribution in generating small investment projects for rehabilitation and repair of existing
local infrastructure in various cities under MDDP Iand 11. Some sub-projects under MDDP I,
62

Georgia CASCR

e.g. in Poti and Rustavi, involved technical and financial management improvements to
ensure the sustainability o f water utility operations and had positive results. For example, in
Poti, local authorities fully adopted the recommendations o f an international consultancy and
reorganized the water utility along commercial principles. The rate o f collection rose from
less than 5 percent to more than 35 percent within a year after the utility was authorized to cut
off defaulting customers.
Financial sector

22.
There have been significant improvements in the financial sector, although limited
access to finance remains a concem. In close collaboration with the IMF, the Bank and IFC
helped introduce a range o f financial sector reforms and provided TA, training, and long term
investment capital to commercial banks through components in SATAC Z and ZZ, SRS, ADP1
and several IFC investments.
A joint IMF/Bank FSAP in 2001 led to significant
improvements in banking supervision. Overall, the banking sector has consolidated from 6 1
banks in 1996 to 19 in 2005. Banking sector assets grew from 6 percent o f GDP in 1996 to
17.4 percent in 2005, with similar growth in deposits and lending. Asset quality also
improved, with the proportion o f non-performing loans reduced to 5.7 percent from 9.2
percent in 2001. The spread between lending and deposit rates, although s t i l l high, declined
from about 40 percent in 1997 to 12 percent in 2005. The insurance sector has also begun to
develop, with gross premiums growing by 50 percent a year over the past 4 years. A
Securities Commission was set up in 1999 and Georgia Stock Exchange started functioning.
Bank Group interventions helped restructure and divest Agrobank, which emerged as a viable
commercial entity as Peoples Bank. Repeated IFC investments and technical assistance in
TBC, Bank of Georgia, and Procredit Bank had substantial impact on the institutional
capacity of these banks. IFC engagement supported growth in S M E lending, the introduction
o f mortgage lending (first introduced through a credit line to Bank o f Georgia in FYOO), the
first currency and interest rate swaps (with TBC in FY04) and the introduction of
subordinated debt (TBC in FY05). IFC support has also led to some increase in term lending,
particularly to S M E s and homeowners and contributed to the recent introduction o f financial
leasing to Georgian companies. Continuing issues in the financial sector include the limited
reach o f the formal banking sector, particularly in rural areas; limited attraction o f deposits;
continuing high interest rate spreads; excess liquidity in the system and inadequate termlending due to high perceived risks; and deficiencies in contract enforcement, collateral
legislation, and credit information on clients.
Rural development

23.

While the Bank financed a range of investments in rural areas, significant
impediments to agricultural growth and rural development remain. Nearly half o f Georgia’s
-population lives in rural areas and agriculture remains a central component o f Georgia’s
economy, accounting for 16 percent o f GDP and 52 percent o f employment in 2004. A range
of Bank activities since 1997 aimed to help stimulate agricultural growth and rural
development. They include the ADP (FY97-05), ARET (FY00-06), ZDCD (FYO1-07), GSZF 2
(FY03-08), Secondary and Local Roads (FY04-10); RSC (FY04); the Trade Study (FY03)
and a Social and Institutional Constraints to Rural Growth study (FY04). The ADP helped
increase credit flows to agribusinesses in rural areas; establish a rural credit union system that

63

Georgia CASCR

has provided access to credit for thousands o f rural farmers; and piloted a land registration
system that has yielded an increase in land transactions in target areas. However, due to some
political pressure, the expansion o f credit unions occurred much too rapidly and in the end
only some 50 of the 100 plus credit unions remain viable. The on-going ARET project has
made some progress in establishing an agricultural knowledge system to demonstrate,
disseminate and promote adoption o f appropriate technologies.
The IDCD project
rehabilitated irrigation and drainage systems in pilot areas, with preliminary data indicating
significant increases in crop yield in target areas. The Social and Institutional Constraints to
Rural Growth analysis was conducted just before the Rose Revolution and should provide a
good baseline to measure progress since then. Despite these contributions, the high potential
for value-addition in agriculture remains unrealized and the welfare o f rural dwellers has
declined. Recent studies indicate that Georgia has untapped potential in a range o f products
including wine, nuts, mineral water, herbs, citrus, fresh vegetables, and livestock. Continuing
impediments to agriculture and agro-processing include poor transport infrastructure; scant
and unreliable utility provision; limited term credit; an undeveloped land markedleasing
industry; deteriorating public research and veterinary services; limited knowledge o f and
access to markets for both farmers and agro-businesses; and standards, certification, and
inspection systems that are inefficient and lack credibility in international markets.
Tourism development and cultural heritage Drotection

24.
Bank assistance to restore cultural treasures helped enhance Georgia’s tourist
potential, although a range of critical constraints to tourism remain to be addressed.

Tourism has been widely recognized as an important potential growth sector in Georgia. The
Bank-funded Cultural Heritage Project (FY98-04), a Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL),
was the first stand-alone cultural heritage project supported by the Bank. The project helped
restore cultural and historic treasures in a l l parts of the country. In particular, i t had a
significant impact on revitalizing Old Town, Tbilisi. By restoring facades, resetting the
cobblestone pavement, installing street lights, and landscaping public parks in Old Town, the
project stimulated private investors to renovate several o f the city’s most important o l d
buildings. This led to significant further economic activity including the opening o f cafes,
restaurants, shops, and offices. The project also helped generate widespread public awareness
o f the importance o f Georgia’s cultural heritage and o f actions that communities can take to
revitalize it. I t also helped strengthen the capacity o f the Ministry o f Culture, NGOs, and
community groups involved in protecting the cultural heritage o f the country and led to the
creation o f 37 independent construction companies. Under the GEF Protected Areas
Development Project, the protected area administrations have been allowed to extract
revenues from tourism-related activities and retain 80 percent o f them for the purposes o f PA
management. The project i s also investing in tourism-related infrastructure and the marketing
of the protected areas both nationally and internationally. While these efforts have not in
_themselves stimulated tourism development, they enhance the prospects of tourism when
other constraints are alleviated. A Swiss-financed Regional Trancaucasus Tourism Initiative
supports both community-based and national tourism development initiatives, as well as two
grant-funded community-based tourism activities built on the investments made under the

LIL.

64

Georgia CASCR

C. Human Capital Development and the Social Safety Net
Public expenditure on the social sectors

25.
Public expenditure allocations for the social sectors did not increase due to the weak
revenue position. The CAS and draft CASs in FY98/01/02 each expressed the intention to
help increase the allocation o f public expenditures toward the social sectors. Bank
instruments toward this objective included SAC ZZ (98) SAC ZZZ (99); RSC (04); SATAC ZZZ
(02); and the PER (FY02). This objective was not achieved, however, mostly because o f the
limited success in increasing revenues. In 2004 central government expenditure on education
and health remained l o w at 1.4 percent and 1 percent o f GDP respectively, compared to 1.8
percent and 1 percent o f GDP respectively in 1997. These levels are significantly below
average allocations in transition economies. Social expenditures were not protected from cuts
in primary expenditure and large arrears were accumulated in the education system, health
care services, and welfare programs. Lessons from this experience include: (i)adjustment
lending in itself i s an inadequate instrument to ensure reallocations in public expenditure; (ii)
in the absence of an increase in level o f resources, greater efforts should b e made to increase
the efficiency and targeting o f existing resources; (iii)
establishment of a predictable fiscal
framework i s a necessary condition for improved expenditure management and prioritization.
The current government has announced an intention to increase public spending on health and
education by five percent o f GDP starting from 2006.
Targeting o f social protection benefits and pension reforms
26.
Some progress was seen in pension reform, although targeting of social transfers was
not improved. Social protection systems in Georgia comprise: (i)
pensions; (ii)
transfers to
a poverty benefit program; and account for some 4.2
internally displaced persons; and (iii)
percent o f GDP and 20 percent o f total public spending. These programs have consistently
suffered from inefficiencies, poor targeting, and a constant shortage o f funds. Since 1996 the
Bank supported the Government’s reform agenda through policy dialogue (such as through
the F Y 0 2 PER), policy-based lending, and TA. Under SATAC ZZ, for example, a study was
financed in 1998 that revealed that only 1 million o f the 2.4 million Georgians covered by the
pension plan contributed to it, due to the l o w collection capability as well as widespread
underreporting o f wages. Under SAC ZZ (FY98-99), the government enacted a law on private
pensions and four private pension funds were subsequently established. Since mid-2000 a
range o f steps have been taken to improve management o f the pension system: records were
cleaned and the data base computerized; payment o f pensions was centralized and closely
monitored to avoid regional inequities; the Post Bank was replaced by a consortium o f three
commercial banks; and new business plans, operational manuals, and staff training programs
were developed. Efforts to increase contributions were undermined by strong opposition from
the business community and employees, however. With Bank assistance, the Government
built good capacity for regular poverty monitoring. Quarterly household surveys are
conducted and poverty incidence and gaps are identified. However, such poverty diagnosis
has not yet lead to better targeting mechanisms. In 2004, the Government announced the
65

Georgia CASCR

intention to reform the poverty benefit program, including introducing proxy means-testing to
target benefits. The post-revolution Government has also cleared a significant portion of
arrears, begun to make social transfer payments on time, and increased pensions.
Access to basic services and infrastructure for the poorest

27.
Good progress was made in establishing social-find type mechanisms to increase
access to basic social service for the poorest. With extensive poverty, deteriorating social
and economic infrastructure, and insufficient formal safety nets, there has been an increasing
need to target access to basic social services and infrastructure toward the poorest. Bank
support toward this objective has included GSZF Z and ZZ (FY98 and 04), M D D P Z and ZZ
(FY97 and 04) and components in ESAC (FY99-02). Through financing o f the Social
Investment Fund (SIF) and Municipal Development Fund (MDF), the Bank helped address
community and municipal level demand for infrastructure, primarily school and health
facilities, heating, local roads, small hydropower schemes to provide electricity, drinking
water and sanitation, and transportation rehabilitation. These interventions contributed to
improvements in access to basic infrastructure in urban and rural communities across the
country. GSIF reached some 1,200 poor communities and beneficiary assessments indicate
that target communities have learned to take more action on their o w n and are less dependent
on the state to improve their well-being. GSIF was not intended to be financially viable,
however, and continues to be dependent on donor financing. MDF, on the other hand, has
become financially viable to the extent that i t i s able to pay for i t s own operating costs and
contribute 20 percent o f the cost o f any new capital investment. I t s percentage o f bad loans
has decreased from 22 percent in 2002 to 3 percent in 2005 and i t currently shows a 5.7
percent return on assets. Under the ESAC Project, a poverty benefits program was established
that was designed to help single poor pensioners and orphans deal with the increasing costs o f
electricity supply. Although implementation was hindered by fiscal pressure and arrears
accumulated, the program eventually covered some 45,000 families. The program prompted
U S A I D to initiate a major social assistance program called the Winter Heat Program that i s
covering up to 200,000 families.
Health sector
28.
The Bank helped advance an innovative reform program in the health sector,
although under-finding and excess capacity remain. Since 1996 the Bank placed a consistent
focus on the health sector to help build institutional and human capacity, invest in
infrastructure, improve regulation o f the system, and ensure more stable and adequate
financing in the sector. Bank instruments included the PER (FY02), a Health Sector Note
(FY04), SAC ZZZ (FY99-03), SRS (FY99-07), Health Z (FY96-03) and Health ZZ (FY03-08).
Good initial progress was made, including adoption o f a strategy for primary health care and
development and initial implementation o f a master plan for hospital reorganization,
consolidation, and privatization. This reform program has stood out as one o f the more
innovative in the region and i t was one o f the first to introduce a purchaser-provider split and
make hospitals autonomous. The change in legislation resulted in just 56 percent o f health
facilities remaining public. However, implementation o f the program has remained
incomplete and in retrospect, the reform agenda was overly ambitious given the limited
degree to which the government was willing /able to invest in the sector. A range o f problems

66

Georgia CASCR

persist, including an excess supply o f physicians, weak regulation, and disparities in regional
funding. The hospital restructuring effort stalled after 2003, when a court decision prevented
the second phase o f the restructuring plan. The Basic Benefits Package was rapidly
expanded, partly for political reasons and remains under-funded and poorly targeted. Health
services productivity continues to be l o w and Georgia continues to exhibit a very poor
utilization rate o f hospital and outpatient services. The post-revolution leadership has
prioritized the social sectors and increased public funding and payments to providers and
initiated the design o f improved targeting mechanisms for the Basic Benefits Package.
Education Sector

29.
I n education, the Bank helped advance some reforms, although progress in some
politically dificult areas has been slow. The Bank has been the major external donor in
education since 2001. An FY98 Bank-financed study led to the Georgia Education Sector
Strategy Note that laid the basis for the Education System Realignment and Strengthening
Project (ESRSR) (FYO1-05). The ESRSR involved development of a national curriculum,
training o f education professionals, provision o f basic learning materials, and strengthening o f
the policy and management framework. Under GSIF (FY98) financing was provided for
small-scale rehabilitation o f general school infrastructure throughout the country. A review o f
higher education was carried out in the spring o f 2003 that identified and analyzed key issues
in the sector and presented options for addressing them. Prior to the Rose Revolution, a
National Assessment and Examinations Center to support quality-control was created and a
significant number o f teachers were exposed to new teaching methods. Work also began on
new national curricula in consultation with key stakeholders including students, teachers,
academicians, and pedagogical institutes. A small grants program also had a positive effect on
capacity building at a school level. While these and other efforts to reform the education
system have been steps in the right direction, implementation has been slow, particularly in
politically sensitive areas such as curriculum development, and the quality of learning s t i l l
falls far short o f present day requirements. While ESRSR helped set the government on the
right approach to systemic change, in retrospect, the project may have been premature and
overly complex. More emphasis might have been given to changes at the school level in
parallel with systemic changes at the center. Since the Rose Revolution, the National Goals
for Education and a new law on higher education have been adopted and new management at
the Ministry o f Education has launched a major initiative to accelerate reforms to improve the
relevance and quality o f the education system.
Rehabilitation o f internally displaced people

30.

The Bank helped finance the New Approach to addressing the needs of Intemally
--Displaced Persons (IDPs). Through a Post-Conflict TA grant in 2004, the Bank joined
several other donors to support the government’s N e w Approach to the rehabilitation o f IDPs.
The New Approach aimed to address IDP needs, beyond immediate humanitarian relief,
including removing legislative obstacles to their participation in civil society; creating
capacity building programs for IDPs; implementing a comprehensive assessment o f
vulnerability; and providing development-oriented assistance to IDPs. A Self-Reliance Fund
(GSRF) was established to test potential project modalities and open competitions were held

67

Georgia CASCR

for sub-project proposals. Results to date have been promising. A range o f sub-projects were
legal work to amend the legal framework affecting IDPs; (ii)
studies
financed, including: (i)
on IDP Participation during the 2004 parliamentary elections; (iii)the effectiveness o f
financial instruments to support entrepreneurial activities among IDPs; (iv) IDP health and
education Profile Reviews; and (v) development o f a Public Awareness Campaign to bridge
the gaps between the IDP community and the host population. An evaluation has been
commissioned to assess the effectiveness and efficiency o f GSRF sub-projects to date in order
to institutionalize and broaden coverage o f the program in the future.
Emergency natural disaster response
The Bank responded efectively to two natural disasters. On April 25, 2002, an
31.
earthquake measuring 4.8 on the Richter scale hit Georgia, with i t s epicenter in Tbilisi. The
earthquake had few human casualties and therefore, did not attract much international
attention. However, the overall level of damage to both private and public infrastructures was
substantial. Approximately 17,000 buildings suffered some measurable damage. As a result
of the significant damages to buildings, including houses and schools, students had to be
relocated t o other less damaged buildings, placing a significant burden on their capacity. The
Bank responded with an Earthquake Supplemental Credit under the Social Fund Project to
assist in financing the rehabilitation o f educational infrastructures in Tbilisi. The project
helped reconstruct and rehabilitate 22 schools and ensured continued access o f children to
educational services. I t also introduced construction standards that would enable the new
buildings to withstand an earthquake o f at least similar magnitude. In early 2005, Georgia
was hit hard by major flooding, especially in the east and west o f the country. The floods
washed out roads and bridges, damaged irrigation headworks and canals, and inundated
agricultural lands and villages. The Bank responded by rapidly appraising a US$13 million
Additional Credit and Grant under the IDCD project. The supplemental funds aim to help (i)
return flood-damaged irrigation infrastructure to operational conditions and thereby guarantee
return flood-damaged river bank embankments to
water abstraction and conveyance; and (ii)
fully operational conditions.

D.

Environmental Protection and Sustainable Natural Resource Management

Institutional and policy environment for natural resource protection
32.
Bank interventions have been instrumental in achieving the current policy and
institutional environment for natural resource protection, although much remains to be done.
M u c h preparatory work has been done in terms o f developing visions, drafting strategic
-frameworks and building institutions, although sustained progress toward ensuring protection
o f natural resources i s needed before tangible results are seen. BanWGEF projects helped
advance a number o f policy and institutional reforms, including restructuring the Department
of Forestry and the Department o f Protected Areas (DPA), with the involvement o f the U S
Park Service. The GEF Protected Area Development Project has helped strengthen PA
management in four different regions - Kolkheti, Tusheti, Vashlovani and Lagodekhi and
strengthened the capacity o f the DPA to mainstream biodiversity conservation in production

68

Georgia CASCR

landscapes. Under Bank projects, the area under PA status has increased from 2 percent to
more than 7 percent. The Bank also helped develop the first National Environmental Action
Plan o f Georgia in 2000. Under the ETIB project (FYO1-05), the capacity o f the Ministry o f
Environment to monitor implementation of the conditions o f the environmental permit for
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline was strengthened. Through the Integrated Coastal
Management project (FY99-05), the Bank has helped establish the institutional and legal
framework for integrated decision-making and spatial planning in Georgia’s coastal area; and
built technical and human capacity for monitoring the quality o f coastal developments. Since
the Rose Revolution, in particular, the project has made significant inputs into policy actions
and legal changes underway to prevent uncontrolled construction and development on
Georgia’s coast and it i s directly referred to in several Government resolutions. Moreover,
the former Departments of Forestry, Protected Areas, and Geology have been merged into the
Ministry o f Environment, bringing management of a variety o f natural resources under a
single institution. In retrospect, closer and more consistent Bank policy dialogue with the
Government may have helped avoid progress from lapsing for extended periods. There are
also some areas where further Bank analytical work would have been useful, including
environmental taxation, financing environmental services, and environmental security.
Reducing water, air and solid waste pollution
33.
Bank interventions helped improve wastewater and solid waste management in a few
target locations but did not have wider impact. Heavy water and air pollution as well as a
weak solid waste management system have been detrimental to the quality of l i f e in Georgia,
with particular implications for public health and ecosystem conservation. Several Bank
projects aimed to help protect the environment. The Municipal Infrastructure Rehabilitation
(MIR) Project (FY95-00) financed investments to upgrade municipal wastewater and solid
waste management systems in Tbilisi, Batumi, and Poti, as well as in a few smaller
settlements.
Improved local sewage collectors and pumping stations helped improve
sanitation and living standard for several communities. They did not, however, cover waste
water treatment and therefore did not have an impact on water pollution indicators. Improved
trash collection through provision of garbage trucks and waste containers and construction o f
a landfill wall in Batumi supported improvements in solid waste management. Otherwise
little was done to improve waste management at dumping sites, however, and consequently,
the standards o f landfill management improved only modestly and the level o f sea water
pollution, with waste washed from coastal landfills, did not change significantly. Under the
ARET project (00-06) a pilot activity to reduce nutrient pollution from agricultural non-point
sources of pollution was conducted successfully. N o progress was made in improving the
Tbilisi water supply and sewage management system, however, as the project for addressing
Tbilisi water supply and sanitation was dropped. One of the components o f the I C M Project
(FY99-05) i s building capacity for monitoring the quality o f coastal, bathing and off-shore sea
water, surface water in rivers and estuaries, as well as water pollution from major ports and
other point sources. Bank efforts would have been enhanced had i t provided assistance to
develop national standards of water and air quality; as such standards were essential to
provide reference points to define actions and investments. Additional efforts are also needed
to promote cleaner industrial production to reduce water and air pollution.

69

Georgia CASCR

Forestry sector
34.

Positive steps were taken in the forestry sector although more coordinated eforts are
required for tangible results to be seen. In the late 1990s, the government developed a Forest
Strategy and a Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan to shift Georgia’s forest management
regime f r o m one o f conservation only into one that balanced conservation and sustainable use.
A market-driven forest economy was to be encouraged that would be subject to strict public
oversight to maintain the environmental and social functions o f forests. A new Forestry Code
was adopted that allowed multiple forms o f forest ownership (state, municipal/community,

church, private); and enabled long-term lease o f forests and privatization o f forest
management activities. Delineation o f regulatory and oversight responsibilities between the
State Forestry Department and the Ministry o f Environment was clarified and improved. The
Forests Development Project (FY03-09) aims to help advance the forest reform agenda by
supporting implementation o f the Forestry Code; strengthening public institutions involved in
forest management and monitoring; piloting sustainable forest planning and management
techniques in demonstration areas; and improving forest protection and reforestation in
selected areas. Completed activities under the project to date include preparation o f a “Forest
sector rationalization and institutional strengthening’’ study; completion o f forest inventories
in four districts of Central Caucasus and commencement o f forest management plans for each
district; completion of a pilot phase o f reforestation and afforestation works; and
rehabilitation of a nursery that w i l l provide high quality seedlings.
Despite these
contributions, however, the forestry sector continues to face serious problems and much
remains to be done before significant improvements are realized. A coherent strategy did not
emerge with different ministries developing distinct approaches.
In 2004, the new
government implemented a number o f institutional reforms and has developed a new “Forest
Policy and Strategy”.

E. Public Administration and Corruption
Judicial reform

35.
The Bank helped achieve some progress in strengthening the judicial system,
although reforms have been incomplete. In 1994, the Government began a series o f steps

toward establishment o f a coherent legal framework, supportive o f a market economy. M a n y
important new laws and regulations were adopted. The enactment o f the Constitution o f
Georgia in 1995 and in particular, provisions of Chapter 5 dealing with the judiciary, was a
crucial first step toward establishing the new Georgian judiciary. By adopting the L a w on the
-Judiciary in 1997, the Georgian Parliament took the next important step toward the
establishment o f an independent, corruption-free judiciary, staffed with competent judges.
Under SATAC ZZ (FY98-00) and the Judicial Reform Project (FY99-06), a range o f steps were
taken to help strengthen the judiciary, including attestation o f judges; publication o f laws,
decrees, and court decisions; and establishment o f a training center for judges. Bank projects
also helped computerization of courts, rehabilitate physical infrastructure, pilot new case
management models, and make court decisions public, all o f which have been critical building

70

Georgia CASCR

blocks for a more effective and transparent judiciary. However, reforms have been
incomplete and according to public surveys and Transparency International indexes,
perceptions o f corruption and lack o f judicial independence persist. While initial commitment
to reforms was strong, this wavered in the period 1999-2000 and progress stalled, with
salaries o f judges unpaid for months, and towards the end o f 2002, the President openly
criticized judges for their independence. Successive appointments to the Minister o f Justice
position created a lack o f institutional capacity and leadership at a time when important
reforms could have occurred with the right forces in charge. Moreover, reforms in other
important areas such as the BAR association, the prosecutor's office, and the police lagged
behind, to the detriment o f the performance o f the judiciary and courts.
Local government management and capacity

36.

While progress was made in establishing a regulatory environment supporting local
govemment, capacity at the local level is still is lacking. Deteriorating local infrastructure
and service provision has been recognized as a major obstacle to private sector activity and
addressing this issue has been a focus o f several Bank interventions since 1997. These
include, TA, training, and investment capital to local government and utility enterprises
through MDDP Z (FY98-03) and MDDP ZZ (FY03-06). The Bank also engaged in policy

dialogue with the central government on an appropriate legal and regulatory enabling
framework for local government. Through these activities, the Bank helped pass a series o f
legislation that created a sound foundation for transparent and accountable local government.
After 2000, progress on decentralization slowed, however, due in part to a lack o f political
consensus on the direction o f reforms. Tax reforms and increased transfers f r o m the center
since the Rose Revolution have resulted in an improvement in the revenue position o f local
governments. However, the bulk o f the transfers served to settle overdue wages for school
teachers and other local employees. Parallel cost increases, unfunded mandates, and a history
o f undisciplined spending continue to be problems. Local budget planning also remains
unpredictable and non-systemic leading to weak borrowing and repayment capacity and
dependence on decisions made at the central level. This has threatened repayment o f loans
under the MDDP Z and ZZ as well as constrained emergence of further creditworthy
municipalities.

37.
Much remains to be done to complete the decentralization agenda. Lmplementation
o f the Government's decentralization agenda moved at a much slower pace than anticipated
during MPPD ZZ project preparation. Even though the first local government elections were
held in the fall o f 1998 and followed b y the second elections in the summer o f 2002, the legal
and institutional framework for local government, at this point, remains in a state o f flux.
Existing laws have gone through successive amendments while the adoption o f important new
laws, that should have supported the local government framework, was repeatedly postponed.
t o c a l government responsibilities continue to be shifted, the legal status o f local government
property has yet to be determined, and the system o f intergovernmental fiscal relations i s s t i l l
awaiting a final definition within the local budget law. Since the revolution, the European
Charter on Local Self-Governance has been ratified and a State Commission on TerritorialAdministrative Reform and Effective Governance has been created to design new territorialadministrative arrangements and a decentralization strategy. Legislation has been drafted to
expand and specify the fiscal authority o f representative and executive local bodies. The
71

Georgia CASCR

passage o f an effective L a w represents the first step in improving central-local government
fiscal relations, transparency and enables local governments to have predictable revenues.
Financial Accountability
3 8.
Some improvements have been made in financial accountability, although progress
has been slow. The 2002 Country Procurement Assessment (CPAR) and the 2003 Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) defined a range o f priorities and action plans
related to fiduciary issues and recommended strengthening institutional capacity and fostering
a culture o f compliance in auditing, financial control and procurement. In 2004, the RSC
supported the government’s reform program in the areas o f (a) public financial controls, (b)
public procurement management, and (c) state-owned enterprise auditlmanagement. While
progress in advancing the agenda has been slow, the government has made progress in
integrating its extra-budgetary funds into a single Treasury Account which i s necessary for
effective control o f various entities’ budgets and improved cash management. However, a
number o f State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) budgets remain outside the overall budget
framework. Amendments to the law on Administrative Violations Code have made
procurement fraud punishable. Under the RSC, a State Procurement Agency web-site was
established, although i t needs to be updated and operationalized. At present, discussions are
ongoing with the Chamber o f Control on the development o f a comprehensive reform and
capacity building strategy to improve transparency and accountability within government
entities.
Reliability and dissemination o f statistical information
39.
Bank interventions made some contributions to improving Georgia’s statistical
capacity. Lack o f accurate and timely data has been a consistent problem, inhibiting policymaking and an assessment o f progress in various sectors. Under SATAC ZZ, training and
consultancies were provided to develop a methodology for poverty monitoring and introduce
modern household survey and practice in Georgia. In the health sector, the Bank helped
strengthen capacity in the following institutions: (i)National Institute o f Health which
regular poverty monitoring capacity
produces policy analysis and advice to the ministry; (ii)
building in the State Statistics Department; and (iii)
State Medical Statistics Center production
o f a yearly statistics book. SATAC ZZ also financed a communication plan to deliver
information from the government to the public on economic reforms. This component grew
in size and was seen by the government as essential to counter the “waning” public
enthusiasm for reforms. However, there was some concern on the Bank’s side that i t was
financing political propaganda to boost the fortunes o f the past regime.
Anti-Corruption
~

40.
Bank interventions helped keep the anti-corruption agenda on the table. Governance
and anti-corruption increased in importance to form the cornerstone o f Bank assistance to
Georgia since 2001. A range o f Bank interventions aimed at this, including analytical work
on corruption; an IDF Grant for Public Procurement Development (FY98); and governance
components in SAC ZZ (FY98-99), SATAC ZZ (FY98-OO), SAC ZZZ (FY99-03), SRS (FY99-07)
72

Georgia CASCR

and most recently RSC (FY04-05). A Joint USAIDIBank funded corruption study in Georgia
in 1998 and follow up workshops with high level officials contributed to understanding and
substantive deliberations on this topic both within the government as well as nongovernmental and think-tank institutions, and fed into the National Anti-Conuption Program
o f Georgia. Reform areas addressed through SAC ZZ and SATAC ZZ included strengthening
State Customs and Tax services - the two institutions that had been perceived as the worst in
terms o f honesty and integrity. SAC ZZZ helped strengthen revenue administration and
introduce more transparent licensing and public procurement regimes.
A Country
Procurement Assessment conducted in 2000 found that only 12 percent o f the value o f all
procurement was competitively bid. This led to enactment of a procurement law in April
2001 that increased the level of competitive bidding for government contracts. As a result of
the policy negotiations within the framework o f the RSC, the Government produced a report
on anti-corruption initiatives undertaken between December 2003 and M a y 2004. This report
i s expected to inform a more systemic approach to curbing corruption.
41.
However, very little headway was made against corruption until 2004. Since the late
1990s the governance environment has been poor and rampant corruption adversely affected
all aspects o f the economy. The extent of public mistrust in state institutions was captured b y
a Transparency International survey in 2003, which ranked Georgia among the seven worst
countries with a Corruption Perception Index o f 1.8 (out o f 10). Anti-corruption initiatives
prior to the Rose Revolution lacked strong political commitment and were mostly prompted
by pressures from civil society groups and external donors. These initiatives were limited to
developing anti-corruption programs and recommendations and setting up specialized
agencies such as the Anti-corruption Coordination Council and the Anti-corruption Bureau.
While these programs and recommendations were sound in themselves, only few o f them
were actually acted on. Neither the Council nor the Bureau were given necessary support
from the highest echelons (and eventually were abolished). Since early 2004, the government
has taken significant steps to reduce corruption, including strengthening legislation,
reorganizing key institutions (such as Chamber o f Control, State Security, Customs
Administration, Financial Police), arresting and prosecuting notoriously corrupt officials, and
replacing the “traffic police” with modem and better paid patrol police. In a clear indication
o f the effectiveness o f these measures, tax revenues increased b y 4 percent o f GDP in 2004.
A comprehensive strategy to prevent corruption was approved b y the President in June 2005.
C i v i l service rationalization
42.
Progress in rationalizing the civil service has been slow and an unempowered and
ineflective civil service remains a major development constraint. Since 1998 the Bank has
been among the few development partners to consistently maintain a focus on civil service
issues in i t s dialogue with the Government. The Bank’s inputs include the Civil Service
Assessment Report of 3 9 9 e T A fun&ed--though LIL and IDF, and some conditions in
adjustment lending. Under SAC ZZ, for example, some 19,000 budgetary positions were
eliminated and civil service salaries were substantially increased in 1997. B y and large,
progress has been very limited, however, and no reliable data exists on the current size of the
civil service. While high capacity has existed at the highest levels of the government, midlevels of the civil service have remained ineffective and decision-making has not been
delegated downward. Government performance was uneven at different stages and a major
73

Georgia CASCR

factor preventing greater progress has been insufficient political will. Since the Rose
Revolution, the government has recognized the importance of progress in this area.
Significant retrenchments were carried out in some ministries (mostly in the l a w enforcement
block) with minimal fiscal costs as severance payments were suspended for two years.
Further retrenchments are slated for 2005. The government also introduced a new cabinet
system, chaired by the Prime Minister that has helped improve coordination and speed reform
implementation. Substantial restructuring among state agencies prompted by the L a w on
Government Functions and Structure has had positive impacts in terms o f streamlining central
administration. Further analysis remains to be done, however, to appraise the actual impact o f
first generation reforms on reducing duplications and clarifying mandates among and within
state agencies. Moreover, a comprehensive civil service reform strategy has yet to emerge.

5. Outcome Assessments
A. Outcome: Moderately Satisfactory
An assessment of the outcome of Bank assistance to Georgia since 1997 is as follows:
(a) FY98-00:

Satisfactory due to good progress in most areas of Bank support,
including:
revenue performance, privatization, energy sector, transport,
decentralization.

(b) FY01-02: Moderately Unsatisfactory due to slowed progress in key areas of Bank
support including: the privatization effort, the financial sector.
(c) FY03-FY04 (pre-Rose Revolution): Unsatisfactory due to stalled progress in
most areas o f Bank engagement including: increased perception of corruption; little
progress on fiscal reforms and in the energy sector; n o progress on decentralization.

(d) FY04-FY05 (post Rose Revolution):
Satisfactory due accelerated
implementation and positive initial results in several areas where the Bank i s
providing assistance, including: governance, fiscal management, and the social
sectors.
B. Sustainabilitv: Likely
43.
A high proportion of Bank-supported investments is likely to be sustainable, although
I h e poor fiscal positio*k&e-past
kzsa&hned
maintenance. Ninety two percent (11 out
of 12) of projects completed since 1997 were rated as “likely” to sustainable. This compares
to 66 percent and 81 percent for Bank-wide and ECA respectively over the same period.
While some projects had only partly satisfactory or even unsatisfactory outcomes, the
achievements that were made under the project were considered likely t o be sustained. The
likely sustainability o f Bank’s project outcomes was enhanced by the growing degree of
independence in managing projects by Georgian institutions (see ICR o f the SATAC I project).

74

Georgia CASCR

Throughout the period, however, the l o w revenue base and ineffective expenditure
management threatened the sustainability o f the benefits o f Bank-funded projects. The only
project not rated likely to be sustainable was SAC 111, which was rated as unlikely to be
sustainable because of “serious governance problems.” Since the Rose Revolution, strong
commitment shown by the government in combating corruption, improving fiscal
management, a n d advancing reforms on a broad front portends well for the sustainability of
achievements to date. EU accession criteria also strongly support sustainability. Of IFC’s
nine investment projects, seven proved commercially sustainable, delivering most or all of
their development objectives. O f six projects evaluated by OEG, 83 percent were found to
have had satisfactory or better investment outcomes, and 66 percent were found to have
successfully achieved their development outcomes.

C. Institutional Development Impact: Subsranrial
44.
The Bank placed relevant focus on institutional capacity development in Georgia.
Each of the Bank’s projects in Georgia since FY97 emphasized developing local institutional
capacity. Of the completed projects, 62 percent (8 out of 13) were rated as having had
“substantial” institutional development, compared to 45 percent Bank-wide and 53 percent in
E C A during the same period. Examples o f substantial institutional development impact
include transformation o f the Ministry o f Transport from a traditional-style ministry into a
policy formulation and regulation entity needed in a market economy. In energy, Bank
interventions largely drove sectoral institutional reform and made significant contributions to
the current institutional structure in the sector. In decentralization, the B a n k played a key role
in advancing an enabling environment for local government. SATAC Z and ZZ helped broaden
support for the reform process through an effective public information component. The ERP,
meanwhile, made a significant contribution to developing the local consulting industry in
business restructuring and development. Through the GSIF and MDDP projects, the Bank
helped establish technically competent institutions able to address community-level demand
for basic social services and infrastructure in an environment of deteriorating governance and
effectiveness at the central government level. Under the rural development projects, the
Ministry o f Agriculture was downsized by 20 percent and a new agency was created to
address land registration issues. In the health sector, the Bank helped establish a range o f
public institutions; create the private health market; and introduce continuous medical
education and postgraduate medical education systems.

45.

-

However, in the context, of very poor govemance and an unmotivated civil service,
too much emphasis was placed on technical assistance, with limited tangible results. TA,
training and, advisory service for capacity-building in the c i v i l service were undermined by
the poor governance environment, highly centralized decision-making, and high staff turnover
in an underpaid and unmotivated civil service. In some projects, evaluations found that the
B a n k did not a w t e l y diagnose the e x X i n g state o f capacity in target institutions, identify
the main constraints to improvement, or define capacity-building indicators (as opposed to
outcome or result indicators). In other cases, i t was observed that Bank-financed technical
assistance served to execute specific activities but resulted in little transfer o f s k i l l s or
capacity-building. Project evaluations also report that the poor quality and performance of
some consultants adversely affected outcomes. In the meantime, moreover, significant
capacity exists in c i v i l society in Georgia, indicating that the issue may be more one o f

75

Georgia CASCR

adequate remuneration in the public sector rather than training and advisory services for civil
servants.
The PIUs for Bank projects served as “islands of eflectiveness” although there is
increasing concem about their lack of integration with line ministries. While PIUs were the

46.

right answer f o r the earlier period, there is presently increasing concern about the need for
line ministries t o undertake responsibility to implement projects. The use o f PIUs was
initially justified on the grounds o f the country’s inexperience and language constraints. In
the context o f high corruption and ineffectiveness on the part o f the civil service, the PIUs
subsequently emerged as “islands o f effectiveness and purity,” helping insulate Bank projects
from the worst of the corruption. With the current government’s drive against corruption and
acceleration o f c i v i l service reform efforts, however, there i s increasing justification for
integration o f these institutions into the respective line ministries.

6. Contributions to Results
A. External Factors
47.
Several extemal factors had a negative impact on progress. The 1998 financial crisis
in Russia, Georgia’s largest trading partner, had a particularly destabilizing impact. GDP
growth fell from 10.5 percent in 1997 to 2.9 percent in 1999 and to 1.8 percent in 2000.
Inflation in 1999 surged to 19.2 percent, but decreased to 4 percent in 2000 which
consequently affected the cost o f services. In the financial sector, the crisis adversely affected
progress as most banks held reserves against foreign currency deposits in lari. With strong
demand for hard currencies, international reserves fell to three weeks of imports. The 2001
Turkey crisis caused many business oriented toward these markets to go bankrupt or reduce
operations volume. Several natural disasters affected production and absorbed resources,
included the M a y 2002 earthquake and severe droughts in 1998 and 2000, which affected
agricultural output. C i v i l strife in Abkhazia, Adjara, and South Ossetia has adversely affected
the investment environment. Potential foreign investors have seen Georgia as risky and this
has undermined economic performance. Rising tensions in 2002 played a role in reducing
investor interest in some enterprises slated for privatization.
Georgia’s goal of meeting EU accession criteria and MCC qualification have been
strong positive extemal factors. In the post-Rose Revolution period the government has made
clear steps towards harmonization o f legislation and systems with EU standards and
principles. This has been a very positive exogenous factor that i s likely to affect CPS
outcomes in the future. Georgia’s qualification for financing under the Millennium Challenge
Cooperation has also had positive impacts and the inflow o f funds i s likely to enhance
progress in several areas.

48.

B. Factors under the Control of the Client
Poor govemance has been a critical constraining factor.
49.
Prior to the Rose
Revolution, poor governance and the high level o f corruption were critical detrimental factors
to implementing policy reforms, strengthening new institutions, implementing investment

76

Georgia CASCR

projects, and stimulating private sector activity. As indicated above, a variety o f surveys
revealed the high extent to which corruption was perceived as an obstacle to development. A
breakdown o f law and order that included kidnappings and murders posed a significant
deterrent to both private and public investment. A part o f Georgia’s legacy from the Soviet
period has been inheritance o f strong informal networks defined by regional, personal or clan
loyalties. These have played an important role in undermining the rule o f law. A culture
arose, which accepted rule breaking [see 2000 I M F report p.321. Election spending caused
adverse fiscal impacts. An increasing fragmentation o f political power during the
Shevardnadze government reduced high level commitment to curbing corruption and
advancing difficult reforms. A perception existed that the political apparatus lacked a
commitment to fairness, transparency, and competitiveness. In the case o f the IFC-backed
AES Telasi experience, for example, performance o f the company was undermined by the
government’s failure to enforce electricity payments, particularly by large companies;
arbitrary demands for payments by tax collection agencies; assassination o f its CEO in 2002
etc. The critical importance o f good governance was illustrated after the Rose Revolution
when tax revenues increased markedly, allowing pension and salary arrears to be cleared, as
well as proposed new spending on pro-poor activities.

50.

A high level champion has been critical to success due to limited capacity and
decision-making authority at mid-levels of the civil service. An important factor behind
successful outcomes has been close engagement and firm leadership from top-level officials.
This has allowed timely resolution o f problems and steady progress on difficult issues. This
was the case, for example, during the ZBC, SATAC Z, SATAC ZZ projects where the Deputy
Prime Minister (later Assistant to the President) closely following implementation progress.
SAC ZZ also benefited from a very high ranking official involved in project oversight. As the
o i l pipeline was overseen directly by the President, the “highly satisfactory” OZBC project had
complete support at the highest levels. The successful restructuring o f the Ministry o f
Transport benefited from having the same Minister o f Transport in office during the entire
process. Strong leadership and the independence at NGB helped achieve sound progress in
the financial sector. Conversely, however, projects that did not have high level champions
saw less success in part due to the centralized nature o f decision-making and lack o f
delegation o f authority down the line to regular departments. In several cases, Bank staff
relied on the high level champion for virtually all decisions and when the champion was
removed, i t became very difficult to get anything done. Under SAC 111, for example, when
the senior advisor and key champion o f reforms was reassigned during the early phase o f the
project, implementation slowed considerably and the project was ultimately unsuccessful.

51.

Limited political will to overcome vested interests and incur short-term costs has
proved a critical obstacle. In several cases, despite its expressed will, the government balked
at implementing reforms in the face o f strong contrary vested interests. In the energy sector,
for example, the government proved simply unable to improve governance of the major
Tlectricity enterprises. WElFsuf€iCiEiiT~poIi€iEZil
w i l l has existed to establish -relevant
institutions and new regulations, less commitment has been seen in strengthening institutions
and implementing the new regime. Changes in high level leadership also undermined
ownership and commitment, with some reforms being slowed or reversed with changes in key
individuals. To bolster anti-corruption efforts, for example, the Bank helped establish the
State Procurement Agency. However, high turnover o f the agency leadership (three chairmen
over the five years) and core staff as well as s t i l l ongoing deliberations about i t s status and
~

77

Georgia CASCR

governance structure undermined the success and sustainability o f the public procurement
reform agenda. There have been numerous changes in key Ministers, such as in Finance and
Agriculture, since FY98. There has also been a hesitancy to further some difficult reforms
that incur short-term costs on the public. In the energy sector, for example, power generators
were under continuous political pressure to keep generating electricity despite increasing debt,
inhibiting their operation on commercial grounds. A clear implication for the future i s that
accurate assessments o f short-term, politically sensitive costs must be made and difficult
reforms should be accompanied by measures to prepare for and mitigate politically-sensitive
impacts, as far as possible.
52.
There has been a gap between programs/projects/EDPRP and budgetary
planning/execution. A persistent gap between budgeted and actual expenditures has been a
key short-coming o f government performance. Over-optimistic assumptions on revenues and
grants consistently undermined the planning process and affected program implementation,
including through the inability to meet counterpart fund requirements under Bank projects.
Only in 2004, for the f i r s t time since Georgia’s independence, was the government was able
to spend more than envisaged in the original budget, rather than sequester expenditures during
the year. While the EDPRP provided a sound vision for Georgia’s development, i t fell short
of adequately prioritizing actions, accommodating institutional capacity constraints, and
establishing realistic implementation plans and financing parameters for key actions.

B. Factors under the Control of the Bank
53.
Project quality indicators have been positive, although overly ambitious timeframes
have been set. Of the completed projects since 1997, OED rated ten of the twelve projects or
83 percent as satisfactory, compared to an E C A region average o f 81 percent satisfactory. Of
the six IFC projects rated by OEG, IFC’s effectiveness was rated satisfactory or better 83
percent o f the time. Fifteen projects received QAG quality at entry assessments since 1997
and all were rated satisfactory. However, Bank projects have tended to set overly ambitious
timetables given the range o f obstacles to implementation. Eleven of the twelve projects (92
percent) that closed during the period under review were extended beyond the original closing
date. Under SAC ZZZ, for example the closing date was extended three times as “there were
too many conditions, many o f which were weak” and “the design was too broad” (ICR). The
SRS project was extended as the initial 2 ‘/2 year timeframe was simply inadequate to
complete the complex, multi-sector reform agenda. Targets in privatization were particularly
ambitious, clearly underestimating the complexity o f the task, difficulties in overcoming
vested interests, and the political sensitivities.
54.
The Bank adopted an appropriately cautious approach in the face of a deteriorating
govemance environment. The period between 1998-2000 was the twilight o f the earlier era o f
rapid reform; between 2000-2004 was one o f worsening governance and stalling reforms; and
a f t e r 2004, a time for new-bpe. The BankreCpoiided by effectively moving into a low-case
scenario after 2000. Lending was scaled back from US$300 million in FY98-00 to US$165
million in FYO1-04, including cessation o f adjustment lending. I t nevertheless remained
engaged in the country, focusing lending on the power sector, the social sectors, and locallevel financing through GSIF and MDDP and undertaking analytical work that included a
PER, a poverty assessment, and a trade study. Following the Rose Revolution the Bank was
able to respond rapidly with a policy-based loan and an investment loan. There i s some
78

Georgia CASCR

question as to whether the Bank could have better identified the deteriorating governance
environment earlier, however. In particular, release o f the second tranche of SAC 3 appeared
to give the government the Bank’s stamp o f approval at a time when corruption and political
backsliding were getting worse. The Bank’s CPIA ratings for governance did not show
deterioration during this period.

55.
Bank projects have aimed to achieve difJicult policy and structural reforms and not
just physical investments. In each sector o f Bank involvement, the Bank accompanied
physical investments with a strong emphasis on policy reform and institutional building in the
sector. Along with four adjustment operations focused on the policy environment, this was
the case for example, in transport, the energy sector, health, education. According to several
government counterparts and other observers, W o r l d Bank “hand-holding” and advisory
services were critical during Georgia’s early transition period and without its presence, the
gradual transformation o f the policy and institutional environment would have been even
slower. The Bank took an early lead and was initially the only donor in several important
areas, such as targeting access to the poorest; utilization o f social funds to reach local
communities; decentralization; and civil service reform.
56.
Frequent changes in TTLs undermined implementation, while greater use of local
stafs and consultants enhanced performance. Frequent turnover o f Bank staff may have
undermined effectiveness. Since 1998, there have been 4 changes in economist and SAC ZZZ

was affected during a during a critical period o f dialogue o f the late 1990s when there were
three changes in task manager and no economist for several months. Officials interviewed
during the evaluation emphasized the benefits that staff continuity brings. During the Cultural
Heritage Project, three changes o f TTL resulted in conflicting advice being given on several
On the other hand, effective
occasions, undermining the credibility o f the Bank.
implementation of the GSZF, MDDP ZZ, and OZBC project i s partly attributed to minimal
changes in the composition o f the Bank team. Meanwhile, since 1997, the Bank has
increasingly made use o f local staff and consultants in the implementation of projects and
experience to date indicates a positive impact. Under the ZBCBATAC Z projects, for example,
Bank staff realized that local consultants could carry a greater share o f the work preparing
enterprises for privatization, freeing considerable funds for other needs. For the Power
Rehabilitation project, the Bank hired a local financial analyst in 1998, which proved to be
very beneficial in tracking the financial positions o f the main entities. In environment, the
country office staff took over more responsibility in liaison with the government agencies and
played a critical role in facilitating both policy dialogue and operations in the field.

57.

The Bank could have spent more time raising ownership at the implementing agency
level. Under SAC ZZZ, while high level consultations were carried out, less were done so at the
implementing agency level.
This led to repeated problems during implementation.
According to Borrower comments in the ICR, some “entities and organizations” implemented
measures because they were compeIle-Cm-doTo7atkr than because they appreciated the
value o f such efforts. More time building ownership at the agency level may have countered
the negative effect o f frequent minister-level turnover.

58.

There have been close partnerships with key donors in several areas, although
collaboration at the strategic level shouldfurther evolve. The Bank worked closely with the
IMF in several areas, particularly financial sector reform and fiscal management. In the

79

Georgia CASCR

energy sector, the Bank took the lead in coordinating significant collaboration between
several donors, including U SAID, EBRD, and KfW. Numerous cross-conditionalities in
donor programs were used. In the financial sector, IMF, USAID, EBRD, IFC and TACIS
were active donors. Their support together with counterpart responsibility and willingness to
implement reforms were major factors o f success. In anti-conuption efforts, USAID, U S
DOJ, UNDP, and Soros Foundation provided significant financial resources both to the
Government as well as to the NGOs at the initial stage. Due to fading political w i l l up to the
Rose Revolution, donor attention shifted more towards civil society, including multi-donor
funding o f social fund-type institutions. Coordination with USAID and the Council o f Europe
on decentralization under the framework o f MDDP I1has been very close on the policy front
as well as TA activities. M C C and the World Bank are also joining efforts in financing the
most needed municipal services and infrastructure demands throughout the country. Several
donors including KfW and U S A I D have continued support for GSIF and similar social fundtype implementing mechanisms. However, collaboration in developing fully complementary
assistance strategies has not yet occurred in a manner that key donor assistance supports key
government goals consistently and without duplication. This process has improved recently,
particularly through the PRSO process.

7. Lessons and Implications for Future Bank Partnership
e

Bank resources were scattered thinly and only partial progress was seen across a
broad front. In the past, the Bank provided advice and financing across most
development areas in Georgia. While this partly reflected the broad nature of
Georgia’s development constraints, i t also reflected a lack of prioritization on the part
o f the Bank and in the event, the Bank was unable to help fully achieve goals in most
areas i t was engaged. Implications: The Bank should identify a few critical areas that
have broad implications for the rest o f the economy and concentrate i t s resources
toward realizing significant progress in these areas.

e

Adjustment lending did not prove to be an efSective means of helping advance the
policy agenda in an environment of deteriorating govemance and commitment to
reforms. Two of the three structural adjustment loans to Georgia during the period
under review were rated unsatisfactory at completion. In retrospect disbursement
under SAC 3 appeared to give the government the Bank’s stamp o f approval at a time
when corruption and political backsliding were high. Had the final tranche been
withheld, i t may have sent a powerful, relatively early message to the Government to

~~

e

address the deteriorating governance environment. Implications: The Bank should be
cautious in i t s use of adjustment lending in situations of poor governance and rigorous
in enforcingits underlying conditions.
~~~~~~~

~~~~~

~~

While the Bank’s instruments were able to keep the reform agenda on the table, they
were unable in themselves to overcome lack of political w i l l and tolerance of
corruption. The Bank’s experience in Georgia revealed that little progress can take
place in an environment of rampant high-level corruption. As the governance
environment worsened in the early 2000s, progress toward most objectives supported

80

Georgia CASCR

by the Bank stalled. Conversely, following the Rose Revolution and the new
government’s emphasis on good governance, there was a sharp reversal and progress
in key areas accelerated. Implications: Critical indicators o f governance should be
built into the strategy and an appropriate low-case engagement b e reverted to in a
timely manner in the event o f deteriorating conditions.
Inadequate dissemination of Bank activities has undermined broader ownership and
participation. In the past, consistent concerns have been expressed by representatives
o f civil society that inadequate information was available on Bank-financed project
objectives, conditions, negotiations, and disbursements. Implications: A consistent
public information strategy should be maintained. Focus groups f r o m civil society
should be formed in key engagement areas to enhance monitoring and increase
pressure from civil society to sustain the reform agenda. A regular local-language
bulletin and periodic discussion forum with representatives o f c i v i l groups would
enhance the prospects o f the Bank’s intentions and means o f assistance being better
understood by civil society.
The Bank could have played a greater role in the strategy development process.
During the three-year preparation o f the EDPRP, the Bank kept an ‘arm’s distance’
from the process in order not to undermine “ownership” of the evolving strategy.
Several local observers and participants in the strategy development process, however,
argue that Bank advisory assistance on strategy development, based on i t s world-wide
experience would have enhanced the Georgia’s poverty reduction strategy and
facilitated the process. Implications: The Bank should endeavor to fully participate in
the strategy development process, in a manner that shares global experience without
undermining local ownership.
The present growth pattem is not participatory. While Georgia has achieved a
significant growth rate in the recent past, i t has largely been in sectors that have had
concentrated ownership and generated limited long-term employment opportunities
and not led to a reduction in poverty. Some 1.5 million people l i v e in Tbilisi (over 30
percent o f the population) due to limited economic opportunities outside the city.
Implications: There i s a need to broaden the sources o f growth and expand economic
opportunities outside Tbilisi. A key challenge i s to stimulate growth in agroprocessing, industry, and tourism that can engage a larger share o f the population. The
implication i s for a continued Bank focus on the energy sector and rural infrastructure
development as well as possible further efforts to help develop secondary cities and
high potential economic zones outside the capital.
An unempowered and poorly motivated civil service has been a major constraint to
economic management, public investment, and policy implenentation. In several past
projects, a high level champion has been essential for progress t o be made and absence
o f such a high level facilitator led to long delays and lack o f progress. Middle level
counterparts in the civil service have lacked decision-making authority to facilitate
project and policy implementation and high-level personal intervention has sometimes
been required on every issue. PIUs served as “islands o f effectiveness” and to some
degree, overcame this issue in the past, although there i s strong pressure to absorb
~~

~~~~~~

81

Georgia CASCR

them into regular line ministries. Implications: Bank prioritization and assistance on
reforms t o empower and motivate the civil service can have broad implications for
improving public investment and policy implementation capacity.
e

I n the context of very poor govemance and an unmotivated civil service, too much
emphasis was placed on technical assistance, with limited tangible results. TA,
training and, advisory service for capacity-building in the c i v i l service were
undermined by the poor governance environment, highly centralized decision-making,
and high staff turnover in an underpaid and unmotivated c i v i l service. Meanwhile,
significant capacity exists in civil society in Georgia, indicating that the issue may be
more one o f adequate remuneration rather than training and advisory services for civil
servant.
Implications. TA for capacity-building in a poorly motivated and
remunerated civil service should be used cautiously. Reforms to address fundamental
deficiencies in the civil service should take precedence.

e

Political factors and vested interests overwhelmed some intermediate development
objectives. Georgia remains a state-in-the making, with extraordinary political and
ethnic complexity. In several areas, the inability to overcome vested interests
undermined achievement o f intermediate goals. There was also a clear hesitancy to
further some difficult reforms that incur short-term costs on the public - such as in the
energy sector, where political pressure to maintain electricity supply at any costs
undermined sector restructuring. Other issues such as the present government’s high
priority on territorial integration are also likely to have implications on the
intermediate development agenda. Implications: Political factors in Georgia must be
given full weight in designing programs and the most difficult reforms should be
accompanied by measures to mitigate short-term politically-sensitive costs and tackle
vested interests. Clear identification o f (intermediate) benefits in a 3-4 year time frame
may help support political consensus-building.

e

Results to date have fallen short, in part due to overly high initial expectations.
Successive governments have established highly ambitious reform agendas supported by donors - which have then fallen short o f completion. Similarly, on the
part o f the Bank, i t s projects helped advance partial progress toward goals but fell
short o f fully realizing them, in part because the agenda was too ambitious in the time
frame. Every Bank project since 1997 except one had to be extended beyond i t s
original closing date in order to be completed. Implications: Accept that transition in
Georgia w i l l be a time-consuming process. Objectives and time-frames should not be
over-optimistic. In defining the agenda, due attention should be paid to the realities o f
administrative constraints, political exigencies, and the underlying challenge o f
changing well-established behaviors. Adequate time should be allowed for the
government to build
a political
consensus for reforms.
- ._
..
Past Bank and other donor efsorts were not successful in helping decentralize
govemment functions. In retrospect, more efforts were needed in political consensusbuilding as well as decentralization policy and legislation. There are some views that
decentralization at the present time i s inconsistent with the over-riding goal o f
ensuring national territorial integrity. In the absence o f sufficient political will to

82

Georgia CASCR

adopt a comprehensive strategy for local government reform in Georgia, i t i s unlikely
that any project supporting municipal development w i l l have a sustainable impact on
local financial management, municipal creditworthiness, or sustainable physical
infrastructure development. Implications: More political consensus-building i s
required to advance decentralization efforts.
0

0

0

I n the poor govemance environment of the past, some of the more successful projects
were those that used autonomous implementing institutions. In an environment of
poor governance, ineffective institutions at the central level, and incomplete fiscal
decentralization, the use o f autonomous institutions like S I F and MDF were able to
produce tangible development outcomes. In the long-term, however, absence o f a
central coordinating framework for C D D activities and fuller integration into local and
central governmental institutions has risked continued donor dependency and
undermined sustainable development impact. Implications: While autonomous
implementing agencies were highly relevant and effective in the past, as the
governance environment and public sector management improves, these institutions
should be better integrated with regular government functions.
The quality of consultants can make all the difference in building capacity. Project
evaluations report that the quality and performance o f consultants have had
determining influences on positive or negative outcomes o f TA components.
Implications: Consultant performance should be assessed on the basis o f transfer o f
s k i l l s rather than specific execution and i t should be ensured that the client i s fully
engaged in the study and diagnosis process. Mechanisms should be built in to monitor
the delivery of consultant services from the point o f view of the recipient, as i s done in
the Transport PIU.
Limited public sector intervention in areas that offer tourist potential can stimulate
private investment and economic activity in the area. In the case o f the Cultural
Heritage Project, limited public sector intervention in rehabilitating cultural landmarks
helped stimulate private sector investments and boosted commercial activity in the
area. Implications: Similar efforts to target key public services and infrastructure to
areas o f high commercial potential warrant attention.

83

x

Eb

3m
2
0

u

d

s

0
d

u
m
4

u

..

rl

X

3

3a

zd

u

2u

a

-

I

I

0

1

e,

I

I

I

I

I

I

-

I

I

m

w

CASCR Appendix 11: BANK ANALYTICAL SERVICES
IN GEORGIA 1997-2005
Formal Bank E S W
Georgia - Country financial accountability assessment (2004)
Georgia - An Integrated Trade Development Strategy (2004)
Georgia - Country Procurement Assessment Report (2002)
Georgia - Public expenditure review (1998,2003)
Georgia - Poverty update (2002)
Georgia - Poverty and income distribution (1999)
Georgia - Power Privatization (1998)
Georgia - Judicial assessment (1998)
Other Bank/IFC Analytical Work
Rural Infrastructure Study (2005)
Operationalizing MDGS: A Case Study o f Georgia (2005)
A Study in Strategy, Regulations, and PSP in the Water Sector in Georgia (2004)
Recent Policies & Performance of Low-Income CIS countries: Update o f the c15-7 Initiative
(2004)
Social and Institutional Constraints to Rural Growth (2004)
HIV/AIDS in Georgia: Addressing the Crisis (2003)
Higher Education Sector Note (2003)
Revisiting Reform in the Energy Sector: Lessons from Georgia (2003)
Evaluating the Impact of Infrastructure Rehabilitation on Household Welfare in Rural Georgia
(2003)
FIAS Admin Barriers (2002,2004)
Cost o f Doing Business (2002,2003, on-going)
WB/IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (2001)
Corruption in Georgia: Survey Evidence (2000)
Forestry Study (year)
C i v i l Service Assessment (1998)
Education Sector Note (1998)
IDF/GEF Grantsmrust Fund Adminstration
Program Monitoring & Evaluation in the Ministry o f Agriculture and Food, IDF (2004)
Post Conflict Grant Prep TA (2004)
Improving Usage of Socio-Economic Statistics for Economic Policy Making, IDF (2002)
Protected Areas Development Project, GEF (2001)
Agricultural Research, Extension and Training Project, GEF (2000)
Institutional Strengthening o f the State Chancellery and C i v i l Service Bureau, IDF (1999)
Integrated Coastal Management GEF (1999)
Support to the Georgia Investment Center, IDF (1998)
Development o f Public Procurement Procedures, IDF ( 1998)
Decentralization and Municipal Management, IDF ( 1997)

94

CASCR Amendix 111: BANK PROJECTS IN GEORGIA. 1997-2005
Approval
FY

Exit
FY

Current
Status

Institution Building
3edit
Municipal Infrastructure
Rehabilitation

1995

1998

Closed

1995

2000

rransport
SATAC I
Health
Agricultural
Development
Oil Institution Building
Power Rehabilitation

1996
1996
1996

1999
1999
2003

1997
1997
1997

Municipal Development
and Decentralization

Amount
(US$)

Outcome

Sust

ID
Impact

Bank
Perf.

Borr
Perf.

10.1

SAT

LIK

SUB

SAT

SAT

Closed

18

SAT

LIK

MODEST

UNSAT

UNSAT

Closed
Closed
Closed

12
4.8
16.7

WSAT
SAT
MISAT

LIK
LIK
LIK

SUB
SUB
SUB

HSAT
SAT
SAT

SAT
SAT
SAT

2005

Active

15

2000
2001

Closed
Closed

1.4
52.3

W'SAT
MISAT

LIK
NON-E

SUB
SUB

SAT
SAT

WSAT
UNSAT

1998

2003

Closed

20.9

SAT

LIK

MOD

SAT

SAT

SAC I1
SATAC I1
Social Investment Fund
Cultural Heritage
Project
Restructuringof the
Ministry of Transport
IntegratedCoastal
Management
Enterprise
Rehabilitation
Energy Sector
Adjustment
SAC I11

1998
1998
1998

1999
2000
2006

Closed
Closed
Active

60
5
25

UNSAT
MISAT

LIK
LIK

MOD
MOD

UNSAT
SAT

HUNSAT
UNSAT

1998

2004

Closed

4.49

SAT

LIK

MOD

SAT

SAT

1999

2003

Closed

2.3

SAT

LIK

SUB

SAT

SAT

1999

2005

Active

4.4

1999

2006

Active

15

1999

2002

Closed

25

SAT

LIK

SUB

HSAT

UNSAT

1999

2003

Closed

60

WUNSAT

UNLIK

MOD

UNSAT

UNSAT

Structural Reform
Support Credit

1999

2006

Active

16.5

Judicial Reform

1999

2006

Active

13.4

Agricultural Research,
Extension, and Training

2000

2006

Active

7.6

Roads Project
Energy Transit
Institution Building
Education System
Realignment and
Strengthening
Electricity Market
Support Project
Irrigation and Drainage
Community
Development
Second Municipal
Development and
Decentralization
Health I1 Primary
Health Care
Development
Forests Development
Second Social
Investment Fund

2000

2006

Active

40

2001

2005

Active

9.6

2001

2005

Active

25.9

2001

2008

Active

32

2001

2007

Active

27

2003

2006

Active

19.41

2003

2008

Active

20.3

2003

2009

Active

15.7

Active

15

Reform Support Credit

2004

2005

Closed

24

SAT

LIK

SUB

SAT

SAT

Secondary and Local
Roads
Rural Development
Project
Flood Protection

2004

2010

Active

20

2005

2010

Active

10

2005

2010

Active

13

Name

2003

2008
~~

~~

~

~~~

~

95

Annex 111. CPS Consultations
The World Bank Country Office in Georgia interacts closely with members of civil
society groups and maintains an on-going public relations program to disseminate the
objectives and instruments of Bank Group assistance. Views and contributions from civil
society groups are sought in the preparation and supervision o f IDA projects.
In
addition, during preparation of the CPS, several individual and group discussions were
held with representatives o f civil society. These included meetings between the Country
Director and leading NGOs; interviews with civil societyhusiness leaders on the CAS
Completion Report; an IFC/FIAS roundtable with private sector representatives; and
several further rounds o f discussions with civil society leaders, including a roundtable
with twenty two civil society members on the draft strategy. Consultations also included
a roundtable with “youth voices”, which in turn had held focus group discussions on
Bank activities with a wider range o f participants. Key messages received included the
following:
There was general agreement that the Government had made important progress on
reducing corruption, education and health reform, and improving public sector
institutions and budgeting. However, there were strong concerns that there was
inadequate consultation between Government and civil society. Concerns were
expressed that the Government lacked experience in many areas, that decisionmaking was s t i l l overly concentrated, and that short-comings were apparent in some
o f the strategic directions being developed. There was concern that the Government
was reluctant to engage in some areas that i t lacked experience in.
I t was agreed that employment-generation was a high priority issue and the key to this

was to improve the environment for SMEs. Concerns were raised, however, that
inadequate information existed to develop appropriate strategies as there had not been
a labor market study since 1999. There were some views that labor laws were
inadequate, both failing to protect the workforce and discouraging private investment.
I t was also observed that there was no national innovation system or knowledge
economy strategy in Georgia.
The need for IDA partnership on the anti-corruption effort was recognized as
important. However, there were some concerns as to whether IDA modalities to
address this issue were appropriate. Renovating courthouses, for example, was seen
as an inadequate measure to combat corruption.

IDA objectives in Georgia were seen as too broad and a greater focus was needed.
Concerns were raised as to how IDA would monitor both the Government’s and
IDA’Sprogress in advancing development objectives.
IDA was requested to continue the dialogue with civil society on the CPS and i t s
monitoring and evaluation. There was also a need to include representatives of local
governments into consultations.

96

Annex IV. Potential Sources of Employment and G r o w t h in
Georgia
Employment and Wages
Despite economic growth since 2000, employment has not been increasing.
While the economy has seen sustained growth, averaging 6 percent a year since 2000,
total employment has declined by 3 percent since 2000, including a 2 percent decline in
wage employment (see Table 1). This partly reflects continued restructuring and
reductions in public sector employment, discussed below. The decline in employment
also reflects job shedding in the manufacturing sector, as employers take up the slack
resulting f r o m underemployment and previous employment hording, while also shedding
excess labor. Thus while manufacturing grew by an average o f 10 percent a year,
employment in the sector declined by 17 percent over the period. Meanwhile, key
growth sectors did not show significant employment-generating capacity. While strong
growth was seen in transport and communications, for example, employment in these
sectors showed a decline of 1.7 percent since 2000. Moreover, there has been relatively
l o w growth (2 percent from 2002 to 2004) and contribution to GDP by S M E s (10 percent
in 2004), in spite o f the fact that S M E s comprise 98 percent of the total number o f
companies and account for a large share o f wage employment. In terms of number of
jobs, the most significant areas o f employment growth since 2000 have been in trade and
services, education, and construction. In terms o f growth rates, the fastest j o b creation
since 2000 has been in financial intermediation (35 percent), construction (25 percent),
and hotels and restaurants (19 percent). According to official figures, the unemployment
rate has ranged between 14-16 percent since 2000.
Since independence, the bulk of j o b creation has been in selfemployment,
primarily in agriculture as well as small-scale trading and service activities. With
limited growth in formal employment, agriculture remains the largest employer in
Georgia, accounting for 54 percent o f total employment (up slightly from 52 percent in
2000). Most o f this labor comprises self-employment on small farms. Of the selfemployed, some 60 percent are unpaid workers, mostly on family farms, and the rest are
own-account workers with no employees. The high levels o f self-employment reflect
limited growth in formal wage employment activities to replace the collapsed Soviet-era
production systems. Moreover, with the breakup o f large cooperative f a r m s into small
family-owned plots, wage employment in agriculture declined significantly and presently
accounts for only 7 percent o f total wage employment.

~

~

~~~~

~

~~~

~~

~~

Decreasing employment in public administration/defense by 22 percent reflects
the first wave of restructuring and reorganization. The new L a w on Structure, Functions
and Responsibilities o f the Executive Branch, enacted in February, 2004 reduced the
number o f line ministries and consolidated a large number o f previously semiindependent state departments within the respective ministries. Staff retrenchments were

97

especially large in the law enforcement ministries, which shed some 20,000 employees.
Health sector employment decreased by 39 percent since 2000, following efforts to
license and certify providers and personnel as well as hospital sector restructuring.
Nevertheless, apparent overstaffing s t i l l prevails, with a doctor patient ratio o f 2: 1 instead
of the 1:2 average seen in OECD countries. In education, employment increased by 11
percent, reflecting increased employment in both public and especially private sector
education. Overall, the public sector s t i l l accounts for 16 percent o f total employment. In
principle the Government i s committed to move towards a "smaller and smarter"
bureaucracy, and the proposed PRSOs are supporting civil service and personnel
management reform.

Table 1: Sectoral Growth, Employment, and Wages
(percent except for average income)

Sector
Sectoral
Total
Growth
Employment Share of
2004 over Growth 2004
GDP
2000
over 2000
2000

Agriculture, forestry, fishing
Industry
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Electricity, gas and water supply
Processing products by household
Construction
Trade services, repair services
Restaurant and hotel services
Transport and storage
Communications (wagellabor data included
in Transport and storage)
Financial intermediation
Real estate, renting & business activities
Public administration and defence
Education
Health care and social services
Other community, social and personal
service activities

9.0
30.3
-4.7
52.1
-7.1
5.1
145.2
40.1
69.6
23.1

Private households with employed persons

0.5
-21.2
-40.6
-16.9
-32.4
24.9
7.1
18.7
-1.7

76.0

Sector
Share of
GDP
2004

20.2
13.6
0.7
8.5
4.4
3.7
3.7
12.7
2.3
11.8

16.0
13.0
0.8
9.0
3.2
4.0
6.2
13.3
2.7
9.6

2.5

4.1

ector Share Sector Share
Total
Total
:mployment Employmen
2000
2004

Average
income
amed 2004
3EIJmontk

1

52.1
6.3
0.4
5.9
1.7

54.0
6.5
0.2
5.1
1.2

76.4
283.8
129.2
159.4

1.8
10.0
0.9
4.1

2.4
11.0
1.1
4.2

204.9
132.4
144.0
159.8

74.6
59.2
-2.0
9.3
11.1

35.3
-28.4
-22.0
11.7
-38.9

1.5
7.1
3.4
3.6
5.2

1.3
6.0
5.8
3.5
3.4

0.5
2.2
6.0
6.5
4.9

0.7
1.6
4.9
7.5
3.1

216.7
122.8
117.2
73.6
83.8

30.1

-10.3

3.3

3.4

2.6

2.4

116.8

-30.7

146.8

0.3

0.1

0.2

0.5

115.2

30.3

-3.1

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

118.0

Wages remain low in the sectors with the highest employment. In 2004, the
average wage rate across all sectors was GEL118 or US$60 per month. Wages in
agriculture, education, and health, which account for 33 percent o f total wage

98

employment, average only between GEL74-84 per month. The highest wages are in
mining, finance, and construction, although these sectors account for only 7 percent o f
wage employment. Meanwhile, self-employment (non-wage) activities in agriculture,
small-scale trading, and services are characterized by l o w earnings that often fluctuate by
season and generally offer little potential for long term earnings growth. Comparisons
with poverty data suggest that only workers in construction, hotels and restaurants,
transport, communications, real estate, and international organizations can support four
person households with a single source of income. In terms o f growth, real wages across
all sectors increased by 14 percent between 2000-2004, although the past t w o years have
seen a slight decline. Private sector wages have grown slightly faster than the public
sector. In January 2005 minimum salaries in the public sector were increased from
GEL35 to GEL115 per month.
Figure 1: Average Monthly Wages, 1997 - 2004 (GEL)
F i g u r e 2: A v e r a g e M o n t h l y W a g e s , 1 9 9 7 - 2 0 0 4 , ( G E L )

300,

200,
100,

96
- - - e .In
. d ust-

97

98
99
A g ricu It -A-

00

S e rvice

01

+Ban

02

03
04
king-financial

Improving employment opportunities and incomes w i l l require reallocation of
labor toward high value-added activities. Improved incomes and employment w i l l
require: (i)
increased returns to smallholder farming; (ii)
reallocation o f labor f r o m lowproductivity self-employment into higher value-added activities in commercial
increased productivity in processing
agriculture, industry, trade, and services; and (iii)
activities and a gradual rise in formal wages. As agriculture i s relatively satiated with
labor, increasing returns to farmers are likely to occur through more use of capital and
increased productivity. Job creation in agro-processing and small manufacturing w i l l
likely have the largest impact as i t can attract many poor, unskilled, and self-employed
workers. Earnings in manufacturing are 70 percent higher than in farming and shifting
jobs to processing would thus lead to a significant increase in cash income and household
welfare. Similarly, wages in hotels and transportation are double earnings in agriculture,
and j o b creation in these sectors w i l l lead to significantly improved standards o f living.
Transport access w i l l b e a n issue as value-added jobs are generally located in urban areas
and w i l l thus entail an increase in labor movement and migration. As discussed below,
reallocating labor toward high value-added activities w i l l require improving the
environment for investment and growth o f businesses.

99

Potential Sources of Growth
Georgia’s natural endowments offer strong potential for economic growth.
Georgia’s location on the “Silk Road” between Europe and Asia make i t a primary route
for goods being shipped through the Caucasus. I t s Black Sea coast, mountain regions,
and rich history offer strong tourism potential. Fertile land and favorable climates enable
production o f diverse agricultural produce, including fruits, nuts, vegetables, livestock,
and dairy products. The country has a long history o f viticulture and some 500 local
varieties of grapes are cultivated. Recent o i l exploration has indicated only minor o i l and
gas potential, but the Black Sea Coastline i s yet to be fully explored. Other natural
resources include manganese, iron, coal, copper, gold, granite, limestone, marble, and
mineral waters. Forests cover one third o f the country and numerous rivers offer rich
hydropower potential. Other attributes include an educated labor force and a long
tradition o f entrepreneurship.
Given the relatively small size of Georgia’s domestic market, economic growth is
likely to be driven by export markets. Georgia’s low income level and small population
suggest that export markets w i l l have to drive growth. Georgia has a relatively open
trade regime; joined the WTO in 2000; has free trade agreements with Russia and other
CIS countries; and has recently been granted preferential access to EU markets. At
present, Georgia’s exports mainly comprise low-value added commodities such as
ferrous metals, copper, and aluminum and the challenge ahead i s to increase value-added
exports. In addition, some sectors are more likely to create more jobs by increasing the
demand for labor and broadening the base o f asset-ownership. Bank studies point to
potential in areas such as fresh produce exports, agro-processing, small manufacturing,
tourism, and transit-trade activities.’ The FY06 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
w i l l focus on growth and employment in order to deepen knowledge in these areas.
,

Fresh Produce Exports
Georgia has favorable conditions for fresh produce exports. Agriculture i s
presently dominated by subsistence production. Some 80 percent o f Georgia’s rural
population consume nearly three quarters o f their production and are entirely dependent
upon farm produce for subsistence. Bank studies suggest that Georgia has significant
potential to become a net exporter o f agricultural products. For example, farm modeling
indicates that greenhouse vegetables have the potential to expand their share of the
Moscow market. Similar potential exists for first grade apples to the Russian market.
With improved animal genetics and feed resources, Georgia can also achieve much
higher productivity in dairy products. At present, however, smallholders are constrained
by limited access to improved varieties, new technologies, and working capital;
confinement to small scale activities, with no gains from scale effects; crime, corruption
-and capture o f access tomarkets in mratareas;-poor marketing infrastructure; and costly
and inefficient transport. Also, agro-processing, which represents a significant source o f

’

See Integrated Trade and Development Study (2003); PAD for the Rural Development Project, (2005); Recent
Policies and Performance of the Low Income CIS Countries: An Update of the CIS initiative, (2004); Constraints to
Rural Growth in Georgia, (2004); PAD for Forestry Project (2003); PAD for Secondary and Rural Roads (2004)

100

market growth for farm products as well as a source o f inputs, technology, quality
control, and credit, remains under-developed.
Agro-Processing Exports
Georgia’s food-processing industry declined sharply after independence. During
the Soviet era, Georgia’s primary and processed foods accounted for more than 10
percent o f total intra-Soviet trade in agricultural products and the value o f i t s food exports
was double that o f i t s imports. Since independence, with the collapse o f the supply chain
and deteriorating public infrastructure, particularly in power supply and road access, most
new smallholder farmers shifted to subsistence production. As a result, Georgia saw a
substantial decline in the production o f i t s former export products. Georgia’s per capita
fruit production in 2000, for example, was only one-third o f i t s 1990 level. Some recent
recovery in agro-processing has occurred in sectors such as wine and mineral water,
which has become one o f Georgia’s largest exports, thanks to i t s brand recognition in the
FSU. I F C played a significant role in this sector through an early equity investment in
Georgian Glass and Mineral Water (Borjomi) and continues to be an investor in the M i n a
glass bottle factory, which supplies bottles to this industry.
Georgia has a long history and comparative advantage in viticulture. Wine
exports saw a sharp fourteen fold increase from US$3.5 million in 1995 to US$49 million
in 2004 and about 30,000 farmers are involved in grape production. The CIS accounts
for some 90 percent of wine exports and good growth potential exists in this and other
markets. Part o f Georgia’s comparative advantage lies in i t s ability to produce quality
wines at competitive costs. Georgia i s also known as an origin of quality wines and
several Georgian brands have name recognition in the CIS.2 Growth in the premium wine
market i s linked to increasing incomes in CIS and a shift away from vodka towards
lower-alcohol drinks. Good potential also exists in other markets, including the EU if
Georgia can maintain i t s competitive cost structure and improve product quality.
Improved productivity can partly be achieved through greater foreign direct investment.
A study of several wine producers showed that f i r m s with foreign collaboration achieved
50 percent higher productivity and nearly 40 percent higher turnover per employee than
local firms, due to economies of scale, better management techniques, and greater market
knowledge and access.
Georgia is competitive in hazelnut-processing. The hazelnut sector has grown
five-fold, since 1995. A Bank study estimated that some 12,500 small farmers grow
hazelnuts, while processing and export businesses employ over 1,200 people. Farm
modeling and cost-of-production comparisons indicate that Georgia has a high
comparative advantage in hazelnut production and i s competitive with neighboring
countries. Large potential markets in Russia and China offer strong growth potential. In
-the medium €em
o~~rt~nitiesexi~€~
producers
- r - ~ o t and
k exporters to add value to the
crop. At the farm level, improved techniques and inputs can increase nut size and reduce
spoilage. At the processing level, manufacture o f sliced and diced nuts, flour, and o i l can
One risk to the brand name recognition of Georgian wine i s the lack of an appellation system to certify
different wine varieties and the threat presented by low quality counterfeits produced outside Georgia.

101

diversify revenues away from the low-value whole-nut market toward higher-value
processed product markets. Law and order appears to have been an issue in the past, with
anecdotal evidence suggesting that “mafia-types” controlled ex-farm prices. Transport
within Georgia i s also an issue, in that hazelnuts are produced in western Georgia,
trucked to Tbilisi for processing, and then trucked back to western Georgia to be exported
through Black Sea ports.
Processed fruits and vegetables are a further potential source of export-oriented
growth. Georgia has promising potential to export a range of processed fruits and

vegetables. For example, a niche market has been developed for apple juice concentrate
in the EU. About 30,000 farmers supply Georgia’s three apple juice concentrate export
firms with raw product. A few other firms buy fruit from farmers to process a variety o f
jams, jellies, juices and other products. Niche markets have been developed for products
such as pomegranate juice in Russia, Israel and the US. A few companies have managed
to combine technology and modem management methods to create businesses that can
compete in world markets. T o a large extent, however, high levels of inefficiency,
outdated equipment, and limited management and marketing skills predominate in the
sector. Inappropriate certification and licensing systems also inhibit the availability o f
inputs and slow the transfer of technology. Increasing the capacity and productivity o f
processing activities requires an infusion o f modern technology, managerial know-how,
and improved access to markets and the most likely sources o f these are foreign direct
investors or strategic partners. The need for special permits, which has discouraged
investment in food and other processing in the past, i s being removed under the ongoing
license system reform.
Trade Transit Activities
Improving conditions in the region represent an opportunity to expand transiteconomy activities. Georgia i s located on the shortest route between Europe and
Azerbaijan, Armenia and the Central Asian Republics through i t s Black Sea ports and
also links Russia and Turkey. Georgia maintains good relations with i t s neighbors,
making i t a natural conduit in a volatile region. This was an important consideration in
the development o f the B T C pipeline, which w i l l shortly start to deliver o i l from

Azerbaijan via Georgia and Turkey to the Mediterranean. Transit activities generate
significant budgetary resources and each ton o f transit cargo i s also estimated to generate
between US$20 and US$55 in direct economic activity in Georgia. Based on the success
of the BTC, improving conditions in Georgia, and resolution o f the Adjara conflict, new
trade and energy routes are opening up across the region. These new trade and energy
routes are relevant to Georgia both for transit income as well as to get Georgian goods to
a larger market than otherwise would be possible. Increasing revenue from o i l exports in
Central Asia and the Caucasus i s likely to increase the demand for consumer and
i n d u T t T i a 1 gOods~Zerbaljan’S goal of becoming a regonarloglstlcal and consolidation
center may also lead to additional transit flows.
Poor infrastructure and cumbersome processes inhibit Georgia from fully
exploiting its transit economy potential. The transit sector i s presently dominated by o i l

product transport, which represents about three times the volume o f non-oil transport.
102

Non-oil trade mostly comprises Armenian and Azeri trade goods, which account for a
significant share o f the turnover o f Georgia’s ports. However, Georgia has not yet been
able to realize the transit potential from Central Asian countries. Despite being the
closest maritime gateway to nearly all Central Asian countries, the Georgian route
presently accounts for a negligible portion of the foreign trade o f these countries.
Instead, these countries use ports in Iran, Russia, Baltic Countries and the Middle East to
reach world markets, despite distances that are sometimes 2 to 3 times longer than the
Georgian route. High transit times, poor road conditions, multiple borders that have to be
crossed, and the number of times cargoes need to be handled, together with the formal
and informal payments and delays, explain the limited use o f the Caucasus route. IDA
assistance over the forthcoming CAS period w i l l place an emphasis on helping remove
these constraints to enable Georgia to fully exploit i t s transit economy potential.
The EU-finded Transport Corridor Europe-Caucasus-Asia initiative (TRACECA)
is addressing obstacles to an east-west transit corridor. TRACECA was launched in
1993 to enhance the capacity o f participating countries to access European and world
markets through alternative transport route^.^ The goal was to establish a viable transport
corridor from Europe, across the Black Sea, through the Caucasus and the Caspian Sea,
to Central Asia, and the Far East. The EU estimates that annual freight turnover via the
revived “Silk Road” will rise to over 45 million tons by the end o f 2010.
The
TRACECA program has encouraged closer co-operation and dialogue among
governments, which has led to agreements to keep transit fees at competitive levels,
simplify border crossing formalities, and ship large volumes of cargo along the
TRACECA corridor as the fastest and cheapest route from Central Asia to deep-water
ports linked with world markets. A Permanent Secretariat was established in 2001 and
meetings o f officials from member countries are held annually. With renewed
presidential support in both Georgia and Azerbaijan, the initiative has new momentum.

Smal1 manufacturing
Georgia’s low wage rates give it a competitive advantage in labor-intensive
production, if productivity can be increased. The 2004 average wage rate in the
manufacturing sector was GEL 129 (or US$64) per month, giving Georgia an
internationally competitive basis for labor-intensive production. As an example, Georgia
has a small garment manufacturing industry that employs some 1000 people. Studies
have shown that the average wage paid to garment workers in Georgia i s less than half o f
what a machine operator in China earns. This advantage i s lost in the l o w productivity o f
Georgian factories, however: output per worker i s only about 25 percent o f China. The
productivity gap i s attributed to lower volumes processed in Georgia as well as
deficiencies in plant organization, management, and worker motivation. Competitiveness
i s also undermined by transportation costs associated with importing nearly a l l inputs as
w e l l as export of the finalpEaucti andfinSialjl? power supply, which reduces working
hours and increases plant setup costs.

TRACECA Member countries are: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrghyzstan, Moldova,
Mongolia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.

103

Forestrv and mineral resources
Wood processing offers good export potential, given considerable reserves of
timber and promising market opportunities. While Georgia has 42 percent of the forest
coverage o f Romania, i t has only 5 percent of i t s wood exports. One o f the reasons for
Romania’s higher wood export earnings i s that it has moved up the value chain: while
Romania obtains US$215 to US$1,250 per MT for i t s wood exports, depending on the
degree o f processing, Georgia gets only US$121 per MT, as most exports are in the form
of logs or in a semi-processed state. At present there are only about a dozen f i r m s
engaged in finished good processing and total employment in the sector i s estimated at
2,500 people. If the finished goods industry were able to raise i t s production to
Romanian levels, Georgia could expect exports closer to US$200 million than the US$22
million i t currently has, with consequent implications for labor creation. Key obstacles
include unpredictable supply of quality timber, in part due to government policy; poor
knowledge o f and linkages with world markets; weak distribution channels; and limited
acquisition o f technology. Along with cross-cutting issues such as access to tax-free
inputs, lower transport costs, and improved access to finance, a key priority i s to improve
upstream forestry policy in order to ensure sustainable but adequate access to forestry
resources.
Mineral extraction offers some potential for employment creation. Georgia has
numerous mineral resources that offer strong growth potential. After the fall o f the
USSR, the mining industry declined from 10 percent o f GDP to a negligible level and
remained at less than 1 percent o f GDP in 2004. Experts suggest that Georgia’s potential
in minerals lies in manganese, copper, zinc and possibly uranium and for vertical
integration o f mining and processing activities. Georgia i s estimated to have one percent
of the world’s manganese reserves, for which there i s a large and growing market,
including a market segment for smart batteries for laptop computers, which i s growing at
10-15 percent a year. Georgia also has sizable deposits o f decorative natural stone such
as gray, white and red marble and granite that show considerable potential for export.
Wages in the mining and quarrying sector are the highest of all sectors, although the
sector accounts for only 0.2 percent of total employment. Nevertheless, strong growth
prospects in the sector offer some potential in j o b creation. For example, in Imereti the
Chiatura and Manganese Factory and the Zestaphony Ferro-Alloy Plant currently employ
about 6000 people with potential for greater numbers once the current privatization
process i s complete. In Bolnisi, the Quartzice gold ore production and Madneuli Copper
Concentrate plant employ over 1200 people, again with opportunities for increased
production and e m p l ~ y m e n t . ~

Tourism
~

G e o r ~ ~ ; a k a a s g o - o r h o a r ~ ~ ~ p ~ ~ e ~ t ~ ~ ~ Gstrengthinchrde
e o r g f a ’ . s t o ui t~s
scenic mountain regions, Black Sea beaches, good climate, and rich historical and
~

__________~

Georgia i s presently not part o f the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative since the Georgian part o f the
project involves transportation and not extraction. However, CDAP (the Caspian Development Advisory Panel) has
asked BP to report BTC and SCP data even though this i s not part of EITI. BP has agreed with respect to BTC (for
some reason SCP i s not mentioned).

104

cultural heritage. In the Soviet era, Georgia was a major tourist destination within the
Soviet bloc, although following independence, visitors dropped from 4 million in 1988 to
85,000 in 1995. Since then, a gradual recovery has been underway and prospects for
further growth are promising. CIS countries remain the largest visitor market, while the
Western European market has been growing. Leisure tourists, however, account for less
than 5 percent o f visitors. The hotel and restaurant sector provided some 19,000 jobs in
2004. Incomes in the sector are higher than average - GEL144 per month compared to
an average of GEL118 across all sectors - implying a relatively high impact on welfare if
the sector expanded. Bank analyses suggest that Georgia’s potential lies in the creation
o f niche markets, such as eco-tourism, winter sports, adventure tourism, and cultural
tourism.
With improving internal security and regional integration, Georgia has an
opportunity to revive its tourism industry. With improving law and order, rising incomes
in the region, and greater inter-regional connectivity through the transit corridor,
Georgia’s potential to attract investment in tourism and further develop CIS, Europe and
the Far East markets is likely to be enhanced. K e y constraints include: a reputation as an
unsafe destination; lack o f tourist facilities, as there has been very limited private sector
response to replace collapsed state-owned facilities; poor supporting public

infrastructure; high costs o f both air and surface access; and limited destination
marketing. Moreover, international experience suggests that early in a tourism industry’s
evolution, governments need to take the lead in creating the conditions for a viable
private sector and capacity to undertake this role i s lacking. Recent privatization o f hotel
infrastructure and relocation o f IDPs from hotels should facilitate private sector
engagement. Improved public infrastructure, training in the industry and capacity
building in relevant agencies are further elements needed to enhance Georgia’s tourist
potential.
Financial Sector

Georgia’sfinancial sector has been growing rapidly. Value-added in the financial
sector grew by 75 percent since 2000, employment by 35 percent, and salaries in the
The sector presently contributes only 1.3
sector are among the highest in Georgia.
percent to GDP, but has good growth prospects. Following a range o f banking sector
reforms since 1995, a fairly strong banking sector has emerged that has withstood
frequent internal and external political and macroeconomic shocks. There have been
recent foreign entrants and the sector continues to grow and introduce new products.
Reach and access to financial services remain problems, however. Banking services
outside Tbilisi are very limited and collateral requirements are high due to poor contract
enforcement and limited credit information. The planned introduction o f credit bureaus,
with IFC support, will help decrease the risk o f intermediation. Continued strong NBG
-supervision Ts also needed to-fufiher K i I d public trust in the-banks. The non-banking
financial sector remains undeveloped, although some progress has been made with the
recent passage o f the Leasing L a w and decision to allow foreign insurance companies to
enter the market. I F C has played a significant role in the financial sector, working
through TA and investment with several banks and leasing companies.

105

Annex V: Georgia - External Debt Sustainability Analysis’
After an initial sharp deterioration following independence, Georgia’s
external debt burden has improved in recent years. Starting f r o m a situation o f
virtually n o debt at independence in 1992, Georgia’s nominal public and publicly
guaranteed external debt burden increased to 80 percent o f GDP in 1994. At this level,
arrears accumulated requiring successive rescheduling agreements with bilateral
creditors, including two Paris Club agreements. Since 1999, there has been a moderate
trend decline in the debt burden to 37 percent o f GDP in 2004. The external debt to GDP
ratio in net present value (NPV) terms i s even lower, at 26 percent in 2004.
Georgia’s debt burden indicators show continued improvement under the
baseline scenario in the present debt sustainability analysis (see Table 1). In recent
years, Georgia has experienced robust economic growth and i t s macroeconomic reform
program has made important progress, including sharply higher export and tax receipts
between 2003 and 2004. Provided the solid economic performance of recent years i s
maintained, macroeconomic stability i s safeguarded, and the reform program continues to
be implemented, and with relatively modest levels in 2004, Georgia’s debt burden
indicators are expected t o show steady improvement over the medium- to long-term.
Table 1. Indicative External Debt Burden Indicators
Georgia’s Ratios
Thresholds I/
2004
2005-015 21
NPV of debt in percent ofi
106
81
150
Exports
17
26
40
GDP
126
250
93
Revenue
Debt service in percent of:
Exports
Revenues 3/

18
17

20
30

7
8

1/ Shows policy indicative thresholds used in the joint IMF-World Bank low-income country DSA
framework for a medium policy performer. The quality of policies and institutions i s measured by the
World Bank’s CPIA; 2/ Simple average; 3/ General government revenues, excluding grants.

However, stress tests indicate that Georgia’s debt burden i s vulnerable to
adverse external or domestic developments which underscore the centrality of the
continued implementation of the economic reform program. Stress tests on the
baseline scenario in the debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicate that the debt burden i s
vulnerable to the risks o f deterioration in the external current account deficits, the volume
-and terms o f future capitarInflowS, %&a negative export growth shock: --Given these
vulnerabilities, staff assess Georgia’s debt to be at a moderate risk o f debt distress. These
r i s k s can be mitigated by the continued implementation o f the reform programparticularly in the areas o f improving the business climate to ensure that foreign direct
This Annex was completed in August 2005 by World Bank staff in collaboration with IMF staff.

106

investment and net transfer levels are maintained and that basic transport infrastructure to
support Georgia’s improving export capacity.
Other stress tests generated with the low-income DSA framework indicate
that the baseline assumptions are robust to some alternative scenarios. The
historical scenario, for example, produces a more favorable debt burden profile than the
baseline for the entire projection period for the net present value (NPV) stock ratios and
debt service ratios because recent historical averages o f key macroeconomic variables are
stronger than baseline projections. These results underscore the importance that the
authorities continue to build on recent gains by implementing the reform program, in
order to reduce the r i s k o f debt distress.
Section I:Background
Over the last fifteen
years, Georgia’s debt burden
has experienced three phases.
In the two years following
independence, Georgia’s public
external debt reached over
US$1 billion or 81 percent o f
GDP, owing in large part to
borrowing to finance energyrelated imports from Russia
and Turkmenistan.
External
borrowing in the following ten

Figure 1. Georgia: External Public and Publicly
Guaranteed Debt, 1994-2004

80
70

v1

2
8

*
3

::

k

8

3

I

2,000

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1,500
1,000
500

3

5

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

DPublic External Debt -Public

ExternalDebt/ GDP (9’0)

Over the same period, the composition of Georgia’s external debt by creditor
changed markedly. Whereas bilateral creditors comprised over 80 percent o f total
external debt in 1994 (of which 56 percentage points were non-Paris Club creditors). By
2004 the share o f bilateral creditors fell to 37 percent o f total external debt. In contrast,
_the share ofmultilateral creditors increasedfrom under 5 percent in 1994-to over 50
percent in 2004, with IDA and the IMF representing over 90 percent o f multilateral
credits (Figure 2). This change in creditor composition has resulted in a significant
increase in the degree o f concessionality o f i t s external debt. Similar to other countries in
the same per capita income group, the grant element o f public external debt in 2004 was

107

about 33 percent.
The average I
maturity profile of Georgia’s debt i s
about 25 years, the average grace
period i s 7 years and the average
interest rate i s about 2 percent.

Figure 2. Georgia: Creditor Composition of PPG
External Debt, 2004

0 ther official
bilateral debt
11%

Recent positive developments
need to be sustained over the
medium to long term to further
reduce the scope of vulnerability
resulting from the debt legacy of the
past. D e b t service payments had
reached about 67 percent o f exports of

2%

6%

Monetary Fund
14%

Box 1. Georgia: External Debt Reschedulings
The legacy from the past was marked b y debt servicing difficulties and led to the build-up o f arrears
to key creditors.

During 1995-98 Georgia’s bilateral debt was rescheduled through 11 independent bilateral
arrangements.
In 2001, the Paris Club granted a flow rescheduling on “enhanced Houston Terms” o n about
US$58 million o f maturities falling due from January 01,2001 to December 31, 2002. ODA
debt was rescheduled over 20 years with a 10 year grace period and non-ODA debt over 20
years but with a 3 year grace period, both at market rates.

In July 2004, the Paris Club provided another flow rescheduling including arrears on
Houston terms, reducing arrears and debt service payments to Paris Club creditors on
US$16 1 million falling due during 2004-06. Three agreements with Georgia’s seven Paris
Club creditors have been signed and the remaining four are expected to come to closure b y
September 2005. The Georgian authorities are also in the process o f seeking comparable
treatment from non-Paris Club creditors.

As ef end-XM34&ea&tandingxxtemaLdWo T u r k m e a i s t a w a s a b w t U S $ l 5 5 miUion.
Much o f the debt owed to Turkmenistan was in arrears prior to an arrears clearance
agreement reached in 1999. Under the arrangement, the Government o f Georgia makes
domestic currency payments to domestic commercial companies who provided goods in
kind to the government o f Turkmenistan. The payments imply an average discount to the
Georgia government o f about 25 percent.

108

Section 11: External Debt Sustainability Analysis (2005-23)
T h e baseline macroeconomic framework, underpinning this DSA, i s
relatively conservative compared to recent improved trends (Box 2). The continued
positive impact of the ongoing construction of Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan o i l pipeline and the
South Caucasus gas pipeline resulted in a GDP growth o f 6.2 percent in 2004 following
an 11.1 percent growth rate in 2003. The recent high growth rates also reflect the
inclusion in the national accounts of previously unrecorded exports. Fiscal revenues
grew by over 45 percent in 2004 due in large measure to the authorities’ drive to curb tax
evasion. Export growth was 73 percent in 2004, reflecting the ongoing inclusion of
previously unrecorded activities. In response to improved fundamentals in the economy,
the construction o f the pipelines and privatization efforts, non-debt creating capital
inflows (e.g., foreign direct investment and net transfers in the form o f grants) have also
been robust. Inflows o f FDI in 2004 exceeded the current account deficit for the first time
in several years.
Box 2. Georgia: Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying the DSA
Real GDP growth i s estimated to be 8.5 percent in 2005 before falling to a projected 5 percent over
2006-10, 4 percent over 2011-15 and 3.5 percent for the remainder o f the projection period. The
contribution o f construction to growth i s expected to decrease following the completion o f the major
pipeline projects. Growth assumptions for outer years are slightly more optimistic compared with the
2004 DSA exercise, to reflect the generally improved economic fundamentals.
Inflation i s assumed to fall to 6 percent in 2006 from an estimated 9.4 percent in 2005. A further
decline to 4 percent during 2007-15 and 3 percent thereafter i s assumed. The real exchange rate
relative to the dollar i s assumed to continue appreciating, but at a much slower pace than in recent
years. Reflecting the effects o f the expected bulge in privatization receipts and external grants in the
next few years, i t i s assumed that real exchange rate w i l l appreciate b y 6 percent in 2006, 3 percent per
year over 2007-08, and 1 percent per year thereafter.
Export growth i s projected to average about 8.5 percent over the 2005-10 period and 6.8 percent over
2009-23. Import growth i s expected to average 7.9 percent over 2005-10 and 6.8 percent over 200923.
External current account deficit, excluding interest payments i s forecast to decline sharply from
10.7 percent o f GDP in 2005 to 2.9 percent in 2007 and 1.8, on average, over the 2009-23 period.
Fiscal policy. The authorities are expected to build upon the recent success o f the anti-corruption drive
and improved tax administration. Tax revenues are projected to rise gradually to 23 percent of GDP b y
2023. Government spending, excluding externally financed projects, i s expected to grow gradually to
26 percent in 2023.
New borrowing, relatively small financing gaps are filled with both concessional and non-concessional
funds with a growing share o f non-concessional financing in the medium term, e.g., from 2015 all new
borrowing i s assumed to be on non-concessional terms.

The medium to long t e r m macroeconomic framework i s projected to build on
recent gains. Staff consider that the recent changes in tax and export receipts reflect to
some extent registry o f the grey economy and effective anti-corruption measures. These
institutional changes provide sustainable features of future fiscal and export revenue
collection. Staff expect that these variables can be maintained and can grow at more

109

modest and steady rates from these higher levels. On the other hand, non-debt creating
flows are expected to fall as a share o f GDP once the pipeline construction and
privatization are completed. The medium and long term baseline external debt burden
outlook in Georgia i s set against a macroeconomic framework based on the current
PRGF-supported program and assumes the continued implementation o f economic
reforms. The main achievements o f the 2004 program include the increase in tax
revenues by 4 percentage points of GDP. Measures to improve governance were also
impressive.
U n d e r the baseline scenario, external debt burden indicators are projected to
decline steadily over the period of 2005-23. Under this scenario, Georgia’s net present
value (NPV) of the external debt to GDP ratio i s estimated to fall from 26 to 22 percent
o f GDP in 2005 and to decline steadily thereafter to reach about 10 percent by the end o f
the projection period.2 A similar profile i s projected for both the NPV o f debt-to-export
and fiscal revenues ratios, and starting levels for each are benign at 106 and 126 percent,
respectively. In 2005, these indicators are expected to fall to 98 and 105 percent,
respectively. After 2005, debt service i s expected to be modest and remains at or below
10 percent for the entire projection period (Figure 3). Debt service in 2005 i s significant
owing in part to the clearing o f rescheduled arrears to Turkmenistan.
T h e level and trend in external debt burden indicators under the baseline
scenario indicate improvement. A key feature o f this debt sustainability analysis i s that
it compares the country’s actual debt burden indicators to debt burden thresholds
determined by policy performance. The thresholds are based on the empirical finding
that low-income countries with stronger policies and institutions tend to have a higher
debt carrying capacity.’ None o f the ratios under the baseline scenario breach the
indicative thresholds relevant for Georgia in 2004 (see Table 1). Given the improving
trend in the ratios, the medium-term averages (2005-15) are also well below the relevant
indicative thresholds. The relevant indicative thresholds o f Georgia’s debt w i l l change
together as the policy and institutional framework continues to improve.
Section 111: Sensitivity Scenarios
Despite recent improvements in debt indicators, Georgia’s external debt
burden profile remains vulnerable to shocks. T o analyze these vulnerabilities,
alternative stress scenarios were explored. Medium-term debt dynamics seem to be
sensitive to baseline assumptions regarding the external current account deficit and
foreign financial flows. The debt burden i s also vulnerable to an exogenous export
shock. Three stress tests highlight these vulnerabilities:

The debt measure used in the analysis i s the net present value (NPV) o f public and publicly guaranteed
external debt. A 5 percent discount rate i s used to generate the NPV.
See IDA and IMF, “Operational Framework for Debt Sustainability Assessments in Low-Income
Countries-Further Considerations” (IDA/R2005-0056), April 2005.
The additional financing needs resulting from these stress tests are assumed to be met through borrowing
on concessional terms (Le., 25 year maturity, 7 year grace and an average interest rate of 2 percent).

110

0

0

0

Export growth shock: Almost 30 percent of Georgia’s export revenues are from
metals and over a third o f total exports are destined for Russia and Turkey. A
concentration in export composition and destination such as this leaves Georgia’s
export revenues vulnerable to exogenous shocks. T o gauge this vulnerability, one
stress test applied i s a one standard deviation shock for t w o years t o the historical
export growth rate.5 In this scenario, the NPV debt-to-exports ratio would jump
sharply relative to the baseline scenario and breach the indicative threshold o f 150
percent in 2007 and not return below the threshold until 2012. The debt service
ratio would increase on average about 4.5 percentage points over the entire
period, without breaching the 20 percent indicative threshold.
The external current account deficit remains at the historical average:
Almost one-third o f Georgia’s import expenditures are concentrated in o i l and
related products. High international o i l prices may keep the pressure on import
expenditures despite the projected decline in pipeline-related imports. In addition,
rising wages have increased the demand for consumer products, which could also
make up for a decline in pipeline related imports. T o gauge the vulnerability o f
the current account to changes in import expenditures, this stress test replaced the
baseline current account deficit (as a percent o f GDP) projection with the
historical average (-5.9 percent). In this scenario, all NPV debt burden indicators
follow an upward trend with the NPV debt to exports ratio breaching i t s indicative
threshold (150 percent) in 2014. Debt service ratios rise sharply relative to the
baseline in the medium-term, but remain below the respective indicative
thresholds.
Lower net transfers and FDI: Responding to the authorities’ reform effort, the
international community has provided strong support in the form of net transfers
to Georgia. A donor’s conference in mid-July 2004 yielded aid pledges o f over 17
percent o f GDP, two-thirds of which are to flow in the form of grants by 2007.
Moreover, about 44 percent o f net transfers to Georgia come in the form o f
remittances from Georgians working mainly in Russia. This stress test assumes
that the authorities’ reform program does not proceed as planned, resulting in a
decline in international donor support, including weaker than anticipated FDI
flows. I t also captures the possibility that worker remittances m a y be lower than
expected. This scenario assumes that net current transfers are on average 4.0
percent o f GDP over the projection period relative to the 5.5 percent baseline
assumption. I t also assumes that FDI i s on average 1.4 percent o f GDP relative to
the 2.4 percent baseline assumption.
In this scenario, the NPV debt-to-exports ratio follows an upward path and

approaches the 1 5 0 ~ ~ ~ € ~ ~ ~the~end~4~the~-projection
r e s
period. Both the NPV debt-to-fiscal revenues and GDP ratios show upward

The historical average growth rate (10.4 percent) was calculated over the period 1999-2003.
This stress test i s a standard bound test o f the low-income country debt sustainability framework (see
bound test B2 in Table 3b.)
This stress test and the one that follows are specifically constructed alternative scenarios (see Figure 4).

’

111

~

d

~

b

trends, but do not breach the indicative thresholds o f 250 percent and 40 percent,
respectively. Debt service ratios also deteriorate sharply, but remain below the
respective indicative thresholds.
Other stress tests generated with the low-income DSA framework indicate that
the baseline assumptions are robust to some alternative scenarios. The historical
scenario produces a more favorable debt burden profile than the baseline for the entire
projection period for the NPV stock ratios and debt service ratios, because recent
historical averages of key macroeconomic variables are stronger than baseline
projections. T w o observations follow. One i s that the baseline projections are robust to
some, but not all, alternative scenarios presented. And the other i s that the economic
reforms implemented recently had an important positive impact on debt burden
indicators.

112

Figure 3. Georgia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-23
(In Percent)

:t
-

113

-------

Figure 4. Georgia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-23
(In Percent)

It

114

:"I
' - -

a

p!

v

: -0' 40
'

: a m

' $ 0

22

20

19

18

17

16

I4

13

22
22

I9
?I

18
10

17

16

IJ
I8

II

IO

22
22
22
22
22
22

20
23

20

19
24
26

19

19

17

17

13

13

12

I1

11

IO

9

I7

9

8
17

8
16

7
16

6
15

5
14

14

II

11

IO

13

12

I2
16

IJ

14

11
14
IO
13
13

54

51

4%

J

8. Bwnd Tnb
8 1 R u l GDP 810wl a t h i i w i c a l avmlpe minvr m c standard &rimon in 2006-07
B2 Expo" value plovul at hirmrlol s v e r s y e minu m e rundard &viadon in 2006.07 31
B j US dollsr GDP dcnamr a t historical nvcrmye minus one iundard &dation in 2006-07
84. N c l non-deh muring flows a t hliladcai .\eraye minus one Iundard &nation in 2006-07 41
85 Combination o f 8 1 - 8 4 mine m e - h s l f i u n b r d deviation i h a k i
86. Onr-time30 FccnC nomhll deprcElsvm relative (0 L e h i e h e in 2006 51

26
28
22
30

2J
23

25
28

21
28
25

26

Z W ddebI.to-xpwts

25

20
17

?3

17

22

24
19

?6

22

14
18

14

13

13

12

I6

17

15
18
13
I8
I7

14

19

17
20
I5
20
I8

13
17
16

14
18

20
16

20
15

19

21

21

I9
14

19

17

16

IJ

II

IJ

ratio

98

93

91

89

81

%I

64

M

63

61

59

J7

98
98

89
91

88
98

86
97

95

81

75

50
SI

47
82

44
82

41

37
79

77

75

30

27
73

24
70

w

85
96

79
92

75

54
88

51
88

47
87

43

39
83

35
80

78

31

28

74

2J
71

92
121
131

114
124

112
111

73

70
87

68

65
78
93

55
M
78

86

77

58
76
73

SI
59
73

ni

62
74
8%
66
a7
82

58

133

72
91
103
79
106
95

6

6

6

J

I06
1%

141

in

23

IM
106
106
106
106
106

100

101
113
I23
113
126
137

1w
141

111

Dcbl ~ r v i
17

IO

17
17

IO

10

e"-

8

87

98

LIS

92

92

85

113

94
104
81
110
97

7

5

96

100
76

102
93

si

85

83

97
73
98

90

69

92

34

w

83
62

81

53

70
68

ratio
6

7

6

6

(1

7

6

7

4

5

3

4

6

5

4

6

5

4

6

4

6

4

4

4

J

4

6

6

6

6

'

J

5

5

4
6

4
6

4
6

4
6

5

5
IO
5
6
8
5

Deb1 ~ r v i r c l o - x p o r t r ratlo
16

9

%

I6
I6

9
9

8
8

6
7

8

6
IO
6
7

I6

16
16
I6
16
16

9

II

I?

IO

IO

9
9

9

8
8

8

116

6

n

6

7

6
7

7

II
7
7

Y

7

7

5

5

5

6
7

3
5

3
J

4
6

7

5
IO
5
6
8
5

5
IO
5
6
8
5

J
IO
5
6
8
5

II
7
7

Y

7

J

S

4
6

4
6

J

5
IO
J
6
8
5

10
5
6

8

J

IO

5
6
8
5

5
9

5
6
7
5

5

9

J
6
7
5

Annex VI: Status of Georgia-AdjustedMillennium Development Goals
C u r r e n t Status

Likelihood of Achievement by

Goal 1. Eradicate extreme
poverty

Although the economy has been
growing steadily, growth has been
too narrow-basedto allow for
poverty reduction, while the
govemment’s failure to meet social
transfer obligations in the past
exacerbated poverty.

Goal 2. Ensure coherence of
Georgian educational system with
educational systems of developed
countries through improved
quality and institutional set-up
Goal 3. Promote gender equality
and empower women

Enrollment rates remain high.
Significant reforms are being
undertakenin the education sector.

Potentially. The current poverty
.eduction strategy of (i) broadening
xonomic activities and increasing
:mployment; and (ii) strengthening
;afety nets for the poorest, if
uccessfully implemented, would
ikely yield significant gains in
.educing extreme and overall poverty
~y 2015.
Likely. With continued momentum
i f current reforms, Georgia i s likely
.o meet this goal.

Gender equality exists in school
enrollment, literacy, and share of
women in wage employment.

2015

Likely. Several aspects have been
dready been achieved. However,
Female wages are significantly lower
than male. The legal framework in
gender-related issues needs to be
strengthened.
Potentially. Given recent increased
allocations to the social sectors and
plans for significant sector
restructuring, this target may be met.

I
Goal 4. Reduce child mortality

Goal 5. Improve maternal health

Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS,
malaria and other diseases

Goal 7. Ensure environmental
sustainability

I Goal 8. Develop a global

The under-five mortality rate in
Georgia was better than the average
for ECA. However, in 2004, the
indicator worsened.
Available data suggest that the
matemal mortality rate (MMR) i s
on a decreasing trend.

Decreasing trends of TB prevalence
and malaria have been observed.
Georgia s t i l l has low HIVlAIDS
prevalence, although incidence has
been rising, mainly due to drug use.
Efforts to integrate sustainable
natural resource use policies have had
limited success to date. 95% of urban
population has access to improved
water, but only 35% of rural
population has this.
Strong support from the international
community; competitive banking
system; relatively open trade regime;
improved debt position.
Communications limited in rural

tareas.
~~~~~

117

Potentially. Planned actions aimed
at improving prenatal care are
expected to yield a gradual decrease
of the M M R by 2015.
Likely. Georgia has improved
efforts to control the spread of HIV,
TB, and malaria. If planned
measures are implemented, i t i s likely
that t h i s goal will be met.
Unlikely. In the absence of a
significant increase in political
commitment to the environment and
investment in rural water supply, i t i s
unlikely that this target will b e met.
Likely. European Neighborhood
incentives likely to encourage
reforms. Sustainable debt position
likely with economic growth and
prudent fiscal management.

Annex VII: Country Financing Parameters for Georgia
.tem
i.
Cost Sharing. Limit on the
xoportion o f individual project
:osts that the Bank may finance.

Parameter
up to 100%

B. Recurrent Cost Financing.
Any limits that would apply to the
werall amount o f recurrent expenditures that the Bank may finance.
C. Local Cost Financing. Are
the requirements for Bank
financing: (i)
financing requirements for the country’s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation and
other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii) the
financing o f foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank
to assist in the financing o f
individual projects.

N o countrylevel limit on
recurrent cost
financing
Yes

D. Taxes and Duties. Are there
any taxes and duties that the Bank
would not finance.

No

Exolanation
Government ownership i s key and w i l l continue to be emphasized.
Financing arrangements in individual projects would be driven b y
substantive project design considerations. In community driven
development (CDD) projects and other projects involving local
communities, contributions b y communities are typically built into the
project design as a signal o f commitment and involvement. In some
projects, project design considerations call for contribution from
beneficiarieslenterprises, borrowing agencies, local governments, and
other local sources. The Bank would encourage project teams to seek
co-financing b y other development partners in all projects. The Bank
would also continue to seek Government counterpart funding,
particularly in infrastructure projects. Nonetheless, i t i s expected that
the Bank may finance 100% o f project costs in some projects,
especially social sector projects. The Bank would continue to monitor
the implementation performance of the ongoing portfolio as an
important indicator o f the Government’s commitment and ownership.
Financing of recurrent cost i s expected to remain modest. In
determining Bank financing of recurrent costs in individual projects,
the Bank would take into account sustainability issues at the sector
and project level.
N o special justification for local cost financing would be needed as
long as they are essential to achieve project’s development objectives.

The Bank may finance the cost o f taxes and duties associated with
project expenditures. However, at the project-level, the Bank would
consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share
o f project costs. The Government may also choose to finance specific
taxes in some projects. In these cases, such financing will be taken
into consideration in determining the level o f Government financing
for the project.

118

Annex I X

Standard CPS Tables
Table A2:
Table B2:
Table B3:
Table B3:
Table B4:
Table B5:
Table B6:
Table B7:
Table B8:
Table B8b

Georgia at a Glance
Selected Portfolio Indicators
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC and MIGA program Summary
Summary o f Non-Lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
IFC’s H e l d & DisbursedPortfolio

120

CPS Annex Tables - Page 1 of 13

Georgia at a glance
Europe &
Central
Asia
Georgla

POVERTY and SOCIAL

2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Lowermiddleincome

4.6
910
3.9

473
2,570
1,217

2,655
1,480
3,934

-0.7
-0.1

0.0
0.2

0.9
1.2

63
69
31

811 7105

Development diamond’
Life expectancy
T

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force (“A)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

55
52
72
25
3
71
0
97
99
96

91
3
103
104
102

50
69
32
11
81
10
112
113
111

1983

1993

2002

2003

31.5

2.7
6.0
46.9
-18.9

3.4
22.1
28.7
9.0
11.7

4.0
24.4
31.8
9.9
10.4

-13.1
0.3
20.7
2.4

-5.8
1.3
54.2
11.3
40.6
112.4

7.2
1.1
48.6
11.7

GNI
per
capita

1

Gross
primary
nrollment

Access to improved water source
-Georgia
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic InvestmenffGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savingslGDP

34.5

Current account baiancelGDP
interest payments/GDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
industry
Manufacturing
Services

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
--Services
-.
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

2003-07

-10.9
-11.1

4.7
6.2
10.8

5.5
6.2
5.7

11.1
11.5
4.8

7.2
6.7
24.6

1983

1993

2002

2003

23.8
36.4
28.7
39.8

58.6
22.0
21.5
19.4

19.3
22.7
18.9
58.0

19.3
24.0
18.8
56.6

53.1
12.4

..

113.0
5.9
71.8

81.2
9.8
42.0

80.9
9.2
46.0

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

..

-0.2
8.2
2.4
12.2

-1.4
14.4
8.3
--4.9

10.3
15.1
6.9
11.5

2.6
3.1
18.7
7.5

3.9
4.7
14.6
4.2

-22.5
4.9
28.0
3.6

..

..

Economic ratios.
Trade
-

1
Indebtedness
~

Georgia
Lower-middle-income group

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. if data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

1

CPS Annex Tables - Page 2 of 13

Georgia at a glance (cont.)
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1993

2002

2003

3,125.4
-2.8 15,442.3

5.6
6.5

4.8
3.4

2.3
-31.9
-39.2

15.8
0.1
-2.0

16.2
-0.7
-2.5

1993

2002

2003

497

553
97
72
293
992
185
201
183

730
157
102
424
1,328
236
210
229

78
84
93

87
94
93

1993

2002

2003

530
995
-465

1,026
1,359
-333

1,322
1,816
-494

-20
131

-53
181

-61
269

Current account balance

-354

-196

-286

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

354
-1

234
-38

327
-41

986
6.07E-3

198
2.2

191
2.2

1983

1993

2002

2003

..

559
0
0

1,839
0
49 1

1,935
0
583

13
0
0

129
0
3

181
0
4

95
124
-5
0
0

70
130
151
165
0

81
96
32 0
338
0

Domestic prices
(“7 Change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1983

..

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficit
TRADE

1983

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Iron and steel
Beverages
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

740

Emort price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1983

(US$ millions)
Emorts of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /ocal/US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
iBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfoilo equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repaymentsNet flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

~-

..

~~

0
0
0
0
0
0

I

Inflation ( O h )

1

98

L

99

---GDP

00

deflator

01

02

031

I

+CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
1,200
1,000
800
600
400

1I

200
0

97

98

99
O0
S Exports

O1

O2

Imports

O3

I

j
l
l

Current account balance to GDP (x)
8
6
4
2
0
2

I

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)
F. 47 0 : 38

E 818

55

3

0
61
3
58

20

43
-~
0
43
4
39

D 160
A - IBRD
B IDA
C - IMF

.

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Pnvate

G -Short-term

I

8117/05

~

~-

CPS Annex Tables - Page 3 of 13

-

CPS Annex B2 Georgia
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 811 6/05

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a*
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2003

2004

2005

2006

18
3.4
5.6
5.2
5.6
5.2
21.4

19
4.0
21 .I
18.5
26.3
25.8
17.8

18
4.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.1

18
4.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
16
6
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
421.6
123.2
Yo of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
18.8
16.7
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
42.5
47.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Banks country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andor implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Banks portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CPS Annex Tables- Page 4 of 13

Proposed IBRD;lDA Base-Case Lending Program a
FiscaIyear
2006

2007

Proj ID
PRSO
EDUCATION APL
PURSECTREF

20.0
15.0
3 .0

PRE-IMVESTMENT INFRASTRUCTUREFACIL.

5.0

ResuR

43.0

PRSO II
TRANSIT CORRIDOR

Result
2008

PRSO Ill
TRANSIT CORRIDOR

Result

2009

um9

Infrastructure(TRD)

Results
Overall Result

Strategic Rewards B implementation b
mW4
Risks (HAW4
H
H

H

M
M
M

20.0
20 .0

H
H

M
M

20.0
20.0

H
H

M
M

20.0

H

M

40.0

40.0

20.0
143.0

Notes:

1) In the event that additional funding becomes available through the IDA performance based allocation
framework, Transit Corridor projects would be considered for higher allocations and possible support in the
health sector would be considered.
2) FY09 infrastructure project could support roads, railways, energy, irrigation and drainage, or other
infrastructure needs.
3) Carbon financing operation for gas pipeline rehabilitation and other activities w i l l be considered.
4) IBRD-enclave in the energy sector w i l l be considered.

-

CPS Annex Tables - Page 5 of 13

CPS Annex B3

Georgia IFC and MIGA P r o g r a m

IFC approvals (US$m)

FY 2000-2005

2000

200 1

2002

2003

2004 1/

2005

33.36

0.29

9.72

5.00

26.75

3 .OO

9%
1%

100%

100%

100%

34%

100%

Sector (70)

FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
OIL, GAS & MINING
UTILITIES

100%

100%

100%

100%

9%
1%
90%

100%

100%

93%
7%

81%
2%
15%
2%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

Total

66%

90%

100%

Investment instrument( %)

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)
1/ Includes BTC Pipeline for $17.6 million approved on 11/4/03.

CPS Annex B3 (IFC & M I G A ) for Georgia

-

Georgia I F C and M I G A Program, FY 2002-2005
2002 2003 2004 2005
IFC approvals (US$m)

9.72 5.00 9.15

Sector (%)

Finance & Insurance

100

100

100

Total

100

100

100

51
7

50

41

50

44
7
44
5

99

100

100

Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total
~

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

2.13 2.13 2.13

100%

100%

CPS Annex Tables - Page 6 of 13

-

CPS Annex B4 Summary of Non-lending Services - Georgia
AS

Product

of

amios

Completion FY Cost (US$OOO) Audiencea Objectiveb

Recent Completions

Health Note
Policy Recommendation Note
Child Welfare Note
Post Conflict Grant TA
Financial Sector Note TA
Social Capacity & Rural Development
Pension & Social Assistance

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05

50.0
60.0
70.0
155.0
83.0
55.0
100.0

G,B
G,D,B,P
G
G,D
G
G,B
G,B

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG, PS

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

170.0
40.0
25.0
50.0
n/a

G,D,B,P
GI D,B, P
G,B
G,D,B,P
G, B

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG, PS

FY06
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY09
On-going
On-going
On-going
On-going

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
80.0
150.0
100 p.a
100 p.a.
100 p.a.
25 p.a.

Underway

Country Economic Memorandum
Water Resource & Risk Mngmnt TA
Kolkheti National Park TA
Rural Infrastructure Study
Financial Sector Assessment Prog.
Planned

CPAR Updat&
CFAA Updatg
Agriculture Sector Updatd
Education Sector NotG
Energy Sector Update
Country Economic Memorandum
Programmatic Poverty Assessment
Business Environment TA
Programmatic PER
Youth Voices

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

-

Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
May be integrated into a Public Financial Management Report
The timing and financing of this activity are still to be determined.
May be integrated into the Programmatic Public Expenditure Review

PS
PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD, PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
PD,PS
PS
PD

CPS Annex Tables - Page 7 of 13
Table B5: Georgia Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group
Lowermiddleincome

1975-80

1985-90

1997-2003

Europe &
Central
Asia

5.1
0.7
51.6
2.3

5.5
0.6
55.4
2.2

5.1
-0.6
57.0
1.1

472.2
-0.1
63.8
1.6

2,655.5
0.9
49.8
2.1

2,580

1,490

4.2
3.8

2.7
3.5

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

11.1
12.1
9.9

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

770
212
21 3

INCOMWCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

36.9
6.4
43.6

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, pG~100,000liE birthsj
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

1.o
2.2

97
97
97

71
67
75

210
94

93
93
93

89
89
88

76
90
61

91
98
80

82
94
71

73
76
3

92
90

86
88
11

72
69
76

73
69
78

68
64
73

69
67
72

43
47

41
45

29
36

31
39

195
90

250
133
3 2
96

317
136
-58-

21 3
131
121
86

~~~~~

~

~

~

~~

~~~~

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
2005 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

5

1

G.

N

I

2

m

x)

w

w
m
W

N

3

L
m

3

m
m

w

t-

0

I?
r-

In

m

d

m
m

r's

8

%Q

-

8N

lr,

Sm

m

8

m
N

N

%m

-

-

0

d
d
m
0

0

0
N
0

m
N

8N

xm

G.
m

2

N

m

N
N

m

2
r

2

5n

-

z

m
w

O m N

0°C

o

m
rIn
m

*

I

Z

Nm

'49
e

-099
&

~m ~

c Q ? - o m
" " O m -

d : ? ?

2 m
o
e m

.

~
m

CPS Annex Tables - Page 11 of 13

Table B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Actual

Estimate

Projected

Indicator

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Total debt outstanding and

1466

1648

1653

1638

1729

1839

1935

2024

2079

2189

2311

2421

2441

2459

Net disbursements (US$mIa

153

153

59

33

117

16

-52

36.6

91.9

75.3

57.4

70.1

67.6

27.8

Total debt service (TDS)

46

213

109

118

77

129

181

186

202

169

178

149

152

194

174.0
41.0

178.1
45.5

168.4
58.3

136.9
53.8

160.0
54.0

161.8
54.2

125.6
48.6

90.9

85.9

83.5
30.7

80.5
29.6

71.7

33.0

81.7
30.2

75.6

39.0

28.2

26.8

5.5
43.5

23.0
46.0

11.1

7.2
49.7

11.3
54.0

11.7
59.4

8.4
59.0

8.3

6.5

6.3

5.0

4.7

5.6

49.6

9.8
49.1

56.6

56.6

56.9

56.6

56.6

56.6

3.7
19.5

1.0
6.4

3.1
41.7

3.3
49.0

5.9

4.4

4.4

7.3

15.9

17.5

44.9

42.9

50.8

9.0
41.9

13.6

63.2

3.4
69.0

3.4

60.2

48.4

48.4

48.4

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

disbursed (TDO) (US$""

(uS$~n)~
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

TDOIXGS~
TDOIGDP
TDSLXGS
ConcessionaUDO
IDA exposure indicators (70)
IDA DSIpublic DS
Preferred creditor DSlpublic
DS (%)'
IDA DSIXGS
IBRD TDO (us$m)d

Of which present value of
guarantees (USSm)
Share of IBRD portfolio (70)

IDA TDO (US$mld
IFC (US$"

Loans
Equity and quasi-equity le

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

212

274

346

347

396

491

583

678

766

830

891

951

..

3.0

24.2

45.4

63.6

63.4

59.6

33.4

42.8

50.6

54.6

2.8

2.8

3.3

6.8

7.0

7.3

20.8

5.5

5.5

16.5

25.5

..
..

MIGA
MIGA euarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of I M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD. IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

0
1011

0
1069

I

MAP

