Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 43276-CR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA

July 25,2008

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
InternationalBank for Reconstructionand Development

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

The date o f the last Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report was October 26,2006.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Colon
U S $ 1.0 = 517.93
Fiscal Year:
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ARESEP
BCCR
CAE
CAFTA
CAS
CASCR
CCSS
CCT
CEM
CFAA
CPAR
CPS
ESW
FDI
FIAS
FIRST
FONAFIFO
FSA
FSAP
FY
GDP
GEF
IBRD
ICA
ICE
IDA
IDB
IDF
IFC
IMF
INEC
INTEL
JBIC
LAC
LIL
MDG

Analytical and Advisory Services
Public Service Regulatory Authority
Central Bank o f Costa Rica (Banco Central de Costa Rica)
Country Assistance Evaluation
Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS Completion Review
Social Security Institution (Caja Costarricense del Seguro Social)
Conditional Cash Transfer
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative
Costa Rica's National Forestry Financing Fund
(Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento Forestal)
Financial Sector Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Investment Climate Assessment
State Electricity Company (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad)
International Development Association
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
National Statistics and Census Bureau
(Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censos)
High Technology Corporation (Corporacion de Aka Tecnologia)
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Latin American Countries
Learning and Innovation Loan
Millennium Development Goals

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEP
MICA
MOE
MOH
OED
PA
PAC
PCF
PER
PHDR
PLN
PPIAF
PSE
R&D
RAMP
SIP0

TA
TRE
UNDP
WB

Ministry of Public Education (Ministerio de Educacion Publica)
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Education
Ministry o f Health
World Bank Operations Evaluation Department
Poverty Assessment
Citizen Action Party (Partido Accion Cuidadana)
Prototype Carbon Fund
Public Expenditure Review
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund
National Liberation Party (Partido Liberacion Nacional)
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Payment for Environmental Services Program (Pago por Sewicios Ambientales)
Research and Development
Reserves Advisory and Management Program
Population Information System
(Sistemade Identijkacibn de la Poblacibn Objetivo)
Technical Assistance
World Bank Treasury
UnitedNations Development Program
World Bank

IBRD
Vice President:

Pamela Cox

Country Director:

Laura Frigenti

Task Team Leader

Neeta Sirur

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This CPS i s a product o f the Bank’s Costa Rica Country Team. The following members made especially
important contributions: Eduardo Wallentin (IFC), Ana Lucia Armijos, Humberto Lopez, Maria Ivanova
Reyes, Carlos Sobrado (LCSPR), Rafael Cortez, Laura Rawlings, Joel Reyes (LCSHD), Benoit Bosquet,
Cecilia Corvalan, Francis Ghesquiere, Emmanuel James, William Reuben (LCSSD), Juan Navas-Sabater
(CITPO); Antonio Blasco, Todd Crawford, Joao Vega (LCOSU), and Sonia C. Molina, Sabine Perrissin,
Jessica Poppele, Dean Thompson, Josef Trommer , (LCC2C), Miguel Navarro-Martin, Ricardo Tejada
(BDM).

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

.................................................................................
.......................................................................................
.................................................................................
......................

Executive Summary
I Introduction
I 1 Country Context
A . Country Context ................................................................................
I11 Recent Developments, Challenges, and Government Priorities
A . Recent Macroeconomic Developments., ...................................................
B. Outlook for 2008-20 10.......................................................................
C . Growth. and Competitiveness................................................................
D. Poverty Reduction and Social Sectors......................................................
E. Environment and Disaster Mitigation......................................................
I V Costa-Rica World Bank Group Partnership.
A . Lessons from the Last CPS ..................................................................
B. Current Bank Group Program...............................................................
C . Country Partnership Strategy (FY09 to mid-FY11).....................................
D. Role o f External Partners., .................................................................
E. Risks...........................................................................................

.

.
.
.

............................................

i
1
1
1
3
3
-5
7
8
11
12
12
13
15
-19
19

TABLES. CHARTS & BOXES
Table 1: Key Social Indicators ...................................................................... 2
Table 2: Key Macroeconomic Indicators. 2004-2007 ........................................... 5
Table 3 : Poverty and Unemployment .............................................................. 9
Table 4: IBRD Active Portfolio and Proposed Base Case Assistance Program...........-17

Chart 1: Poverty and Unemployment ..............................................................

9

................................................................................................

6

Box 1.1.

ANNEXES
Annex A2 . Costa Rica At-a-Glance
Annex B1: Results Monitoring Framework
Annex B2. Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3. IBRD Program Summary
Annex B3. IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Annex B 4. Summary o f Nonlending Services
Annex B5: Social Indicators
Annex B 6. Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7. Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8. Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants)
Annex B8. Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex C: CPS Consultations
Annex D: FY04-08 CPS Completion Report

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
This CPS i s the second to be prepared for Costa Rica following a nearly 1O-year period o f
very limited engagement between Costa Rica and the Bank. The previous CPS, presented to the
Board in mid-2004, was a key step in establishing a framework for a closer partnership and
aimed at mutual learning and knowledge sharing, rather than significant resource transfer via
lending operations. The present CPS also includes a very selective, demand-driven program,
taking into account the government’s policy priorities. To enable better alignment with Costa
Rica’s political cycle going forward, this CPS has a relatively short time-frame -- August 2008December 2010 - covering the remaining term o f the current administration and an additional 7
months following the next presidential transition in May 20 10 to enable development o f the next
CPS with a new, incoming government. This w i l l help better align future CPS preparation with
Costa Rica’s political cycle, in turn, smoothing CPS design and implementation going forward.

..

Costa Rica i s a development success story in many respects. An upper middle-income
country with about 4.5 million people and a GDP per capita o f $5,800 (2007), Costa Rica has
been one o f the most stable democracies in Latin America - with relatively strong public
institutions and peaceful transitions o f power since 1949. Poverty and inequality are much lower
in Costa Rica than the averages for Latin America and Central America, and social indicators are
generally much stronger than for comparable countries in the region and world-wide. The
country has experienced steady economic expansion over the past 25 or so years, primarily due
to the implementation since the late 1980s o f a strategy o f outward-oriented, export-led growth,
openness to foreign investment and gradual trade liberalization. Costa Rica grew at an annual
average rate o f 5% throughout the 1990’s and has generally outpaced the average growth rate for
the region in the current millennium. GDP growth reached a peak o f 8.8% in 2006 and
maintained a healthy pace (6.8%) in 2007. Finally, it should be noted that Costa Rica has also
been a world leader on environmental issues, ensuring that economic growth i s not achieved at
the expense o f i t s rich natural endowments, and successfully exploiting linkages between
environmental protection and poverty reduction.
11.

iii. Costa Rica’s outlook for the CPS period i s broadly positive, but a gradual moderation o f
growth should be expected. GDP growth i s expected to decline to about 5 percent over the CPS
period, due to the slowdown in the US, high food and o i l prices, and gradual monetary tightening
to reduce inflation, although consumer and business confidence i s expected to remain high.
Costa Rica’s strong fiscal performance in recent years implies, however, that the country has
some room to maneuver. The combination o f high growth rates and important administrative
measures introduced by the present Government have contributed to a significant increase in tax
collection - over 27 percent per year in the last two years. This, in turn, led to an increase in the
tax-to-GDP ratio o f 1.5 percentage points over that period. Combined with lower interest rates
on public debt, higher tax revenues have allowed for increased spending in priority areas while
simultaneously contributing to a small fiscal surplus. Nonetheless, the Government i s very
conscious o f the fiscal risks associated with the unfavorable external environment (as well as the
ever-present threat o f natural disasters) and i s moving to develop a comprehensive risk
management framework.

iv.
Besides risk management, the Costa Rican Government's medium-term strategic
priorities are associated with: (a) the need to address emerging challenges to continued growth
and competitiveness, in particular with respect to infrastructure shortcomings, skills gaps and
excessive red tape; and (b) sustaining and deepening recent gains with respect to poverty
reduction, social sector development and the environment. To help further these priorities, and
taking into account the lessons learned from implementation of the 2004-08 CPS, the
Government and Bank have identified specific activities for inclusion in this CPS as described
below. The Government has been particularly interested in some of the newer instruments
offered by the Bank, in particular contingent financing (DDO) and opportunities for
reimbursable TA.
Four lending operations, totaling about US$258 million, targeted to specific areas in
which the Bank has global expertise or suitable instruments for managing risk (a Cat
DDO, Telecommunications TA, Secondary Education and Labor Skills, and Integrated
Infrastructure Development of the City-Port of Puntarenas)
Reimbursable TA for the CCSS both in the management of pension assets and in
supporting continued strengthening of the health system and continued support for
domestic debt market development
Non-reimbursable TA related to competitiveness, poverty targeting and streamlining of
social assistance.
This proposed lending program, albeit still modest, represents an increase in the volume
v.
of lending over the previous CPS which included a program of about $218 n~illionover a 3 112
year period. excluding grants. Successful implementation of this CPS will allow for even closer
engagement in the future, in areas of mutual interest. Indeed, the Government and Bank have
already agreed that the lending envelope for Costa Rica could be enlarged over the CPS period,
should the Government be interested in further financial and related technical support from the
Bank.
IFC's strategy for Central America, including Costa Rica, concentrates on financial
vi.
sector, infrastructure, health and education and agribusiness with particular emphasis on IDA
countries. In this context, the strategy in Costa Rica continues to center on pursuing investment
opportunities in: (a) developing regional capital markets and strengthening local financial
institutions; (b) viable manufacturing and service projects; and (c) the agricultural sector. The
strategy for the financial sector combines advisory and investment activities to support locallyowned financial institutions that serve the SME and housing segments. For the manufacturing
and services sectors, IFC's strategy focuses on the retail and commercial real estate sectors as
well as for IT services and products bringing higher value-added to Costa Rica, more at the brink
of the US-CAFTA implementation. Finally, with respect to agribusiness IFC is focusing on
supporting exports-oriented primary agricultural producers such as bananas and pineapples.
vii.
The risks associated with this CPS are relatively low. The most pertinent risk to
implementation of the CPS lending program derives from the lengthy legislative approvals
process which applies to externally funded operations. This risk could be magnified as the
country enters the election cycle from mid next year. The CPS attempts to minimize the risk of
delays by: (i) focusing operations on areas of high strategic importance to a wide range of

political actors; (ii)
ensuring that the size o f operations i s adequate to ensure high level political
commitment within the executive; and (iii)
working closely with the Executive to build wide
consensus, including among Assembly members, on the content o f the operations throughout the
development phase. Other risks derive principally from the external environment, particularly a
sharper-than-anticipated acceleration in food prices andor an unexpectedly prolonged slowdown in the United States. Costa Rica has been proactively addressing these risks, in particular,
by drawing up a comprehensive strategy with respect to food price increases, covering both i t s
potential economic and poverty impacts. The Bank i s prepared to support implementation o f the
strategy through both analytical inputs and lending, should the Government request it.

...

111

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA

I.Introduction
1.
This Costa Rica-World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
has a relatively short time-frame August 2008-December 2010 -- to enable better
alignment with Costa Rica’s political cycle going forward. The CPS covers the
remaining term of the current administration, led by Nobel Peace Laureate, Oscar Arias,
and allows for an additional seven months following the next presidential transition in
May 2010 to enable development o f the next CPS with a new, incoming government.
The last CPS, presented to the Board in May 2004, straddled the latter half o f the Pacheco
administration and the first half o f the current, Arias, administration, which took office in
May 2006. A CPS progress report was prepared in October, 2006 to make necessary
adjustments to programmed CPS activities and ensure their consistency with the Arias
Government’s priorities. Following a nearly decade-long period o f extremely limited
engagement between Costa Rica and the Bank, the 2004 CPS, was a key step in
establishing a framework for a closer partnership aimed at mutual learning and
knowledge sharing rather than significant resource transfer via lending operations. This
CPS also includes a very selective program, taking into account the government’s policy
priorities for the next two years and the political realities o f the upcoming presidential
election cycle.

--

11. Country Context
A. Country Context

2.
Costa Rica i s a development success story in many respects. An upper middleincome country o f about 4.5 million people and a GDP per capita o f $5,800 (2007), Costa
Rica has been one o f the most stable democracies in Latin America - with uninterrupted
democratically-elected governments and peaceful transitions o f power since 1949.
the limited presence and
Several factors have contributed to this stability, including: (i)
power o f land-based oligarchies; (ii)
the abolition o f the army after a brief civil war in
1948; (iii)the enactment o f a new constitution in 1949 which founded one o f Latin
America’s first welfare states; and (iv) the presence o f effective mechanisms for social
mobility. The President and a Legislative Assembly comprised o f 57 legislators are
elected for four-year terms. Two major political parties have generally alternated in
power, but recent years have seen greater political diversity, with the rise o f a number o f
smaller parties. Costa Rica’s government and political norms have long placed a high
premium on achievement o f wide socio-political consensus on major policies. W h i l e t h i s
can lead, at times, to extremely slow decision-making, it also helps create a broad social
base, enhancing the sustainability o f economic and social reforms and helping to
maintain the credibility and accountability o f public institutions.

1

3.

Poverty i s much lower in Costa Rica than the averages for Latin America
and Central America. The percentage o f Costa Ricans living in poverty f e l l from close
to 32 percent in 1989 to around 22-24 percent during the period 1994-2006, using the
national poverty line. Over the same period, extreme poverty hovered at 6.5-7 percent.
If the international poverty lines o f $2 and $1 per capita per day for poverty and extreme
poverty respectively are used, only about 9 percent o f Costa Ricans were poor and only
about 2% were living in extreme poverty. Despite these low overall levels o f poverty in
Costa Rica, there are some areas o f the country in which the concentration o f poor and
extremely poor households i s relatively high, meriting focused attention to improve
economic opportunities and basic and social services.

4.
Income inequality, measured by the gini coefficient, i s also lower in Costa
Rica than in neighboring countries and the Latin America region as a whole, but, at
0.48 in 2004, i s nonetheless higher than countries at similar income levels in other
world regions. Moreover, there i s some evidence that income inequality has been rising,
from a lower level o f 0.44 in 1989. The Arias administration i s strongly committed to
further reducing both poverty and inequality through rapid, equitable growth, improved
targeting o f social assistance and social services, and integrated interventions to revitalize
areas o f high poverty concentration. The specific priorities outlined in the Government’s
plan are described further in section I11below.

5.
Costa Rica’s social indicators are strong relative to comparable countries in
the region. L i f e expectancy at birth, at 79 years, i s comparable to OECD levels and
close to 96 percent o f Costa Rican adults are literate. Social security coverage (both
health insurance and pensions) i s among the highest in Latin America and, since 1995, i s
managed by the autonomous Social Security Institute (CCSS). As shown in Table 1
below, Costa Rica’s key social indicators are generally in line with, or stronger than, the
averages for Latin America and other upper middle income countries. The one notable
exception i s secondary education, where coverage lags the comparator countries by a
substantial margin.

Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,OOO), 2005
School enrollment, primary (% net), 2003
School enrollment, secondary (% net), 2003
Improved water source (% o f population
with access), 2004

2

12.0
90.0*
53.0*

30.8
94.0
68.1

29.9
93.5
75.8

97.0

91.0

92.7

6.

T h e low levels o f poverty and strong social indicators observed in Costa Rica
have been facilitated by steady economic expansion over the past 25 o r so years.
From the mid-1980s onwards, Costa Rica has been one o f the more stable, and fastergrowing economies in Latin America, primarily due to the implementation o f a new
strategy o f outward-oriented, export-led growth, openness to foreign investment and
gradual trade liberalization. This strategy helped transform the economy from high
dependence on traditional agriculture (coffee and bananas) to today’s diversified
economy, led by high-tech computer and electronic industries, services, non-traditional
agriculture and tourism. This i s illustrated by the changes in coffee and banana exports
which account for under 10 percent o f total exports today versus nearly one-third o f total
exports in 1985. Over the same period, the ratio o f exports to GDP doubled, rising from
under 20 percent to over 40 percent. Annual growth during the 1990s averaged about 5
percent, substantially higher than the L A C average, with factor productivity accounting
for two-fifths o f this performance. In the current millennium, growth slowed in 20012002 in line with the rest o f the region, but picked up again, reaching a peak o f 8.8
percent in 2006 and maintaining a healthy pace o f about 6.8 percent in 2007. Growth in
Costa Rica has consistently been above the Central American average during 2001-2007,
and above the Latin American average for all but one o f those years (2004).

7.
Costa R i c a has also been a w o r l d leader on environmental issues, ensuring
that economic growth i s not achieved at the expense o f its rich natural endowments,
and successfully exploiting linkages between environmental protection and poverty
reduction. It has set aside about 25 percent o f i t s land to protected areas and has put in
place innovative ways to pay i t s citizens for good environmental practices. Given Costa
Rica’s rich biodiversity - about 5 percent o f known species world-wide - and improving
tourist infrastructure, eco-tourism has become, after the INTEL chip plant, the principal
foreign exchange earner, and a driver for rural development. In addition, Costa Rica has
been a leader in developing markets for global environmental services, such as Carbon
Trading Offsets, as well as for local environmental services, where water bills in some
parts o f the country now include a charge to pay farmers upstream for “producing water”.
Studies show payments for these local and global services can be effective ways to
reduce rural poverty in a sustainable way. The current Government has recently
committed the country to a 0 carbon-footprint by the year 202 1. The Government i s also
developing plans for more cost-effective ways to mitigate the impact on the populace,
and especially on poor households, o f the many natural disasters (hurricanes, seismic
activity) to which the country i s subject by virtue o f i t s topography and geographic
location. In this context, Costa Rica has high potential to be a regional leader for SouthSouth cooperation in the field o f disaster risk management.

111. Recent Developments, Challenges and Government Priorities

A. Recent Macroeconomic Developments
8.
Costa Rica’s recent macroeconomic performance has been one o f the
strongest in Latin America. GDP growth reached 8.8 percent in 2006 and an

3

estimated 6.8 percent in 2007. B y comparison, Latin America as a whole grew at 5.1
and 4.5 percent in the same two years. Costa Rica’s strong economic performance i s
attributable to a combination o f internal and external factors. On the internal front,
relatively high business and consumer confidence and low interest rates contributed to an
acceleration in private consumption and investment, high activity in the construction
sector and robust growth in domestic manufacturing, especially in high-tech industries.
On the external front, robust world growth helped create strong external demand for the
country’s exports, and sizeable increases in tourism and foreign direct investment (FDI)
inflows.

9.
The country’s external position also strengthened in 2006-2007. Costa Rica’s
large trade imbalance showed signs o f improvement during 2007. Merchandise exports
more than offset an upsurge in imports to produce a reduction in the country’s trade
deficit. The positive export performance was driven by an increase in industrial exports,
mainly computer components and microchips, while imports increased by about half the
growth rate o f 2006. As a result, the trade deficit for the full year declined from 15
percent o f GDP in 2006 to 14.3 percent in 2007. Notwithstanding the fact that the current
account balance increased to -5.7 percent o f GDP in 2007, strong capital inflows-1.6
billion dollars in 2007-allowed the country to increase i t s reserves to over 4 billion
dollars by the end o f the year.
10.
After a period o f relatively lower inflation from 2006-mid-2007, inflation in
Costa Rica has been on the rise, driven in large measure by the high prices o f food
and oil. Following a steady decline through mid 2007, when it moderated to an annual
rate o f 8.6 percent (August 2007), headline inflation reversed i t s declining trend. This
reversal has been driven principally by external factors such as the evolution o f o i l and
international food prices (which over 2007 increased 47 percent and 60 percent
respectively), and also by domestic pressures associated with booming domestic demand
under tight supply conditions. The evolution o f food price inflation i s particularly
worrisome given the impact it has on the poor. Year-on year food price inflation reached
22 percent in February 2008, with likely severe effects on the poor who necessarily
devote a large share o f their income to food. Background analysis prepared for this CAS
indicates that the recent rise in food prices in Costa Rica may have contributed about 1.5
percentage points to Costa Rica’s overall poverty rate. The Government i s currently
developing a comprehensive strategy, including investments in agriculture and targeted
income transfers to the most vulnerable, aimed at mitigating high food prices going
forward.

11.
Recent fiscal performance has also been very strong. Administrative measures
introduced by the present Government, combined with strong economic growth, have
contributed to a significant increase in tax collection - over 27 percent per year in the last
two years. This, in turn, led to an increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio o f 1.5 percentage
points over the period, with total tax revenues reaching 15.1 percent in 2007. Combined
with lower interest rates on public debt, higher tax revenues have allowed for increased
spending in priority areas while simultaneously contributing to a fiscal surplus for the

4

first time in fifty years: the overall balance o f the public sector shifted to a surplus o f 0.6
percent o f GDP in 2007. Net public debt fell to a record low o f 38.4 percent in 2007.

Table 2. Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 2004-2010
(percent o f GDP, unless noted otherwise)
2004
4.3
2.3
13.1
23.1
18.6

2005
5.9
4.1
14.1
24.8
20.1

2006
8.8
7.0
9.4
26.4
21.9

2007
6.8
5.1
10.8
24.7
18.7

2008
4.5
2.8
13.0
26.3
19.8

Projected
2009
4.0
2.3
10.0
25.4
19.7

Real GDP (“hannual growth)
Real GDP per capita growth (%)
Inflation rate (%, end o f year)
Gross Domestic Investment
Gross National Savings
Public Sector
Overall Public Sector Balance
-3.6
-2.3
-0.5
0.6
-0.5
-0.7
50.3
44.6
41.6
39.7
Total Gross Public Debt
59.7
55.7
34.0
54.1
50.4
44.5
38.4
35.9
Total Public Debt (net)’’
External Sector Indicators
Current account balance
-4.3
-4.9
-4.7
-5.7
-6.5
-5.5
Trade Balance
-10.5
-14.1
-15.0
-14.3
-11.3
-10.5
MerchandiseExports (fob)
34.0
35.3
36.4
35.7
32.0
32.3
43.3
42.8
Merchandise Imports (fob)
44.5
49.4
51.4
50.0
GDP (US% million)
18,598 19,909 22,522 26,238 30,828 35,144
I‘ Excludes Central Government debt held by the NFPS.
Source: Ministry o f Finance, Central Bank, IMF reports and World Bank staff estimates.

2010
5.0
3.3
10.0
26.3
19.9
-0.6
38.6
32.9

-5.8
-10.2
33.2
43.4
40,415

.

B. Outlook f o r 2008-10
12.
The outlook for 2008-10 i s broadly positive, but a moderation o f growth i s
expected to take place in light o f external factors, including the slowdown in the U S
and continued high food and oil prices. The central government now forecasts a 4.5
percent real GDP growth for 2008 (see Table 2 above). In May 2008, the economic
activity index increased by 4.2 percent over the same month in 2007. This growth
represents the slowest pace in almost three years and given that the U.S. i s Costa Rica’s
main trading partner and its most important source o f FDI, a deeper or more prolonged
slowdown in the U.S. could have a direct negative impact on exports, investment and the
country’s external position. Thus far, however, indications are that the large capital
inflows to Costa Rica are unlikely to be significantly affected as they have continued to
be stable despite the present US downturn. On the domestic front, expected contraction
o f domestic demand could affect tax revenues while rising interest rates will likely
increase interest expenditures on the debt. As a result, the fiscal surplus o f 2007 could
turn into a small deficit. The Government i s currently revising the macroeconomic
program for 2008-09 to reflect these factors.
13.
Inflationary pressures are likely to be moderately high during 2008 but are
expected to reduce somewhat in 2009-2010. Headline inflation reached 12.8 percent in
June 2008, reflecting high food and fuel prices. Food prices have risen twice as fast as
headline infiation (26% as o f June). Perhaps more worrisome, the core inflation rate
(headline inflation net o f food and oil) has also been rising--from 8.5 percent in January

5

2008 to 11.4 percent in June 2008-indicating
that there are second-round effects
associated with high food and o i l prices. In response to these developments, the
authorities are taking steps to avoid a return to double-digit inflation, high public debt,
and larger external balances. To that end, priority actions include moving toward greater
exchange rate flexibility, using interest rates to bring down inflation, and further
recapitalization o f the central bank.
14.
Nonetheless, Costa Rica’s strong fiscal performance in recent years implies
that the country has some room for maneuver. As noted in para 11, Costa Rica i s in a
relatively strong position to respond to shocks thanks to its sound fiscal policy and
important efforts to improve tax collection in recent years. Public debt i s expected to
continue in the downward trend witnessed in 2006-07, given expectations o f continued
growth in the 4-4.5 percent range. Gross public debt would gradually fall to about 38
percent o f GDP by 20 10, while external public debt would stabilize at around 11 percent
o f GDP. Moreover, Costa Rica has sizable foreign exchange reserves ($4.2 billion as o f
June 2008), has taken important steps toward a more flexible exchange rate regime in the
context o f the transition to inflation targeting, and has implemented measures to
strengthen the financial system. Despite these positive factors, there is some risk that
global shocks, in particular further slowdown o f the US economy, could further depress
growth rates as well as negatively affect the external current account position.
Box 1.1. Debt Sustainabilityin Costa Rica - IMF Assessment
In its latest Article I V consultation report o f March 2008, the I M F finds that Costa Rica’s external and
public debt outlook i s sustainable following a downward path in the medium term horizon. The
sustainability o f debt i s maintained even under alternative sensitivity scenarios. The baseline scenario
estimates that total public debt (including the nonfinancial public sector and the Central Bank) would be
reduced to 37.4 percent o f GDP by 2012 (from 44.6 in 2007), while total (public and private) external debt
i s projected to decline from 26.4 percent o f GDP in 2007 to 20.5 by 2012. The public sector external debt
would be reduced from 17.9 percent o f GDP in 2007 to 11.2 percent in 2012.
Under the historical average scenario” debt indicators increase less than 2-percent o f GDP during the
short-term horizon and then converge close to the baseline scenario levels by 2012. The short-term horizon
increase in public and external debt ratios does not pose a risk to debt sustainability. The different Bound
Tests scenarios present a potential risk for the country’s public debt if growth significantly deviates from
the baseline or if the country experiences a one-time real depreciation o f at least 30 percent; in spite o f
these stress tests, the debt to GDP ratio will remain below 50 percent by 2012.

Real GDP growth (%)
Average nominal interest rate on public
debt (YO)
Average real interest rate (‘YO)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, %)
CAB (% o f GDP)

Actual
2006 2007
8.7
6.8

2008
5.0

2009
5.0

Projection
2010
2011
5.0
5.5

2012
5.5

11.8

10.8

9.4

9.7

9.7

9.2

8.6

0.5
11.2
-3.3

1.8
9.0
-4.5

-0.1
9.5
-5.4

2.7
7.0
-4.4

4.1
5.5
-4.9

4.7
4.5
-4.8

5.3
3.3
-5.2

” The historical average scenario i s the main sensitivity analysis evaluated by the IMF under its most recent DSA for Costa Rica. This
scenario assumes that the key macroeconomic underlying variables are at their historical average (of the latest 10 years) during the
projection period. The key variables include real GDP growth, real and nominal interest rates, inflation, current account, among
others.

6

C. Growth and Competitiveness

15.
Beyond continued macroeconomic stability, Costa Rica’s medium-term
challenges are also associated with the efforts needed to continue to improve
competitiveness and the business climate. On the trade front, Costa Rica remains the
only signatory to CAFTA-DR which i s yet to implement the agreement. Although the
free trade deal was narrowly approved in October 2007 in an historic referendum, some
elements o f the complementary agenda, which involves major structural changes such as
opening the insurance and telecommunications sectors, s t i l l await approval by the
Assembly. The Government, which i s deeply committed to securing the approval o f
CAFTA, requested an extension from CAFTA signatories before the deadline for passage
o f the complementary laws expired on February 29, 2008. Approval o f the CAFTArelated legislation i s now expected before the new deadline o f September 2008 and i s a
major priority o f the country’s reform agenda. O f the 12 laws included in the
complementary agenda, 10 were passed by July 2008. The remaining two --public
entities modernization law and additional regulations related to intellectual property
rights) are under discussion in the Assembly and are expected to be finalized during a
special Assembly session in August.
One o f the most pressing issues affecting Costa Rican competitiveness i s the
16.
need to address infrastructure bottlenecks which could jeopardize the country’s
attractiveness to investors in the medium to longer term. A key challenge i s to
rehabilitate the primary trade corridors, including both the link highways and major ports
on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, to help facilitate trade, tourism and business
expansion. To bring about the required efficiency and investments, Costa Rica will need
to introduce institutional reforms as well as consider a way to ensure that the budgetary
process allows sufficient resources for road maintenance. Government i s seeking ways
o f enhancing the impact o f additional infrastructure spending through mechanisms that
exploit public-private synergies, reduce overlaps and improve overall cost-effectiveness
o f road rehabilitation programs. This should help with the aim o f significantly lowering
costs in the long-term, while improving road quality on a sustainable basis. The Bank’s
recent PER i s supporting Government in this effort through analysis o f viable policy
options. It i s also worth noting that the Costa Rican Government i s giving attention to
addressing growing road safety concerns and has developed a comprehensive plan - the
most advanced o f i t s kind in Central America.
Besides transport, Costa Rica’s long-term competitiveness i s closely linked to
17.
improvements in energy and telecommunications. In the electricity sector, there i s a
need to expand supply and reduce prices through the provision o f incentives to expand
generation assets as well as parallel efforts to strengthen regulatory oversight. Although
basic indicators for the telecommunications sector reveal high penetration, other
important issues such as the low quality o f service (both landline and mobile), the low
penetration o f high-speed internet, the lack or delay in technological innovation,
uncertainties in the allocation o f spectrum and overall slow pace o f investment point to
the need for a more competitive regulatory environment. The Government i s very

7

conscious o f the above issues and is promoting legislation to spearhead sectoral reforms
in electricity and telecoms, which was approved by the National Assembly earlier this
year as part o f the CAFTA-DR complementary agenda. Moreover, in energy and
telecoms, as well as transport, it i s looking towards the execution o f pending concessions
and identifying other public-private partnerships as a principal means o f supporting
sectoral expansion, and hence, growth. These efforts will be crucial to achieving the
increased investment in infrastructure that i s needed to maintain the country’s
attractiveness to business investment.
18.
While Costa Rica holds a reasonably high rank on some global
competitiveness rankings, other comparisons indicate that there i s considerable
room for cutting back on red tape associated with business starts, operation and
exits. For example, Costa Rica’s traditional strengths - political stability, strong
institutions and l o w corruption vs. comparable countries - place it at a relatively high
rank in the Global Competitiveness Index. I t s showing is, however, much lower in the
Bank’s Doing Business Report (DBR), which tends to focus more narrowly on the
regulation and processes associated with businesses as well as labor market rigidities.
Costa Rica ranked second-lowest (after Honduras) among the CAFTA-DR partner
countries in both the 2006 and 2007 DBR rankings, in 117* and 115* place in 2006 and
2007 respectively. The Government i s currently exploring means o f improving the
regulatory environment for businesses, in part with assistance from the Bank.
19.
An important challenge in Costa Rica’s efforts to increase competitiveness
concerns the emerging shortages of skilled workers, pointing, in turn, to the need to
strengthen the coverage, quality and pertinence o f secondary education. The issues
concerning secondary education which have both a competitiveness and an equity
dimension are discussed further in Para. 24 below.
Finally, while Costa Rica has a number o f governance strengths - political
20.
stability, strong institutions and low corruption versus comparable countries - there
i s nonetheless scope for modernizing public financial management both to improve
efficiency in public funds execution and to strengthen Costa Rica’s competitiveness
position. Specific priorities for improvement identified by the Government in
conjunction with the Bank-led C F M C P A R are inclusion o f the State-Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) budget within the budget law, standardization o f SOE financial
statements and standardization o f accounting practices for public and private enterprises.
In the procurement area, as well, there is a need for modernization o f systems and
processes aimed at increasing the efficiency and speed o f public procurement.

D. Poverty Reduction and Social Sectors
21.
After well over a decade (1994-2006) o f very little change in poverty and
unemployment levels, important reductions in both took place in 2007. Overall
poverty decreased from 22-23 percent down to 19 percent and extreme poverty fell even
more rapidly from 6.5 percent to 3.7 percent. This decline in poverty i s in part linked to
the fast expansion o f the Costa Rican economy over the past 3 or so years, as reflected in

8

unemployment figures which show a decline in jobless rates to 4.6 percent in 2007,
considerably lower than their historical level o f around 6 percent (Chart 1 and Table 3
below). The decline in poverty is also directly attributable to two policies put in place by
the current government: (i)
a decision to raise (fiom about $30 per month to about $100
per month) the non-contributory minimum pension covering some 72,000 persons
including both the indigent elderly and others, such as the mentally or physically
handicapped, who are unable to provide for themselves; and (ii)
the implementation o f a
conditional cash transfer (CCT) program which provides a cash benefit to poor
households in exchange for enrolling their secondary school-aged children in school.
The CCT program currently provides nearly 71,000 transfers per month ranging in value
from $30-$100 per household, depending on the number o f eligible children. Within the
framework o f the National Food Strategy currently being developed, the Government
also expects to implement a new targeted transfer program which would provide up to
$100 per month to about 16,000 low-income, female-headed households to help cushion
the impact o f high food prices. Given Costa Rica’s population size o f 4.5 million and
the fact that transfers benefit the entire household o f the recipients (5 members per
average), the impact o f the programs above on poverty has been significant.

Chart 1: Costa Rica: Poverty and Unemployment
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%

0%
1989

1994

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Table 3: Costa Rica: Povertv and Unemdovment

I Rural

** I

** I

5.1%

I

6.5%

9

I

5.8%

I

6.6%

I

6.1%

I

6.2%

I

4.2%

I

3.1%

1

22.

The policy decisions to double minimum pensions and put in place a CCT
program linked to secondary school attendance were the first steps in the
Government’s strategy for reducing income poverty; the medium-term goal i s to
eradicate extreme poverty and reduce overall poverty by one percentage point per
year on average. Following on the demonstrated success o f these two policies in
furthering Costa Rica’s poverty reduction goals, the Government aims to focus in its
remaining time in office on strengthening the institutional framework in order to sustain
the momentum for poverty reduction. The main elements o f this agenda are the
creation o f a consolidated Ministry of Social Development to take the lead
following: (i)
in policy and program coordination o f the country’s poverty reduction efforts and social
assistance programs, which have thus far been managed in a fragmented (and sometimes
duplicative) fashion; (ii)development and implementation o f a national management
information system to bring together information from the plethora o f social assistance
programs and statistical data sources on household information; and (iii)
drawing on
information collected regularly by the CCSS and the management information system,
design and implementation o f an integrated national poverty targeting system, including
proxy means testing mechanisms to identify beneficiary households. Besides improving
the focus on poverty reduction within government, the institutional changes proposed are
also intended to increase the effectiveness and efficiency o f social assistance, which
accounts for about 1.6 percent o f GDP in Costa Rica, a level that i s considerably higher
than in the region as a whole.

23.

As noted earlier, Costa Rica’s health indicators are very strong but there i s
some risk that these could erode if emerging epidemiological and system efficiency
issues are not addressed in a timely manner. O f particular concern from an
epidemiological standpoint are two different challenges: (i)the rapidly aging
demographic profile and the concomitant growth in the importance o f chronic illnesses,
which are relatively costly to address; and (ii)
the emergence in some parts o f the country
o f communicable diseases, such as dengue fever outbreaks along the Pacific Coast, which
involve public health surveillance and public health interventions o f a type for which
Costa Rica i s inadequately equipped. Moreover, there are signs that despite high levels
o f public spending on health (about 5.4% o f GDP), quality and outcomes are uneven at
both the primary and higher levels o f the system, and that, unsurprisingly, poor
households remain underserved vis a vis the non-poor (30% o f the poor are uninsured
versus about 16% o f the non-poor). The CCSS, the major provider o f health services and
old age pensions in Costa Rica, has been facing mounting financial imbalances given
rising costs related to population aging coupled with stagnating revenues as the number
o f contributors has remained constant. In this context, the CCSS is giving high priority to
increasing the efficiency o f its services focusing on the referral network with particular
attention to the primary level, including protocols for health workers, information
campaigns related to dengue, HIV/AIDS and other communication diseases, and a more
reliable MIS. There i s also a system-wide effort to achieve greater efficiency in the cost
o f pharmaceuticals and medical supplies. With respect to i t s pension operations, the
CCSS i s seeking to modernize i t s investment strategies, including both improving returns
and diversifying investment.

10

24.
While education indicators are satisfactory overall, they mask considerable
disparities in educational attainment between poor and non-poor households and
across geographic regions. I n addition, relatively low secondary education coverage
and quality are especially worrisome in light o f the economy’s demand for higher
skilled workers and emerging evidence o f labor shortages. While Costa Rica spends
about 6 percent o f GDP on education - one o f the highest levels in Latin America outcomes have not been commensurate and efficiency is low. From the mid-1990s
onwards, there has been a gradual decline in the proportion o f secondary school graduates
and those who do graduate take close to double the years formally required. Moreover,
secondary education standards, curricula and methodologies are inadequate to developing
either a solid academic grounding or pertinent technical (including technological) skills.
Government is currently working on strategies to modernize the education sector,
including addressing inequities in coverage, optimization o f allocated resources and
revamping o f technical skills programs in partnership with private sector businesses. In
parallel, as mentioned above, it has put in place a CCT program aimed at increasing
demand for secondary education among poor households to address equity issues.

E. Environment and Disaster Mitigation

25.
Costa Rica’s pioneering program o f payments for environmental services
(PSA) has had tremendous success in promoting forest and biodiversity
conservation but faces challenges o f financial sustainability and increasing the
participation o f the poor in conservation programs. To enhance the sustainability o f
the program and further increase i t s reach, the Government is implementing a four-part
strategy: (i)
introduction o f service user fees to allow for expansion o f the PSA program
beyond the level now being financed through fuel taxes and donor contributions; (ii)
increasing program efficiency through differentiation o f payments to land holders; (iii)
targeting o f promotional efforts to draw (poorer) small and medium-sized landowners
into the PSA scheme; and (iv) improved program monitoring. The strategy also involves
the strengthening o f partnerships between the different Government entities involved in
the conservation effort as well as promoting effective linkages between local
conservation NGOs and small landowners so that the latter receive specialized support
enabling them to participate in the PSA program. The Bank’s involvement with the
program has, in turn, helped enable the development o f similar programs in other client
countries.

26.
Given Costa Rica’s vulnerability to natural disasters o f climatic and seismic
origins, Government i s giving high priority to disaster risk mitigation. Like i t s
Central American neighbors, Costa Rica i s exposed to a large variety o f adverse natural
hazards, earthquake, volcanoes, floods, landslides and torrential debris flows. At the
same time, the growth in construction activities, accelerated by the economic boom,
industrial expansion and agrarian export activities has generally resulted in a marked
increase o f assets located in risky areas. This situation, combined with environmental
degradation has led to a marked increase in losses from natural disasters, particularly
floods, in recent years. Until recently, disaster management in Costa Rica centered

11

essentially on reactive action, with very few pro-active prevention programs. The current
Government has, however, begun to place increasing attention to management o f disaster
risks. In particular, and through an amendment o f L a w No. 7914, the government has
chosen to significantly strengthen the Commission Nacional de Emergencia (CNE) with a
particular focus on its role as a promoter and coordinator o f risk mitigation. An
important support to this agenda i s the availability in Costa Rica o f good quality
independent scientific and engineering research which has allowed for a sound base o f
knowledge on the causes, variables and parameters o f risk present in the country which
should enable the development o f revised standards and building codes tailored to microregions which could contribute to the reduction o f vulnerability. The Government is also
exploring means o f reducing fiscal vulnerability in the event o f disasters by developing a
reserve fund to cover the costs o f repairing damaged public assets and other financial risk
mitigation instruments in partnership with the Bank’s Global Fund for Disaster Risk
Reduction (GFDRR).

IV. Costa Rica-WorldBank Group Partnership

A. Lessons from the Last CPS (see also the CPS Completion Report, Annex D)

27.

The 2004 CPS, which was prepared after a ten year interval of very limited
engagement with Costa Rica, was central to the reestablishment o f a closer
relationship between Costa Rica and the Bank Group, and had clear benefits for
each partner. The CPS comprised a very modest lending program o f $2 18 million but
included strong components o f economic and sector work and AAA in support o f core
Government objectives. The focus on knowledge sharing and mutual learning in a few,
carefully- selected sectors was an appropriate one: it afforded the Bank an opportunity to
gain in-depth insights into Costa Rica’s successful poverty reduction and economic
diversification efforts and pioneering environmental programs which are extremely
relevant for other Bank clients; and, the Bank’s involvement facilitated Costa Rica’s
access to relevant global knowledge and experience in designing strategies and programs
to address emerging development issues in a number o f areas. Some areas o f cooperation
that stand out in terms o f clear benefits:
0

0

0

the debt and reserves management AAA by the Bank’s Treasury Unit which
helped establish a new strategic and institutional framework for debt
management, supported the adoption o f new debt projection models by the
Finance Ministry and helped the Central Bank to implement a new reserves
investment strategy
the poverty and social sectors dialogue, analytic work and lending which
contributed to the design o f the country’s first CCT program, the development
and implementation o f strategies to improve educational coverage and the
consolidation o f the health sector reform
support to the national dialogue o n CAFTA-DR, through the preparation o f a
regional study and wide dissemination through workshops and technical inputs to

12

0

0

0

for telecoms laws which were considered in the design o f sectoral reforms and in
the draft laws submitted to the Assembly
the C E M and I C A which both analyzed Costa Rica’s successes thus far in
attracting private investment and helped identify priorities for future action
technical and lending involvement in the further development o f Costa Rica’s
innovative and effective PSA conservation program
the development o f a viable, integrated strategy for revitalization o f Puerto Limon
which is addressing the needs o f a disproportionately poor and excluded area
through the creation o f economic and cultural opportunities
the PPIAF support for private alliances in infrastructure which identified practical
approaches to addressing Costa Rica’s infrastructure deficit through publicprivate cooperation, elements o f which have now been incorporated into sectoral
development plans

28.

However, the 2004 CPS underestimated the implications o f Costa Rica’s
lengthy, consensus-based processes for the timely passage o f reforms and for
legislative action to approve Bank-supported projects. As noted earlier, the process
o f building wide consensus and slow political processes have affected Government’s
ability to quickly move forward i t s reform agenda. This has been especially apparent in
the lengthy efforts to ratify C A F T A and i t s complementary agenda. C A F T A was
ultimately approved via a public referendum late last year, but discussions in the
Assembly are still ongoing on some key, but controversial, laws which need to be passed
before C A F T A can go into effect. Similarly, efforts by both the Pacheco and Arias
administrations to pass a comprehensive fiscal reform package have been stalled in the
Assembly for a considerable period o f time. The need for the Executive to expend scarce
political capital on moving forward some o f these important priorities for the country has,
in turn, affected its ability to push for rapid approval o f projects developed with the Bank
(or, indeed, other IFIs), causing significant delays in project implementation in some
cases (e.g., Education Quality, Eco-markets 11). Based on this experience, the
Government concluded that small projects, particularly projects with a heavy dose o f TA,
are difficult to steer through the Assembly and should not be attempted going forward.
Rather, its strategy, which this CPS reflects, focuses on a few, large projects which are
likely to have wide social and political support. I t also suggests the need for Government
teams preparing lending operations to consider early engagement with relevant
committees in the Assembly to build understanding o f the operations well before they are
formally presented for legislative action. The Bank would be prepared to support the
Government teams in these discussions if requested by the Executive.
B. Current Bank Group Program

29.

The Costa Rica portfolio o f Bank-supported projects i s relatively small,
comprising four lending operations totaling $146 million and a GEF grant of $10
million, linked to the Eco-Markets I1 project. I n addition, AAA activities are
ongoing in two important areas, domestic debt market development and poverty
targeting. One o f the lending operations, the Health Sector Strengthening Project, which
has helped to implement and consolidate the country’s ambitious 1995 health sector

13

reform (including the shift to an insurance-based model for the majority o f health
services provision), was approved in the period before the 2004 CPS. The project i s close
to completion, but an extension for an additional year was granted to complete activities
related to upgrading the MIS. The other three operations, including (i)
the Education
the Eco-Markets I1 project and associated GEF; and
Equity and Efficiency Project; (ii)
(iii)
the Puerto Limon Integrated Infrastructure Project were all foreseen as part o f the
program for FYs04-FY08. O f these operations, the Education Project i s effective - since
end-2006 -- following i t s approval by the Assembly close to eighteen months after i t s
approval by the Bank's Board. The Eco-Markets I1 project was recently approved and
should be made effective shortly, while discussion by the Assembly o f the Puerto Limon
project i s currently underway. As noted earlier, the process o f securing legislative
approval o f projects has been considerably delayed, in large part because o f the high
priority given to moving forward the CAFTA complementary agenda.

30.
Of the four other projects included in the FY04 CPS, three were dropped
and the fourth i s likely to carry over into the present CPS period. Two o f the
projects - small TA operations for e-Government and agricultural research -- were
dropped by the Arias administration after it took office in 2006 and took careful stock o f
i t s needs, alternative financing options and the political exigencies o f shepherding its
reform priorities and externally-financed projects through the legislature. The third
project, for the water sector, was dropped following a corruption scandal in an externally
funded project in the water sector, which led the Government to halt further external
financing to the sector until institutional reforms were adopted and implemented. The
last project, also a TA operation for the telecommunications sector, i s well advanced in
its preparation. I t s presentation to the Board, and subsequently to the Costa Rican
Assembly, was delayed to await the approval o f a new telecoms framework law which
was recently approved as part o f the CAFTA-DR complementary agenda. This was
appropriate given that the aim o f the project i s to support Costa Rica in the
implementation o f the provisions o f the new telecommunications law.

31.
During FY06-08, IFC committed two regional projects for $35 million that
are benefiting Costa Rica. One project i s a $20 million loan to a well established
Central American auto finance company. The company provides financing and leasing
for new and used vehicles with about 60% o f its loans going to SMEs, a market segment
which has weak access to bank financing. The other project i s a $15 million loan to
Central America's largest trucking company and the only one with physical infrastructure
and operations in five Central American countries. The project assists in the
development and expansion o f a regional logistics group as well as further supports
regional integration by increasing efficiency and cost effectiveness o f the logistics chain.
32.
IFC's committed portfolio at the end o f June 2008 amounted to US$102
million (US$47 million for IFC's own account, and US$55 million for Participants'
accounts) in four projects. Over 40% o f IFC's own account was in the financial sector;
30% in the wholesale and retail sector; an additional 26% o f the portfolio was for an
investment with the Juan Santamaria International Airport (JSIA) in San Jose. After more
than four years o f negotiations, the authorities and the operator failed to reach an

14

agreement that would restore financial equilibrium to the project. In February 2008, the
authorities sent a formal notification to the operators initiating an administrative process
for the anticipated termination o f the management contract with the company, opening a
cure period for the operator to find a solution (new financing) or for IFC to identify a new
operator, which would accept the debt o f IFC and i t s participant banks. IFC has identified
a new operator through a transparent and open process, in close coordination with the
company. The Costa Rica government i s currently evaluating the offer o f the potential
new operator.
MIGA’s outstanding portfolio for Costa Rica, as of April 30,2008 consists of
33.
5 contracts of guarantee, with a total gross exposure of US$186.7 million (2.9% of
gross portfolio) and net exposure of US$93.9 million (2.7% of net portfolio). These
guarantees involve participation in three projects, one in the tourism sector and two in the
infrastructure sector (power and transportation, respectively). The bulk o f the exposure i s
for the guarantees in support o f the San Jos6Caldera toll road, which was signed on the
second quarter o f FY08. MIGA i s currently underwriting another large transportation
project which could potentially lead to the doubling o f i t s exposure in Costa Rica;
however, outstanding issues remain and the project may not be finalized until late FY09
or early FY10. MIGA has also guaranteed two projects by Costa Rican investors, in
financial leasing. These were to support expansions o f a local company into Nicaragua
and El Salvador as part o f its efforts to increase its regional presence. These two projects
totaled US$6.6 million. MIGA remains committed to supporting intra-regional
investments.
C. Country Partnership Strategy: FY09 to mid-FY11

--

34.
This CPS i s both demand driven and highly selective focusing on areas in
which the Government believes it can benefit from the Bank’s global experience and
from new lending and AAA instruments which are suited to the country’s needs. In
particular, the Government believes that the Bank’s new contingent financing instruments
(DDO) can be a key element o f Costa Rica’s risk management strategy. It i s also taking
advantage o f opportunities for reimbursable TA in areas where it sees benefits from
seeking the Bank’s technical support. As noted at the outset o f this report (Para l),
the
period covered by the CPS includes the remaining term o f the Arias Administration plus
an additional seven months to prepare a follow-on CPS with a new Government,
expected to take office in May 2010. This will help better align future CPS preparation
with Costa Rica’s political cycle, in turn, smoothing CPS design and implementation
going forward.
35.
The overall aims of the CPS are to support the Costa Rican government in
implementing its two main development priorities for the next two years: (i)
addressing emerging challenges to continued growth and competitiveness, including
fiscal risk management; and (ii) continuing to reduce income poverty and increase
equity in social service provision. In this context, the Government has requested Bank
support for a few selected areas as follows:

15

Four lending operations, totaling about US$258 million, targeted to specific areas
in which the Bank has global expertise or suitable instruments for managing risk
such as the Cat DDO (see below for more detailed descriptions of these
operations)
Reimbursable TA for the CCSS both in the management of pension assets and in
supporting continued strengthening of the health system
Non-reimbursable TA related to competitiveness, poverty targeting and
streamlining of social assistance.
This proposed lending program, albeit still modest, represents an increase in the volume
of lending over the previous CPS which included a program of about $2 18 million over a
3 112 year period, excluding grants. The Government and Bank have agreed, however,
that the lending envelope for Costa Rica could be enlarged over the CPS period, should
the Government be interested in further financial and related technical support from the
Bank.
The four lending operations agreed for this CPS are all in areas deemed high
36.
priority for Costa Rica's development, and are believed by Government to address
areas for which there will be sufficient support in the legislature and in society at
large. The operations are the following:
A Catastrophic Risk Deferred Draw-Down Operation (Cat DDO) (FYO9 US$65
mill): The DDO would provide Costa Rica a rapid source of funds in the event of
a major natural disaster, enabling a quicker response to address emergency needs.
The DDO would be accompanied by the implementation of comprehensive
disaster mitigation measures as discussed earlier in Para 24.
A Telecommunications Reform Project (FY09 US$13 mill): Preparation of this
project is very advanced since the last CPS period and it is intended to bring
global experience to bear on the opening up of the telecommunications sector,
once the framework law is passed.
Secondary Education and Skills Development Project (FY 10, US$80 mill): This
project would conlplement the ongoing Education Quality and Efficiency Project
(which is focused on equity at the secondary level) by improving the relevance of
secondary education to labor market demands through a revamping of the
curriculun~,pedagogical methods, teacher training and updated equipment and
technology.

Puntarenas Integrated Infrastructure Development Project (FYI 0 US$lOO mill):
The design for this operation will be modeled on the Puerto Limon operation
approved last year. The long-term goal would be to transform the Punta Arenas
area (including the nearby Calderas port) into a regional center of economic
growth. The project would seek to revitalize the port and urban environment,
leverage the interface and synergies between the port and the city, and increase
econon~icopportunities for the poorest households represented in this area.

Commitments

and improve the
efficiency, quality,
and equity of public
social expenditures

- Reduce poverty,

Reduce poverty

Promote
sustainable
economic growth
- Improve
fundamentals and
risk management
(fiscal, monetary,
and financial)
-Improve
competitiveness
- Accelerate
protection of natural
resources

Key factor

Equity &
Efficiency in
Education (FY06)

Health Sector
Modernization
(FY 02)
($17m)

Port City of Limon
(FY08)
($72.5m)

Mainstreaming
Market-Based
Instruments for
Environ.
Management
Project/GEF Grant
(FY06)
($30m)

Lending

TFSCB Support for the
National Statistical
Development Strategy
(FY08)

TA on public asset
catastrophe risk
insurance
Poverty Measuring &
Targeting
(Phase 11: FY08)

COOPEAGRI
Carbon Sequestration)
(FY06)
($2.2m from Bio
Carbon Fund)

Public Debt
Management
& Domestic Debt
Market Development
(Phase 11: FY08)

Non-lending

Active Portfolio
(Approval Year)

CAT-DDO
($65m)

Telecoin Sector
Modernization
($13m)

Lending

Pension Investments
Partnership Program
(fee for service TA for
CCSS)

Health Sector
Modernization (fee for
service TA for CCSS)

Poverty Measuring &
Targeting
(Phase 111: FY08)

AAA for reduction of
greenhouse gas
emissions from
deforestation and
forest degradation

Development Policy
Notes

Conferences on
Macro-Issues
Port of Puntarenas
($loom)

Secondary
Education Quality
& Competitiveness
($SOm)

Lending

Table 4: IBRD Active Portfolio and Proposed Base Case Assistance Program FY08-10

I

Non-lending

CA Macroeconon~ic
Monitoring Report
(FY 10)

Conferences on
Macro-Issues

FYlO

--

AAA activities - reimbursable and non-reimbursable
would generally
build on activities begun during the previous CPS, particularly in the areas o f
domestic debt market development (via the Bank’s Treasury department), poverty
targeting and social assistance consolidation. Additional reimbursed TA would be
provided to CCSS for pension’s assets management, consolidation o f health system
Past work o n
reform, and medical supplies procurement and distribution.
competitiveness will be deepened through a new study focused o n the key
competitiveness challenges o f infrastructure, skills and labor market flexibility and red
tape reduction. In the environment area, we expect to support Costa Rica’s efforts to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions through support from the Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (FCPC) to help design positive incentives for emissions reduction. This will
build o n our ongoing dialogue in the context o f the payment for environmental services
initiative. Another area in which we expect to continue to be involved as a follow-up to
our recent C F M C P A R (albeit not necessarily with a formal product) i s public
procurement, in line with a request by the Costa Rican Supreme Audit Agency to support
the efficient implementation o f public investment projects. The Bank i s well-positioned
to support Costa Rica in developing a comprehensive vision for, and consensus on, a
modernized, integrated public procurement strategy. In addition, we expect to continue
to support the modernization o f public financial management within the context o f our
other planned lending and non-lending products. Finally, in support o f the upcoming
political transition (May 2010) we expect to prepare a series o f short, concise Policy
Notes that would summarize the Bank’s policy perspectives o n key areas o f our
involvement as a means o f furthering the dialogue with the new Government. Both
lending and non-lending activities are summarized in Table 4 above.

37.

38.
IFC’s strategy for Central America, including Costa Rica, concentrates on
financial sector, infrastructure, health and education and agribusiness with
particular emphasis on IDA countries. In this context, the strategy in Costa Rica
continues to center on pursuing investment opportunities in: (a) developing regional
capital markets and strengthening local financial institutions; (b) viable manufacturing
and service projects; and (c) the agricultural sector. The strategy for the financial sector
combines advisory and investment activities to support locally-owned financial
institutions that serve the SME and housing segments. For the manufacturing and
services sectors, IFC’s strategy focuses o n the retail and commercial real estate sectors as
well as for I T services and products bringing higher value-added to Costa Rica, more at
the brink o f the US-CAFTA implementation. Finally, with respect to agribusiness IFC’s
is focusing o n supporting exports-oriented primary agricultural producers such as
bananas and pineapples.

39.
The Government o f Costa Rica and the Bank have jointly developed a results
monitoring framework f o r this CPS, which i s included in the annexes to this document.
The Government i s fully committed to the results specified and both country outcomes
and the milestones specified for areas o f direct Bank support should be achievable within
the CPS period. Results will be monitored using intermediate indicators and the
Government’s existing data collection and monitoring and evaluation systems. The

18

results framework lays out planned lending and non-lending Bank activities which
contribute to the achievement o f Government’s broader goals. It should be noted that the
indicators to be monitored are already effectively collected on a regular basis by the
Ministry o f Finance, the Central Bank, the General Comptroller’s office and sectoral line
ministries. Bank staff has reviewed the existing systems for data collection and found
them to be o f adequate quality to enable meaningful monitoring o f development progress.

D. Role of other External Partners
40.
There i s no formal aid coordination mechanism in Costa Rica, in part
because there are very few external partners active in the country. The main active
partners are the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI), the InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB), the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation
(JBIC), the United Nations agencies and the World Bank. Government negotiates
directly with each o f the partners on a bilateral basis and suggests specific areas in line
with the partners’ comparative advantages and the fit with Government priorities. This
system has worked well and there does not seem to be any duplication in work by
external partners. Both IDB and CABEI are heavily involved in financing roads and IDB
i s also playing a role in the agricultural sector. One area in which the Bank and IDB may
provide coordinated support to Costa Rica in the hture i s secondary education, where
Government has asked that the two agencies consider options for a joint project.
E. Risks

41.
The risks associated with the modest assistance program are relatively low.
Although Costa Rica exceeds the guideline for preferred creditor debt service to total
public debt service, it i s well below the other exposure guidelines pertaining to debt and
debt service owed to IBRD.
42.
The most pertinent risk to implementation of the CPS lending program
derives from the lengthy legislative approvals process which applies to externally
funded operations. This risk could be magnified as the country enters the election cycle
focusing
from mid next year. The CPS attempts to minimize the risk o f delays by: (i)
operations on areas o f high strategic importance to a wide range o f political actors; (ii)
ensuring that the size o f operations i s adequate to ensure high level political commitment
within the executive; and (iii)
building wide consensus on the content o f the operations
throughout the development phase.
43.
Other risks derive principally from the external environment, particularly a
sharper-than-anticipated acceleration in food prices and/or a n unexpectedly
prolonged recession in the United States. As discussed in Para 12, based on current
expectations with respect to food prices and U S economic performance, Costa Rica’s
economy i s expected to continue to perform well over the CPS period, albeit at a slower
pace than in the recent past. Moreover, its safety net system appears adequate to protect

19

the most vulnerable groups. The country has been proactively addressing these risks, in
particular, by drawing up a comprehensive strategy with respect to food price increases,
covering both its potential economic and poverty impacts. As noted earlier (Para 33), the
Bank is prepared to support implementation o f the strategy via a DPL-DDO, if the
Government should request one. More generally, Costa Rica has been a leader among
Central American countries in deepening the regional dialogue on risk management
(including both economic and natural disaster risks). This effort is being supported as
needed by the Bank, IDB and other partners which have provided analytical inputs and
helped create spaces to maintain a productive dialogue.

20

Annex A2
Page 1 o f 3

Costa Rica a t a glance

io/im7

Key Development I n d i c a t o r s

Costa
RW

Latin
America
&Carib.

Upper
middle
income

4.4
51
1.4
62

555
20,415
1.3
78

810
41,460
0.7

21 9
4.990
10,770

2,650
4,767
6.798

4,790
5,913
10.8 17

8.2
67

5.5
4.2

5.6
4.9

3
10
79
11

9
22
72
26

70
26

95
95
110
109

91
69
120
116

94
92
106
104

97
92

91
77

93
81

I

f2W
Populatan. md-par (milions)
Sulfacearea (thousand sq km)
Populatungrovdh (%)
Urban wDUlabM) (% oftotal popu~tiont
GNI (Atlas method,U S blhons)
GNI per capita (Aths mthod, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, Internabonal$)
GDP gmvdh (%)
GDP per capita g r h (%)

Pne distribution 2006
Mde

Fenale

7c-74
€@4
50.54

75

40-44
30-34
2024
1&14

M
15

10

5

0

5

10

15

percant

(most recent eslimate. 2000-2006)
Povertyheadcountrahoat$laday(PPP,%)
Povertyheadcountraboat$Zaday(PPP,%)
Lie expectanq at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per1,wO liw b~rths)
Childmalnutnbon(lofchldren undw5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and dder)
AdultIiteracy,female (% dages 15andolder)
Gross pnmaryenrdment,male(%ofagegroup)
Grosspnmalyenrdment,female (%ofage group)
Access toanimproved watersource(% ofpopulabon)
Access toimproved sanitabonfaalbes (% ofpopulatwn)

Jnder-5 mortality rate(per1,WO)
60,

0 Costa Rca
O L a i n P m r c a & thecanbtean

N e t A i d Flows

1980

19w

2oW

2006

64

227

11

30

3

0

25
0

15
1
1

6
5
5

1.4
27

3.2
74

0.1
3

02
7

Conslmr prices (annual % change)
GDP implick defhtor (annual %change)

18.1
18.8

19.0
17.1

11.0
7.0

11 5
10 1

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Termsoftradeindex(ZW0 = 100)

6.6
10 1

91.5
95

306.2
1W

511 3
87

(US $ m#/fons)
Net O M and oficial a d
Top 3 donom (in 2005)
Ulited Kingdom
Germany
Noway
A d (% ofGNI)
A d percapita(US$)

a
~

1
13

Srowth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

Long-Term Economic Trends

'-C-GDP

-GDP per capla

1980-90 199&2OOO
200046
(average annual growth %)

39
15946

44
22,229

2.7
3.1

2.4
5.3

1.8
4.8

lndusby
Manuladurng
servtces

20.2
30.6
21.1
62.6

(%of GDP)
123
95
299
32 1
22 6
25 3
57 8
58 5

88
29 4
21 6
61 8

3.3
3.5
3.5
2.7

4.1
6.2
6.8
4.7

3 .O
5.2
5.2
5.3

Household final consumpbon expenditure
General gov't mal conswnpbon expenditure
Gross capital fonnabon

65.5
18.2
26.6

72 9
147
185

67 0
133
169

656
13 7
27 0

3.8
1.1
5.6

5.1
2.0
5.1

3.3
1.3
10.1

Exportsofgwdsandservlces
Imparts of goods and serum
Gross savings

26.5
36.6
12.2

30 2
363
132

48 6
45 8
125

49 6
55 9
18 7

6.2
7.8

10.9
9.2

7.1
6.6

Population, md-par (milions)
GDP (US$milkons)

4 rICUltUre

2.3
4,831

31
7,403

Note Figuresin aalrsareforyearsotherthanVlose qeeified 20ffidata arepreimnary
a Addata arefor2005
Development Economcs, Devebpment Data Group (DECDG)

indicatesdata arenotawlable

Annex A2
Page 2 o f 3

Balance of Payrnenb and Trade

2000

2006

(USSmilions)
Tdal mrchmdise exwtts ITob)
T d d mdmdise inpals (u9
Net bade in g a d s and smites

5.813
6,389
454

8,238
11,347
-1,389

-705
-4.4

-1,338
4.7

136

490

1.318

3.115

IGovemanceindicabn, 2000andZ006

Currentaccwntbalance
asa%dGCP

Workers' remittancesand
compensationdenpbyees (receipts)
Reserves, hcClding @d

I

Rub of law

Cmtml d cunrpton

Current revenue @-&dinggrants)
Tax revenue
Current awenditure

12.4
12.3
14.0

14.4
14.2
14.5

Overall surplusideflcit

-3.0

-1.1

Highest magind tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

25
30

25
30

I

25

0

Central Government Flnance
(% of G P )

,

Rqulsbry qrsldy

50

im

75

s2006

Cauntvr p e m n t i e rank (C-100)

02000

hWulknptybslsr&nga

S o m KUfman~Kr8ay-Mwkuz1,World B a k

Tedmobgy and Infrastructure

2WO

2005

Paved roads (Oh of tdal)
Fixed Ire mdmoMlephone
subscribers (per 1,oOO people)
High techndogyexports
dmrnufaduredexports)

22 .O

24.4

283

575

51.6

38.0

56
46.5

56
46.8
23.6

External Debt and Resource Fbwr
Environment
(US$ milions)
Tdd debtoutstmding md disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HPC, MDR)

4,456
646

8,071
730

27.9
8.0

27.3
6.1

4M)

1,340

-

Total debt (% d GCP)
Tdddebtservice(%dexports)
Foreign direct investment (net inRows)
Poltfdioequity (netinbws)

-

Agrkutural land (%ofiadcvea)
Forest m a (% of i d mea)
Natbnally protected areas (Oh d !and m a )
Freshwaterresourcespercapita(cu. meters)
Fresthvaterwithdraw3(%of internai rercurces)

2.4

C 0 2 emissionspercapita(mt)

1.4

1.5

G t P perunitdenergyuse
(2OOOPPP8 per kg ofoi equivalent)

9.7

10.0

Ewgyuse percapita(kgof0i equivalent)

842

870

IeRD
Total debt wtstmding and dsbursed
Disbwsemnts
Prindpd repavents
Interest pavents

121
6
33
12

55
5
9
3

IDA
Total debt wtstmding and dsbursed
Disbtrsements
Total debt savka

2
0
0

1
0
0

46
41
0

134
69
42

4

24

72

79

25,975

:omposition of total external debt, 2006

&IS$ m'li0nS)

v,,,,,
2,628

SB nillions

Private Sector Development
T i m requted to stat a business (days)
Costtostartabushess(%dGN percape)
T i m rmured to rmiste- m a l t y (davs)

R a k e d as a meor msbaint to bushes
(% of mrnagers surveyed vvho agreed)
Access tdcost of f i m d n g
Anticunpetitive a hfcrmal practices
Stcckmirketcapitalization (% dGDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio(%)

2000

2006

-

77
23.5
21

..

..

60. I
48.7

18.3
10.6

7.4
12.2

IFC (rSSCa/ year)
Tdal disbursed md outstding paffdio
of which IFC Ovvn acmunt
DisbwmmentsfaIFCow account
PotLfolb sales, prepaymentsd
repaymentsfor IFC own -nt

MGA
Gross exposure

Note:Figuresin blicsareforyearsdherthanthose pecified. Z O C 6 d a t a ~ e p r e i r n h ~ ,
.. hdicatesdatam rot available. -indicates observationisrotapplbabie.
Development Eumom'cs, Devebpment DataGnup(DECD3)

1 (Y1107

Annex A2
Page 3 o f 3

Mil Iennium Development Goals

Costa Rica

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(esbmate closest to date show, W- 2 years)
Goal 1: hahratheraksfor $1 adaypoverlyandmalnltrition
Poveltyheadcountraboat$l aday(PPP,% dpopulabon)
Poverivheadcount raboat natnnal povertvIne(%dwpulatim)
Share dincome a m s u m p b a n tothepmest qunble(%)
Prevalencedmahutribon(96ofduIdrenunder~

lBB5
36

XU0
20

2005
33

39
5.1

41

35

82
98

87
61
98

92
79
93

37
11

37
16

103
39
19

104
39
39

18
16

16
14
91

14
13
82

12
11
89

43
98

99

lQe0
52
22 0
40
28

Goal 2: ensurethat children areable to candete pnmary schooling
Prmrvy schoolenrdlment(net,%)
Rma-v candetlon rate (% of relevant me a r w d
Secondary schod enrdlment (gross. %)

87
75
45
97

Ywthliteracyrate(%ofpeopleages1524)

Goal 3: eliminate gender dsparltyln ebcation and empower women
Raboofgllls toboys in wmawand secondaryeducatm (%)
Women i n p b p i n the rm&rlcuitural sector(% ofnon&ncultural errpbyment)
Proportion d seats held by m e n in natiml parlianent (%)

Goal 4: reduceunder.5mortality bytwetlirds
ulder-5 mortality rate (per 1 .ooO)
lnfantmortalityrate(pr1,WOlivebirths)
Measks imnunbatnn(propodiond myearolds imnuneed, %)

w)

Goal 5 : reducemakrnaimortaiitybythreebulms
Maternal mortalitymb (modeled esbmate,perl00,000 h e bims)
B I ~ attended
S
by skiled health staff (% of totaD

98

Goal 6: hakandbedntoreversethespreadof HIWAIDSandother malordiseases
Prevalenceof HV (% dpopuhtion ages 1549)
Contraceptiveprevalence (% of w m n ages 1549)
lncidenceoftuberculasis@er 100,WOpeople)
Tubawloris cases detected under DOTS (%)

03
22

Goal 7: halvetheproportion ofpeople withoutsurfalnableaccess to basicneeds
Accesstom tnprovedwatersource(% dpopuhbon)
Access to improwdsanitatm faulibes (% of popuiabon)
Forest sea (% of total land area)
Nabmlyprdectedaeas(%oftdalland area)
CO2 emissons(metrictonspercaplta)
GDP perunitdanergyuse(consiant 2ooOPPP$ perkg dolequivalent)

lntemetusers(perl,000people)
PersmI computecs @er 1,000peopk)
Youthunemployment (%oftotal laborforceages15-24)

YI.l
25

m

m2

I

0.9
9.5

14
96

14
9.7

102
0

143
4
68
11 1

283
58
153
11 .o

575
254
219
15.0

46.5

CT indlcaton (per 1,000 people)

750

1

xo5

m
+Rmary

14
118

97
92
48.8
23.6
1.5
70.0

8.3

Measler immunlzation(%ofIysaroids)

80
17
11 9

502

Goal 8: develop aglobal pamenhip brdevelopment
Fixed Ineandmcble phone subscrbers@er1,000people)

Education lndcators(%)

75
19

m

2005

net enmiher# r&o (..I

~ R a l o o f g i ~ r t o t o y o i n p r i n s r&y
semndary education

G o s hRia
Q a t n A m n c a 8the CEbbesl

Note:Figuresin itelicsarefayerrsdherthanthose rpecified. ..indicates datasendavaihble.
Development Ecummcs, Devebpment CataGroup(DECD3).

I

OFixed+ mcbilerrbrolbers
Inernat usen

1Wlm7

Y

6?

E

W

Annex B2
Page 1 o f 1

-

CAS Annex B2 Costa Rica
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 06/04/2008

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
SuDervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2005

2006

2007

2008

4
5.4
25.0
18.0
25.0
18.0
26.8

4
4.6
50.0
35.3
50.0
35.3
15.6

3
3.4
66.7
71.4
66.7
71.4
3.8

4
3.6
25.0
19.2
25.0
19.2
4.0

No
134
34

No
188
63

No
398
99

No
256
64

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
26
3
606.4
15.1
8.3
0.0
10.7
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 3

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRWIDA Program Summary
As Of Date 06/04/2008
Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal
year
2009

2010

strategic

pmj,D

US$(M)
Telecom Sector Modernization

13.0

CAT-DDO

65.0

Result

78.0

City-Port of Puntarenas

100.0

Secondary Education Quality & Competitiveness

80.0

Result

180.0

Overall Result

(HW)

Implementationb
Risks ( H A M )

H
H

MIL

H
H

H
L

H

258.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next two fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B3
Page 2 o f 3

Costa Rca: IFC Inveslment Operations Program
2005

2006

2007

20w

40.00
40.00

0.00
0.00

0 .00
0 .OO

0.00
0.00

100
100

0

0

0

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Loan
100
100
Total

0

0

0

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net"

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
Finance & Insurance
Total

* As of June 30,2008

" IFC's OMI Acount only

Annex B3
Page 3 o f 3

Costa Rica: MIGA Program, FYO4-F08
(through 4/30/08)
Guarantee Program
M I G A Outstanding Exposure (Gross Exposure, $US million)
As of end of fiscal year

FY2004

FY2005

FY2006

FY2007

FY2OO8
through
4/30/08

Sectoral Distribution

0.0
4.5

0.0
1.4

153.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

137.8

0.0
118.8

98.0

73.8

33.3

144.1

124.2

102.5

75.2

186.7

Finance

0.0

Infrastructure

6.4

Mining

0.0

Oil & Gas

0.0

Agribusiness/Manufacturing/Services/Tourism

0.0
5.4

0.0

MIGA's Risk Profile

97.3

77.4

51.9

28.4

153.4

130.7

116.7

95.6

75.2

177.7

71.2

66.7

46.5

27.0

144.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

144.0

MIGA's Gross Exposure in Country

144.1

124.2

98.7

75.2

186.7

YOShare of MIGA's Gross Exposure

2.8%

2.4%

1.8%

1.4%

2.9%

MIGA Net Exposure in Country

121.5

103.6

87.3

63.1

93.9

YOShare of MIGA's Net Exposure

3.7%

3.3%

2.6%

2.0%

2.7%

Transfer Restriction
Expropriation
War & Civil Disturbance

Breach o f Contract

Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services
As of 08/04/08

Product

Completion F Y Cost (US$OooO) Audience.

Recent completions
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum
Poverty Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Measurement &Targeting (Phase I)

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08

Undeway
FSAP Update
Poverty Measurement &Targeting (Phase II)

Approval F Y
FY08
FY08

Planned
Competitiveness Study
Poverty Measurement &Targeting (Phase Ill)
Health Sector Modernization TA (fee for service)
Pension Investment TA (fee for service)

-

PHRD Port City of Limon Project
Biodiversity Fund COOPEAGRI
FIRST - Public Debt Management TA (Phase I)
TFSCB TAfor National Statistical Agency*
FIRST Public Debt Management (Phase II)

-

-

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
TFSCB = Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building

FYO9
FYO9
FYO9
FYO9
Grants
FY05
FY06

[ I
FY08
FY08

...

Objective

G,B
G.6
G,D,B,PS
G,D,B,PS
G,B,PD
G,B,PD
G,B,PD

KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG ,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS

...

GP,B
G,B,PD

KG,PS
KG,P D,PS

...
...

G,D,B, PD
G,B,PD
GB
G,B

KG,P D,PS
KG,P D,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

G,B
G,B
G
G
G

PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

...
...

...
...

...

...

...

...
...
334.6

...
...
...

Annex B5
Page 1 o f 1

Costa Rica Social Indicators
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (miiiions)
Growth rate (% annual average forperiod)
Urban population (77 ofpopulation)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1980-85

1990-95

20 00-06

Latin
America
8 Carib.

2.7
2.8
45.6
3.4

3.5
2.4
55.8
2.7

4.4
1.9
62.2
2.1

556.1
1.3
77.7
2.4

81 1.3
0.6
75.0
2.0

22.0
19.2
25.5

23.9
20.8
28.3
4,785
143

5,913
132

3.3
4.0

3.6
4.1

94
94
94

94
94
93

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$j
Consumer price index ( 2 ~ ~ ~ = 1 ~ ~ )

1,580
10

3,250
55

5,030
189

I NCOM€/CONSUMPTION DlSTRl BUTlON
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of incume orconsumption)
Highest quintile (% ofincorne orconsumption)

47.5
3.3
51.1

46.3
4.0
50.6

48.2
4.1
53.3

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Publlc expenditure
Health (% Of GDP)
Education (%of GDU
Net primaryschcal enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of chiidren ages 12-23monU1s)
Measles
DPT
Llfe expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Ma le
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1.000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

5.4
4.7

07
87
66

Uppermiddleincome

96
100
92

97
100
92

91
96
73

93
98
78

78
90

91
85

89
91

93
92

94
96

75
72
77

77
75
79

79
76
61

73
70
76

70
67
74

20
23

14
16

11
12

22
26

22
26

159
100

134
88

116
62
30
99

197
107
130
88

260
137
97
94

98

06/w/o8
CAS Annex 65. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in Series between I997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vacanations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 2

-

Costa Rica Key Economic Indicators

ROJentd
hdlcabor

2504

2WS

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

201 I

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product’

1000

1000

100.0

1000

1000

1000

1000

86

88

9.0

84

83

82

82

8.2

Industly

295

292

29.1

295

278

275

27 3

27 4

Services

61 8

620

61.9

62 1

63 9

642

646

64.4

Total Consumption

80 1

80.7

80.0

790

82.3

81 7

81 7

81.5

Gross domestic fixed investment

18.6

18.8

20.0

21 6

203

20 5

19 5

19.4

1.1

1.1

0.9

13

13

12

12

1.2

17.5

17.7

19.0

20 3

19 1

19 3

18 3

18.2

Exports (GNFS)b

46.3

48.6

48.9

48.4

44.1

41.2

40.4

40.1

Imports (GNFS)

49.5

54.1

55.3

53.0

50.6

47.3

45.2

44.7

Gross domestic savings

19.9

19.3

20.0

21.0

17.7

18.3

18.3

18.5

Gross national savingsc

16.9

16.7

18.3

19.7

17.7

18.8

17.4

17.6

Agriculture

Government investment
Pnvate investment

100 0

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product

18,598.0

19,909.0

22,522.0

26,238.0

30,828.0

35,144.0

40,415.0

44,173.6

4,420.0

4,650.0

5,030.0

5,480.0

6,280.0

6,990.0

7,810.0

8,570.0

(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita WS$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (“YO, calculated from 91 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices

4.3

5.9

8.8

6.8

4.5

4.0

5.0

5.0

Gross Domestic Income

3.1

3.4

6.9

6.1

4.4

3.9

47

4.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (“h,calculated from 91 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices

2.3

4.1

7.0

5.1

2.8

2.3

3.3

3.3

Total consumption

1.o

2.1

3.8

4.1

6.8

1.7

3.1

3.0

Private consumption

1.2

2.6

4.1

4.6

7.1

1.7

3.0

3.0

16,623 7

Balance o f Payments (US%millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
MerchandiseFOB

8,611 5

9,720 8

11,0443

12,799 6

13,340 5

14,018 6

15,291 3

6,369 7

7,099 6

8,068 5

9,267 8

9,762 6

9,985 3

10,708 2

11,416 0

9,175 5

10,757 6

12,451 5

14,066 7

15,312 3

16,072 9

17,134 5

18,518 5

7,791 0

9,252 3

10,835 9

12,255 4

13,281 6

13,900 0

14,793 0

15,445 9

Resourcebalance

-564 0

-1,036 9

-1,407 2

-1,267 1

-1,971 8

-2,054 3

-1,843 3

-1,894 8

Current account balance

-795 9

-985 1

-1,060 8

-1,499 1

-1,966 0

-1,885 2

-2,184 5

-2,265 3

733 3

9040

1,371 0

1,661 3

1,5990

1,799 0

1,9060

2,021 0

-4.3

-4.9

4.7

-5.7

-6.4

-5.4

-5.4

-5.1

Net pnvate foreign dlrect investment

Memorandum items

Current Account balance (“ho f GDP)

(Continue4

Annex B6
Page 2 o f 2

-

Costa Rica Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Fsiwte

Actuat

Iudiltor

2004

2005

2005

2007

2008

Projected

2009

2010

2011

at market prices)'
Current revenues

13 6

13 9

14 2

15 5

15 7

15 8

15 I

15.7

15 4

Current expenditures

15 2

14 9

14.4

13 I

14.8

14 2

14.3

Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)

-1 6

-1 0

-0 1

19

03

1.o

15

1.4

11

1.1

09

13

13

1.2

12

1.2

M2/GDP

24.8

25 9

25 5

25.8

25.8

25.8

25 8

25.8

Growth o f M2 (%)

25.4

21 9

194

19.0

15.9

13.4

11 8

9.7

Private sector credit growth /

61.1

109.2

115 0

121.8

-63.2

73.0

136 6

139.1

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

91.9

91.9

92.7

95.3

104.3

112.7

118.7

122.6

Consumer price index (% change)

12.3

13.8

11.5

9.4

11.1

9.2

6.9

4.8

GDP deflator (% change)

11.9

10.3

11.3

10.2

11.0

9.0

6.5

4.5

Capital expenditure

Monetary indicators

total credit growth (%)

Price indicesf YR91 =loo)

Annex B7
Page 1 o f 1
Costa Rica - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2004

2005

2006

Projected
2009
2010

2007

2008

2011

6222.9 6832.1

6493.0

6232.1

5907.4

5936.1

5495.7

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"
Total debt service (TDS)

716.6

606.0

650.7

730.3

889.6

990.3

653.8

895.6

TDOIXGS~

63.3

60.1

57.2

46.6

31.3

30.3

24.7

38.1
17.4

30.1

30.9
7.9

42.3
20.6

35.2

TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaVTDO

15.7

13.3

5.9

5.5

5.2

6.0

6.4

3.9

4.9

7.9

6.5

6.6

3.3

4.1

3.7

2.3

2.0

6.0

4.0

36.8

67.7

66.0

50.5

34.6

2.5
32.9

52.8

34.8

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.1

70.7

58.6

52.9

49.0

129.1

273.4

318.9

365.4

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.9

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.3

0.2

0.0

(US$rn)"
Debt and debt service indicators (%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (us$m)d
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

e

13

x

I

,

,

0

I

m

1

'

3

.-0
GL

I

z

c)

E

B
R

c)

4

c

m
E

x

I

,

,

m

"

0
r(

'

Annex C
Page 1 o f 3

CPS Consultations with Costa Rican Stakeholders
The proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) program was developed in dose
cooperation with the Costa Rican Government over a period o f six months,
including on-site visits, exchanges of letters, and reviews o f draft documents. This
demand-driven process has produced a program comprised o f activities requested by
Government representatives from a variety o f sectors and under the leadership o f the
Minister o f Finance. This CPS program targets areas where Costa Rica stands to benefit
from the Bank's expertise and global experience, as well as areas where the Bank could
learn from Costa Rica's developmental leadership.
The CPS was consulted through a broad participatory process involving
representatives o f a wide range o f Government and Non-government organizations.
As part o f preparation o f the CPS, formal consultations were held in San JosC on M a y 1314. These consultations primarily included meetings with government representatives,
complemented by representatives from business, the international donor community, and
civil society. The principal purpose o f the consultations was to solicit views on h o w
ongoing and future Bank activities could more effectively support Costa Rica's
development agenda. The framework for the consultations included a PowerPoint
presentation delivered by the Bank Country Director, outlining proposed CPS areas o f
emphasis and listing proposed lending and non-lending activities in support o f the
Government's development plan. Following the presentation, participants had the
opportunity to raise questions and offer comments. This open-ended approach facilitated
a productive and frank discussion with a range o f stakeholders.
Participants in the consultations were supportive o f the approach, with many o f
them stating that this was a new and welcome format. They also expressed the
importance o f ongoing dialogue with the Bank and o f follow-up once the CPS is made
public. I t is worth noting that the Ministry o f Housing offered explicit support for
consultations with representatives from civil society. The formal consultations produced
recommendations in line with both the Bank's global expertise and the pillars o f the
Government's program. A summary o f views expressed by stakeholders appears below:
Main Comments and General Recommendations o f the Consultations. The groups
raised a number o f general concerns with respect to promoting broad-based economic
growth and competitiveness, addressing weak public institutional capacity, and fostering
human capital formation, aging infrastructure, environmental sustainability and
disaster prevention, socioeconomic equity (especially in light o f higher food prices),
and better provision o f social services, as well as a more participatory process for
monitoring and evaluating performance o f program activities.

Annex C
Page 2 o f 3

I. Address emerging challenges to growth and competitiveness

Participants highlighted the importance o f promoting broad-based economic growth
and competitiveness as a way to reduce poverty and promote employment. The issue o f
how to remain competitive (especially in light o f the impacts o f CAFTA-DR) and how to
enhance the country's work force, as well as transportation issues and innovation
capacity, were o f highest interest to participants. In addition, improved efficiency and
transparency in business regulation (more specifically with regard to red tape associated
with business starts, operation, and exits) would encourage an improved investment
climate. It was also recommended that both Government and the Bank develop stronger
mechanisms to ensure that the benefits o f economic growth reach poor populations in
both rural and urban areas.
Participants stressed the importance o f increasing Bank support for institution building
to enhance cross-sectoral coordination within government and beyond and to strengthen
the capacity o f key public institutions to assume strong leadership roles. Furthermore,
participants highlighted the importance o f building solid consensus o n reforms to foster
the adoption o f public policies which would continue to be implemented despite changes
in government. In this context, participants called for continued Bank support for the
creation o f a Ministry o f Social Development in the face o f current inter-institutional
coordination problems.
Participants highlighted the importance o f human capital formation as a key element in
the future development o f Costa Rica. The groups called for the Bank to examine in
greater depth the causes o f student drop-out and low educational performance problems,
thereby questioning the homogeneity assumed by the Costa Rican educational
model. Efforts to close educational gaps will be key to overcoming the backwardness o f
public secondary education in order to enhance the quality o f country's workforce.
Participants agreed that expanding investment in regional infrastructure (roads, power,
and communications) i s key to promoting economic growth and competitiveness. In
particular, participants received with enthusiasm the scope and projected results o f the
Ciudad Puerto L i m 6 n Project to help revitalize the urban environment o f Lim6n by
modernizing urban and port infrastructure and promoting business growth and
opportunities for the poor. Participants welcomed the idea o f replicating this regional
development model in Punta Arenas (on the Pacific coast).
Participants showed great enthusiasm for Bank support o f new environmental
sustainability and disaster prevention initiatives; such an approach would serve as a
complement to the now well-established pioneering conservation practices which have
earned Costa Rica wide international recognition and have had a galvanizing effect on
tourism to the country. In this regard, the participants strongly stressed the need for
financial sustainability o f environmental efforts. In addition, participants welcomed the

Annex C
Page 3 o f 3

Bank’s involvement in Government efforts to prevent and mitigate natural disasters.
Participants noted that Costa Rica has become increasingly vulnerable to losses from
natural disasters, particularly floods caused by environmental degradation and climate
change.
11. Reduce poverty and enhance health, education, and social services

Participants agreed that socioeconomic equity should be given substantial weight in the
assessment o f investment priorities. Multiple calls were made to acknowledge the
existence o f major differences in welfare and livelihoods in Costa Rica (especially in the
wake o f rising food prices), requiring differentiated and selective actions to address
diverse needs. Overall, participants agreed that while Costa Rica’s human development
and poverty indicators are more equitable than those o f most countries in the region,
households at the bottom o f the economic spectrum have significantly diminished access
to social services. Further, they felt that the CPS should emphasize the situation o f
excluded groups, give priority to improved data collection, and systematically monitor
the relevant indicators. Participants welcomed efforts to provide World Bank support in
reviewing the overall national strategy for allocation o f human and financial resources for
the social sector. Ultimately, targeting problems are considered to be negatively affecting
the performance o f social services and the optimum use o f resources.
Participants consider improved health and education services a priority item for
investment. These areas remain critical to reducing poverty, stimulating economic
growth, and improving income distribution. Participants were also concerned about the
negative impact that rising food prices (especially o f staple foods) could have on recent
poverty gains. Participants view the Government’s targeted safety net programs
(including conditional cash transfers and school feeding programs) as important
interventions to protect most vulnerable groups. Participants requested that the Bank
assist the Government at least with analytical inputs to highlight the least distortionary
courses o f action and help forge an effective response. In the medium term, most
participants hoped that the Bank could help the Government interpret and contextualize
the implications o f rising food prices in areas such agricultural productivity and
targeted safety net programs.

O t h e r Concerns

Lastly, participants in the various groups highlighted their desire to make project design
and implementation procedures more inclusive and participatory. In their view, such a
shift would enhance the link between development processes and their beneficiaries. In
turn, a more inclusive project culture would also result in permanent and more
transparent mechanisms for monitoring and ensuring accountability o f both projects and
public policies.

Annex D
Page 1 o f 26

Annex D: FY04-OS CPS COMPLETIONREPORT:
Costa Rica

A.

Introduction and Key Lessons

1. This report assesses the relevance, progress, and performance of the Costa Rica CPS
FY04-08 and has been prepared as an input to the preparation o f the new CPS, due to be
presented to the Bank’s Board in July 2008. The Costa Rica CPS (discussed by the Board on
M a y 18,2004) addressed strategic areas of the Government’s development program mainly
through selective analytical and technical assistance to help Costa Rica with emerging
economic and social challenges, and lay the policy groundwork for progress on DR-CAFTA and
i t s complementary agenda. The CPS period covered two administrations which, with varying
success and emphasis focused development efforts under four pillars to which CPS activities
were aligned: ( i ) maintain macroeconomic stability; (ii) strengthen trade and competitiveness;
(iii) sustain social progress; and (iv) maintain world leadership with respect to environmental
management. The Progress Report was undertaken following the political transition from the
Pacheco to the Arias administrations midway through the CPS period. The CPS-PR was
instrumental in engaging the new Government’s interest in continuing a partnership with the
Bank, ensuring continued consistency o f the CPS program with national priorities and updating
expected outcomes (via the results matrix) taking into account political and economic realities
which affected the program. The Progress Report, which was delivered to the Board on October
26, 2006, also extended the CPS to FY08. This CPS Completion Report assesses progress
against the revised program and results matrix included in the 2006 CPS Progress Report.
2. The main conclusion of this assessment i s that the Costa Rica CPS (FY04-08), which
followed a ten year interval of very limited engagement with Costa Rica, was central to the
reestablishment of a closer relationship between Costa Rica and the Bank Group, and had
clear benefits for each partner. The revised CPS (FY04-08) comprised a very modest lending
program o f $105-128 million, but included strong components o f analytical and advisory
activities, including seven diagnostic reports, in support o f core Government objectives. The
focus on knowledge sharing and mutual learning in a few, carefully-selected sectors was an
appropriate one: it afforded the Bank an opportunity to gain in-depth insights into Costa Rica’s
successful poverty reduction and economic diversification efforts and pioneering environmental
programs which are extremely relevant for other Bank clients. Bank involvement also facilitated
Costa Rica’s access to relevant global knowledge and experience in designing strategies and
programs to address emerging development issues in a number o f areas. Some areas o f
cooperation that stand out in terms o f clear benefits:
the debt and reserves management TA which helped establish a new strategic and
institutional framework for debt management and helped the Central Bank to implement
a new reserves investment strategy and the follow-up to the Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) which included transfer o f new debt simulation models to the
Finance Ministry
the poverty and social sector dialogue, analytic work, TA and health and education
lending which contributed to the design o f the country’s first CCT program, an overhaul
of data systems for poverty program targeting, including more accurate approaches for

Annex D
Page 2 o f 26

0

0

poverty monitoring, the development and implementation o f strategies to improve
secondary educational coverage and the consolidation o f the health sector reform.
Support to the national dialogue on DR-CAFTA and advancement o f the complementary
agenda that will allow Costa Rican’s to benefit broadly from greater trade openness,
through the preparation o f a regional study and wide dissemination through workshops,
technical inputs to the insurance and telecoms laws which were included in the draft laws
submitted to Congress, and analysis o f barriers to infrastructure modernization and
greater foreign investment included in the CEM, Investment Climate Assessment and the
Public Expenditure Review which were followed by dialogue and workshops to identify
priorities for future actions.
Technical and lending involvement in the further development o f Costa Rica’s innovative
and effective Payment for Environmental Services conservation program.
The development o f a viable, integrated strategy for revitalization o f Puerto Limon which
i s addressing the needs o f a disproportionately poor and excluded area through the
creation o f economic and cultural opportunities linked to modernization o f the areas
primary economic asset; i t s ports.

3.

However, the FY04-OS CPS underestimated the implications o f Costa Rica’s
lengthy, consensus-based processes for the timely passage o f reforms and for legislative
action to approve Bank-supported projects. The process o f building wide consensus and
slow political processes have affected Government’s ability to quickly move forward i t s reform
agenda. This has been especially apparent in the efforts to ratify DR-CAFTA and i t s
complementary agenda. DR-CAFTA was ultimately approved via a public referendum in late
2007, but discussions in the Assembly are s t i l l ongoing on some key controversial laws such as
insurance and telecom, which need to be passed before DR-CAFTA can go into effect.
Similarly, efforts by both the Pacheco and Arias administrations to pass a comprehensive fiscal
reform package have been stalled in the Assembly for a considerable period o f time. The need
for the Executive to expend scarce political capital on moving forward some o f these important
priorities for the country has, in turn, affected i t s ability to push for rapid approval o f projects
developed with the Bank (or, indeed, other IFIs), causing significant delays in project
implementation in some cases (e.g., Efficiency in Education, Eco-markets 11). Based on this
experience, the Government concluded that small projects, particularly projects with a heavy
dose o f TA, are difficult to steer through the Assembly and should not be attempted going
forward. Rather, i t s strategy, which this CPS reflects, focuses on a few, large projects which are
likely to have wide social and political support. I t also points to the need for the Bank and
Government to maintain close dialogue on evolving strategic priorities as well as the processing
steps and requirements for activities by each party to ensure coordinated planning. Another
cause o f delays in some activities was the transition o f administrations midway through the
CPS period, suggesting the need for better alignment with the country’s political cycle for
future partnership strategies.
B.

Costa Rica’s Long-Term Development Goals

4. Costa Rica i s a well performing upper middle income country o f about 4.5 million
people and one o f the most stable democracies in Latin America. Costa Rica has achieved
success by investing in broad-based economic and social services. Costa Rica’s average GDP

Annex D
Page 3 o f 26

growth o f 4.7% for the past 15 years surpassed the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region’s
average by about two percentage points. Education enrollment and access, with the notable
exception o f secondary education, are among the best in the Latin America, and widespread
health care coverage has led to high l i f e expectancy and some health indicators that parallel those
in the OECD. Poverty and inequality are also low by L A C and Central American standards.
Costa Rica has been a leader in environmental management, halting deforestation in the early
2000s and pursuing innovative partnerships with the private sector to protect forests and
biodiversity. The country’s development success can be attributed to strong institutions, high
social investment averaging about one-third o f public expenditure, a relatively well-educated
workforce, and generally stable political and macroeconomic environments.

5. Emerging economic and social challenges spurred the two Administrations of the CPS
period to seek adjustments to Costa Rica’s development model while maintaining equitable
growth as the overall focus. Leading up to the CPS period, real growth averaged 5 percent
from 1990-1999. Then it slowed dramatically to just 2 percent (2000-2002). Inflation remained
at an annual rate o f 10 percent over the same period as the public sector deficit shot up to 5.7
percent o f GDP in 2002 and public debt rose from 44.9 percent o f GDP in 1999 to 5 1.9 percent
o f GDP in 2002. At the same time, progress on poverty reduction stagnated after 1994; poverty
levels hovered around 22-23 percent. As Costa Rica’s economic model began to take advantage
o f globalization and information age technologies beginning in the mid-1990s, new employment
opportunities benefited those with higher educations, even as secondary education enrollment
and completion rates lagged. Notably, unemployment among the extreme poor doubled from 12
to 27 percent between 1994 and 2003. The quality o f infrastructure was on the decline, including
poorly maintained roads and out-moded ports and telecommunications. The development
policies and priorities o f the Pacheco administration (May 2002-May 2006) and o f the Arias
administration (May 2006- May 2010) have sought to address these emerging economic and
social challenges.
6. The two Administrations, with varying success and emphasis, focused efforts on four
strategic pillars: (i)maintaining macroeconomic stability, (ii)strengthening trade and
competitiveness, (iii) sustaining social progress, and (iv) continuing leadership in
sustainable environmental practices. As discussed in the Progress Report, reform progress
stalled under the Pacheco administration as the contentious political environment grew even
more intransigent. The cornerstone o f the 2002-2006 Administration’s economic reform
package, a fiscal reform, languished for four years in the Legislature and ratification o f CAFTA
had to be passed to the Arias administration. The Arias administration brought greater focus to
longer-term poverty reduction and income equality objectives to breathe l i f e back into
languishing economic reforms. I t made passage o f the DR-CAFTA and the reforms to
implement and ensure broad-based benefit from the treaty the central thrust o f these reforms
efforts. The Administration pointed to universal secondary education combined with initiatives
to and open up and investment in infrastructure, telecommunications and energy as primary
drivers for increasing Costa Rica’s competitiveness to take advantage o f greater trade openness
and create skilled labor matched to new jobs for poverty reduction. To make its education
targets and other needed public expenditures possible, the Administration supported the creation

Annex D
Page 4 o f 26

o f an “appropriate and progressive” tax system to end “the country’s perennial fiscal crisis.”’
Fiscal reform was to be combined with a gradual shift away from a crawling-peg exchange rate
regime toward greater exchange rate flexibility and inflation targeting over the medium-term to
resolve high dollarization and inflations2 At the same time, the Administration emphasized state
modernization as a vehicle for i t s broader policy agenda, including a big push for e-government
to improve efficiency and transparency o f government institutions and regain citizen confidence.
The new President also aimed to return Costa Rica to i t s leading role in the international theater,
including making sustainable development and environmental protection foreign policy
priorities.
C.

Progress on Costa Ftica’s Long-term Development Goals included in the CPS

7. Over the CPS period, Costa Rica made progress across the areas within the four pillars
that were a part o f the partnership strategy. Many near-term targets were achieved and
poverty was reduced despite the slower-than-expected pace o f structural reform. The CPS
Progress Report discussed progress through 2006. This section notes more recent gains and
gives an overall assessment o f achievements in each pillar focusing on the selected areas covered
by the CPS. Looking ahead, the pace o f implementation o f structural economic changes, the
success o f new social policies along with any responses to emerging challenges including high
food and energy prices are expected to determine continued progress on Costa Rica’s long-term
development goals.
Reduction o f Poverty and Inequality. After seeing little change in income poverty levels
since 1994, income poverty dropped from 23.5% in 2002 to 19% in 2007. Costa Rica i s
also on i t s way to eliminating extreme income poverty which was cut from 6.9% in 2002 to
3.7% in 2007.3 The Government estimates that almost half o f the drop can be attributed to
increases in the minimum pension that were introduced in [2007].

Pillar I Maintain Macroeconomic Stability. Macroeconomic targets were largely
achieved owing to exceptional growth, responsible fiscal policy and strengthened
monetary policy. The Government aimed to achieve fiscal sustainability by modernizing
the tax structure, rationalizing public expenditures, strengthening debt management and
improving government efficiency and budget administration. Growth reached 8.8% in 2006
and 6.8% in 2007, driven by domestic and external demand, strong FDI flows, falling real
interest rates, good domestic manufacturing, and a boost in construction. Exports grew by
12% annually from 2004 to 2007, and the current account deficit remained around 4.8% o f
GDP. Tax revenues rose sharply as a result o f growth and improved tax administration,
although tax policy reform remained stalled in the Legislative Assembly.

Oscar Arias’ speech at his Presidential Inauguration, M a y 8, 2006.

The Administration intends to complement these medium-term reforms by deepening domestic financial markets
and recapitalizing the Central Bank.
These recent poverty gains may be an indication o f improved income equality, however figures are not yet
available.

Annex D
Page 5 o f 26

The non-financial public sector balance f e l l from -4.0% o f GDP in 2002 to a surplus o f 1.3%
in 2007, and total public debt f e l l from 54.3% o f GDP in 2002 to an estimated 44.5% in
2007. These gains were initially made through lower public and discretionary spending, a
lower public wage bill, and cuts to infrastructure spending. But, beginning in 2006, higherthan-expected growth, increased fiscal revenues, improved debt management and a lower
debt service enabled the central government to increase spending in priority areas, and to
register in 2007 a surplus o f 0.4% o f GDP and a public sector overall balance o f 0.6% (for
the first time in two decades). Reforms to improve budget planning and formulation and
public procurement, including work on standardizing contracting procedures, also
strengthened fiscal sustainability. The Central Bank’s introduction o f an exchange rate bands
in 2006 represented a significant shift in monetary policy and helped reduce inflation from
14.1% in 2005 to 9.4% in 2006. However, inflation reached 10.8% in 2007 because o f
growing food prices and higher transportation costs due to o i l price increase, leaving inflation
as the main short-term policy challenge.
0

0

Pillar 2 Strengthen Trade & Competitiveness. The Dominican Republic-Central America
Free Trade Agreement was ratified in 2007 and implementation i s expected by the end
o f 2008. This will secure the administration’s priority goal in trade opening and
complementary structural reform. Progress on improving competitiveness has been
limited, but i s expected to pick-up pace with CAFTA implementation. Following
prolonged debate on DR-CAFTA in the Assembly, the free trade agreement was narrowly
approved via an historic national referendum in October 2007. Despite this win, passage of
the 13 bills that comprise the implementation agenda for DR-CAFTA was protracted,
monopolizing the attention o f the Legislature as well as the Executive. These bills include,
inter alia, sensitive structural measures to open the insurance and telecommunications sectors
to greater competition. Passage o f the five remaining bills i s expected by fall 2008 at which
time the treaty would become effective. At the same time, the Administration has been
working to allow private sector participation in other public-dominated sectors to boost
competitiveness and improve services. To date, “trial” concessions have been executed in the
transport and port sectors, such as for the Caldera Port and San Jose-Caldera trunk line.
Enabling legislation for concessions i s in place for many sectors, but the concession process
remains costly, burdened by lengthy and cumbersome procedures (reducing attractiveness to
investors), and regulatory agencies sometimes lack the leadership and capacity to followthrough on implementation.
Pillar 3 Sustain Social progress. The government achieved its near-term social sector
goals. Efforts focused on boosting secondary education outcomes, reforming health
system management under the CCSS, and improving social assistance targeting and
poverty measurement systems. Costa Rica continued to benefit from nearly universal
primary school enrollment and widespread health care coverage, as reflected in its strong l i f e
expectancy and childhood health indicators. N e t secondary enrollment made important
gains, rising from 64% in 2002 to 71% in 2007, supported by the introduction o f a
conditional cash transfer program targeted to 90,000 low income secondary school age youth.
However, access to secondary education among the poorest quintile remains approximately
half that o f the wealthiest quintile, and only 37% o f those who begin secondary school
complete their studies. The Government continues to prioritize expanding secondary

Annex D
Page 6 o f 26

education and improving instructional quality, particularly in rural and poor areas, and i s
working to improve the efficiency o f education expenditures.
In the health sector, primary health coverage increased from 81% in 2001 to 91% in 2006,
but consolidating health system reform remains on the agenda, as reflected in the slight fall in
measles and polio vaccination rates from 1990 to 2004 and in the rise in the incidence o f
dengue, tuberculosis, and AIDS. Gains in health coverage and financial efficiency were
supported by government’s continued reform o f the Social Security Administration (CCSS)
to achieve more efficient delivery o f primary health care services. The Government took
steps to decentralize CCSS operations, improve information systems, increase funding in
undeserved regions, and support accreditation o f providers. Finally, the Government
improved i t s capacity to assess and address poverty through the application o f a more
accurate income and expenditure survey, and the design o f a new national poverty targeting
strategy based on data collected and managed by the CCSS.

Pillar 4 Maintain Leadership in Environmental Protection. Costa Rica continued worldclass leadership in management and protection o f forests, biodiversity, and
environmental resources even as progress on new initiatives has been slower than
planned. In the early 2000s, after nearly 50 years o f deforestation, Costa Rica was able to
increase forest coverage as a result o f its innovative Payment for Environmental Services
program (PES), which pays fanners, who own 60 YOo f the countries forest land to leave
forest in tact thereby protecting biodiversity, watersheds, and scenic resources. From 2000 to
2007, the Government increased land under conservation contracts in priority areas o f the
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor from about 140,000 to 270,000 hectares4 The financial
sustainability o f the program was improved by instituting [in 20061 a new water tariff. A
Biodiversity Fund was established [in 20061 to ensure an additional sustainable income
source, though this Fund has yet to be fully capitalized. The Government also took steps to
reengage in carbon trading, including through a project approved in 2006 supporting
reforestation in southeast Costa Rica. Despite these efforts, the long-term financial
sustainability o f the PES remains an on-going challenge. Government plans in to address this
challenge include differentiating payments based on potential environmental benefit and
expanding the program’s scope by increasing participation o f small farmers. Structures are in
place to make headway on these plans, including a new Bank project, but implementation has
been slow in recent years owing to the government’s focus on DR-CAFTA reform.

8. Costa Rica’s government program remains relevant, but enhancing competitivenessand
ensuring that the poor benefit under DR-CAFTA reforms continue to preoccupy the
government’s short-term agenda. Given the intensity and scope o f proposed reforms, DRCAFTA may continue to dominate the legislative debate over much o f 2008. In this context,
authorities are supporting policies that enable Costa Ricans to capitalize on increased trade
openness, including modernizing infrastructure, removing bureaucratic barriers to business, and
strengthening secondary education. Fiscal reform i s s t i l l planned, but may be more politically
feasible after 2008. Officials are also continuing work to ensure that poor, indigenous and AfroCaribbean groups are not left behind by increasing education services in certain areas and
Participation o f female landowners increased, and indigenous community-owned land in the PES rose by 970%.

Annex D
Page 7 o f 26

moving ahead on efforts to improve the targeting and coverage o f social programs, including
through better coordination. The new FY09-11 CPS will provide select lending and non-lending
assistance to support these renewed goals.

D.

How Did the CPS Contribute to Costa Rica’s Progress

9. Following limited engagement between Costa Rica and the World Bank over the 199Os,
the FY04-OS CPS was designed to provide select, demand-driven assistance emphasizing
knowledge sharing and analytical work in areas o f mutual interest. Planned activities
included in the revised CPS program are listed in Table 1. Most o f the analytical reports were
prepared in consultation with the first administration (during FY04-06). These reports then
became valuable tools for engaging the in-coming Arias administration in policy discussions and
led to continued engagement through a wide range o f formal and informal technical assistance
and capacity building activities that were in many cases added to the revised CPS program.
These included activities poverty measurement and targeting (that spanned FY07-08),
procurement and financial management reform (FY07 and then taken forward in FY08 through
the PER) and debt simulation modeling (FY07 as follow-up to C E M discussion^).^ O f the three
additional loans planned for the remainder o f the CPS, one was completed (Port City Limon
delivered in FY08), one delayed (Telecomm project) and one dropped (E-government project).
The CPS was a pilot results-based strategy, aligned to Costa Rica’s development program. The
results matrix was up-dated in the Progress Report and the format was adapted to emerging best
practice. This section discusses progress toward the revised outcomes to which the CPS program
was expected to contribute.

5

As a consequence o f extended discussions on these topics and the new Administration’s interest in capturing their
own progress and plans in reports, there was often long lag between initial delivery o f reports to Government and
their completion. For example, the CFAA and CPAR were f i r s t delivered in FY05 and completed only in FY07.

Annex D
Page 8 o f 26

Public Expenditure Revim

Telecom Sector
Modernization
(US$12-15 million)
I

I

I

I

Lending Portfolio (Ongoing and New)
Ecomarkets I (US$32 6 million, ongoihg)

I

Health Sector Strengthening and Moderriization I1 (US$l7 million, ongoing)

Equity and Efficiency in Education
Ecomarkets II
* Full Title: Mainstreaming Market-based Instruments for Environmental Management Project.

10. Overall, the support to the Government’s Development Plan was mainly provided
through high quality inputs often linked to capacity building outcomes in selected areas.
The focus on knowledge sharing and mutual learning in a few, carefully selected sectors was an
appropriate one. I t gave the Bank an opportunity to gain in-depth insights, relevant to other
Bank clients, concerning Costa Rica’s successful poverty reduction and economic diversification
efforts and i t s pioneering environmental initiatives. The Bank’s involvement also facilitated
Costa Rica’s access to global knowledge and experience in designing strategies and programs to
address emerging development issues in many areas. Notable Bank inputs included analytical
reports whose analysis was used in workshops to broaden policy discussions and formulate
follow-up actions in areas ranging the barriers to greater foreign investment, including in
infrastructure, to health and education to poverty monitoring and social assistance targeting.
Often grounded in the findings o f these analytical reports, the Bank helped build government
capacity in areas o f fiscal sustainability, debt management, procurement and financial
management modernization, the DR-CAFTA agenda and poverty monitoring. Such inputs also
happened in the context o f lending operation preparation and supervision. For example

.

Annex D
Page 9 o f 26

preparation o f Ecomarkets I1 provided analytical inputs and global experience for plans to secure
the long-term financial viability o f the program. Supervision support to the Health
Modernization program provided important examples from other countries and analysis as Costa
Rica engaged in the long-term process o f restructuring the CCSS’s delivery systems and
improving pharmaceutical services. Preparation o f projects in education and modernization o f
Limon provided analytical bases for policies and actions that are expected to improve outcomes
over the next CPS period. Financing support in select areas also linked pioneering
environmental protection efforts in Costa Rica to the Bank’s global knowledge reserve where
funding support helped in documenting the feasibility and potential o f PES. Likewise, financing
support under the Health project for discrete pilot activities under the broader CCS reform helped
demonstrate efficiency gains. In general, Bank lending support has been most effective when
projects formed one part of, or made a strategic contribution to, a broader Government initiative
that enjoyed broad-based support. Table 2 below assesses Bank contributions against the country
outcomes to which the Bank was expected to contribute, as set forth in the revised CPS Results
Matrix.

I

Table 2: Pro res on Select Country Outcomes UI l e r the FYO4-07 CPS
Govt. Priority I
Country Outcomes the
Assessment o f Bank’s
Bank was expected to
influence
Contribution
Current Status o f Outcome

Achieved

Ministry of Finance technical
capacity and policymaking tools
for achievingJisca1sustainability
enhanced.

The MOF has improved its technical
capacity in debt design and adopted
new debt modeling and forecasting
methodologies.

TA under the Bank’s FY06 CEM
provided assistance to update MOF
methodologies for debt modeling and
forecasting, and offered guidance on
restructuring debt to improve
sustainability of the debt portfolio.
Assessment:
Medium Relevance
Moderate Impact on MOF capacity

Strengthen public sector debt
management and debt market
development

BCCR ’s and MOF’s technical
andpolicymaking capacityfor
debt management enhanced
through adoption of an
integrated debt management
strategy
Domestic debt and repurchase
markets further developed.
Public sector debt governance,
transparency, and accountability
improved

Some Progress

Integrated debt strategy not
developed, though institutional
fiamework in place to improve
MOFBCCR coordination.
Domestic debt and repurchase market
strengthened; limited progress on
infiastructure and development of
secondary markets.
Work underway to draft a debt law
and improve the regulatory fiamework
to clarify institutionalroles and
improve accountability.

The Public Debt Management
Modernization program (PDMM)
facilitated dialogue on coordination of
debt issuances between the MOF and
BCCR. MOF staff was trained in debt
design and select TA was provided to
develop and implement a domestic
debt market strategy.
The ongoing second phase o f the
PDMM will support a workshop in
coordinated debt issuance, additional
training on debt management, drafting
of the new debt law, and improve I T
architecture for debt tracking.

Annex D
Page 10 o f 26
Govt. Priority I
Country Outcomes the
Bank was expected to
influence

Current Status o f Outcome

Assessment o f Bank’s
Contribution
Note: The Bank also provided TA to
help the BCCR improve reserves
management in FY04 and FY05. TA
supported development of a reserves
investment strategy and a consolidated
database for reserves management,
and helped establish a new risk
management unit.
Assessment:
High Relevance
Limited Impact

Strengthen monetary policies
BCCR institutional capacity and
monetary policymaking
effectiveness enhanced through:
Introduction of measures to
increase exchange rate flexibility

-

Achieved
Monetary policymaking was enhanced
though the BCCR’s adoption o f a
monetary policy targeting inflation in
October 2006. A more flexible
exchange rate regime was introduced
in 2007 allowing the Colon to float
within a band.

The FY06 CEM presented a set o f key
policy options to reduce macro
vulnerabilities, including moving
toward inflation targeting and greater
exchange rate flexibility to reduce
inflation and dollarization;
recapitalizing the Central Bank to
enhance its credibility in it s fight
against inflation; and reversing the
rising dollarization trend through the
strengthening o f public finances.
Costa Rica also received TA from the
IMF to advance these agendas.
Assessment:
High Relevance
Moderate Impact (WB support role
was secondary to the IMF’s)

Partially achieved
Comprehensive Plan developed to
enhance online delivery o f public
services; functionality and coverage o f
the e-procurement system
(COMPRARED) enhanced, but online
services still limited.

The Bank shared best practices and
provided feedback on the national egovernment plan during preparation o f
the dropped E-government loan.

Improve government efficiency
Government capacity for using
resources more eflciently and
providing services more
accountably improved through:
- implementation of actions to
allow e-delivery of high profile
public services
-Implementation of actions to
modernize procurement and
financial management

Some progress was made on
improvingprocurement. Procurement
supervision and regulations were
strengthened and initial steps were
taken to harmonize and standardize
contracting procedures.

The FY05 CFAA and CPAR analyzed
and developed comprehensive action
plans to improve procurement and
public financial management. The
Bank provided an analysis o f “quick
gains” in public procurement and
provided advice on COMPRARED.
The Bank providedtraining and advice
on the application o f the OECD
indicators in FY08.

Annex D
Page 11 o f 26
Govt. Priority I
Country Outcomes the
Bank was expected to
influence

Current Status o f Outcome
Some progress was made in financial
management, includingwidening
coverage of budget formulation,
improvingbudget monitoring, and
upgrading accounting to better comply
with international standards.

Assessment o f Bank’s
Contribution
The FY08 PER analyzed procurement
expenditure, assessed the
purchasinghontractingstrategy,
identified opportunities for achieving
greater efficiency, and offered
recommendations on reform scenarios
and a pilot cost-reduction program
focused on improved planning and
consolidated purchases. The PER also
analyzedthe budget process, focusing
on public expenditure management,
and suggested policies to enhance the
efficiency and sustainability of the
budget.
Assessment:
High Relevance
Moderate Impact

Continue reform of the
financial and insurance sectors
Institutional framework to
enhance competition in the
insurance sector established
through passage of new
insurance law.

Good progress:
Insurance law drafted but pending in
legislature as of April 2008.

An FY05 TA program supported the
development of a supervision strategy
for the insurance sector, and supported
drafting of the pending law.
Assessment:
High Relevance
No Impactyet

Pillar 11: Strengthen Tradc md Competitiveness
Support trade negotiations
Good Progress:
Institutional framework enabling
more open external trade and
greater domestic competition
established through:
Ratgcation of DR-CAFTA
- Approval of DR- CAFTA
“implementation measures”

-

DR-CAFTA was approved in a
national referendum in October 2007;
approval o f implementation measures
i s pending and effectiveness i s
projected for fall 2008.

An FY05 regional study analyzed
benefits and challenges of DRCAFTA, particularly related to
vulnerable groups. Regional
workshops were held to disseminate
the study’s findings and promote
dialogue on related issues. The Bank
catalyzed knowledge generation, but
passage of DR-CAFTA and
implementation measures was
internally led.
Assessment:
High Relevance
No Impact

Improve key infrastructure
and telecom

Some Progress:

No outcome related to
infrastructure goals was

The City of Limon developed an
urban revitalizationplan including
upgrades to port transport linkages

Preparation of the Port City o f Limon
project supported development of the
urban revitalizationplan. On
eovernment reauest. the Port-Citv of

Annex D
Page 12 o f 26
Govt. Priority I
Country Outcomes the
Bank was expected to
influence
included in the results matrk for
this CPSperiod.

Current Status o f Outcome
and modernization o f port operations.
Government has hired consultants to
develop a concession plan for port
terminals. Implementation o f the
revitalization plan i s expected in 2008
and beyond.

Assessment o f Bank’s
Contribution
Limon project was broadened to
encompass municipal development,
infrastructure upgrades, and SME
development in addition to
investments in port transport linkages
and TA to improve port operations.
Initial outcomes are expected in the
next CPS period.
Assessment:
High Relevance
No Impact yet

Institutional framework enabling
competition in the telecom sector
established through:
Passage of the Telecom Sector
LaW
-Licensing of at least one new
cellular operator, and several
Internet Service Providers

-

Partially achieved

The General Telecom law was
approved in 2008 (creates the overall
regulatory framework for fair
competition and private participation
in the sector). Approval o f the
Telecom institutions modernization
law i s expected by July 2008 (creates
new telecom sector regulatory
authority within ARESEP, creates role
o f policy maker within the Ministry o f
Environment, Energy and Telecom
and provides I C E with additional
investment and operational
flexibility). The associated
regulations are being developed.
The I C E remains the only cellular
provider; no new ISPs were licensed.

FY05-07 PPIAF grants funded
diagnostic studies o f the telecom and
transport sectors, and supported the
development o f the new telecom law
and associated regulations. These
activities fed into preparation o f the
Telecom project. A PHRD grant
supported studies to ensure rural
access.

An FY06 TA program supported by
F I A S produced a study on
telecommunications competition
issues, and a Dutch Trust Fund
financed a study on radio spectrum
issues in Costa Rica.
Assessment:
High Relevance
Moderate Impact

Pillar 111: Sustain Social P gress
Improve health systems
performance and sustainability
Improved eficiency and
efectiveness of health care
services as indicated by:
- 92% primary health care
coverage in 2007
Greater penetration of
deconcentration reforms
Increased hospital
accreditation
Sustained CSS healthcare
vatient satisfaction
- Financial eficiency and
viability of CCSS strengthened

-

Mostly achieved::

Primary health care coverage rates
increased from 8 1% in 200 1 to 9 1% in
June 2006 (later data not available).
Percent o f deconcentrated health
providers rose from 10% in 200 1 to
25% at end-2006.
No public or private hospitals
accredited between 200 1 and 2006.
No data on patient satisfaction.

CCSS underwent structural and
institutional reforms to strengthen

The Health Sector Modernization
project supported Costa Rica’s broad
reform o f health care administration
and service delivery under the CCSS.
The project improved institutional
efficiency by supporting the split o f
CCSS’s financing, purchasing, and
service provision functions. It also
boosted funding allocations to regional
health areas and supported the design
o f an accreditation methodology and
computerization o f the pharmaceutical
budget. Uncertainty around the
changeover o f the Administration
initially slowed reforms, but activities
picked up in 2006.

Annex D
Page 13 o f 26

Bank was expected to

Improve effectiveness o f social
assistance

- Social assistance targeting
improved by widening the
application of poverty targeting
criteria under SIPO.

Assessment o f Bank’s
Contribution

Goodprogress through alternative
system:
SIPO was dropped in 2007 in favor of
a comprehensive national targeting
system based on data collected in the
primary health care system and
managed by CCSS. This system was
designed and initial implementation
steps, such as establishment of a data
registry, are underway.

A conditional cash transfer program
was launched and reached 90,000
targeted poor families. It aims to
increase poor children’s participation
in secondary education.

Assessment:
High Relevance
Moderate Impact
The FY06 Poverty Assessment
provided recommendationsto improve
targeting, including introducing a new
proxy means test. An FY06-07 TA
program disseminatedfindings of the
PA and supported the study and
application of an improved decadal
income and expenditure survey (2004
I&E survey), which i s expected to
result in more accurate poverty
measurement. This TA also supported
the development of the new national
targeting system, with complementary
support from the Bank’s Health Sector
Modernization project. In addition, the
FY08 PER analyzed social
programming expenditure and
assessed the efficiency of spending on
two key social programs (school
lunches and childcare centers).

’
The Government created a new
Ministry o f Social Development to
consolidate leadership of social
programs and targeting activities.

Assessment:
High Relevance

Pillar IV: Continue World Leadership in EnvironmentalM

Annex D
Page 14 o f 26
Govt. Priority I
Country Outcomes the
Bank was expected to
influence
Maintain world leadership in
sustainable environmental
protection
Ability ofpriority lands to
provide environmental benefits
and services strengthened.
Fiscal sustainability of the PES
program strengthened through:
Water andfuel tariffs
An endowed Biodiversity Fund
Trading of Carbon emissions

-

Current Status o f Outcome
Partially achieved
Hectares o f land under conservation
contracts in priority areas o f the
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor in
Costa Rica increased by 130,900 since
2000, and participation o f priority
groups including female landowners
and indigenous communities grew.

Tariffs f i o m water users and
certificates o f environmental services
are generating $0.5 million annually
for the PES; a 3.5% fuel tax earmark
has been a principal source o f PES
funding since 1997.

Assessment o f Bank’s
Contribution
The Ecomarkets Iprogram was a key
external funding source supporting the
PES. Investments, activities, and TA
under this project directly supported
PES expansion and it s financial
sustainability.
Preparation o f Ecomarkets 11provided
analysis and global experience which
helped the Government design
approaches to secure financial
viability o f PES.

Conservation International provided
$0.5 million to support agroforestry
contracts in Osa, Amistad Pacifica,
and the Chirripo National Park.

To-date, the Bank’s FY06 Carbon
Sequestration project (COOPEGRI)
has supported contracts to reforest
about 500 hectares o f degraded land in
southeast Costa Rica. Issuance o f
initial emissions reduction certificates
expected over FY09 to FY 11.

A trust find for sustainable
biodiversity was created, but full
capitalization i s not yet achieved.

Assessment:
High Relevance
Moderate Impact

A reforestation project was approved
to support sale o f 0.61 million tons o f
C 0 2 equivalents by 20 17 to the
BioCarbon Fund.

11. Shortfalls in projected CPS outcomes reflected a broader climate o f legislative gridlock
and the practical implications o f Costa Rica’s consensus-based political process which was
better suited to the country’s original two party system. By the start o f the CPS period, Costa
Rica’s two-party system had evolved into a multi-party system. The governance procedures o f
the Assembly, which empower minority parties and served the country very well when power
was split between two parties, are challenging the historical success o f Costa Rica’s methodical
consensus building. Now, multiple minority parties are using the provisions to delay important
initiatives and extract concessions for special interests. The longer-tern effects o f this
institutional evolution are unknown, but in the short-run it has been unexpectedly burdensome on
the Executive. In this environment, CPS outcomes were mainly achieved where the Bank was
providing analytical inputs and technical assistance in areas under direct control o f the Executive
(e.g., debt management). Contributions that relied on approval and implementation o f reforms
and loans have been delayed. In summary, the Administration and the Bank underestimated the
political difficulties in securing passage o f key reforms and lending - even lending for programs
such as secondary education that enjoyed broad-based support -- particularly in the DR-CAFTA

Annex D
Page 15 o f 26

environment. The Bank’s support was most effective when Bank team’s stayed in close
dialogue with the Executive; briefing new counter-parts on project designs and objectives; then
keeping them well informed o f World Bank requirements and procedures to advance project
preparation and potential implications o f delays in effectiveness (so that these could be factored
into government plans and priorities). Armed with information, the Government engaged directly
in political battles and negotiations. Looking forward, continuing t h i s close dialogue will be
important to ensure that CPS activities are matched (and stay matched) to politically feasible
undertakings.

E.

Bank Performance

12. Bank activities were relevant, sustainable and of good quality. The previous section
discussed progress toward and achievement o f planned outcomes. Overall, the success o f Bank
contributions to advance and secure outcomes was to a large extent due to the close dialogue
between the Bank and administration, which ensured relevance and usefulness o f Bank work,
and also to the high quality o f Bank products. Projects exiting the portfolio or near closure had
satisfactory outcomes, reaching or exceeding project objectives6 Though no formal evaluations
o f non-lending activities were carried out, the relevance and impact o f Bank support implies
good quality. The Government sought follow-up non-lending activities in areas covering three o f
the four CPS pillars (in many cases beyond the scope o f the planned activities) suggesting
satisfaction with work quality and i t s usefulness to priority issues. In addition, Government i s
taking forward programs in all the areas o f the CPS program, implying a high likelihood o f
sustainability. Indeed, the plodding pace o f securing political backing for reforms in Costa Rica
traditionally translated into longer-term sustainability. For example, the health sector project
experienced delays during periods o f ambiguity about reform, but with sustained consensus
building that translated into renewed political backing the streamlined operations and
restructuring o f the CCSS are now expected to yield better primary care services well into the
future.

13. The 2006 Progress Report’s assessment of slow progress on CPS activities continued to
characterize CPS implementation. The technical assistance, capacity building and analytical
report activities included in and added to the CPS -- which were largely executed by the Bank in
close collaboration with the Administration -- were completed with delivery o f the Public
Expenditure Review in FY08. Portfolio implementation and new lending project preparation
continued to proceed slower than planned, consequentially, portfolio indicators f e l l short o f
Progress Report projections in FY07, but have rebounded in FY08; a better indicator o f the
portfolio’s strength (Table 3). (See Box 1) The number o f problem projects rose as a
consequence o f continued delays in the Costa Rican Assembly’s approval o f projects (and
subsequently o f budget space for approved projects). The disbursement ratio, which measures
disbursements from all Board-approved projects was similarly affected. However, if only
projects that were able to initiate disbursement are considered, the proxy disbursement ratio
The ICR for the EcomarketdGEF project gave satisfactory ratings for quality o f entry, supervision, and Bank
performance, as well as government and borrower performance. QAG also rated this project as highly satisfactory at
entry. In 2005, an independent panel o f outside experts reported that Ecomarkets Ihad reached i t s key targets and
objectives.

Annex D
Page 16 o f 26

shows solid implementation performance (FY06-08 ratios would have risen to between 17.2%
and 26.0%).7 Recent upturns in the indicators are the result o f steady efforts. Bank and
Government teams have remained in close contact with each other despite approval and
effectiveness lags, continuing advance work and preparations for project start-up. As such, the
lending operations are expected to make important contributions as soon as implementation i s
unlocked by Legislative actions. Notably, total lending during the CPS exceeded the high end o f
the revised CPS envelop by lo%, even though one small TA project was dropped (eGovernment) and one project i s s t i l l under preparation (Telecom, whose final preparation i s
awaiting approval o f telecom reform laws). This reflects the Government’s interest in larger
projects that merit the political effort needed to secure loan passage in the Assemble. N o projects
had any significant safeguard issues.

’ For FY06, including only the effective projects, the ratio would have been 26.0%, reflecting high end-of project
disbursement for Ecomarkets. For FY07 the ratio for effective projects drops slightly to 17.2. The ratio for
disbursing projects rises in FY08 with improving performance o f the Health sector project. The Education project
was effective in FY08, but was only able to initiate disbursements in the second half o f the fiscal year following
Assembly approval o f CY08 budgets. If the Education project i s also considered in the FY08 disbursement
indicator, the ratio would drop to 6.9%.

Annex D
Page 17 o f 26
BOX 1: Challenges and lessons from lending preparation,
start-up and implementation(FYO4-OS)

The pace o f preparation, start-up and implementation o f lending operations was affected by four factors
over the CPS period:
Bias against foreign borrowing for consultant services. There i s a widely held presumption in
Costa Rica that foreign borrowing should be limited to projects that will generate a revenue stream to
cover repayment. This has led to careful scrutiny o f potential borrowing plans and skepticism about
borrowing for technical assistance and consultants where consultant roles are seen to duplicate
Government functions. Even for projects that supported widely popular programs, like the WB
financed education project, received long and careful scrutiny by the Legislature. (The Government
halted preparation o f the small E-government project when the potential benefit was weighed against
the political cost o f passage.) Lending operations under the new CPS will be o f sufficient scale
and “soft” inputs will be focused on building Government capacity.
The Government’s lengthily decision making processes are out-of-sync with Bank procedures.
Government processes affected both the pace o f action by the Executive during preparation, and by
the Legislative Assembly during steps to secure project effectiveness and secure budget space. The
fact that DR-CAFTA issues monopolized the attention o f the Assembly since the Progress Report
compounded this issue. For projects prepared as part o f the FY04-08 CPS, project preparation time
averaged [29.7] months (compared to [ 1) (from concept review to Board approva1)and the time from
Board approval to effectiveness i s projected to average about 18 months, well above the L A C average
o f [8.1] monthsa8 Final preparation o f the planned Telecomm project has been delayed pending
passage for requisite reforms. The new CPS has built in realistic assessments of Costa Rica’s
decision making processes into project timelines and aims to maintain close dialogue so that
requirements by each side are well understood and factored into planning.
Shifts in Government policy priorities. The CPS covered two administrations (on-going projects
had been prepared with previous administrations). The changes in policy priorities from one
administration to the next affected attention to on-going projects and the focus and design o f projects
under preparation. For example, preparation o f the Puerto Limon project benefited from greater
support for policy reforms that will contribute to i t s outcomes, but its preparation time was extended
substantially as a consequence. The Costa-Rica Bank CPS cycle will become synchronized
through the next CPS.
Uncoordinatedimplementation procedures. Costa Rica has well established procurement controls
and financial management procedures that have yet to be harmonized with the Bank. Inexperience
with World Bank fiduciary requirements which differ from those o f the Government led to slower
project implementation. Greater harmonization with Government financial management (FM)
procedures and regular training in Bank procurement procedures helped speed up the Health
Modernization Project. Harmonization with government FM procedures, three-part policy
dialogue with the Ministry of Finance, Contraloria and the Bank to initiate more coordinated
and efficient procurement as well as more training in Bank procurement will be streamlined in
projects part of the new CPS.

* The computation of the effectiveness lag assumes, reasonably given current developments, that Ecomarkets I1
becomes effective in July 2008, and Port-City of Limon in November 2008.

Annex D
Page 18 o f 26

Table 3: Costa Rica: Portfolio PerformanceIndicators (FY04-08)*

I
Disbursement Ratio
No. ofprojects
Undisbursed Commitments (US$
mil)
Percent of Commitments At-Risk

FY04

FY05

FYO6

(est/ actual)

19.3

23.5

11.2

1813.4

2

3

4

41 3

29.6

52.6

73.8

641 71.2

0.0%

21.3%

40.1%

O/ 77.9%

2
(Health &
Education)
50%

01 2
(Education
& Eco. 11)
01 67%

Number of Actual Problem Projects

0
Percent of Projects At-Risk

F.

0%

1
33%

FY08

FY07
4.0
4

140.9
20.5%'
1
(Eco. II)
25%

Aid Coordination

14. There i s no formal aid coordination in Costa Rica partly due to the small number o f
active donors. The Ministry o f Finance coordinates the programs directly with each o f its
creditors. The Bank has been coordinating activities with other development partners (IDB,
UNDP, JICA) especially o n activities in education, environment and infrastructure.
G.

Lessons learned

15. World Bank reengagement with Costa Rica since FY04 was highly successful in
providing analytical, TA and capacity building inputs that played a small but strategic role
in supporting the Government achieve or make progress on its near-term development
goals. The Government and the World Bank did this through (i)
close dialogue on policy issues,
ensuring relevancy and timeliness o f WB inputs; and (ii)
Joint selection o f topics for in-depth
analysis, based on government demand and WB expertise and follow-through by the Bank with
formal and informal TA and capacity building (often not originally programmed in the CPS),
including in the course o f project preparation and supervision, to help the Government develop
and follow-through o n its action plans.
16. These approaches were successful across the four pillars, including in areas of: debt and
reserves mgmt; financial management modernization, DR-CAFTA implementation, including
insurance and telecomm reform, port city revitalization, poverty monitoring, social assistance
targeting, education quality, health services efficiency; and payment for environmental services

17. There is substantial scope for even more collaborative approaches to AAA (greater
involvement o f local stakeholders in analytical work as was done for the poverty monitoring

I

Annex D
Page 19 o f 26

follow-up technical assistance) and possibly for fee for services in select cases (e.g., for work
with the well-endowed Social Security Administration.)
18. 2004 CPS underestimated the implications o f CR’s consensus-based, lengthy political
processes for: (i)Moving o n key economic policies - fiscal reform, C A F T A approval etc; and
(ii)
Preparation o f projects and approval o f lending operations by the Assembly, which has made
small operations politically unfeasible. This resulted in time consuming project preparation and
protracted project start-up. Lending was cut back dramatically in the revised CPS program, but
ultimately exceeded the high-end o f the revised envelop by 10% (despite reduced number o f
operations) underscoring the Government’s interest in larger operations.
19. Moving forward, the CR-Bank partnership will need to: (i)Continue to be selective, and
for lending focus on areas that form part o f larger Government programs which enjoy
widespread support; (ii)Design projects that make the maximum use o f Government capacity,
including approaches to strengthen that capacity to minimize the use o f consultants; (iii)
involve
substantial AAA inputs, retaining flexibility for opportunistic formal and informal follow-up
and selective lending for relatively larger operations; (iii)
increase responsiveness, including
through new Bank products and lending instruments.

20. Progressively transfer responsibilities to the Country’s fiduciary systems as part o f
overall goal o f maximizingthe use o f Government capacity in project execution.

Annex D
Page 25 o f 26
Annex B. Planned versus Actual Lending (FY04-FY08)
(based on revised program in 2006 CPS Progress Report)
Planned Lending
Project

I IBRD(m)

I

I None

Actual Lending
IBRD (m)
Status

FY04

None

FY05

Equity and Efficiency in Education

30.0

Actual

30.0

Subtotal
Mainstreaming Market-based
Instruments for Environmental
Management Project*

30.0
30.0

Subtotal
Actual

30.0
30.0

Subtotal
Moved to FY08
Moved to FY09

30.0
0.0

F Y06

FY07

FY08

Subtotal
Port-City o f Limon
Telecom Modernization
Subtotal
E-government LIL

Subtotal
Totals

30.0
30.0-40.0
12.0-15.0
42.0 - 55.0
3.0-13.0

3 .O- 13.O
105.0128.0 m

0.0

Subtotal
Dropped
Port o f Limon

72.5

Subtotal

72.5
132.5 m

Note: Two ongoing projects were active over the CPS: the FYOO Ecomarkets (US$32.6 millionlUS$8 million GEF
Grant), which closed in FY07; and the FY02 Health Sector Strengthening and Modernization I1 project ( U S 1 7
million), which i s expected to close in FY 10.

* US$10 million GEF grant complements the US$30 million loan.

Annex D
Page 26 o f 26
Annex C. Planned Non-lending and Actual Deliveries
(based on revised program in 2006 CPS Progress Report)

Planned Products
NO4

Public Debt Management (TRE)
Reserves Advisory Program (RAMP)

FY05 C F A A
CPAR
Drivers o f Rural Growth (regional)

Actual Products
Actual (delivered over FY04-05)
Actual (delivered over FY04-05)
Actual
Actual
Actual
New Products:
Insurance Modernization TA
PPIAF Grant for Infrastructure and Telecom
(two grants: delivered over FY05-07)

FY06 Country Economic Memorandum
Investment Climate Assessment
Poverty Assessment
Public Debt Management (first phaseFIRST program)
DR-CAFTA Report (regional)
Shocks and Social Protection (regional)

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

Actual
Actual
New Product:

COOPEAGRI*
FY07

New Product:
Poverty Targeting TA (Phase 1)

FY08 Public ExpenditureReview

Actual

Carbon Sequestration in Small Farms in the Brunca Region; US$2.2 million grant funded by the
Biodiversity Fund.
I

.-

86ºW

85ºW

Lag o de
N ic ar ag ua

To
Rivas

84ºW

83ºW

82ºW

NICA RA GUA

La Cruz
Los Chiles

11ºN

ALAJUELA

e

GUANACASTE

Cañas

as

San Rafael

te

Puerto
Viejo

Lago de
Arenal

Co

rd

Santa Cruz

ill

er

Flamingo

a

Nicoya

Til

ará

n

San Ramón
Carmona

10ºN

Quesada

de

Garza

Alajuela

Puntarenas
Orotina

Playa
Naranjo

P U N TA R E N A S
Go l f o d e
N i co y a

Cord

e
SAN
a nd
Gr Santiago

ón
az

iller

Guácimo
Volcán Turrialba
(3,328 m)

Heredia

a C
ent
ra

Volcán Irazú
(3,432 m)

JOSÉ

Rev
en
t

Temp
isq
u

ac

Siquirres

Puerto Limon
Turrialba

SA

N

Parrita

JO

Puerto
Quepos

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

LIMÓN

C A R TA G O

San Marcos

Jacó

SÉ

Co
San Isidro

B a hí a d e
C o r o na d o

rdi

ller

a d
e

Ge n

To
Changuinola

Sixaola

Cerro Durika
(3,296 m)

Ta l a

man

Cerro Kámuk
(3,554 m)

ca

eral

Palmar
Sur

9ºN

P U N TA R E N A S

PA CIFIC
O CEA N

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

Bribri

Sixaola

Cerro Chirripó
Chirripo
(3,810 m)

Dominical

C O S TA R I C A

San Vito

Go
lfo

PROVINCE CAPITALS

Golfito

PAN AM A

Neily

lce

To
David

RIVERS
0

0

20

40

20

60 Kilometers

To
Puerto
Armüelles

40 Miles

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES
JULY 2008

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
84ºW

83ºW

82ºW

IBRD 33392R

RAILROADS

To
Cerro Pando

Du

NATIONAL CAPITAL

MAIN ROADS

10ºN

l

Cartago

San Ignacio

Car i bbe an S e a

de
lA
tlá
nti
co

Liberia

COSTA RICA

Ch
irr
ipó

an

IA

Gu

Chirripó

de

ED

ra

HER

lle

ar
los

G olfo de
P a pa ga yo

rdi

11ºN

Upala

Sa
nC

Co

