d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 82054-KM 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

AND 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE UNION OF COMOROS 

FOR THE PERIOD FY14–FY17 

April 16, 2014 

Southern Africa Country Department 2 
Africa Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Sub-Saharan Africa Department 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without 
World Bank Group authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Last Interim Strategy Note: 
May 27, 2010 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
Currency Unit = Comorian Franc (KMF) 
(as of October 11, 2013) 
KMF 363.25 = US$1 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AfDB 

BCC 

CEM 
CPS 
CREF 
DCPT 

DeMPA  

DPO  
ECF  

EDA  

EGTAG  

EGRG 
ERDPG 
ESRP  
EU 
FADC 

FPAD 

FSAP 

GAC 
GDP 

HIPC 

African Development Bank  

Banque Centrale des Comores (Central Bank of 
the Comoros) 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Economic and Financial Reforms Unit  
Direction Générale de 
la Comptabilité 
Publique et du Trésor (Directorate of Public 
Accounts and Treasury) 
 Debt Management Performance Assessment  

Development Policy Operation  
Extended Credit Facility  

Electricité d’Anjouan (Electricity Company of 
Anjouan) 
Economic Governance Technical Assistance 
Grant  
Economic Governance Reform Grant 
Economic Reform Development Policy Grant 
Electricity Sector Recovery Project  
European Union 
Fonds 
d’Appui 
au 
Développement 
Communautaire 
(Community Development 
Support Fund)  
Forum des Partenaires au Développement 
Development Partners Forum  
Financial Sector Assessment Program 

Governance and Anti-Corruption 
Gross Domestic Product 

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 

ICT 

IDA 

IFC 
I-PRSP 
IMF 
ISN 

and 

Information 
Technology 
International Development Association 

Communications 

International Finance Corporation 
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
International Monetary Fund 
Interim Strategy Note 

JSDF 
MA-
MWE 

INSEED National 
Institute of Statistics and 
Economic Studies and Demographics 
Japan Social Development Fund 
Gestion de l’Eau et l’Electricité aux 
Comores (Water and Power Utility in 
Comoros) 
Millenium Development Goals 

MDGs 

MIGA 

MDRI 
NACC 
NPDC 
NPV 
PFM 

Guarantee 

Investment 

Multilateral 
Agency 
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative 
National Anti-Corruption Commission 
National Public Debt Committee 
Net Present Value 
Public Finance Management 

PRGSP 

SCADD 

Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy 
Paper 
Sustainable Accelerated Growth and 
Development Strategy 
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
SWIOFP South West 
Indian Ocean Fisheries 
project 
United Nations Development Program 

UNDP 

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

IDA 
Makhtar Diop 
Mark Lundell 
Thomas Buckley 

IFC 
Jean-Philippe Prosper 
Oumar Seydi 
Kailash Sharma Ramnauth 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
This CPS was prepared under the supervision and guidance of Haleh Bridi (Country Director, AFCS4 
until January 31, 2014) by a team consisting of: Thomas Buckley (Country Program Coordinator, TTL), 
Rafael Muñoz Moreno (Senior Economist, AFTP1), Noro Aina Andriamihaja (Economist, AFTP1), 
Ellena Rabeson (Operations Officer AFMMG) Anne-Lucie Lefebvre (Senior Public Sector Specialist, 
AFTP1), Hajarivony Andriamarofara (Senior Governance and Public Sector Specialist, AFTP1), Xavier 
Vincent (Senior Fisheries Specialist, AFTN1), Dirk Bronselaer (Senior Procurement Specialist, AFTPE), 
Tim Kelly (Senior ICT Policy Specialist, TWICT), Mustafa Zakir Hussain (Senior Energy Specialist, 
AFTG1), Doekle Wielinga, (Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist AFTN2) Andrea Vermehen, 
(Lead Social Protection Specialist, AFTSE) Steven Dimitriyev (Senior Private Sector Development 
Specialist AFTFW) Hugues Agossou (Senior Financial Management Specialist, AFTME), Said Ali 
Antoissi (Consultant, AFTP1) and Keiko Kubota (Lead Economist, AFTP1). The team benefited from the 
extraordinary assistance of Katy Roffe (Senior Program Assistant, AFCMG) and Jane Banda (Temporary, 
AFCCM).  

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................................................................... i 
I. Country Context ...................................................................................................................1 
A.
Social and Political Con tex t .............................................................................. 1 
B.
Poverty Profile and Trends ............................................................................... 2 
C.
Millennium Development Goals ....................................................................... 4 
D.
Gender .............................................................................................................. 5 
E.
Recent Economic Developments ....................................................................... 5 
F.
Development Challenges and Opportunities ..................................................... 7 
1. Strengthening Public Sector Management and Accountability .................................8 
2. Reducing Vulnerability to Natural Disasters ...........................................................10 
3. Laying the Foundations for Stronger, More Inclusive Growth................................10 
4. Migration and Remittances ......................................................................................13 
G.
Government Priorities and Medium Term Strategy ......................................... 13 
II. World Bank Group Assistance Strategy ............................................................................15 
A.
Implementation of the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) and Lessons Learned ...... 15 
B.
Stakeholder Feedback ..................................................................................... 17 
C.
Proposed World Bank Group Assistance Strategy ........................................... 17 
D.
Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities ......... 18 
1. Pillar 1: Increased Public Sector Capacity ...............................................................20 
2. Pillar 2: Shared Growth and Increased Private Sector Employment .......................23 
E.
Implementing the FY14-17 Country Assistance Strategy ................................ 26 
F.
Partnerships and Donor Coordination ............................................................. 27 
III. Risks and Mitigation ..........................................................................................................29 

List of Tables 
Table 1: Comoros - Selected Economic Indicators, 2009-16………..………………………..6 
Table 2: Doing Business Indicators – 2014 Ranking………………………………………...11 
Table 3: Planned vs. Actual ISN Lending……………………………………………………15 
Table 4: CPS Pillars and Results Areas……………………………………………………....19 
Table 5: Proposed Lending Program…………………………………………………………26 
Table 6: CPS Indicative Knowledge Services Program, FY14-17…………………………...27  

List of Figures 
Figure 1: Growing Slowly and Falling Behind………………………………………………2 

List of Boxes 
Box 1: Drivers of Fragility…………………………………………………………………....3 
Box 2: Official Development Assistance to Comoros………………………………………28 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
List of Annexes:  
Annex 1: Comoros CPS Results Matrix ..................................................................... 31 
Annex 2: Debt Sustainability Analysis Update ........................................................... 34 
Annex 3: Partnerships ................................................................................................ 46 
Annex 4: Strengthening Statistics: Challenges and the Way Forward ........................ 50 
Annex 5: Planned ISN Outcomes and Results ............................................................ 52 
Annex 6: PEFA Indicators, 2007 and 2013 ................................................................ 53 
Annex 7: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ......... 54 
Annex 8: Summary of Non-Lending Services ............................................................ 55 
Annex 9: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/ IDA and Grants) ............................................. 56 
Annex 10: Trust Fund Mobilization ........................................................................... 57 
Annex 11: Country at a Glance .................................................................................. 58 

Map: IBRD 33389 

iv 

 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR COMOROS FY2014-17 

1. 
The Union of the Comoros is a small nation made up of three islands with an 
estimated population of 760,000.  Like other small island nations, it is characterized by 
geographical isolation, limited resources, a small domestic market, a narrow export base and a 
high dependence on food imports and remittances. Since independence in 1975 Comoros has 
experienced recurrent political crises and conflict between the islands. Political instability has 
contributed to a long-term declining trend in real income per capita and taken a severe toll on the 
government’s ability to deliver quality basic services. The legitimacy and accountability of the 
state has suffered as a result.  
2. 
Constitutional reforms adopted in 2009 represent a turning point in Comoros’ 
development, transforming relations between the islands, significantly reducing tensions 
and improving the prospects for greater stability. Since 2009, macroeconomic management 
has improved supported by a three year Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program with the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Implementation of structural reforms enabled the country to 
reach the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) completion point in December 2012 and 
consequently benefit from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI).  Successful HIPC 
completion underpinned by greater political stability and increased support from development 
partners offer the possibility of further acceleration of reform, growth and poverty reduction. The 
Bank Group is in an excellent position to support this process, thanks in large part to the 
strengthened partnership with Comoros developed through the HIPC process. 
3. 
Despite these achievements, the country faces serious challenges. First, although data 
on poverty is outdated, there is evidence that poverty is widespread. Poverty incidence at the 
household level was estimated at 36.9 percent in 2004 (when the most recent household survey 
was carried out) and the share of the population with incomes below US$1.25 per day was 
estimated at 48 percent.  A shortage of employment opportunities is a major driver of poverty 
and is the result of economic growth which is insufficient to create employment for the growing 
labor force. Second, the country remains at high risk of debt distress and will require continued 
access to concessional finance while accelerating reforms to ensure fiscal and external 
sustainability. Third, institutional capacity remains limited and undermines policy design and 
implementation.  
4. 
The proposed CPS aims to build on the successes achieved through the HIPC 
process and supports the Government’s objectives to strengthen governance and promote 
private sector growth and job creation.  The Bank-supported program (knowledge, finance, 
and partnership) will be structured around two pillars: (i) Increased Public Sector Capacity; and 
(ii) Shared Growth and Increased Employment. These strategic priorities are aligned with the 
Government’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy Paper (PRGSP) and contribute directly 
to the objectives of reducing extreme poverty and increasing shared prosperity in Comoros. The 
CPS proposes a selective approach that emphasizes consolidating the gains achieved to date 
while laying the groundwork for further progress. The initial emphasis will be on using 

 
instruments that have proven effective (social protection, public financial management (PFM) 
reform and development policy operations) while implementing recently approved infrastructure 
operations in electricity and information and communications technology (ICT) which leverage 
partner and regional IDA resources.  At the same time, the Bank will carry out core diagnostic 
economic and sector work (ESW) and other analytical and advisory assistance (AAA) services 
needed to build the Bank’s knowledge base on Comoros while maintaining flexibility to respond 
to the Government’s needs and the priorities to be identified in the upcoming poverty reduction 
strategy and by the new Government following presidential elections now expected in 2016.   
5. 
Activities under Pillar 1 of the CPS will aim at enhancing public sector capacity to 
deliver results by: (a) building the capacity to mobilize and effectively use public resources; and 
(b) strengthening mechanisms for addressing vulnerability at the national and household levels. 
The PRGSP recognizes that inadequate institutional arrangements have undermined the capacity 
of the state to deliver results and cope with shocks. This has reinforced political instability, and 
addressing the root causes of this instability is a core strategy of the PRGSP.  This pillar of the 
CPS program will seek to address the key drivers of fragility, namely the lack of trust between 
the islands and the Union, the resulting administrative inefficiencies and lack of accountability, 
and the consequent inability to effectively deliver services and public goods. This pillar of the 
CPS also seeks to reduce vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters at both the 
national and household levels.  
6. 
Pillar 2 of the CPS focuses on strengthening the foundation for diversified and 
sustainable economic growth. The CPS program under this pillar features investment lending to 
address critical economy-wide infrastructure constraints to growth and job creation (energy, 
telecoms) and reforms that will strengthen the environment for private investment in sectors with 
the potential to generate sustained economic growth and employment (tourism, agriculture and 
fisheries).  The program also builds on recent and planned IFC advisory work aimed at 
strengthening the enabling environment for private sector investment.   
7. 
The national IDA allocation for the CPS period is expected to be about US$25 
million based on indicative average annual IDA financing over the FY2014 to FY2017 
period of US$6 million. The CPS period encompasses the final year of IDA16 and the full 
IDA17 period.  The CPS financing program leverages national IDA resources with an estimated 
US$29.4 million in regional IDA funds (through the RCIP-4 and the planned Southwest Indian 
Ocean Fisheries projects) for an overall CPS IDA envelope of about US$60 million. 1  
8. 
The CPS will feature a mix of instruments in support of the proposed strategy.  A 
series of development policy operations (DPOs) will form the core of the Bank financing 
program and will be designed to deepen and sustain the reforms initiated under the HIPC process 
with a focus on strengthening economic governance, enhancing transparency across the Union 
and island governments, and improving efficiency in key infrastructure sectors (electricity and 
ICT). Complementary technical assistance will be critical to the success of the reforms supported 

1 The amounts shown in outer years are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on: (i) total IDA resources 
available; (ii) the country’s performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA assistance 
(grants/credits) and the allocation deductions associated with Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) annual debt 
service foregone; (iv) the performance, other allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA 
borrowers; and (v) the number of IDA-eligible countries. 

ii 

 
                                                 
by DPOs, and the ongoing Economic Governance TA operation as well as other technical 
assistance (for example in Statistics) and investment lending in energy and fisheries will 
continue to support implementation of the reforms. 
9. 
Renewed political instability is the main risk to achievement of CPS objectives. 
Other risks include: (i) weak institutional capacity; (ii) macroeconomic risks tied to the global 
economic context and internal developments; and (iii) vulnerability to natural hazards and 
climate change.  

iii 

 
 
COMOROS: COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY2014-17 

I. Country Context 

1. 
The Union of the Comoros is a small archipelago with an estimated population of 
760,000 2 covering a territory of about 1,800 square kilometers. About 52 percent of the 
population lives on the largest island, Ngazidja (or Grande Comore), which is also home to the 
Union capital, Moroni, the seat of the Union government.  The second largest island, Nzwani 
(Anjouan), has 42 percent of the population, and the smallest, Mwali (Mohéli), 6 percent.  
Comoros has a high population density of about 328 inhabitants per km2 and a population growth 
rate estimated at 2.9 percent.  About 53 percent of the population is younger than 20 years old.   
2. 
Like other small island states, Comoros faces challenges linked to its small size and 
geographic isolation. A narrow resource base and small domestic market prevent Comoros from 
diversifying its economy, making it vulnerable to domestic and external shocks. Transport costs 
are high and international connectivity is weak, making it difficult and costly to access world 
markets to compensate for its small domestic markets, a situation that increases the cost of 
intermediate 
inputs and 
imports and hampers efficiency and 
innovation. Moreover, 
communication among and within the islands is difficult, further fragmenting the market. 
Domestic competition is also limited, which hampers development. Also, like many small states, 
Comoros is characterized by weak capacity in both the public and the private sectors and has a 
relatively large public sector. Finally, Comoros is not only vulnerable to climate change-related 
impacts and natural disasters including cyclones, floods, and volcanic eruptions which typically 
have a high impact on the economy given its relatively small size, but also lacks access to risk 
mitigation tools that could help mitigate these impacts.  

A.
Social and Political Context 
3. 
Until recently, one of the most notable features of Comoros was its history of 
frequent political crises and conflict among the three islands.  At the core of this instability 
lies the difficulty in striking a balance between the roles of the respective island and Union 
governments. As a result, successive regimes have found it difficult to establish strong state 
institutions (the country has had five constitutions over 35 years of independence). Attempts at 
building political consensus have led to overlapping layers of decision-making, bureaucracy, and 
administrative inefficiencies. State inefficiency, vulnerability, and mistrust among stakeholders 
have translated into frequent coups and coup attempts 3. Political instability has contributed to a 
long-term declining trend in real income per capita and taken a severe toll on the government’s 
ability to deliver quality basic services, fueling grievance and instability (Figure 1). The 
legitimacy and accountability of the state has suffered as a result. Poor economic governance and 
weak institutional capacity at all levels of public administration have contributed to this de-

2 This is according to data from the Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy Paper (PRGSP), but population estimates for the 
Comoros vary widely from about 600,000 to 800,000.  The last population census was in 2003 and indicated a population of 
576,000.  It is estimated that an additional 250,000 citizens live as an emigrant diaspora, mostly in France. The next census is 
planned for 2015. 
3 Comoros has experienced 21 coups and coup attempts since independence in 1975. 

 
 
 
                                                 
1400

1200

1000

i

800

600

400

200

$
S

U

t

n

a

t

s

n
o

c

n
o

s
r

e
p

r

e
p
e

m

o
c
n

Comoros

Low Income

Lower middle income

Figure 1: Growing Slowly and Falling Behind 

legitimization 
and 
further 
impeded economic growth and 
poverty 
reduction. 
In 
an 
environment 
of 
weak 
governance, 
deeply 
rooted 
patronage systems fragmented 
across the islands, and unmet 
demand 
for 
social 
and 
economic 
improvement, 
pressures for recruitment into 
the public sector—civil service 
and 
inefficient 
state-owned 
enterprises—have 
remained 
intense, both a symptom and a 
cause of further tensions. (See 
Box 1). 
4. 
Constitutional reforms 
adopted in 2009 represent a turning point in Comoros’ development, transforming 
relations between the islands, significantly reducing tensions and improving the prospects 
for greater stability. A constitution adopted in 2001 greatly increased the autonomy of island 
governments with a president for each island and included a union presidency that rotated every 
four years among the islands. However, a secessionist crisis in 2008 created the conditions for 
reconciliation and a fundamental revision of inter-island relations. In 2009, Comorians adopted 
by referendum a series of amendments to the 2001 constitution intended to streamline and 
rationalize federal administrative arrangements. The amendments curtailed the autonomy of the 
islands, converted the island presidents to governors, and reaffirmed the unity of the state and the 
pre-eminence of the federal government by reducing political decentralization and bureaucracy. 
Presidential elections were held in late 2010 and the new president took office in May 2011. 
With presidential elections not expected until 2016, these developments are expected to 
contribute to greater political stability in the future and could set the basis for a new focus on a 
continuous reform program in the Comoros. 

Source: World Development Indicators 

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

0

B.
 Poverty Profile and Trends 
5. 
Data on poverty has serious shortcomings that hamper diagnosis and policy making. 
The data deficiencies are due to inadequate staffing and funding of the statistics office and 
technical and political difficulties in integrating island-based data.  These deficiencies have in 
turn contributed to the limited demand for data from policy-makers and analysts. Some progress 
was made with collecting income-distribution statistics and social welfare indicators when the 
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) was being prepared in 2003-04. This is the 
latest solid information available. The limited information hampers policy-making and 
monitoring of progress towards development objectives such as the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) and poverty reduction. 
6. 
Poverty incidence at the household level was estimated at 36.9 percent in 2004. 
Poverty was mostly a rural phenomenon, with four out of five rural households classified as 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
poor; in urban areas, only one in four was poor. Not surprisingly, development indicators for 
rural areas lagged behind those for urban areas, with a higher poverty rate, a greater fertility rate 
among women of childbearing age, less common use of contraception, more prevalent stunting 
among children, more widespread adult illiteracy, and a greater share of the population lacking 
access to improved sanitation services. Urban poverty grew during the 1990s and early 2000s. In 
recent years, a rural to urban exodus has transformed previously rural areas into rapidly growing 
and crowded suburbs. With a Gini coefficient of 0.557, inequality was high and a significant 
share of the population was vulnerable although not poor. While 36.8 percent of households were 
poor, 47 percent were very vulnerable; 25 percent of non-poor but vulnerable and precarious 
families had an 80 percent chance of dropping back into poverty in the short term. The share of 
the population with incomes below US$1.25 per day was estimated at 48 percent.  
Box 1. Drivers of Fragility 

Fragility in Comoros has been driven by a lack of cohesion and trust among the three islands and a resulting 
difficulty in developing state institutions conducive to development.  This lack of trust, initially the result of 
geography and cultural heterogeneity, has fed conflict over the distribution of political representation and public 
resources and contributed to weak institutions and poor governance. 
Despite their common culture, language and religion, forged over centuries, the three islands present diverse 
social systems. Social cohesion, though strong at the level of the extended family, clan, or village, remains weak 
at the whole country level where tensions among elites and notables are common. As a result it has been 
difficult to forge a consensus over the respective roles of national and island governments and the sharing of 
public resources through transparent and accountable institutional arrangements. 
The sharing of power and resources between the three islands has been the main source of political tensions in 
Comoros. For example, separation attempts by Anjouan in 1997 and 2007 were driven by grievances against the 
national government primarily related to resources, representation at the national level and centralization of 
government services in Moroni.  
Instability has in turn contributed to a long-term declining trend in the economy and taken a toll on the public 
sector’s ability to deliver basic services, further fueling grievances and instability. In addition to the stress of 
political tensions, the frequent changes in the setup of government have allowed State institutions little time to 
mature, resulting in ineffective and overlapping layers of decision mechanisms and bureaucracy. In this context, 
a lack of transparency in the allocation and management of resources and public funds is a driver of mistrust and 
conflict. A critical challenge for the leaders of the country is to find a more stable equilibrium based on 
transparent rules and collaboration. 

7. 
A shortage of employment opportunities is a major driver of poverty. The economy 
is dominated by the informal sector centered on agriculture and fishery production intended for 
self-consumption. Unemployment is widespread in Comoros, exceeding 15 percent of the active 
population and affecting one out of two young individuals in 2004, especially in rural areas. It is 
the result of insufficient economic growth and the multiple constraints which increase the cost of 
local production and discourage job creation including the high cost of energy and 
telecommunications, the poor state of transport infrastructure, costly bureaucracy, and limited 
access to credit. On the supply side, Comorians are often insufficiently trained to meet the needs 
of the employment market. The civil service is currently the biggest provider of employment in 
the Comoros. Not surprisingly, Comorians have often migrated to other countries in search of 
better economic prospects. 

3 

 
 
8. 
In the coming years poverty reduction and shared prosperity are expected to be 
driven primarily by employment creation brought about by faster growth. This will require, 
first and foremost, continued political stability to sustain the positive trend in Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI), development assistance, and tourist arrivals. Second, macroeconomic stability 
will need to be sustained, particularly by improving budgetary and expenditure management to 
rein in the public deficit and reduce the risk of debt distress. Because poverty reduction has also 
been hampered by a lack of fiscal space that has constrained public services for the poor and 
public investment needed to support growth and job creation, HIPC debt relief, reinforced by 
improved budgetary and expenditure management, is expected to benefit the general public and 
particularly the poor by facilitating reallocation of limited resources towards poverty-reducing 
expenditures.  Third, structural reform will be needed to facilitate private sector development, 
providing credit, easing regulations and ensuring basic infrastructure. Fourth, as the country 
develops, additional effort will be needed to improve the skills base of the work force.  

C.
 Millennium Development Goals 
9. 
Progress toward achieving the MDGs has been uneven. Despite lackluster economic 
trends, some social indicators have shown improvement in recent years, benefitting from aid-
supported government programs. Performance in achieving universal primary education, 
reducing maternal mortality by three-quarters, and halting and beginning to reverse the spread of 
HIV/AIDS make it possible to achieve most MDGs by 2015. However, the goals of halving the 
population of undernourished population, achieving gender parity in schooling, and reducing 
child mortality by two-thirds are unlikely to be attained by 2015. In contrast, the objective of 
halving the proportion of people without access to safe drinking water has been surpassed. Some 
areas, such as the progress in halving the proportion of the population earning less than US$1.25 
per day, cannot be assessed due to a lack of data.  Further details are provided in Annex 11.  
10. 
Comoros has made progress in education and health. Gross enrollment in primary 
education exceeds 100 percent (although net rates remain below 80 percent). In spite of this 
notable increase in primary enrollment, the estimated number of out-of-school children is still 
high, especially in Anjouan. While enrollment increased from less than 3,000 in 2010 to about 
9,000 in 2011, access to pre-primary education is still limited,  with a gross enrollment rate of 16 
percent in 2011 and is essentially private and urban. The gross access rate to primary education 
is 80 percent (86 percent for boys and 74 percent for girls) and the gross enrollment rate is 104 
percent (95 percent for girls). There are about 28,000 out-of-school children between the ages of 
6 to 11 years old, including 12,000 who have never been to school. In 2013 Comoros gained 
access to financing through the Global Partnership for Education. Child mortality at birth (49 per 
1,000) and maternal mortality (380 per 100,000 live births) have slowly declined over the 
decade, and there has been some progress on the fight against HIV/AIDS and malaria. According 
to an assessment by the United Nations International Children’s Fund (UNICEF) about one-third 
of the children under 5 years of age suffered from chronic malnutrition in 2008. 4 

4 See : Rapport d’Evaluation de l’Etat Nutritionnel des Enfants de Moins de 5 ans et de la Mortalité dans l’Union 
des Comores. UNICEF Comoros, December 2008.  

4 

 
                                                 
D.
 Gender  
11. While household surveys suggest that women are overall economically better off 
than men, full participation of women in the country’s development remains a work in 
progress 5. Although women generally inherit land and houses under customary law, they do not 
always have usufruct rights, which tend to go to their husbands, maternal uncles or failing that, 
their brothers. There is a high level of female-headed households due to migration of husbands; 
female single parent households represent 40.2 percent of the total, and there is a higher than 
average level of dependents in female-headed households. Although remittances benefit female-
headed households in particular, they create economic dependency and act as a constraint to 
economic participation by women. Female labor force participation is comparatively low (36 
percent as opposed to approximately 81 percent for men) and there are more unemployed women 
than men. Women’s employment is also more likely to be precarious -- there are very few 
women in wage-earning non-agricultural work (13.7 percent) and there are more self-employed 
women than men. A high percentage of women work in the informal agricultural sector 
(approximately two-thirds). Despite having ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all 
Forms of Discrimination against Women, Comoros continues to suffer from underrepresentation 
of women in all spheres of socio-economic activities, including national (3 percent) and local 
politics, in administration, and in the legal and judiciary profession judiciary.  

E.
 Recent Economic Developments 
12. 
Since 2009, macroeconomic management has steadily improved allowing Comoros 
to weather the adverse impacts of domestic and external shocks while attracting increased 
support from development partners. An IMF Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program has 
been sustained for three years. The World Bank has approved two Development Policy 
Operations (DPOs) in support of HIPC reforms and other bilateral and multilateral donors—UN 
agencies, France, the European Union (EU), the African Development Bank (AfDB) and Gulf 
countries—have also been supporting the authorities’ policies. Economic activity in Comoros 
has improved steadily since bottoming out in 2007 and real GDP growth reached an eight-year 
high of 3.5 percent in 2013 (Table 1). The peg of the Comorian Franc (KMF) to the Euro has 
served to keep inflation low at an estimated 2.3 percent for 2013, down from 6.3 percent in 2012. 
While positive aggregate growth is welcome, with population growth estimated at 2.9 percent a 
year, much faster economic growth sustained over a long period will be needed to combat 
poverty. 

5 This paragraph is based on Comoros – Country Gender Profile (African Development Bank, 2010). 

5 

 
 
 
                                                 
Table 1: Comoros - Selected Economic Indicators, 2009–16 
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified) 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012  E3 

2013P3 

2014P3 

2015P3 2016P4 

2.1 
3.9 

2.2 
6.8 

3.0 
6.3 

1.8 
4.8 

13.9 
9.7 

22.8 
-2.6 
0.8 
0.0 

14.5 
47.7 
-7.8 
6.8 

16.1 
7.5 
0.4 
22.0 
1.6 
-1.9 
0.0 

19.3 
9.6 
1.2 
25.1 
3.0 
2.9 
0.0 

National Income and Prices 
 Real GDP growth (% change) 
 Inflation (% change, annual average) 
Public Finance 
Domestic Revenue (excl. grants)  
Grants 1/ 
Of which, HIPC Grants 
Total expenditures (incl. net lending)  
Domestic primary balance 
Overall balance (incl. grants) 
Financing gap 
External Sector 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Current account balance  
Gross reserves (months of imports) 
External debt 
 External debt, NPV  (percent of GDP) 2/ 
46.2 
38.9 
 External debt service (in % of exports) 2/ 
13.5 
11.4 
 NPV of external debt (in % of exports) 2/ 
329.7 
248.6 
Sources: Comoros Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff estimates. 
1/ Includes interim HIPC assistance (2010-12) and debt relief under HIPC and MDRI. 
2/ External debt ratios after full HIPC, MDRI and beyond HIPC relief from end-2012. 

14.3 
14.9 
0.2 
22.1 
-1.6 
0.9 
0.0 

15.7 
49.9 
-5.7 
6.4 

33.1 
10.0 
203.9 

14.5 
53.9 
-3.8 
7.1 

16.2 
50.2 
-9.4 
6.7 

3.5 
2.3 

15.2 
28.6 
19.1 
25.5 
-1.2 
17.4 
0.0 

15.6 
53.1 
-6.1 
6.1 

4.0 
3.2 

15.0 
9.1 
0.0 
25.8 
-0.5 
-2.5 
1.1 

15.8 
52.3 
-10.5 
6.0 

4.0 
3.2 

15.2 
8.7 
0.0 
25.6 
0.1 
-2.5 
1.0 

16.1 
49.7 
-9.1 
6.1 

4.0 
3.2 

15.4 
8.7 
0.0 
25.5 
0.4 
-2.1 
1.2 

16.2 
47.3 
-7.5 
6.1 

10.0 
0.7 
64.1 

12.3 
1.8 
78.0 

14.4 
2.4 
89.2 

16.0 
4.1 
98.4 

8.4 
10.6 
56.5 

13. 
Comoros has made progress in fiscal consolidation. Domestic revenues have 
improved, from 13.9 percent in 2009 to 19.3 percent in 2012, thanks to implementation of tax 
reforms and better governance of the Economic Citizenship Program (ECP) which represented 
an impressive 5.6 percent of GDP in 2012 6. Nevertheless, government finances remain fragile. 
Tax collection remains low (11.8 percent of GDP in 2012) when compared to other small island 
states and is highly dependent on the ECP. External grants remained high during the last four 
years, and were estimated at 9.6 percent of GDP in 2012. These resources have served to finance 
a high level of public expenditure—around 25 percent of GDP in 2012, with increasing public 
investment that now represents around 7 percent of GDP. Nevertheless there remains 
considerable scope for improving the efficiency of public expenditure and putting in place 
mechanisms of fiscal management to support economic growth while dealing with external 
shocks.  
14. 
Despite receiving debt relief under the HIPC initiative, Comoros remains at high 
risk of debt distress. Comoros reached the decision point under the HIPC Initiative in June 2010 

6 The ECP allows Comoros to offer citizenship to foreigners who reside in partner countries. The partner 
government selects the candidates following a background check conducted by the partner government. In 
exchange, Comoros receives a fee for each passport issued.  In recent years revenue from the program has become 
significant in relation to Comoros’ GDP. 

6 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                                                 
and the completion point in December 2012, resulting in debt relief totaling US$144.8 million in 
end-2009 net present value (NPV) terms. In practical terms, however, the effective contribution 
of HIPC on the yearly flow of resources is relatively modest although it has opened up new 
opportunities for Comoros to receive additional concessional financing. The external debt 
outlook remains vulnerable to shocks, particularly those relating to its export potential and/or 
weaker GDP growth. The December 2013 Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) update indicates 
that under the baseline scenario the debt ratio and debt service indicators rise gradually over the 
medium term, increasing the risk of breaching critical benchmarks. Further, stress tests indicate 
serious risks to sustainability7. These results highlight the paramount importance of continued 
efforts in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to achieve higher growth and ensure debt 
sustainability.  
15. 
As a very small open economy with limited exports that is highly dependent upon 
the imports of goods and services, Comoros remains extremely vulnerable to external 
shocks. The deficit in the trade of goods and services has been around 35 percent of GDP in 
recent years. Exports of goods and services, which were estimated at 15 percent of GDP in 2012, 
remain particularly low even when compared to other economies that are highly dependent on 
remittances. In contrast, imports of goods and services were equivalent to 54 percent of GDP, 
with the import bill for oil accounting for 11 percent of GDP in 2012.  The current account 
deficit is financed by buoyant remittances and official transfers, which are estimated at around 
23 percent of GDP and 10 percent of GDP, respectively. Moreover, the more stable conditions in 
Comoros have allowed for more stable official transfers and a steady inflow of FDI, reaching 3 
percent of GDP in 2012. International reserves are now at 7.1 months of imports, a level that is 
consistent with the relevant Zone Franc regulations and supports the peg with the Euro. Stronger 
exports are particularly critical for Comoros to mitigate external shocks. 
16. 
Acceleration of structural reforms will be key to gaining competitiveness.  While the 
latest assessment 8 of the real effective exchange rate indicates that the Comorian franc is broadly 
in line with its medium-term fundamentals, the results are subject to considerable uncertainty due 
to the difficulties of assessing the exchange rate with standard analytical methodologies.  Moving 
forward, adequate flexibility of the factor markets will be required to cope with potential 
overvaluation.  More importantly, accelerating structural reforms in the business environment, 
infrastructure, and skills will be key to improving Comoros’ export performance. 

F.
 Development Challenges and Opportunities  
17. 
Comoros’ recent stability and success in implementing reforms has started to pay 
off but the risk of reversals is high. The recent economic and political stability and progress in 
improving policies allowed the country to reach the HIPC completion point in 2012. 
Macroeconomic management has improved with help from an Extended Credit Facility (ECF) 
program with the IMF. Reflecting the improving but still highly risky investment environment, 
Comoros became eligible for and gained membership in the Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA) in 2013, and is now capable of offering investors protection against political 

7 See Annex 3.  
8 IMF Country Report No. 13/32.  Staff Report for the 2012 Article IV Consultation, Fourth Review Under the 
Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, and Financing Assurances Review, February 2013. 

7 

 
                                                 
risks. The challenge now is to avoid a reversal of these gains while increasing the pace of income 
and employment generation. Overcoming the mutual mistrust that bred chronic instability is the 
foremost challenge for policy-makers as the governance weaknesses and instability that it has 
bred have been among the most persistent barriers to sustained growth. Greater generation of 
income and employment would in turn enhance the legitimacy of the political and institutional 
reforms under way. 
1. Strengthening Public Sector Management and Accountability  
18. While Comoros has introduced wide-ranging reforms to the legal and institutional 
framework for public finances, there remain significant challenges, particularly to 
accelerate implementation and strengthen budget and treasury management.  Recognizing 
that inter-governmental fiscal relations have been an important source of tension as well as 
inefficiency, in August 2012 the National Assembly adopted the Public Financial Management 
(PFM) Bill aimed at defining a clear and transparent fiscal relationship between the islands and 
the federal state. The new Law represents a significant improvement as it provides more clarity 
in the roles and responsibilities of the federal government and autonomous islands in the 
management and accountability of public finances. However, implementation is hampered by 
jurisdictional disputes between the Union and Autonomous islands in various areas such as civil 
service and customs management. Moreover, despite significant 
technical assistance, 
implementation of the new law has lagged and substantial challenges remain, the most urgent of 
which is the limited capacity for the government of the Union to prepare a comprehensive budget 
and monitor implementation. 9 Annual budgets do not yet reflect the revised 2009 budget 
classification. Quality of information is also poor, undermining comparisons between the 
approved and the executed administrative and sector budgets. 
19. 
The 2013 Public Expenditure and Financial Assessment (PEFA) report highlights 
substantial fragmentation in treasury and cash management.  A Directorate of Public 
Accounts and Treasury (Direction Générale de la Comptabilité Publique et du Trésor) (DCPT) 
has been created to consolidate the accounting functions and treasury management but it has yet 
to become operational.  The country continues to operate with four parallel treasuries at the 
Union and islands levels which undermines the capacity of the Ministry of Finance to manage 
and consolidate cash positions, manage cash flows, and minimize borrowing costs. Furthermore, 
this fragmentation makes it difficult to prepare periodic financial reports and the consolidated 
accounts for external audit. Treasury management is further undermined by the substantial 
amount of off-budget accounts held by sector ministries 10. As a result the Treasury lacks a 
comprehensive picture of the cash position of the government which undermines its capacity to 
allocate resources and decide on priority payments. Improving debt management remains critical 
against a background of high risk of debt distress, even after recently achieving the HIPC 
completion point. The 2011 Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) 11 found 

9 Key PEFA indicators for budget management continue to score at the lowest level. See Annex 6 and the recent 
PEFA 2013 for detailed findings. 
10 There are currently around 50 accounts at the Central Bank (including 15 different accounts for the Customs 
Directorate). 
11 World Bank, “Union of the Comoros: Debt Management Performance Assessment,” June 2011.  

8 

 
                                                 
weaknesses in nearly all areas of debt management and prompted the preparation of a debt 
management reform plan in 2012. 12  
20. 
The government has taken steps to 
improve the effectiveness of public 
administration, but much remains to be done. There were 11,000 civil servants at the time of 
the census in 2010, and recruitment has continued ever since.  The public sector wage bill, which 
represented 8 percent of GDP and 40 percent of total revenues in 2012, absorbs too large a share 
of resources. Despite this high expenditure, the civil service delivers weak service outcomes. 
Obstacles to reform include the overlapping and often disjointed responsibilities between the 
Union and Island authorities 13, the role of political patronage in civil service recruitment, and the 
lack of alternative employment opportunities, all of which create strong vested interests in the 
status quo and opposition to reform.  A unified computerized civil service roster is being 
established, and development of integrated civil service and wage management software is 
underway. The High Authority of Civil Service has also carried out a review of the existing 
organizational structures of each administration (cadres organiques), an updated version of 
which was adopted by Parliament in 2010 and is gradually being implemented. The remaining 
challenges include regularizing mismatches between the database and the reality on the ground, 
as they render the civil service roster an ineffective management tool. 
Steady progress was registered in the fight against corruption, but a culture of 
21. 
impunity and weaknesses of the justice system undermine the ability of government to take 
action. Recent efforts to combat corruption are reflected in the results on the Transparency 
International Perception of Corruption Index. In 2012, Comoros ranked 133 out of 176 countries, 
having climbed up 21 places compared to its ranking of 154 out of 178 countries in 2010. Under 
the leadership of the President, an independent anti-corruption commission was created in 
August 2011. In 2012, government adopted an overall strategy for the fight against corruption 
and a decree on asset and income declaration. The commission is responsible for implementation 
of the national strategy to combat corruption. However, scarce qualified legal and judicial 
personnel, poor infrastructure, cumbersome procedures and limited access to judicial and legal 
information undermine government’s ability to really tackle corruption. Also, transparency and 
accountability mechanisms supporting demand for services in Comoros are generally weak; there 
is limited social accountability and Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) are generally excluded 
from real decision-making processes, with limited influence on development policies. 14  
22. 
The lack of up-to-date and accurate information limits analysis and policymaking. 
Most notably, as mentioned above, information on the basic characteristics of the population is 
outdated. Shortcomings in national accounts compilation undermine their accuracy and 
reliability and impart a high degree of uncertainty to economic analysis.  Efforts underway to 
mend this situation include: the revision of the national accounts, the production of a new 
household survey (expected in 2014), and the undertaking of a new population census. There is 

12 World Bank, “Union des Comores: Plan de réformes de gestion de la dette publique,” July 2012. 
13 For example, the Island Governments maintain the right to recruit employees while the Union Government pays 
for them, giving the Islands little incentive to contain recruitment. 
14Overall, all the indicators on Demand for Good Governance (DFGG) are generally very low in comparison to 
neighboring countries. For instance, the Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) for 2011 on Voice and 
Accountability indicate that Comoros is in the 32.9 percentile. WGI 2011 Voice and Accountability: 0 (lowest rank) 
to 100 (highest rank). 

9 

 
                                                 
also the need to be able to track the critical indicators of growth and employment. Plans for 
revamping the statistical agency are underway, but implementation needs to be accelerated.  
2. Reducing Vulnerability to Natural Disasters 
23. 
Comoros is highly vulnerable to natural disasters.  The Natural Disaster Hotspot 
Report estimates that 39.6 percent of Comoros’ land area is exposed to natural disaster risk and 
32 percent of the population lives in these areas. 15 The Karthala volcano, the most active volcano 
in Sub-Saharan Africa located on the island of Grande Comore, has become more active in the 
past few years, registering four major eruptions between 2005 and 2007, compared to an average 
of one eruption every eleven years recorded over the past 200 years. Comoros is also exposed to 
the same cyclones that threaten Madagascar and other island states in the southwestern Indian 
Ocean. Each year, heavy rainfall leads to localized mudslides and rock fall.  Storm surges caused 
by heavy winds and sea level threaten the coastal areas, where the majority of the population 
resides. This became evident during the 2012 floods, which affected 65,000 people (8 percent of 
the total population) and resulted in damages estimated at US$18 to 20 million (around 3 percent 
of GDP).   
24. 
This vulnerability is expected to increase as a result of climate change.  First, the 
expected increase in population density will put additional pressure on limited land and 
resources, placing additional burdens on the environment and putting more people and assets at 
risk. Urban areas will come under considerable stress as a result of the increased population and 
the continued migration from rural areas.  Second, the projected rise in sea level could have a 
major negative effect on agriculture and fisheries as well as public and private infrastructure.  
Maplecroft, a UK-based firm that specializes in risk analytics and forecasting, ranked Comoros 
in 2008 as the most vulnerable country to face the future impacts of global warming, such as 
increased storms, rising sea levels and agricultural failure. Under certain scenarios, up to 10 
percent of the coastal population could be displaced due to erosion and contamination of coastal 
water tables by sea water, potentially destroying coastal infrastructure - including much of the 
road network - and raising the incidence of malaria.  
3. Laying the Foundations for Stronger, More Inclusive Growth  
25. 
A rapidly-growing population will need jobs and accelerating economic growth will 
be essential. The labor force is expected to double over the next 15 years. Because of high 
fertility, the population of Comoros will continue to be young until 2028, posing a significant 
challenge in terms of employment generation for the youth bulge. As highlighted in the 2013 
World Development Report (WDR) the experience of other small island states suggests that 
establishing links with nearby economic centers, maximizing the benefits of migration, and 
exploiting niche markets while preserving a fragile ecosystem will be critical.   

15 World Bank, 2005, “Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis” 

10 

 
                                                 
26. 
The regulatory environment for business is onerous. Excessive regulations compound 
an already weak investment climate due to the country's small, isolated economy and high 
political risk over the years. Comoros was ranked 158 out of 189 countries in the 2014 Doing 
Business Indicators (see Table 2) with particular weakness in business entry and exit 
mechanisms, getting credit, and overall legal security (contract enforcement).  Weaknesses in the 
legal and judicial sector, particularly with respect to property and land rights, are an important 
contributor to these obstacles 16. With the support of IFC and other partners, some reforms have 
been implemented to improve business regulations, reduce time and cost of doing business, and 
introduce alternative dispute resolution. Notable reforms achieved to date include: streamlined 
procedures for business entry and registering property; creation of the Chamber of Arbitration; 
and enactment of the leasing law.  Nevertheless, the still-challenging environment is reflected in 
low private investment that experienced a significant decline, from more than 30 percent of GDP 
in 1980 to 7.7 percent in 2009, increasing marginally to 10 percent of GDP in 2012.  
27. 
Skills appear to be a constraint, as Comoros has among the lowest secondary and 
tertiary education completion rates in the world. According to the 2004 household survey, 70 
percent of the population had not finished primary education and around 2.6 percent had 
completed tertiary education. This leaves a large part of the population with inadequate skills. In 
addition, tertiary education is predominantly general academic training and falls short of the 
needs of the labor market. Technical and vocational education and training are predominantly 
informal.  Among those who do receive formal training, few are able to find jobs in their chosen 
field. An ongoing EU-financed professional training project is supporting a strengthened legal 
and regulatory framework for the sector as well as training for job seekers, particularly young 
people who lack professional skills, who have dropped out of school, or who have never attended 
school. 
28. While access to electricity in Comoros is above 50 percent, similar to the rest of the 
sub-Saharan Africa, electricity is only available sporadically. Users located in the capital and 
its immediate surroundings get unreliable electricity supply for most of the day. In the rest of the 
Island, electricity is supplied for only 
a few hours a week, if at all.  The 
main constraining factor to normal 
service provision is the high cost of 
the imported petroleum products used 
for power generation. Due to their 
poor performance in terms of billing 
and collection, the two Comorian 
power utilities (MAMWE and EDA) 
are only able to pay for a portion of 
their 
fuel 
consumption. 
The 
corresponding losses are borne by 
Société 
Comorienne 
des 
Hydrocarbures (SCH) which in turn 
finds itself unable to fully pay the 

Table 2: Doing Business Indicators - 2014 Ranking 
Starting a business 
163 
Dealing with construction permits 
44 
Getting electricity 
109 
Registering property 
79 
Getting credit 
159 
Protecting investors 
138 
Paying taxes 
123 
Trading across borders 
146 
Enforcing contracts 
159 
Resolving insolvency 
189 

Source: World Bank's Doing Business Index.  

16 2011 WBI Indicator for Rule of Law places Comoros in the 16.7 percentile (0 lowest rank, 100 highest rank). 

11 

 
                                                 
  
 
State for the taxes collected on fuel. As a result, the energy sector represents a high burden on 
public finances: it is estimated that total de facto subsidies to the energy sector reached 
approximately 10 percent of the operating budget of the State in 2011. The average electricity 
tariff (around 33 US cents/kWh) is high compared to most Sub-Saharan countries, reflecting the 
economics of a small system with generation based almost exclusively on expensive diesel oil. 
Nevertheless, MAMWE is unable to purchase fuel and carry out periodic maintenance on 
generators.  
29. 
The telecommunications sector in Comoros offers basic communications services 
but at prices significantly higher than the world average and thus unaffordable for most 
Comorians. While introduction of mobile telephony has helped to narrow the voice gap, the 
number of mobile subscriptions (32 per 100 inhabitants) is still well below the average for Sub-
Saharan African nations. International connectivity is improving, but there is little competitive 
pressure to take advantage of lower wholesale prices which results in high prices even for basic 
services. Recognizing the importance of competition to drive down prices and encourage 
innovation, the government is renewing its efforts toward ICT sector reform. Privatization of 
Comoros Telecom is underway with IFC advisory support.  Government is also in the process of 
re-launching the bidding to license a second operator which would enter into operation by June 
2014. To take full advantage of increased international connectivity, the government needs to 
create an enabling environment for open access to existing and new infrastructure.   
30. 
Recent developments suggest that Comoros may benefit from exploitation of 
substantial offshore oil resources. Geophysical surveys indicate a reasonable probability of 
hydrocarbon potential in an area directly to the east of the offshore blocks of Mozambique and 
the Tanzania Rovuma Delta, where giant hydrocarbon discoveries have already been made.  A 
number of companies have expressed interest in exploration activities in the area and sizable 
investments in exploration have recently been announced. The Government of Comoros has 
already entered into production sharing contracts with several companies. Depending on the 
results of these activities, oil revenue may fundamentally change the outlook for public finances 
in Comoros, though it is unlikely that this would be realized during the CPS period.  At the same 
time, an apparent lack of transparency and competition in the award of these contracts highlights 
the risk that poor governance could undermine the potential benefits.  
31. While Comoros is endowed with a pristine marine environment and spectacular 
natural beauty, the tourism sector performs far below its regional competitors in attracting 
visitors. Nevertheless, tourist arrivals have increased over the last five years and tourism now 
provides an estimated 8.1 percent of the country’s GDP and 11,000 jobs. Statistics from 2011 
estimate 17,500 arrivals in that year with approximately half of these visiting family and 
relatives.  The main long haul source market is France while short haul visitors come from 
Réunion and Madagascar. Government has identified tourism as a high priority for future 
growth. Key challenges to development include geographic isolation, lack of regular air service, 
political instability, and the low level of tourism infrastructure. 
32. 
Agriculture is the single largest sector in the economy of Comoros, generating about 
46 percent of GDP, accounting for approximately 57 percent of employment, and generating 
nearly 90 percent of total export revenues. Agriculture in Comoros remains mainly subsistence- 
oriented with the bulk of production coming from small family-owned and operated farms that 

12 

 
produce food crops mainly for home consumption. The gradual shift to agriculture that has taken 
place over the last three decades has been part of a process of involution associated with the 
stagnant economy and the shrinking of the export sector. Commercial agriculture is 
underdeveloped and revolves around the production of three high-value crops destined for 
export, namely, vanilla, cloves, and ylang-ylang. The country is heavily dependent on food 
imports, which represent more than 75 percent of the country’s total food consumption 
requirements. Agricultural productivity is lower than in many other developing countries with 
similar agro-climatic conditions and has remained constant, with value-added per agricultural 
worker remaining virtually unchanged.  
33. 
The fisheries sector has the potential to make a greater contribution to growth and 
poverty reduction.  Comoros Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is over 70 times the size of the 
country’s land area and straddles the important tuna fishing grounds at the mouth of the 
Mozambique Channel. However, tuna is fished predominantly by countries from outside the 
region and no landing takes place in Comoros; hence the benefits consist largely of payments to 
the Government for access of foreign vessels to national waters. Meanwhile, small-scale fisheries 
serve a vital safety net function for the poor, employing a high proportion of the coastal 
population often among the most vulnerable, marginalized and landless communities. Many 
workers are women involved in gleaning, processing and marketing. By adopting sustainable 
management approaches that develop alternative livelihood opportunities in post-harvest value-
added, aquaculture, and recreational fisheries, the sector could make a substantially greater 
contribution to Comoros’ social, environmental and economic benefits. This would require 
public investments in: (i) strengthened governance that is more transparent and empowers users 
to have a long-term stake in the health of the resources; (ii) creating opportunities to capture 
greater benefits from the ‘offshore’ fisheries and value added from the fish products; and (iii) 
regional collaboration on shared fisheries management, fisheries enforcement and knowledge. 
4. Migration and Remittances 
34. 
Like many other small island nations, a large diaspora serves as an important and 
vital connection between Comoros and the rest of the world.  According to UN Statistics, 
there were 108,986 Comorians living abroad in 2012, mostly in France.  Remittances provide a 
steady and growing flow of foreign exchange. The most recent figures from the Central Bank of 
Comoros indicate that remittances represent 23 percent of GDP, 360 percent of Official 
Development Assistance (ODA), 66 percent of FDI, and 170 percent of the state budget (2012). 
However, they mostly finance private consumption, suggesting that their potential to support 
productive investment remains largely untapped 17. The microfinance sector in Comoros is 
relatively large and if policies to improve investment opportunities succeed, remittances could 
turn into a key source of financing for small-scale development.  

G.
 Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy 
35. 
Comoros officially adopted its Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy Paper 
(PRGSP) 2010-14 in 2009. The PRGSP continues the efforts begun under the I-PRSP to 

17 Remittances are concentrated in one of the islands and it is estimated that about 2/3 of all remitted funds are spent on Anda, or 
grand mariage ceremonies, an important social custom in Comoros.  

13 

 
                                                 
stabilize the economy, promote private sector growth, and improve delivery of social services. 
The strategy was prepared in a participatory manner with extensive consultations both at the 
Union and Island levels through working groups involving a broad range of stakeholders, 
including representatives from civil society, traditional and religious leaders, non-government 
organizations (NGOs), and development partners. Its vision is aligned with the objective of 
making progress towards the MDGs. Technical working groups were constituted at the ministries 
and the islands level to follow up the implementation of the PRGSP. 
36. 
The PRGSP outlines a strategy aimed at achieving three broad objectives: (i) robust 
economic growth; (ii) human and institutional capacity building; and (iii) strengthened 
governance and public management.  In support of these objectives the strategy outlines six key 
axes, or Core Strategies, for the Government’s poverty reduction program, as follows: (i) 
stabilize the economy and lay the groundwork for strong equitable growth; (ii) strengthen key 
sectors by focusing on institution-building and ensuring a broader role for the private sector; (iii) 
strengthen governance and social cohesion; (iv) improve the health status of the general public; 
(v) promote education and vocational training with the aim of developing human capital; and (vi) 
promote environmental sustainability and civil security.  
37. 
The second Annual Progress Report on the PRGSP that was discussed at the Board 
in November 2012 documented moderately positive implementation performance during 
2011. Although the reform agenda under the ECF arrangement with the Fund veered temporarily 
off-track in the first half of 2011 because of slippages in the fiscal and structural areas, 
performance improved markedly in the remainder of the year thanks to the adoption of critical 
corrective measures. On the structural front, the authorities completed a long-delayed census of 
the civil service, adopted new ministry personnel frameworks aimed at streamlining and moving 
towards a financially viable civil service, and developed a roadmap for the privatization of the 
public telecommunication company (Comores Télécom). Limited but encouraging progress was 
also recorded in the health and education sectors as infant and maternal mortality rates declined, 
and primary school enrolment rates improved slightly, including for girls. However, monitoring 
and evaluation of PRGSP implementation continued to be hampered by the lack of a 
comprehensive and reliable statistical system, as well as by the authorities’ limited technical 
expertise in key policy areas. 
38. 
Comoros is currently developing its next PRSP, the Strategy for Accelerated Growth 
and Sustainable Development (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Développement Durable 
(SCADD)) which is expected to be completed in 2014 and cover the 2015-19 period. While the 
process is in the early stages, the main strategic directions of the SCADD have begun to emerge, 
including the overarching objectives of accelerating growth and diversifying the economy in 
order to reduce poverty and inequality and create jobs. In addition to promoting growth, the 
strategy will target: (i) development of infrastructure; (ii) improving access to basic social 
services and increasing the resilience of households; and (iii) strengthening governance and 
institutional and human capacity. Development partners, including the Bank, are providing 
technical and analytical support for preparation of the strategy. Once the SCADD is finalized, the 
CPS program will be adjusted as needed to ensure alignment with the Government’s strategy.  

14 

 
II. World Bank Group Assistance Strategy 

A.
Implementation of the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) and Lessons Learned 
39. 
Reflecting the volatile political environment, the Bank’s program in Comoros has 
been guided by a series of interim strategy notes since 2000.  While this CPS does not include 
a CPS completion report that would systematically evaluate the Bank’s program since the last 
ISN, the 2010 ISN did include a set of outcomes and planned deliverables against which 
performance can be measured. These results are summarized in Annex 4.  The 2010 ISN was 
prepared in the context of positive developments including resolution of the political crisis 
between Anjouan and the Union in 2008 and improving inter-island relations and reforms in the 
structure of the federal administration following passage of the May 2009 Constitutional 
Amendment.  In this more favorable context, the Bank delivered all of the lending operations 
envisaged in the ISN, albeit with a delay in one case (see Table 3).  In addition, during FY13 the 
Bank was able to provide additional financing for the Emergency Crises Response Project. 
Support was also provided through the (now closed) regional Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries 
Project (SWIOFP) and a Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF)-financed Coastal Resource Co-
Management for Sustainable Livelihood Project that was approved in 2011. 

Table 3: Planned vs. Actual ISN Lending 

Planned 
Fiscal 
year 
2010 
2010 
2011 
2012 

Project 

US$(M) 

Status 

Development Policy Grant 
Emergency  Crises Response Project 
Economic Governance TAL 
Economic Reform Development Policy Grant 

3.0 
5.6 
2.0 
2.5 

Delivered 
Delivered 
Delivered 
Delivered (FY13) 

Actual 
Amt 
3.0 
5.3 
1.8 
5.0 

40. While progress in achieving ISN outcomes was mixed, overall the ISN program was 
successful in supporting Comoros to accelerate reforms.  Most notably, the ISN program was 
successful in its overarching objective of helping Comoros to achieve debt relief through the 
HIPC Initiative, working with the IMF, IFC and the authorities to reach the HIPC decision point 
in mid-2010 and the completion point by the end of 2012. Development policy operations and 
associated policy dialogue played an important role in helping Comoros to implement structural 
reforms in key areas including public financial management, restructuring public utilities, 
increasing access in the education and health sectors, and enhancing transparency of fisheries 
access and revenues. The Emergency Crises Response project (ECR) succeeded in increasing 
access to short-term employment and to basic social and economic services in areas affected by 
the rapid rise in food prices and severe flooding. The Economic Governance Technical 
Assistance project (EGTA) provided key support to the implementation of the reforms in the 
areas of public financial management and civil service reform. Fiduciary performance of both 
investment projects has been rated satisfactory throughout the ISN period and disbursement 
performance has been satisfactory, particularly under the ECR, which has disbursed and reached 
project targets at a faster pace than originally anticipated.   

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41. 
The ISN program was less successful in strengthening the knowledge base.  The ISN 
highlighted the need to invest in AAA that would enable the Bank to better understand the 
political economy of reform and lay the foundation for preparation of a growth-focused strategy 
by the end of the ISN period.  Some progress was made by delivering substantial knowledge 
through operations and trust funds but several planned outputs, including a Development Policy 
Review and Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), were delayed. Also, some core 
diagnostic products (e.g., Public Expenditure Reviews) have not been prepared for quite some 
time, in part hampered by the limited data available. On the other hand, policy notes on the 
political economy of civil service and energy reforms were prepared and a broader Governance 
and Anti-Corruption (GAC) review was launched in 2012 and is expected to be completed by the 
end of FY14. Sector diagnostic work progressed with technical studies prepared in connection 
with investment lending operations supplemented by a recently completed comprehensive set of 
policy notes on key growth sectors 
including, 
fisheries, agriculture, energy and 
telecommunications. Significant IFC advisory services included an investment climate 
assessment. Overall, however, significant gaps remain in the Bank’s knowledge of Comoros and 
further strengthening of the analytical foundations of the Bank program will continue to be a 
priority. Moreover, a thin evidence base, including a lack of data on poverty and service 
delivery, remains a challenge and highlights the need to support the strengthening of the 
Comoros national statistical system.   
42. 
The ISN also highlighted the challenge of improving the depth and quality of the 
Bank’s engagement in a small, remote client country without on-the-ground presence. 
During ISN implementation, responsibility for managing the Comoros program shifted from 
Kenya to Madagascar and a combined Madagascar/Comoros country team was formed to build 
synergies in support of these two francophone countries.  Key staff are increasingly based in the 
region, including the country economist, a lead economist covering Comoros and Madagascar, 
and the TTL for the EGTA project. A part-time locally-recruited consultant based in Moroni has 
supported the program. Bank presence has been more regular and the number of missions to 
Comoros has more than doubled since FY11 as the reform program gathered pace.  Meanwhile 
IFC established an office in 2012 to support its advisory activities.  Overall, the increased 
presence of Bank Group staff has proven valuable, particularly in light of Government capacity 
constraints.   
43. 
Implementation of the ISN generated important lessons that are reflected in this 
CPS. First, with respect to instruments, the ISN experience showed that development policy 
operations, supported by complementary TA, can support and sustain reforms in a low-capacity 
environment while serving as a tool for enhancing coordination with government. Development 
policy operations under the ISN were critical for helping Comoros to reach HIPC Completion. 
Second, sustained investment in building institutions pays off.  The long term investment in the 
capacity of the Fonds d'Appui au Développement Communautaire (FADC) through the ECR 
project and its predecessor, the Services Support Project, helped to build what is now one of the 
few institutions in Comoros with the management, staffing, administrative capacity, and 
decentralized structure to be able to effectively implement projects on all three islands.  Third, 
given the complex political environment in Comoros, effective support for governance reform 
and institution building requires going beyond provision of technical advice and finance to 
facilitating change management through inter-governmental dialogue aimed at gaining political 

16 

 
support for reforms.  Finally, getting results in a fragile, low capacity setting requires more 
intensive supervision and frequent interaction with counterparts.  

B.
Stakeholder Feedback 
44. 
CPS Consultations.  Consultations on the CPS were held in September 2013.  These 
included Government counterparts, (including representatives of all three islands), sectoral 
technical groups, representatives of NGOs, the private sector, and donors.  In general, the 
consultations indicated that the CPS is well-aligned with the Government’s emerging strategic 
priorities. In particular, the proposed CPS emphasis on growth and job creation is consistent with 
the planned pillars of the SCADD Strategy that is now being developed and is expected to be 
adopted in 2015. Participants emphasized the importance of support to the fisheries sector with 
an emphasis on support for fishermen's associations. Multiple interlocutors cited the issue of the 
lack of reliable statistics and the need for support in this area. Finally, strengthening of donor 
coordination was consistently identified as a priority to ensure synergies and maximum impact. 
45. 
Results of the Country Opinion Survey.  A country survey was conducted in June 2013 
inviting stakeholders of the Bank in Comoros to provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance. 
Participants in the survey were drawn from a wide variety of stakeholders including 
Government, bilateral and multilateral agencies, 
the private sector, academia/research 
institutes/think tanks, and other organizations.  Overall, the survey found that the Bank has 
established positive relationships in Comoros, and that stakeholders see an important role for the 
Bank in the country’s future. In terms of sector priorities, the survey found that governance is 
viewed as a top priority along with energy and jobs.  Survey responses showed that stakeholders 
believe that the Bank should emphasize (with lending and knowledge) energy, governance, jobs, 
and domestic private sector development. While views of the Bank were generally positive, 
especially with respect to the quality of Bank knowledge work and how the Bank collaborates on 
the ground with government and other donors, there was dissatisfaction expressed regarding the 
lack of Bank staffing in the country. 

C.

 Proposed World Bank Group Assistance Strategy 
i. 
Strategy Overview 
46. 
Favorable developments over the ISN period represent an important opportunity 
for the Bank and Comoros. Successful HIPC completion underpinned by greater political 
stability offer the possibility of acceleration of reform, growth and poverty reduction. Meanwhile 
the partnership between the Bank and Comoros has strengthened considerably, in large part 
through the HIPC process. In this context the overall objective of the CPS will be to consolidate 
and build on the gains of the past several years and support Government’s objectives to 
strengthen governance and promote private sector growth and job creation. The CPS will be 
guided by the principles of knowledge and selectivity. 
47. Knowledge: As discussed above, one legacy of instability and limited resources is a 
relative lack of Bank core knowledge products. For example there has not been a Country 
Economic Memorandum (CEM), Public Expenditure Review (PER) or Poverty Assessment (PA) 
in the past decade. The CPS program will prioritize addressing this knowledge deficit through 
core diagnostic and other AAA while supporting the development of government data and M&E 

17 

 
 
systems to facilitate evidence-based policy making.  The recently-completed policy notes series 
is a good first step in this direction, representing a comprehensive “first cut” diagnostic of 13 key 
policy areas. These have been used to inform the reform agenda in the new DPO series, 
beginning in FY14, and will support development of the upcoming SCADD. As CPS 
implementation progresses and the Bank develops a deeper understanding of the country context 
through the AAA program, the Bank will refine the CPS program and program IDA resources 
for maximum impact.   
48. 
Selectivity. To ensure that IDA and administrative budget resources are used to 
maximum effect, the following selectivity criteria will be applied: 
• Realism and readiness. Proposed interventions will aim at outcomes that are realistic in 
light of Government priorities and commitment to reform, and achievable given available 
implementation capacity. In the context of Comoros’ low capacity and history of 
fragility, the CPS also recognizes the potential for reversal of reforms and will therefore 
emphasize sustaining the achievements realized to date.  
• Comparative Advantage. The CPS program will focus on areas where the Bank has a 
recognized comparative advantage in Comoros such as economic governance, energy, 
telecoms, social protection and growth diagnostics. The program will not include sectors 
where other donors are active and can effectively respond, for example health, education, 
and transport.  
• Partnership and Leverage. The strategy will prioritize interventions that offer the 
opportunity to strengthen partnerships in order to increase impact and supplement 
national IDA resources with other funding sources such as regional IDA or bilateral 
financing.  
• Continuity. The CPS will emphasize continued financing for ongoing operations and 
instruments that have shown results. 
49. 
In line with these principles and recognizing the still developing relationship 
between Comoros and the Bank, the CPS proposes an approach that emphasizes 
consolidating the gains achieved to date while laying the ground work for further progress. 
The initial emphasis will be on using instruments that have proven effective in reforming key 
sectors (social protection, PFM reform and development policy operations) while implementing 
recently-approved infrastructure operations in electricity and ICT, which leverage partner and 
regional IDA resources.  At the same time, the Bank will carry out core diagnostic ESW and 
other AAA needed to build the Bank’s knowledge base on Comoros while maintaining flexibility 
to respond to the Government’s needs and the priorities to be identified in the upcoming poverty 
reduction strategy and by the new Government following presidential elections now expected in 
2016.  As CPS implementation progresses, the program will be refined on the basis of this 
knowledge work as well as the Government’s priorities as spelled out in the new PRSP.   

D.
 Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities  
50. 
The CPS is aligned with both Bank Group and country strategies.  The Bank 
program (knowledge, finance, and partnership) will be structured around two pillars: (i) 
Increased Public Sector Capacity; and (ii) Shared Growth and Increased Employment. These 
strategic priorities are aligned with the Government’s PRGSP and the Bank Group’s corporate 
strategic priorities of reducing extreme poverty and increasing shared prosperity.  The two pillars 
18 

 
of the strategy contribute directly to the objectives of reducing extreme poverty and increasing 
shared prosperity in Comoros. 
51. 
Activities under Pillar 1 of the CPS activities will aim at enhancing public sector 
capacity to deliver results by: (a) building the capacity to mobilize and effectively use public 
resources; and (b) addressing vulnerability at the national and household level. This pillar of the 
CPS program will seek to address the key drivers of fragility, namely the lack of trust between 
the islands, the resulting administrative inefficiencies and lack of accountability, and the 
consequent inability to effectively deliver services and public goods. The program will 
emphasize AAA and lending to improve PFM and civil service management as well as reforms 
in other areas that aim to increase transparency. This pillar of the CPS also seeks to reduce 
vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters at both the national and household levels 
and is aligned with Core Strategy 6 (Environmental Sustainability and Civil Security) of the 
PRGSP.  The program will build on an ongoing social protection project targeting the poorest 
and most vulnerable and provide AAA aimed at strengthening the technical capacity, the policy 
and regulatory framework and institutions responsible for disaster risk management. The PRGSP 
also focuses on reforms to address corruption and strengthen the judiciary, areas the CPS will 
explore through AAA with a view to identifying areas of possible support later in the CPS 
period.   
52. 
Pillar 2 focuses on strengthening the foundation for diversified and sustainable 
economic growth and is aligned with Core Strategies 1 and 2 of the PRGSP. The PRGSP 
strategy links growth to poverty reduction through a combined approach that targets the sectors 
where the poor are concentrated (e.g., small scale fisheries and agriculture), to directly and 
quickly increase their income, and by promoting development of new growth sectors over the 
medium term (e.g., tourism and ICT). The CPS program under this pillar features investment 
lending to address critical economy-wide infrastructure constraints to growth and job creation 
(energy, telecoms) along with knowledge and advisory services that will seek to identify the 
reforms and potential investments in the key sectors identified in the PRGSP as having the 
greatest potential to generate sustained economic growth (tourism, agriculture and fisheries).  
The program also aims to build on recent and planned IFC advisory work aimed at strengthening 
the enabling environment for private sector investment.   

Table 4: CPS Pillars and Results Areas 

Pillar 1: Increased Public Sector Capacity 

Pillar 2: Shared Growth and Increased 
Private Sector Employment 

• Public Financial Management 
• Civil Service Reform 
• Statistical Capacity Building  
• Social Protection 
• Strengthened Disaster Risk Management 

(Power, 

infrastructure 

• Strengthened 
Telecoms) 
Increased Employment and Income from 
Fisheries 
Improving 
 Competitiveness of 
the 
Business Environment and Investment 
Climate 

• 

• 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
1. Pillar 1: Increased Public Sector Capacity  
53. 
The PRGS identifies weak governance and political instability as among the most 
important obstacles to development in Comoros and highlights the need to strengthen 
social cohesion and trust by cementing the Constitution’s arrangements on power sharing 
between the Union and the islands. The CPS will contribute to this process through support for 
improved economic governance, greater public sector 
transparency, and strengthened 
accountability. DPOs and non-lending TA will support the government in redefining its 
governance and anti-corruption action plan and reforms. The CPS will also seek ways to 
strengthen the demand for good governance as an adjunct to supply-side interventions. 
Possibilities include social accountability tools like CSO monitoring that could contribute to 
improving service delivery as seen in other Bank-financed projects. Such initiatives could also 
help to tackle the widespread corruption in the country and complement existing supply-side 
efforts like the establishment of the National Anti-Corruption Commission (NACC).  
54. 
The proposed program under Pillar 1 also focuses on strengthening social 
protection programs and improving disaster risk management. An immediate priority will 
be to support the Government in the development of a social protection policy that would 
identify and address gaps in the existing social protection programs system in order to address 
the most pressing needs of the poor and vulnerable population.  Due to high unemployment and 
because economic growth moving forward is likely to face skills constraints, the program will 
support the development of measures to improve skills and employability which could possibly 
be implemented through a JSDF grant.  Consideration will be given to internal as well as 
external/regional skills development options. This will be informed by planned analytical work 
that will seek to identify skills gaps in the key sectors where employment growth is achievable in 
the short term including agriculture, fisheries, tourism, ICT, construction, and other services. The 
program under this pillar will be supported by AAA in poverty analysis, including a planned 
poverty and gender assessment based on the results of an ongoing household survey which will 
also inform the targeting strategy as part of social protection policy.  Disaster risk management 
(DRM) can be improved by supporting the Government to establish a DRM framework 
including policies, strategies and implementation plans to strengthening risk information, 
integrate this into sector development, establish risk financing mechanisms and increase 
preparedness and response capacities. 
55. 
Support for governance reforms is also mainstreamed throughout the proposed 
program.  In addition to the governance and public sector management objectives pursued under 
Pillar 1, sector governance and strengthening of institutional capacity is embedded in all 
operations.  For example, the Energy Sector Recovery Project focusses on management of the 
sector and has as its starting point a Recovery and Development Plan that establishes a 
performance and accountability framework for the power utility while also assisting in the 
development of the policy, legal and regulatory framework of the sector to improve supervision 
of the utilities’ performance and clarify institutional responsibilities and authorities. In 
telecommunications, the RCIP project investments in expanded fiber optic connectivity are 
backed up by a sector reform program based on privatization, market liberalization and effective 
regulation.  In fisheries, DPOs and investment lending aim to improve the transparency and 
monitoring of fishing agreements, licenses and related revenues.  Finally transparency and 

20 

 
accountability for results will be supported through statistical strengthening at the national and 
sector level.  
Results Area 1: Public Financial Management 
56. 
In support of its PRGSP, the Government finalized a comprehensive PFM Reform 
Strategy for the period 2010-19. Bank support for implementation of this strategy is being 
provided through the DPO series and an EGTA project that focuses on increasing the efficiency, 
accountability, and transparency of public financial management and improving the management 
of human resources and wages within the civil service. Budget transparency has improved with 
the publication of budget data on the government’s official website since May 2013 but progress 
has been slow (less than half of the milestones under the action plan for 2010-12 were achieved) 
and much more needs to be done to develop robust and reliable systems supporting the revised 
institutional framework and establish appropriate checks and balances. A new detailed action 
plan for 2014-17 is under preparation. Additional financing for the EGTA project, together with 
African Development Bank (AfDB) support (through its Institutional Capacity Building project) 
is expected to result in further strengthening of the budget process and deployment of an 
integrated financial management information system by 2016 18. This will result in more timely, 
comprehensive and accurate budget reporting. The DPO series will focus on enhancing 
transparency in economic management, improving Treasury management, and strengthening 
debt management. A public expenditure review (PER) will be prepared to explore alternatives 
for creating fiscal space through enhanced revenue collection, greater use of Public/Private 
Partnerships (PPPs), and improved expenditure management.  The Bank will also maintain a 
dialogue in the oil and gas sector and, depending on developments, may support development of 
these resources in conjunction with partners and in line with global best practice, guided by 
transparency principles. 
Results Area 2: Civil Service Reform (CSR) 
57. 
Comoros has launched multiple attempts at reforming the civil service during the 
past 20 years. However since adoption of the Civil Service Law in 2004 the reform process has 
yet to move beyond basic issues related to civil service structure. While the support under the 
EGTA project has strengthened the civil service payroll system, recent developments and 
constraints in the implementation of the organic framework under the new constitutional 
arrangement for Island autonomy and the HIPC completion points, underscored: (i) a lack of 
strategy; and (ii) continued institutional weakness. The CPS program will seek to reinvigorate 
the CSR reform process by supporting the preparation of a comprehensive civil service reform 
strategy. Reflecting lessons learned during ISN implementation, this will be complemented by 
enhanced change management processes supported by the World Bank Institute (WBI)  
Leadership for Results team. The latter is expected to help overcome opposition to reform by 
allowing key decision makers (politicians and civil servants) access to training, coaching and 
mentoring in the areas of leadership, change management, communication and consensus 
building. Support will be provided through the restructured EGTA project, non-lending technical 
assistance and DPOs and linked with activities supported by other development partners 
including AfDB, the IMF, and UNDP.  The result is expected to be a further increase in the use 

18 The Integrated Financial Management Information System is being jointly financed by IDA and AfDB. 

21 

 
                                                 
of the automated payroll system and clarification of the roles of the Union and Islands 
governments regarding the civil service. 
Results Area 3: Statistical Capacity Building 
58. 
Comoros faces a huge statistical gap and lacks capacity to produce statistical data, 
undermining government’s capacity to design, implement, monitor and evaluate policies 
(see Annex 4).  The law to modernize the national statistical system was adopted in March 2011 
and established the National Council of Statistics (NCS) and envisions the creation of the 
National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies and Demographics (INSEED). However, 
since adoption of the law, little progress has been made. The forthcoming DPO supports the 
adoption of a decree to make the NCS operational while a recently approved grant from the Trust 
Fund on Statistical Capacity Building is supporting reform of the statistical system, including: (i) 
strengthening the capacity of the staff in the Department; (ii) strengthening dissemination of 
statistics; (iii) support for the preparation of the national census in 2014; and (iv) support for the 
creation of the INSEED. This will be complemented by support provided by other donors and 
through the Southwest Indian Ocean (SWIO) Fisheries operation that will establish a fisheries 
information system to improve statistics on catch, fish stocks, fishing communities and other 
fisheries-related data.  
Results Area 4: Social Protection 
59. Given the Comoros high level of poverty and the likelihood that policies to stimulate 
growth and employment will take some time to bear fruit, there is a need to strengthen 
programs to assist the poor and vulnerable immediately.  At present however, there are very 
few social protection programs. Those which exist (cash-for-work, for example) are largely 
financed by donors and there are large gaps in coverage (for example, nutrition).  The ongoing 
ECR project which supports cash for work through the FADC provides short term employment 
to the most vulnerable people affected by a succession of crises (oil crisis, food crisis, Anjouan 
embargo, etc.) while at the same time the activities help to maintain critical infrastructure (e.g. 
rural roads) and protect the environment. Under the CPS, the Bank program will build on this 
success and international experience to help Comoros develop a social protection strategy and 
design appropriate programs. A follow-on social protection operation is planned for FY15. 
Comoros can draw from the rich experiences in the region, including post-conflict countries, 
where innovative social assistance programs have been combined with training and access to 
basic services. In addition to generating short-term employment opportunities, consideration will 
be given to supporting households over a longer period of time with a view towards their 
productive development. Consideration will also be given to developing conditional cash transfer 
mechanism to address demand side constraints in health, nutrition and education. 
Results Area 5: Disaster Risk Management 
60. Given the vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change there is a need to 
strengthen institutions and practices.  The 2012 floods highlighted the vulnerability of 
Comoros, as a small island state and revealed major gaps in disaster risk management.  Comoros 
has moved to strengthen disaster risk management institutions by creating a civil security 
directorate and establishing a national platform for disaster risk reduction in order to move away 
from ad hoc disaster response to ex ante disaster risk reduction and preparedness. The ongoing 

22 

 
‘Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction for Sustainable Poverty Reduction in the Comoros’ 
project supports the strengthening of these institutions and seeks to mainstream disaster risk 
reduction into national policies. This is implemented in partnership with the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) and complements support in disaster risk management 
provided by other development partners such as the European Union (EU) and Agence Française 
de Développement (AFD). To further strengthen knowledge in risk reduction, this project as well 
as two regional projects, both funded by grants from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction 
and Recovery (GFDRR) 19, will support risk and vulnerability assessments for high-risk areas, 
establishing a national risk profile and inter-island knowledge exchange and cooperation in 
disaster risk management. This information will be used to establish an open-source data 
platform for natural hazard information and will facilitate the formulation of a country specific 
disaster risk financing strategy. Further support will be provided in contingency planning and 
disaster preparedness in selected communities, in follow up to the flood impact assessment and 
training provided in 2012, with an emphasis on data preparedness and capacity building.  
2. Pillar 2: Shared Growth and Increased Private Sector Employment 
Results Area 1: Strengthened Infrastructure 
61. 
Improving power supply is critical for achieving faster growth and poverty 
reduction. The acute power supply situation is due to a number of linked factors: poor billing 
and collection practices, difficulties with the purchase of fuel, and inability to carry out periodic 
and appropriate maintenance on generators. These factors are all linked to the operational and 
technical performance of Gestion de l’Eau et l’Electricité aux Comores (Water and Power 
Utility in Comoros (MA-MWE). The AfDB has taken a lead role in the sector and is leading 
overall coordination. The Bank, the EU, and AFD have agreed on specific areas of focus within 
the overall engagement in the sector. Qatar is also coordinating with the AfDB to provide 
significant funding while the Export-Import Bank of India has extended financing for expanded 
generation capacity. Within this framework, the Bank is focusing its engagement on supporting 
the development of MA-MWE’s commercial and financial performance. The US$5 million 
Electricity Sector Recovery Project (ESR) will finance technical assistance to improve the 
utility’s technical, commercial, financial and operational performance and to implement the 
proposed program of investments.  The project is expected to result in increased collections and 
reduced losses which, in addition to contributing to fiscal consolidation, will over time lead to an 
increase in the availability and reliability of power.  This in turn will facilitate investment and 
job creation.   
Comoros has embarked on a wide-ranging program of reform 
in 
the 
62. 
telecommunications sector based on a roadmap that encompasses privatization of the 
incumbent operator, Comoros Telecom, licensing of a second operator, creation of independent 
Internet Services Providers (ISPs) and introduction of additional competition, and strengthening 
of the regulator. The CPS will continue Bank Group support for this process through IFC 
advisory services and IDA financing. With IFC advisory support, Government has submitted to 
the National Assembly legislation to privatize Comoros Telecom. Under the Fourth Phase of the 

19 ‘Support for the Establishment for a Technical Center for Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change 
Adaptation’ and the ‘Indian Ocean Islands Catastrophe Risk Profiling & Financing Initiative’ (pipeline).  

23 

 
                                                 
Regional Communications Infrastructure Project (RCIP-4), approved in September 2013, IDA is 
providing technical assistance to support sector reforms and increasing connectivity by financing 
Comoros’ participation in the FLY-LION3 cable that links Comoros with Mayotte and 
Madagascar. The latter will enhance competition by enabling a future second operator, as well as 
future ISPs, to gain access to international connectivity at equivalent prices to those offered to 
Comoros Telecom.  Implementation of RCIP-4 is expected to better integrate Comoros within 
the region, facilitating an increase in regional trade and better competitiveness internationally. 
This is expected to reduce retail prices and increase internet access from both fixed and mobile 
platforms. By facilitating cheaper access to the internet, the project will promote employment 
and over time will improve Government’s efficiency and transparency by enabling e-
Government applications. Improved access and quality of ICT services will also have positive 
social benefits by reducing isolation and enhancing economic activities in poorer rural areas and 
by creating additional opportunities for women entrepreneurs to own ICT-related SMEs.  
Results Area 2: Increased Employment and Income from Fisheries 
The PRGSP prioritizes the fisheries sector as one of the sectors with significant 
63. 
potential to generate growth and employment. With the support of multiple donors including 
the EU, Japan and Qatar, efforts to date have centered on modernization of the fleet and key 
facilities along with training and technical assistance in fisheries management.  An ongoing 
JSDF grant managed by the Bank targets poorer fishing communities and provides capacity 
building in conservation and collaborative resource management. The Economic Reform DPO 
also supported improvement in sector governance by introducing systematic disclosure of fishing 
agreements, licenses and related revenues. The CPS envisages further support to the sector, 
complementing the activities of other donors, through the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries 
Governance and Shared Growth Program (SWIOFish), an IDA regional project that will also 
include Tanzania, Mozambique, and Seychelles and is aimed at increasing shared benefits from 
economic growth based on sustainable fisheries and coastal marine resources by: (i) 
strengthening capacity to manage fisheries at the national and regional level; (ii) investing to 
increase the profitability and sustainability of fisheries and value chains, and boost the value-
added captured by Comoros and the other SWIO countries; (iii) supporting policies that improve 
the sharing of benefits derived from sustainable use of marine living resources in particular 
through pro-poor and community fisheries; and (iv) building robust and cost-effective regional 
cooperation on fisheries.  The primary program beneficiaries are the coastal artisanal fishing 
communities. About half the fisheries labor force are women, who are mostly engaged in 
processing and marketing but also have an important role in managing household finances, and 
shoreline collection of shellfish. 
Results Area 3: Improving the Business Environment and Investment Climate 
64. 
Building on initial progress made under IFC’s Investment Climate program, the 
Bank and IFC will continue to provide analytic and advisory support to improve the 
business and investment climate. With IFC support, the government continues to implement 
reforms to improve the business environment and unlock binding constraints to private sector 
development. This includes the development of small business, development of improved 
financial tools (i.e., leasing) to support SMEs, and the creation of alternative business dispute 
resolution mechanisms. Bank and IFC advisory services will continue to support legal and 

24 

 
regulatory reforms with a focus on the public enterprise and banking sectors, and in land reform. 
For IFC, a major near-term focus will be on supporting the implementation of reforms to 
facilitate leasing. Bank ESW on Growth and Employment will explore the constraints and 
opportunities in the priority growth sectors identified by government with a view to identifying 
the critical reforms and investment needed to spur investment and job creation.  
65. 
Strengthening the capacity of Government and the private sector will be featured in 
the strategy.  Both Government and the private sector lack technical know-how and institutional 
capacity to conceive, prepare, market and execute projects requiring investment finance, such as 
for development of infrastructure or promising value chains in industries, such as agribusiness, 
fisheries, tourism and derivative businesses in construction, transportation, ICT and professional 
support services. Ongoing and recently completed technical assistance financed by the 
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and the Global Partnership on 
Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) trust funds focuses on the potential for public-private partnerships 
(PPPs) in water and sanitation and solid waste management. During the CPS, the Bank Group 
will seek to mobilize additional trust funds to assist in strengthening the legal and regulatory 
framework for PPPs and build capacity for PPP project development. In addition, encouraging 
and supporting entrepreneurship through pilot programs and special funding facilities supported 
by technical assistance (e.g. Business Plan Competition) will also be considered to complement 
IFC training and education programs for entrepreneurs. These efforts would be complemented by 
policy reforms advanced through the DPO series. 
66. 
The Bank Group will support efforts by Comoros to increase the contribution of 
remittances by facilitating transfers, exploring the feasibility of creating a diaspora bond 
and supporting complementary strengthening of the financial sector. Comoros’ large 
diaspora offers a significant opportunity to support development by increasing direct 
investments, improving access to foreign savings of the diaspora, establishing contacts to 
promote trade and investment, and transferring technology. Currently, informal transfers account 
for approximately 80 percent of remittances due to the high cost of formal channels (up to 10 
percent of the principal). As with other potential investors and trading partners, diaspora 
members seeking to invest in or trade with Comoros are constrained by the poor business 
environment in the country. Focus group discussions with the Comorian diaspora in France 
facilitated by the Bank indicate that there is considerable interest in harnessing remittances for 
productive investment. During the CPS period, the Bank and IFC will work with Government 
and partners to reduce the transaction cost of transferring remittances and to facilitate diaspora 
access to investment opportunities at home. Complementary assistance to stabilize and 
strengthen the banking system, including the fast-growing microfinance sector will be supported 
by trust funds from the Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening (FIRST) initiative. Similarly, 
the FIRST trust fund could support the technical strategy for modernization of financial 
infrastructure such as the payments systems architecture for clearing and settlement of 
transactions, which would also enable the economy to benefit more efficiently from mobile 
payments, remittance flows, credit reporting and financial transactions with the largest 
commercial trading partners. 

25 

 
E.
Implementing the FY14-17 Country Assistance Strategy 
67. 
The national IDA allocation for the CPS period is expected to be about US$25 
million based on an indicative average annual IDA financing over FY2014 to FY2017 
period of US$6 million 20. The CPS period encompasses the final year of IDA16 and the full 
IDA17 allocation.  The CPS financing program leverages national IDA resources with an 
estimated US$29.4 million in regional IDA funds (through the RCIP-4 and the planned 
SWIOFish projects) for an overall CPS IDA envelope of about US$60 million. 
68. 
The CPS will feature a mix of instruments in support of the proposed program.  As 
outlined above, a series of DPOs will form the core of the Bank financing program and will be 
designed to deepen and sustain the reform process initiated under the HIPC process with a focus 
on strengthening economic governance, enhancing transparency across the Union and island 
governments, and improving efficiency in key infrastructure sectors (electricity and ICT). 
Complementary technical assistance will be critical to the success of the DPO instrument and the 
ongoing EGTA operation will continue to be important in this regard. The planned DPO series of 
US$3 million per year together with the planned social protection operation in FY15 accounts for 
about two thirds of the expected national IDA17 allocation.  The balance of the IDA program 
will be programmed later on the basis of analytical work to be carried out in FY14 and FY15 and 
the Government’s new poverty reduction strategy.  The CPS results framework will be updated 
accordingly at the time of the CPS Progress Report.   

Table 5: Proposed IDA Lending Program 

FY 14 
IDA Regional 
IDA 

FY 15 
IDA Regional 
IDA1 

FY 16 FY 17 

IDA 

IDA 

Pillar 1: Increased Public Sector Capacity  
Social Protection  
Economic Governance Reform DPO (series) 

Economic Governance TAL (AF) 

Pillar 2: Shared Growth and Increased Employment  
Energy Sector Recovery 
Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance 
Regional Comm. Infrastructure – Phase 4 
Total 

3.8 

3.5 

5.0 

0.8 
13.1 

3.0 
3.0 

1.2 

7.2 

21.2 
21.2 

3.0 

3.0 

8.3 

8.3 

3.0 

3.0 

1/ Regional IDA allocation is notional. The actual allocation will depend on eligibility of project activities for Regional 
IDA funding 

20 The amounts shown in outer years are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on: (i) total IDA resources 
available, (ii) the country’s performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA assistance 
(grants/credits) and the allocation deductions associated with Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) annual debt 
service foregone; (iv) the performance, other allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA 
borrowers; and (v) the number of IDA-eligible countries. 

26 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
                                                 
69. Knowledge activities will play a central role in the CPS Program.  Raising the 
efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure is a high priority for Comoros but further 
analysis is needed to help define options for prioritizing expenditure, expanding revenue 
mobilization and improving management of existing resources. An early priority will therefore 
be to complete a PER to help define the reform program. This will be complemented by 
technical assistance in debt and public investment management. The Statistical Development and 
Mapping Service Delivery TA activities will help to generate the critical information needed to 
support decision making and monitor results and will be closely coordinated with partners. These 
will also help pave the way for a Poverty and Gender Assessment to be prepared once required 
household survey data is available.   
Diagnostic ESW will also be important to help develop the reform agenda under 
70. 
Pillar 2. The planned Growth and Employment ESW will seek to identify key bottlenecks 
including policies, skills, and technology that need to be addressed in support of the 
Government’s growth and employment creation agenda. The aim will be to develop specific 
reforms and investment opportunities in the sectors with the greatest potential for growth and 
employment creation such as agribusiness and tourism.  During the CPS, the Bank will explore 
South-South learning opportunities with a view to sharing experience of other small island states 
that have managed to overcome obstacles similar to those faced by Comoros.   

Table 6:  CPS Selected Knowledge Services Program, FY14-17 

CPS Pillars 
Pillar 1 Increased Public Sector 
Capacity 

Pillar 2 Shared Growth and 
Increased Employment 

FY14-17 
Public Expenditure Review 
Debt Management TA (TF) 
Supporting Statistical Development TA (TF) 
Mapping Service Delivery TA 
Governance and Anti-Corruption TA  
Poverty and Gender Assessment 
Comoros Policy Notes Series 
Multi-hazard Risk Assessment (TF) 

Growth and Employment ESW 
Comoros Policy Notes Series 
Private Sector Development TA  
Banking Sector Legal Framework TA (TF) 
PPP Preparation and Execution Framework TA 

F.
Partnerships and Donor Coordination 
71. 
Like many small countries, Comoros is highly dependent on donor support.  Overall 
donor support is equal to 10 percent of GDP and in some sectors donor support accounts for far 
more than government resources.  For example, donors contribute more than 80 percent of the 
funds allocated to the health sector.  There is a consensus among government and donors that 
more could be done to harmonize donor efforts and improve results. Recent efforts to strengthen 
harmonization include the creation of Development Partners Forum (DPF) in May 2013, under 
the leadership of the UNDP. Coordination takes place at the sector level, including in public 
financial management, energy, telecoms, support on statistics, governance and anti-corruption 
and social sectors. The DPF has tried to involve and open the dialogue to non-traditional donors, 

27 

 
 
 
 
which has been limited to date. During the CPS period, the Bank Group will support 
Government’s efforts to strengthen the coordination mechanisms now in place and fully engage 
the donor community around the PRGSP agenda.  
72. 
The Bank Group is a relatively small donor in Comoros and needs to coordinate its 
efforts closely with other development partners to improve its impact.  The most active 
development partners are France, the EU, and UN agencies (see Box 2). Arab League donors 
have played an important role. A donor conference held in Doha in March 2010 on investment 
and development of the Comoros resulted in pledges of around US$540 million, mainly from 
Arab countries, through bi-lateral financing, and private and NGO investment, notably in the 
social sectors. An ‘Arab Committee’ was formed under the leadership of Qatar to lead the 
realization of Doha projects in the sectors of health, airport security and rehabilitation, road 
infrastructure, fisheries, agriculture, and transport. Several Arab League countries including 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are also providing budget support.  

Box 2: Official Development Assistance to Comoros 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Components of Net ODA 

IDA

Other Multilateral

Bilateral

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Top Donors  
France 
EU Institutions 
UN Agencies 
United Arab Emirates 
IMF 
Japan 

2009-11 avg (US$ m) 
22.2 
11.6 
6.6 
6.0 
4.0 
3.5 

16%

14%

12%

10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%

Net ODA as % of GNI 

Comoros
HIPC Countries
Low income

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Sectors 
Debt Relief 
Infrastructure 
Education 
Health and Population 
Multisector and Other 
Other Social Sectors 
Program Assistance 

2009-2011 Share 
3% 
17% 
16% 
10% 
11% 
22% 
21% 

Source: OECD DAC, World Development Indicators 

s

n

o

i
l
l
i

m

$

S

U

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73. 
The CPS program seeks to position Bank support in areas that are well aligned with 
the efforts of other donors and where the Bank can make a unique and catalytic 
contribution.  For example in the power sector, while the Bank’s support to the sector is 
relatively small compared with other support currently being discussed (US$5 million compared 
with US$23 million from the AfDB, US$10 million from Qatar and a line of credit of US$41.6 
million with Export-Import Bank of India, the Bank’s support is targeted at important policy- 
making institutions of the sector, further supported by DPOs.  Similarly, support for key 
structural reforms and strengthening governance (especially PFM reforms) are expected to have 
far-reaching benefits although the level of financing will be relatively modest.   

III. Risks and Mitigation 
74. 
Renewed political instability is the main risk to achievement of CPS objectives. 
While the country will not have a new presidential election until 2016, the legislative campaign 
will start in 2015 and fragility in the political environment remains a challenge. Renewed 
instability would result in a slowdown or reversal of the Government’s reform program and the 
delivery of planned financing under the CPS. The Union government is well aware that careful 
attention to the political economy of inter-island fiscal tensions requires steps to foster trust 
among the parties and continued consensus building. Donors, including the Bank, have only 
limited capacity to mitigate this risk.  Nevertheless, support by the international community for a 
constructive dialogue between the Union and Island governments can help.  The CPS program’s 
focus on increasing transparency in economic governance will also help mitigate this risk by 
contributing to greater trust and reducing tensions over issues related to the sharing of resources 
across the islands. 
75. 
There is a risk that the Government’s reform program could stall because of 
complacency or internal opposition to reforms.  Reaching the HIPC completion point was a 
major achievement and there is a risk that this could be seen as a culmination rather than the 
starting point for further reforms. Some reforms (e.g., civil service and State-Owned Enterprise 
(SOE) restructuring) are almost certain to trigger strong opposition. A concerted effort among 
the donor community accompanied by substantial financial and technical assistance to carry out 
these reforms will help the Government to persevere. Moreover, a more dynamic communication 
strategy from both the government and donors, providing examples of similar reforms 
implemented in peer countries, will provide a more balanced picture of the long-term gains of the 
reforms beyond the short-term costs. Financial assistance, particularly the DPO series, will be 
contingent on implementation of reforms and therefore will also serve to reinforce the process, 
but delivery of IDA financing, particularly DPOs, would be delayed by a slowdown or reversal 
of reforms.  
76. 
Capacity constraints could undermine reforms and weaken project implementation. 
The Government’s reform agenda is highly ambitious in light of the limited institutional, 
technical, and financial resources at its disposal. The lack of government implementation 
capacity is a critical challenge and could undermine achievement of project outcomes or prior 
actions delaying CPS program implementation. The authorities and donors are tackling this issue 
by: (i) coordinating and, when possible, consolidating their interventions, including through a 
new informal platform and consultation of development partners implemented in Moroni under 

29 

 
the leadership of the UNDP; (ii) providing significant parallel technical assistance and capacity-
building interventions; and (iii) focusing the reform agenda on a limited number of achievable 
measures. The Bank has also stepped up its engagement through more frequent missions in order 
to address implementation constraints.   
77. 
Comoros remains vulnerable to a worsening of the global economic context, 
especially in the Euro zone. The main channel of impact is that of remittances (about 25 percent 
of GDP), with a large Comorian community living in France. However, remittances remained 
buoyant in recent years despite the 2008 global crisis and subsequent slowdown in European 
economies. Price shocks on key import commodities, notably oil and food, could also depress 
growth and unsettle external and fiscal balances. Even with stronger growth and continued 
efforts to stay the course on fiscal consolidation, the Government lacks the fiscal space needed to 
adjust to external shocks if and when they occur. To address this, in consultation with 
development partners, the timing and sequencing of budget support provided under the CPS will 
be adjusted as needed to reflect economic circumstances. 
78. 
Comoros’ vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change remains a constant 
threat. Cyclones, floods, landslides and sea level rise are among the natural hazards that will 
become more erratic and severe as climate change intensifies, while a major volcanic eruption in 
the coming decade cannot be ruled out. These risks can be mitigated by a set of measures that 
Comoros and its partners are working on in terms of assessing the risks, adopting mitigating and 
adaptive measures, and strengthening institutions and capacities for preparedness, including early 
warning and response.  A key element of success will be the intra-island coordination as well as 
cooperation with neighboring Indian Ocean states. The flexible design of the CPS will allow the 
Bank to respond dynamically in case  significant exogenous shocks materialize. 
. 

30 

 
Country Development Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Objectives and Indicators 

Bank Group Program (and 
Partners) 

Annex 1: Comoros CPS Results Matrix 

Pillar 1: Increased Public Sector Capacity 

Enhance 
Public 
Financial 
Management (in terms of increased 
efficiency, 
accountability 
and 
transparency in the use of public and 
donor resources) 

PFM information 
systems are rudimentary 
and obsolete 

Budget preparation is 
delayed and the process 
is non-participatory  

Undertake Civil Service Reform 

Strengthen Statistical Capacity 

High wage bill and 
frequent salary arrears  

Weak checks and 
balances in civil service 
recruitment 

Weak capacity to 
produce statistical data 
contributes to a lack of 
transparency and 
evidence-based planning 
and policy making 

Improved Public Financial Management 

• The composition of budget expenditure deviates from the 
original budget by less than 5%  (PEFA PI-2 rating increases 
from D (2007) to D+ (2016)) 
• Budget execution reports are published (on the web or national 
media) regularly and include social sectors and/or priority 
sectors 
• Cash management plans integrating the Union and island 
treasuries are operational by 2016 

Enhanced transparency in the fight against corruption 

• Percentage of senior officials with completed, publicly 
available Asset Declaration Forms increases from 30% (2013) 
to 80 % (2015). 

Ongoing  
Economic Governance TAL 
Institutional Capacity Building Project 
(AfDB) 

Lending 
Economic Governance TA Additional 
Financing 
Economic Governance Reform DPO 

AAA 

Public Expenditure Review 
Public Investment Policy Note 
Governance and Anti-Corruption TA 

Strengthened civil service management 

• The share of civil servants paid through the automated payroll 
system increases from 50%  (2010) to 90%  (2015) 
• Inter-islands arrangement clarifying hiring authority and 
payment responsibility concluded by 2015 

Ongoing 
Economic Governance TAL 

Lending 
Economic 
Governance 
Additional Financing 

TAL 

Increased capacity to gather and release statistics in accordance 
with international standards 

Statistical Strengthening TA 

• WB Index of Statistical Capacity increases from 44 (2012) to 
50 (2017) 

Mapping 
for Evidence-Based and 
Equitable Social Service Delivery 
(TA) 

Institutional Capacity Building Project 
(AfDB) 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
Reduce Social Vulnerability 

Improve Management of Disasters 
and Climate Risks 

Issues and Obstacles 
The policy and 
institutional framework 
for social protection are 
unclear and not guided 
by an overall strategy  

Lack of short term 
employment opportunity 
for vulnerable.  

Existing social protection 
programs have limited 
scope and coverage 
Poor regulatory and 
policy framework. 
Limited knowledge of 
areas at risk to a variety 
of natural disasters.  
Limited capacity of 
governmental actors to 
effectively intervene, 
coordinate and 
communicate; lack of 
baseline data to assess 
impact of floods; limited 
awareness and 
preparedness of the 
affected communities, 
local and central 
government institutions.  

CPS Objectives and Indicators 
Improved effectiveness of social protection programs to enhance 
the resilience of poor to shocks. 

• Revised Social Protection Policy adopted. 
• Number of people benefitting from cash-for-work and basic 
services/infrastructure increases from 43,000 to 53,000 by 
2016.   

Improved regulatory framework for DRR 
• Development and adoption of a national DRR policy and a 
strategy for its implementation. 
Improved knowledge base on natural hazards 
• National multi-hazard disaster profile in place and open risk 
information data platform established, operational and 
accessible to all. 
Improved surveillance, coordination and communication 
• Early warning tested and operational, for both volcanic and 
meteorological hazards 

Bank Group Program (and 
Partners) 

Ongoing:  
Emergency Crises Response Project 

Lending 
Social Protection Project (FY15) 

AAA 

Poverty and Gender Assessment 

Mapping 
for Evidence-Based and 
Equitable Social Service Delivery 

AAA 
National DRM Project 

Regional Project to strengthen DRM 
capacity and knowledge exchange 

Regional Disaster Risk assessment and 
Financing Initiative Project 

Enhance 
supply 

reliability of 

electrical 

Pillar 2: Shared Growth and Increased Employment 

Electricity 
supply 
is 
sporadic due 
to high 
technical 
and 
commercial 
losses 
that 
leave MAMWE unable 
to 
finance 
fuel 
and 
maintenance 

Improvement in the commercial and financial performance of the 
electricity sector 

• MAMWE collection rate improves from 55% to 70% by 2017 
• MAMWE total losses reduced from  45% to 37.5% by 2017 

Lending 

Energy Sector Recovery Project 
(FY14) 
Comoros – Energy Sector Support 
Programs (AfDB) 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
Improve 
International 
Telecom 
Connectivity 

Increase Income and Employment 
from Fisheries  

Issues and Obstacles 
Basic communications 
and Internet services are 
not affordable due to 
lack of connectivity to 
global fiber optic 
broadband infrastructure 
and lack of competition 
in voice and data 
services   
Overexploitation, 
ecosystem degradation, 
illicit fishing activities, 
and 
lack 
of 
local 
participation 
in value 
chains.  

CPS Objectives and Indicators 
Increased access and voice/internet connectivity 

• Number of Internet subscribers (fixed & mobile) increases 
from 5,400 to 66,000 by 2017 
• Number of licensed internet service providers increases from 1 
to 4. 
• Number of licensed telecom operators increases from 1 (2013) 
to 2 (2015) 

Bank Group Program (and 
Partners) 

Lending 
Regional Communications 
Infrastructure Program (FY14) 

IFC Transaction Advisory services 

Strengthened capacity of governments and coastal communities 
to effectively manage selected priority fisheries 
• Number of new bilateral and/or multilateral protocols on 
fisheries entered into by Comoros (Baseline: 0 ; Target: 2) 
• Management Plans with measures to control fishing efforts for 
priority fisheries developed. (Baseline: 0 ; Target: 1) 

Ongoing 
Coastal Resources Co-Management 
for Sustainable Livelihood (JSDF) 
Lending 
Southwest 
Indian Ocean Fisheries 
Project (FY15) 

Increase private sector income and 
employment 

Regulatory burden 
high 

is 

Improved policy and regulatory environment in targeted areas 

IFC Advisory 

of 

Weak 
regulation 
financial sector  
Limited financial product 
offerings and payments 
infrastructure 

Weak 
capacity 
for 
investment 
project 
launch and realization 

• Cost to register a business reduced by 50% by 2017 
• Strengthened Legal and Regulatory Framework for PPPs 
adopted 

Investment Climate Advisory services 

Improving Youth Employability for 
Private Sector Development (JSDF) 

AAA 
Growth and Employment ESW 
Banking Sector Reforms TA 
PPP Preparation 
and Execution 
Framework TA 
Diaspora Finance Options 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Debt Sustainability Analysis Update 
1.      This debt sustainability analysis (LIC-DSA) updates the assessment included in the 
HIPC completion point documentation, 21 using the forward-looking debt sustainability 
framework (DSF) for low-income countries.  In line with the previous DSA exercise, the 
present analysis concludes that Comoros is in high risk of debt distress and debt dynamics 
remain vulnerable to a number of shocks over the projection period. 
2.      Comoros reached the decision point of the HIPC Initiative in July 2010 and was 
granted debt relief by a number of multilateral and bilateral creditors, following the 
completion point in December 2012. The authorities have continued making good faith efforts 
toward completing agreements with Paris Club and non-Paris Club bilateral creditors, as well as 
other official and commercial creditors on the provision of debt relief on terms compatible with  
the relief accorded under the November 2009 Paris Club Agreement and in the context of the 
HIPC Initiative. Understandings have now been reached with all the major non-Paris Club 
creditors, representing 16 percent of the total nominal stock of debt at end-2011. This includes, 
the Abu Dhabi Fund for Development, the Arab Bank for Development in Africa, the Islamic 
Development Bank, the Kuwait Fund, the Saudi Fund for Development, and Mauritius. One new 
loan (US$41.6 million) was contracted in 2013 for project financing, but fell slightly below 
concessionality benchmark established under the ECF.  

Te x t Table 1. Nom ina l of Stock of Ex te rna l Debt
(Mi l l ions of U.S. dol la rs; end-of-pe riod)
2012 1 
130.9
96.7
14.7
10.7
0.0
28.3
43.1
32.5
5.0
27.6
0.0
0.6
27.0
0.0
1.6

Tota l e x te rna l debt
Mult ilateral c reditors
   IMF
   IDA
AfDB
BADEA
Other mult ilateral c reditors
Of f ic ial B ilaterals
Paris Club c reditors
Non-Paris c lub c reditors
UAE 
Maurit ius
Kuwait
India 3
Commerc ial c reditors

2013 2
172.3
96.6
14.7
10.6
0.0
28.3
43.0
74.0
5.0
69.1
0.0
0.5
27.0
41.6
1.6

1  After HIPC and MDRI relief. Part of the debt was s t ill under res truc turing/negot iat ion. 
2  Following Paris Club cancellat ion of all of its HIPC-eligible deb, rescheduling of 
short-term debt in arrears , and res truc turing non-Paris c lub debt . 
3  Disbursements are expec ted over a 4-year period, s tart ing in 2014. 

21 Union of the Comoros—Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries—Completion Point Document 
and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (EBS/12/155, 12/03/12). 

34 

 
 
                                                 
3.      The present value of the stock of debt at 20.2 percent of GDP slightly exceeds that in 
the last DSA prepared in December 2012, reflecting some depreciation of the exchange 
rate. The DSA takes into account all debt relief granted to date by multilateral organizations, 
Paris Club creditors, and the current status of relief provided by non-Paris Club creditors. The 
DSA also adds arrears that are now falling due but were not included in previous estimates. Also 
adding to the debt profile are the remaining credits and loans with Paris Club creditors of original 
maturity of one year or less for which the cancellation rate was only 47 percent.  Finally, the new 
assessment is based on a discount rate of 5 percent, in line with the approved changes to the 
framework. 
4.      The baseline macroeconomic assumptions for the current DSA are consistent with 
the macroeconomic framework underlying the current ECF arrangement (see main 
document tables 1 and 4). Real GDP growth is projected to accelerate over the medium term to 4 
percent per year, CPI inflation over the long-term is projected to remain stable at around 3 
percent per year, the current account deficit (including official grants) is expected to widen in 
2014 on account of lower exports reflecting decline in commodity prices, and higher import 
volume associated with capital spending and projected increase in import prices for food and 
energy products, before it gradually declines, converging to about 7 percent of GDP over the 
projection period, remittances and FDI are projected to remain robust, fiscal consolidation is 
expected to continue over the medium term, and financing are assumed to be covered initially 
assumed mostly on grant terms, followed by loan financing for the concessionality level 
gradually drops during the projection period.  

Baseline 

5.      Under the baseline scenario, most external debt indicators for Comoros are 
projected to remain below their relevant indicative thresholds over the medium term (Table 
1a, Figure 1a). The present value of debt to GDP and revenues and debt service indicators are 
projected to remain below critical benchmarks over the projection span. However, compared to 
the external debt indicators in the last analysis, the current analysis shows some deterioration. 
Specifically, the debt to exports ratio is increasing at a faster pace, breaching the critical 
benchmark by the end of this decade, reflecting more conservative assumptions about export 
growth. The present value (PV) of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt to exports 
ratio is projected to be about 65 percent in 2013, below the critical benchmark, and gradually 
increases to above the 100 percent threshold for most of the projection period. In addition to the 

35 

 
base effect, debt service is higher compared to the previous analysis, reflecting the service falling 
due on arrears that had been assumed to be cancelled, but were not part of the final debt relief. 

6.      Relevant debt ratios are substantially better when including remittances (Text 
Figure 1).  Including remittances, which account for some 20 percent of GDP and have been 
remarkably stable  in recent years, the present value of external debt to exports  is projected to be 
substantially lower than in the base case at around 25 percent in 2013, and although gradually 
increasing, remains below the 100 percent threshold over the projection period.  The ratio of debt 
service to exports (plus remittances) similarly shows a substantially better picture. 

Text Figure 1. Comoros: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt under 
Alternative Scenarios Including Remittances, 2013-2033 1/ 

c.PV of debt-to-exports+remittances ratio

e.Debt service-to-exports+remittances 

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Threshold

Baseline

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2013

2018

2023

2028

2033

2013

2018

2023

2028

2033

Sensitivity Analysis 

7.      The external debt outlook remains vulnerable to shocks, especially shocks to non-
debt creating flows (e.g. FDI) and a combination of several other shocks (Table 1b, and 
Figure 1b). The policy thresholds for three key ratios are breached under the most extreme stress 
tests for a prolonged period of time. Both the PV of external debt-to-GDP and the PV of external 
debt-to-revenues indicators deteriorate significantly under the scenario assuming a shock to non-

36 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
debt creating flows. 22 In addition, the PV of debt-to-exports ratio is vulnerable to a combined-
shock scenario entailing weaker GDP growth, lower exports, and subdued non-debt creating 
flows.  

8.      The inclusion of Comoros’ domestic public debt in the analysis does not significantly 
alter the dynamics of debt burden indicators (Table 2a, 2b). Under the baseline scenario, the 
PV of total public debt-to-GDP is projected to increase moderately, but remain around 30 
percent of GDP, over the medium term, reaching 35 percent by the end of the projection span. 
However, the present value of total public debt-to-revenue (including grants) ratio is projected to 
increase steadily over time, reaching rather high levels (82 percent) over the medium term. 
Further, the evolution of public debt indicators is sensitive to a wide range of shocks (Table 2b). 
The dynamics of debt appears unsustainable when key variables are kept at historical levels. 
While no full information on contingent liabilities is available, based on partial data, it seems 
that their effects are more than adequately covered in the effects of a 10 percent shock to debt 
creating flows in 2014. 

9.      The results of the assessment highlight the paramount importance of continued 
efforts in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to achieve higher growth and ensure 
debt sustainability. To that end, more efforts to diversify the economy and increase the scope 
for private sector contribution to key sectors, underpinned by steady progress in developmental 
and capacity building, will help sustain the growth momentum going forward.  

Conclusion 

10.      The DSA indicates that Comoros remains in high debt distress, despite debt relief 
following the HIPC completion point in December 2012. Under the baseline scenario the debt 
ratio and debt service indicators are rising gradually over the medium-term, increasing the risk of 
breaching critical benchmarks. Further, the stress tests indicate serious risks to sustainability.  

11.      Ensuring sustainability and improving the external debt outlook will depend on 
maintaining sound macroeconomic policies. The inclusion of Comoros’ domestic debt in the 

22 In light of exceptional amount of grants in 2013, the analysis assumes a smaller grant amount, as projected in 
2014, which stabilizes the primary deficit at 1.1 percent of GDP over the projection span.  

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
analysis reinforces the conclusions of the external DSA and stresses the risks to debt prospects 
absent prudent policies to build the necessary buffers to be able to weather the effects of external 
shocks. In this context, it is essential that the authorities continue current efforts to strengthen 
public finance management, reform state-owned enterprises, and improve the investment climate 
so as to lay the foundation for rapid sustainable economic growth and ensure robust debt 
sustainability in the face of volatile shocks.  

38 

 
 
Figure 1a. Comoros: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed 
External Debt under Alternatives Scenarios, 2013-2033 1/

a . Debt Accumulation

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2018
2023
Ra te o f Deb t Accumulat ion
G rant-equivalent financing (% o f GDP)
G rant element o f new bo rrowing (% right scale)

2028

2033

c.PV of debt-to-expor ts ratio

b .PV of debt-to GDP ratio

2013

2018

2023

2028

2033

d .PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

2013

2018

2023

2028

2033

2013

2018

2023

2028

2033

e.Debt service-to-expor ts ratio

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2013

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

25

20

15

10

5

0

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

2013

2018

2023

2028

2033

Mo st extreme sho ck  1/

Thresho ld

2013

2018
Basel ine

2023

2028
2033
Histo rical scenario

Sources : Country author ities ; and s taff es timates and pro jections .

1/ Th e mo st extreme stress test is th e test th a t yield s th e h igh est ra t io in 2023. In f igu re b . it 
co rrespon d s to a Comb in a t ion sh o ck ; in c. to a Comb in a t ion sh o ck ; in d . to a Comb in a t ion sh o ck ; 
in e . to a Comb in a t ion sh o ck an d  in f igu re f . to a Comb in a t ion sh o ck

39 

 
 
Figure 1b. Comoros: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 
2013-2033 1/

Basel ine

Fix Prima ry Ba lance

Mo st extreme sho ck G rowth

Histo rical scenario

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2033

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2033

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2033

Sources : Country author ities ; and s taff es timates and pro jections .
1/ The mos t extreme s tress tes t is the tes t that yields the highes t ratio in 2023. 
2/ Revenues are defined inclus ive of grants .

40 

 
 
Table 1a.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2010-2033 1/

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise ind icated)

Actual 

His tor ica l 6/ Standard 6/
Average Deviation

2010

2011

2012

6.2

2.7

-21.5

-1.3

7.5

1.2

1.8
7.4
0.6
9.3
15.8
...

1.3
9.4
0.2
15.0
11.7
...

External debt (nominal) 1/
of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in externa l debt
Identified net debt-creating flows 
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in ba lance of goods and services
Expor ts 
Impor ts 
Net cur rent trans fers (negative = inflow)
of which: offic ial
Other cur rent account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FD I (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contr ibution from nomina l interes t rate
Contr ibution from rea l GDP growth 
Contr ibution from pr ice and exchange rate changes 
Residual (3-4) 3/
of which: exceptional financing

PV of externa l debt 4/
In percent of expor ts 
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports 
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Tota l gross financing need (Billions of U.S. do llars )
Non-interes t cur rent account deficit that s tab ilizes debt ratio 

Key macroeconomic assumptions

Rea l GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US do llar terms (change in percent)
E ffective interes t rate (percent) 5/
Growth of expor ts of G&S (US do llar terms , in percent)
Growth of impor ts of G&S (US do llar terms , in percent)
Grant element of new pub lic sector bor rowing  (in percent)
Government revenues (exclud ing grants , in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US do llars ) 7/
of which: Grants
of which: Concessional loans
Grant-equiva lent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equiva lent financing (in percent of externa l financing) 8/

Memorandum items:
Nomina l GDP (Billions of US do llars )  
Nomina l do llar GDP growth  
PV of PPG externa l debt (in Billions of US do llars )
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Gross workers ' remittances (Billions of US do llars )  
PV of PPG externa l debt (in percent of GDP + remittances )
PV of PPG externa l debt (in percent of expor ts + remittances )
Debt service of PPG externa l debt (in percent of expor ts + remittance

49.2
49.2
-2.7
3.4
5.3
34.2
15.7
49.9
-28.9
-8.9
0.0
-1.5
-0.3
0.4
-1.0
0.3
-6.1
...

...
...
. . .
. . .
. . .
11.4
11.4
12.5
0.0
8.0

2.1
-0.6
0.8
10.1
6.3
...
14.3
0.1
0.1
...
...
...

0.5
1.5

0.1
...
...
...

44.7
18.9
44.7
18.9
-4.5
-25.8
0.3
3.2
9.1
3.5
33.9
39.0
16.2
14.9
50.2
53.9
-24.9
-35.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-3.8
-1.7
-5.0
1.5
0.3
0.4
-1.0
-1.4
-4.4
2.5
-4.8 -29.0
0.0
-22.6

...
...
. . .
. . .
. . .
10.0
10.0
10.1
0.0
13.6

2.2
9.8
0.8
15.7
12.7
...
16.1
0.0
0.0
...
...
...

0.6
12.2

0.1
...
...
...

8.4
56.5
8.4
56.5
43.6
10.6
10.6
8.2
0.0
29.3

3.0
-5.2
0.8
-10.3
5.0
...
19.3
0.1
0.1
...
...
...

0.6
-2.4
0.1

0.2
6.7
20.8
3.9

Projections

2015

25.1
25.1
2.3
6.0
8.8
33.6
16.1
49.7
-24.9
1.3
0.1
-2.3
-0.6
0.3
-0.8
…
-3.7
...

2016

26.7
26.7
1.7
4.5
7.1
31.1
16.2
47.3
-24.0
1.2
0.0
-2.1
-0.6
0.3
-0.9
…
-2.8
...

2017

27.9
27.9
1.2
4.4
6.9
29.2
16.1
45.3
-22.2
1.2
-0.1
-1.9
-0.6
0.4
-1.0
…
-3.2
...

2018

27.7
27.7
-0.2
3.6
5.9
27.8
15.9
43.7
-21.6
1.2
-0.3
-1.8
-0.5
0.5
-1.1
…
-3.8
...

14.4
16.0
17.2
17.3
89.2
98.4
107.0
109.2
14.4
16.0
17.2
17.3
89.2
98.4 107.0 109.2
94.4 103.5 110.5 110.6
2.4
4.1
4.7
5.2
2.4
4.1
4.7
5.2
2.5
4.3
4.8
5.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
6.5
5.5
5.7
6.1

4.0
4.2
1.2
10.5
3.0
32.8
15.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
10.1
78.0

0.8
8.4
0.1
3.3
0.2
11.7
37.4
1.0

4.0
4.2
1.4
9.1
3.2
31.3
15.4
0.1
0.1
0.0
9.9
78.7

0.8
8.3
0.1
2.9
0.2
13.1
42.4
1.8

4.0
4.0
1.6
7.3
3.5
31.2
15.6
0.1
0.1
0.0
9.8
79.9

0.9
8.2
0.2
2.7
0.2
14.3
46.9
2.1

4.1
4.1
2.0
7.1
4.5
32.3
15.7
0.1
0.1
0.0
9.4
86.1

1.0
8.4
0.2
1.6
0.2
14.5
48.5
2.3

2014

22.7
22.7
2.5
7.3
10.4
36.5
15.8
52.3
-26.2
1.0
0.1
-2.4
-0.6
0.2
-0.7
…
-4.8
...

12.3
78.0
12.3
78.0
82.1
1.8
1.8
1.9
0.1
7.8

4.0
4.3
0.8
9.9
6.7
31.5
15.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
10.5
77.9

0.7
8.4
0.1
3.4
0.2
10.0
31.5
0.7

2013

20.2
20.2
1.3
2.9
6.0
37.5
15.6
53.1
-31.5
-2.8
0.0
-2.6
-0.5
0.1
-0.6
…
-1.5
...

10.0
64.1
10.0
64.1
65.9
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.0
4.7

3.5
5.6
0.5
14.3
7.6
32.3
15.2
0.2
0.2
0.0
29.5
93.8

0.7
9.4
0.1
2.5
0.2
8.0
25.1
0.3

 2013-2018
Average

3.9
4.4
1.3
9.7
4.8
31.9

8.5

2.7

 2019-2033
Average

2.9

-19.1

-0.9

4.6
3.3
2.4
7.0
6.3
26.3
16.1

9.5
80.7

8.0

2.2

2023

28.6
28.6
0.4
0.8
2.5
22.6
14.9
37.5
-20.0
0.3
-0.1
-1.1
-0.5
0.6
-1.2
…
-0.5
...

2033

32.6
32.6
0.7
2.5
3.7
20.4
13.7
34.1
-16.9
0.3
0.2
-0.5
-0.7
0.8
-1.5
…
-1.8
...

19.6
24.4
131.1
177.8
19.6
24.4
131.1 177.8
121.3 157.5
7.1
12.1
7.1
12.1
6.6
10.7
0.0
0.2
2.1
3.0

4.4
3.3
2.3
6.6
6.7
27.1
16.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
9.5
81.9

1.4
7.8
0.3
2.1
0.2
16.7
60.6
3.3

5.1
3.3
2.8
8.0
8.1
23.6
15.5
0.3
0.3
0.0
9.6
75.6

3.1
8.5
0.8
2.8
0.4
21.3
87.1
5.9

0

Sources : Country author ities ; and s taff es timates and pro jections .
1/ Inc ludes both public and private sec tor external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) ]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) tim es previous period debt ratio, w ith r = nom inal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar term s. 
3/ Inc ludes exceptional financ ing ( i.e. , changes in arrears and debt relief) ; changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustm ents. For projec tions also inc ludes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assum es that PV of private sec tor debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest paym ents divided by previous period debt stock.  
6/ H istorical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subjec t to data availability. 
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financ ing inc ludes grants provided direc tly to the governm ent and through new borrow ing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt) .

41 

 
 
 
UNION OF THE COMOROS 

42 

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2023

2033

Baseline

10

12

14

16

17

17

20

24

A. Alternative Scenarios

A1. Key var iab les at their his tor ica l averages in 2013-2033 1/
A2. New pub lic sector loans on less favorab le terms in 2013-2033 2

10
10

10
13

11
16

13
19

14
21

15
21

28
26

43
36

B. Bound Tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviation in 2014-2015

10
10
10
10
10
10

13
14
13
23
22
17

15
19
16
34
35
20

17
21
18
35
36
22

18
22
20
36
37
24

19
22
20
35
36
24

21
23
22
35
36
28

26
25
28
28
30
34

B2. Export value growth at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015
B4. Net non-debt c reating flows at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 4/

B5. Comb ination of B1-B4 us ing one-ha lf s tandard deviation shocks 
B6. One-time 30 percent nomina l depreciation relative to the baseline in 2014 5/

Baseline

64

78

89

98

107

109

131

178

A. Alternative Scenarios

A1. Key var iab les at their his tor ica l averages in 2013-2033 1/
A2. New pub lic sector loans on less favorab le terms in 2013-2033 2

64
64

64
84

68
101

77
115

86
128

92
134

186
173

315
260

B. Bound Tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviation in 2014-2015

64
64
64
64
64
64

78
103
78
146
146
78

90
163
90
213
235
90

99
173
99
217
239
99

107
184
107
222
246
107

110
186
110
221
245
110

132
212
132
232
259
132

179
253
179
207
239
179

B2. Export value growth at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015
B4. Net non-debt c reating flows at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 4/

B5. Comb ination of B1-B4 us ing one-ha lf s tandard deviation shocks 
B6. One-time 30 percent nomina l depreciation relative to the baseline in 2014 5/

Baseline

66

82

94

103

110

111

121

157

A. Alternative Scenarios

A1. Key var iab les at their his tor ica l averages in 2013-2033 1/
A2. New pub lic sector loans on less favorab le terms in 2013-2033 2

66
66

67
88

72
107

81
121

88
133

93
135

173
160

279
230

B. Bound Tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviation in 2014-2015

66
66
66
66
66
66

85
93
88
154
148
116

101
126
107
226
230
133

111
133
118
228
234
146

119
139
125
229
236
156

119
138
126
224
231
156

130
144
138
215
223
171

169
164
179
184
197
222

B2. Export value growth at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015
B4. Net non-debt c reating flows at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 4/

B5. Comb ination of B1-B4 us ing one-ha lf s tandard deviation shocks 
B6. One-time 30 percent nomina l depreciation relative to the baseline in 2014 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

Table 1b.Comoros: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2013-2033

(In percent)

PV of debt-to GDP ratio

Projections

 
 
 
 
 
UNION OF THE COMOROS 

Table 1b.Comoros: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2013-2033 (continued)

(In percent)

Debt service-to-exports ratio

Baseline

A. Alternative Scenarios

A1. Key var iab les at their his tor ica l averages in 2013-2033 1/
A2. New pub lic sector loans on less favorab le terms in 2013-2033 2

B. Bound Tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviation in 2014-2015

B2. Export value growth at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015
B4. Net non-debt c reating flows at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 4/

B5. Comb ination of B1-B4 us ing one-ha lf s tandard deviation shocks 
B6. One-time 30 percent nomina l depreciation relative to the baseline in 2014 5/

1

1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

Debt service-to-revenue ratio

Baseline

A. Alternative Scenarios

A1. Key var iab les at their his tor ica l averages in 2013-2033 1/
A2. New pub lic sector loans on less favorab le terms in 2013-2033 2

B. Bound Tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviation in 2014-2015

B2. Export value growth at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015
B4. Net non-debt c reating flows at historical average m inus one standard deviation in 2014-2015 4/

B5. Comb ination of B1-B4 us ing one-ha lf s tandard deviation shocks 
B6. One-time 30 percent nomina l depreciation relative to the baseline in 2014 5/

1

1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

2

2
2

2
2
2
2
2
2

2

2
2

2
2
2
2
2
3

2

2
2

2
4
2
4
5
2

3

2
2

3
3
3
5
5
4

4

3
4

4
7
4
8
9
4

4

4
5

5
5
5
8
9
6

5

4
5

5
8
5
8
9
5

5

4
6

5
6
5
9
9
7

5

4
6

5
8
5
9
10
5

5

5
7

6
6
6
9
9
7

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on res idua l financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/

26

26

26

26

26

26

7

8
8

7
11
7
10
11
7

7

7
7

7
7
7
9
10
9

26

12

18
18

12
18
12
18
20
12

11

16
16

11
12
12
16
16
15

26

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estim ates and projec tions.

1/ Variables inc lude real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator ( in U.S. dollar term s) , non-interest current account in percent of GDP , and non-debt c reating flows. 
2/ Assum es that the interest rate on new borrow ing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline. , while grace and m aturity periods are the sam e as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assum ed to rem ain perm anently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assum ed to return to its baseline level after the shock 
( implic ittly assum ing an offsetting adjustm ent in import levels) . 
4/ Inc ludes offic ial and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Deprec iation is defined as percentage dec line in dollar/ local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 ( less favorable financ ing) in which the term s on all new financ ing are as spec ified in footnote 2.

43 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 2a.Comoros: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2010-2033

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise ind icated)

Actual 

2010

2011

2012

Average

5/ Standard 
Deviation

5/

Estimate

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2013-18 
Average

2018

2023

2033

2019-33 
Average

Public sector debt 1/
of which: foreign-currency denominated

Change in pub lic sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Pr imary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Pr imary (noninteres t) expend iture
Automatic debt dynamics
Contr ibution from interes t rate/growth d ifferentia l
of which: contr ibution from average real interest rate
of which: contr ibution from real GDP growth
Contr ibution from rea l exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Pr ivatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of imp licit or contingent liab ilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other )
Other (specify, e.g . bank recap ita lization)
Res idua l, includ ing asset changes

Othe r Sustainability Indicators
PV of public sector debt

of which: foreign-currency denominated
of which: external
PV of contingent liab ilities (not included in pub lic sector debt)

Gross financ ing need 2/
PV of public sec tor debt-to-revenue and grants ratio ( in percent)
PV of public sec tor debt-to-revenue ratio ( in percent) 

of which: external 3/

Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio ( in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio ( in percent) 4/
Prim ary defic it that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

Key macroeconomic and f iscal assumptions
Real GDP growth ( in percent)
Average nom inal interest rate on forex debt ( in percent)
Average real interest rate on dom estic debt ( in percent)
Real exchange rate deprec iation ( in percent, + indicates deprec iation
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real prim ary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percen
Grant elem ent of new external borrow ing ( in percent)

51.4
49.2

-3.3
-7.6
-7.4
29.2
14.9
21.7
-0.2
-2.9
-1.8
-1.1
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.3

2.2
0.0
. . .
. . .
-3.4
7.7
15.7
…
6.1
12.5
-4.2

2.1
0.8
-4.2
5.6
4.4
0.0
. . .

47.2
44.7

-4.3
-7.4
-1.8
23.6
7.5
21.8
-5.7
-3.0
-1.9
-1.1
-2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.2

2.5
0.0
. . .
. . .
1.9
10.6
15.5
…
6.9
10.1
2.5

2.2
0.8
-4.5
-5.7
4.7
0.0
. . .

21.2
18.9

-26.0
-13.7
-3.9
28.9
9.6
25.0
1.3
-2.2
-0.8
-1.4
3.5
-11.0
0.0
0.0
-11.0
0.0
-12.3

10.7
8.4
8.4
. . .
0.0
37.2
55.6
43.6
5.5
8.2
22.1

3.0
0.8
-2.5
8.2
2.6
0.2
. . .

-0.4

3.3

1.8
0.6
-3.6
-2.8
3.8
0.0

…

…

1.3
0.2
1.4
7.8
1.5
0.1

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estim ates and projec tions.
1/ [ Indicate coverage of public sec tor, e.g. , general governm ent or nonfinanc ial public sec tor. Also whether net or gross debt is used. ]
2/ Gross financ ing need is defined as the prim ary defic it plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period. 
3/ Revenues exc luding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of m edium and long-term debt.
5/ H istorical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subjec t to data availability.

44 

22.4
20.2

1.2
-19.9
-18.3
43.7
28.6
25.4
-1.6
-1.3
-0.5
-0.7
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.1

12.2
10.0
10.0
. . .
-16.1
27.8
80.2
65.9
0.2
0.7
-19.5

3.5
0.5
-3.0
-2.0
3.1
0.1
32.3

25.7
22.7

3.3
-0.1
1.5
24.1
9.1
25.6
-1.6
-1.4
-0.5
-0.9
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.4

15.3
12.3
12.3
. . .
3.8
63.3
101.8
82.1
1.2
1.9
-1.8

4.0
0.8
-3.1
. . .
3.2
0.0
31.5

27.9
25.1

2.2
-0.2
1.5
23.9
8.7
25.4
-1.7
-1.5
-0.5
-1.0
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.5

17.2
14.4
14.4
. . .
4.6
72.1
113.1
94.4
1.6
2.5
-0.8

4.0
1.2
-3.1
. . .
3.2
0.0
32.8

29.3
26.7

1.4
-0.7
1.1
24.1
8.7
25.2
-1.8
-1.6
-0.5
-1.1
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.1

18.6
16.0
16.0
. . .
4.4
77.1
120.6
103.5
2.7
4.3
-0.3

4.0
1.4
-3.1
. . .
3.2
0.0
31.3

30.6
27.9

1.2
-1.0
0.8
24.2
8.7
25.1
-1.8
-1.6
-0.5
-1.1
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2

19.8
17.2
17.2
. . .
4.0
81.8
127.5
110.5
3.1
4.8
-0.4

4.0
1.6
-3.1
. . .
3.2
0.0
31.2

30.4
27.7

-0.2
-1.3
0.6
24.4
8.7
24.9
-1.8
-1.6
-0.4
-1.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.1

20.0
17.3
17.3
. . .
3.8
82.2
127.6
110.6
3.4
5.3
0.8

4.1
2.0
-3.2
. . .
3.3
0.0
32.3

0.0

-2.1

31.3 35.3
28.6 32.6

0.4
0.7
-1.9
-1.3
-0.2
0.6
24.8 24.2
8.7
8.7
24.6 24.7
-1.6
-1.9
-1.6
-1.9
-0.3
-0.2
-1.3
-1.7
...
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2
2.0

22.3
27.1
19.6
24.4
19.6
24.4
. . .
. . .
3.3
4.7
89.8 112.1
138.2 174.9
121.3 157.5
4.3
6.8
6.6
10.7
-0.6
-0.1

3.9
1.3
-3.1

...

3.2
0.0
31.9

4.4
2.3
-3.2

...

3.3
0.0
27.1

5.1
2.8
-3.2

...

3.3
0.1
23.6

4.6
2.4
-3.2

...

3.3
0.0
. . .

 
 
 
Table 2b.Comoros: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2013-2033

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

Baseline

A. Alternative scenarios

A1. Rea l GDP growth and pr imary ba lance are at his tor ica l averages
A2. Pr imary ba lance is unchanged from 2013
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/

B. Bound tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth is at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviations in 2014-2015
B2. Pr imary ba lance is at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviations in 2014-2015
B3. Comb ination of B1-B2 us ing one ha lf s tandard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent rea l depreciation in 2014
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2014

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline

A. Alternative scenarios

A1. Rea l GDP growth and pr imary ba lance are at his tor ica l averages
A2. Pr imary ba lance is unchanged from 2013
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/

B. Bound tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth is at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviations in 2014-2015
B2. Pr imary ba lance is at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviations in 2014-2015
B3. Comb ination of B1-B2 us ing one ha lf s tandard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent rea l depreciation in 2014
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2014

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline

A. Alternative scenarios

A1. Rea l GDP growth and pr imary ba lance are at his tor ica l averages
A2. Pr imary ba lance is unchanged from 2013
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/

B. Bound tests

B1. Rea l GDP growth is at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviations in 2014-2015
B2. Pr imary ba lance is at his tor ica l average minus one s tandard deviations in 2014-2015
B3. Comb ination of B1-B2 us ing one ha lf s tandard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent rea l depreciation in 2014
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2014

Projections
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2023 2033

2013

12

15

17

19

20

20

22

27

12
12
12

12
12
12
12
12

14
15
15

16
16
15
19
23

15
17
17

20
19
18
20
24

16
18
19

22
21
20
21
25

17
20
20

24
22
22
22
26

17
20
21

25
22
23
22
26

22
26
24

30
24
28
23
28

38
37
34

40
28
37
28
30

28

63

72

77

82

82

90

112

28
28
28

28
28
28
28
28

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

58
62
64

66
68
64
78
94

1

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1

63
70
73

80
81
73
84
101

65
75
78

88
85
81
87
105

67
81
84

96
90
88
89
108

67
83
85

99
90
91
89
108

80
106
98

119
96
110
94
111

2

1
2
2

2
2
2
2
3

3

2
3
3

3
3
3
4
4

3

3
3
3

4
3
3
4
4

3

3
3
3

4
4
4
5
4

4

4
5
5

5
4
5
6
5

125
151
138

161
116
149
115
124

7

7
9
8

9
7
9
11
8

Sources : Country author ities ; and s taff es timates and pro jections .
1/ Assumes that rea l GDP growth is at baseline minus one s tandard deviation d ivided by the square root of the length of the pro jection per iod .
2/ Revenues are defined inclus ive of grants .

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3:  Partnerships 

1. 
Based on its relatively modest financing and lack of on-the-ground presence in 
Comoros, the Bank needs to coordinate its efforts closely with other development partners 
to maximize its impact.  The most active development partners are France, the European Union 
(EU), UN agencies, the United Arab Emirates, and the IMF.  Under the ISN, the Bank tended to 
stay within its comparative advantage, focusing on economic governance and social 
development. More recently it has engaged in energy, fisheries, and telecommunications (the 
latter thanks to the ability to leverage regional IDA resources). Other important areas are covered 
by other donors (e.g., regional integration by the EU and natural disasters and climate change by 
France and social sectors by the UN).  Table 1 provides an overview of the areas of donor 
engagement in Comoros.  

2. 
In September 2009, the IMF’s Executive Board approved a three-year SDR 13.57 
million (about US$21.5 million) arrangement under the ECF (then known as PRGF) for 
Comoros.  The decision enabled Comoros to draw US$6.7 million from the IMF immediately.  
In December 2008, the IMF had already provided US$3.4 million under its Exogenous Shocks 
Facility (ESF) and US$1.7 million in Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA), aimed at 
alleviating the immediate macroeconomic impacts of the global economic and food price crisis. 
The ECF arrangement is supporting a medium-term economic program that is geared toward: (i) 
accelerating recent progress in fiscal consolidation and restoring external viability; (ii) promoting 
financial sector soundness; (iii) strengthening institutions and governance; and (iv) improving 
the investment climate. The sixth and final review under the ECF was carried out in December 
2013 and the authorities and IMF are discussing a successor program.   

3. 
AfDB reengaged in Comoros with a new Interim Strategy for 2009-10, after 
Comoros cleared their US$24 million arrears in December 2008.  Following the interim 
strategy, a new Country Strategy Paper (CSP) was approved by AfDB’s Board for 2011-15 in 
line with the Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (PRGS). The CSP is aimed at 
consolidating peace, diversifying the economy and creating jobs.  The AfDB strategy for the 
Comoros focusses on a single pillar:  Energy Sector Development in Support of Economic 
Diversification. A mid-term review of the AfDB strategy was carried out in October 2013.  
While highlighting delays in achieving the CSP target of an increase in access to electricity from 
45 percent in 2011 to 60 percent in 2013, the review reports major achievements in the energy 
sector during FY13 including the adoption of an energy strategy and action plan and adoption of 
a new petroleum law.  

4. 
France has traditionally been the largest donor to Comoros, with currently US$36.5 
million in active commitments. France was also instrumental in helping Comoros clear its 
arrears to the AfDB. France’s total disbursement by 2012 reached US$28 million and additional 
commitment of US$45 million is planned over FY13-14.  France is in the process of approving a 
new partnership framework document which focuses on three key sectors namely health, 
sustainable development, and support for growth. These sectors are complemented by another 
‘transversal’ sector comprising supportive actions for the strengthening of governance as well as 
improvement in literacy through a better mastering of the French language.  

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Under the 10th EDF, the EU is supporting the Comoros’ development strategy 
defined in the Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (PRGS), identifying ways of 
enabling the country to consolidate its foundations for sustainable development. With an 
envelope of US$66 million, the EU is concentrating its assistance on two priority areas for 2008-
13: (i) the development of transport infrastructure to restart the economy by facilitating trade and 
the development of agriculture and the private sector; and (ii) education, in particular technical 
and vocational training and access to schools for everyone (especially girls), following on from 
the action started under the 9th EDF.  

6. 
The focus of the United Nations System (UN) in Comoros is on supporting progress 
toward reaching the MDGs.  The UN system’s priorities under the 2008-2012 United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) are: (i) growth and poverty reduction; (ii) basic 
social services (health, education); (iii) environment and sustainable development; and, (iv) 
peace and social cohesion.  Total support over the 2008-2012 period from UN agencies’ core 
funds was US$56million.  Projects include: support to local civil society organizations, capacity 
building support to the Union Parliament, and support to the implementation of the national 
gender strategy, sustainable land management, water and sanitation, fight against malaria, and 
agriculture services.  The UNDAF is fully aligned with the 2010-14 PRGS in line with the Paris 
Declaration. This alignment has taken into account the priorities of the country as defined in the 
2009-2014 PRGS and in the other national strategic documents promoting and planning the 
MDGs. 

7. 
In addition, there are several non-traditional donors active in Comoros.  These 
include China, which supports the education, health, energy, transport and tourism sectors 
largely through construction-type activities.  Several Arab League countries including Kuwait 
and Saudi Arabia are providing budget support.  Iran is providing assistance in agriculture and 
the United Arab Emirates are providing assistance to the health sector.  A donor conference held 
in Doha in March 2010 on investment and development of the Comoros resulted in pledges of 
around US$540 million, mainly from Arab countries, through bi-lateral financing, private and 
NGO investment notably in the social sectors. An ‘Arab Committee’ was formed under the 
leadership of Qatar to lead the realization of Doha projects in the sectors of health, airport 
security and rehabilitation, road infrastructure, fisheries, agriculture, and transport. Major 
investment projects realized to date include fisheries (US$22 million), roads (US$50 million) 
and construction of hospitals in Anjouan and Moheli (US$50 million). The Saudi Fund will also 
put US$50 million of which 5 million in the form of aid on the social sectors, 15 million on 
trade, and 30 million in the form of loan on infrastructure. The Islamic Bank reaffirmed its 
engagement of US$150 million.  

8. 
Enhanced donor coordination is crucial to improve aid effectiveness in Comoros.  In 
Comoros, donor coordination is often challenging due to the limited amount of donor presence 
on the ground and low government capacity to monitor and coordinate donor activities.  
Enhanced coordination between donors is necessary in order to avoid duplication and reduce 
transaction costs for the government. In early 2013, donors agreed to enhance coordination in 
line with process of developing the next PRSP for 2015-19, the Strategy for Accelerated Growth 
and Sustainable Development (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Développement Durable). 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The process involves the creation of technical sectoral groups (Groupes techniques Sectoriels 
(GTS)) organized around government priorities to integrate their activities. With UN support, the 
Planning Commission has initiated discussions among donors, government entities, civil society 
and the private sector through a Permanent Technical Steering Committee that will review 
progress under the PRGS and guide the development of the SCADD.  

48 

 
 
 
Table 1: Areas of Donor Engagement in Comoros 

Support Areas 

AfDB 

Arab 
League 

China 

EU 

France 

Global 
Fund 

IMF 

Iran  Libya 

Japan 

UN 
System* 

UAE 

USA 

WBG 

Economic Growth and Diversification 

Infrastructure 

Private Sector 
Tourism 
Agriculture 
Fisheries 
Energy 
Telecommunications 
Transport 
Water 
Education 
Health 
Social 
Protection 
Development/ 
Economic Governance/ 
Public Administration 
Public Finance 

X 
X 

X 
X 

* UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO, IFAD, UNCTAD 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

X 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

Improving Access to Basic Social Services and Resilience of Households 

Strengthening Governance and Institutional Capacity 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4: Strengthening Statistics: Challenges and the Way Forward 

1. 
The Union of Comoros has developed a National Strategy for the Development of 
Statistics (NSDS) to modernize the statistics system and improve the availability and 
reliability of statistics. The country has undertaken reforms to improve its statistics system 
including efforts to strengthen the institutional and legal framework as well as to improve 
data collection and processing. The National Statistics Strategy (NSDS) is aligned with the 
Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy Paper which seeks, inter alia, to strengthen the 
country’s monitoring and evaluation system.  
2. 
Comoros’ statistical system is faced with three challenges. First, the national statistics 
system is centralized and is not integrated with line ministries; production of statistics has 
only involved the Direction Générale de la Statistique and the ministry in charge of 
monitoring and evaluation. Second, the lack of current basic statistics has hampered policy 
decision making in Comoros. The most recent population census and household survey were 
conducted in 2003.  National accounts continue to use the 1968 System of National Accounts 
(SNA) and the consumer price index only covers Moroni, the capital city. Finally, inadequate 
training of statisticians and the lack of qualified statistical officers jeopardize efforts to 
collect and produce good quality statistics. The national accounts do not properly capture the 
large informal segment of the economy and the inflation rate does not reflect the realities of 
the different islands. The lack of updated population and poverty statistics impedes targeting 
of social programs. 
3. 
Some progress has been made in implementing the NSDS.  On the legislative side, the 
law on statistics was adopted on March 26, 2011 and promulgated on July 14, 2011. The law 
provides for the establishment of the NSC through the transformation of the National 
Directorate of Statistics, currently under the supervision of the General Commissariat of 
Planning, into an autonomous National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies and 
Demographics (INSEED). However, much remains to be done to fully implement the NSDS.  
4. 
In response to the increased demand for credible statistics on Comoros, the 
government has requested the Bank’s assistance to strengthen the implementation of the 
NSDS. The Bank’s Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building will support this reform 
approach, including a comprehensive review of the production of core statistics and stronger 
coordination of donor support, to place the Comorian Statistics System on the path to 
becoming a world-class statistics provider.  
5. The Bank’s support on statistics is organized around four pillars:  

(i) Support for Implementation of the NSDS.  The Bank will support implementation of 
the NSDS as well as the institutional set-up of the new Statistics system through the design 
of a system to monitor inputs, outputs and outcomes of the NSDS action plan, the 
validation system and the validation of baselines of selected indicators. This will be 
carried out through operationalization of the National Statistics Council (NSC) to improve 
coordination among all stakeholders involved in the production of statistics and spearhead 
the transformation of the current National Directorate of Statistics into the autonomous 
INSEED. Support will include assisting in the design of the organizational structure of the 
INSEED, specification of its roles and responsibilities, and facilitating the transition from 
the DNS to INSEED.  

50 

 
 
 
(ii) Dissemination and Access to Data.  Second, the Bank will support dissemination and 
access to data through the establishment of a website for the statistical office, including: (i) 
providing training activities to strengthen the capacity of staff from DNS and other sector 
statistical units to write statistical texts for the website; and (ii) support to the website, 
including website maintenance. 

(iii) Support for Data Production.  Third, production of data will be strengthened 
through: (i) the design of a permanent system of household and poverty surveys; and (ii) 
the organization of a study tour for DNS population census managers on the use of 
personal digital assistant and the directives to combine population and agriculture 
censuses. 

(iv) Statistics Training.  Finally, the Bank will support the local statistics school, by 
conducting a two-year pilot training, through: (i) the establishment and operation of a 
statistics training school within the state university; (ii) the acquisition of necessary 
equipment; and (iii) the evaluation of the training. 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5: Planned ISN Outcomes and Results 

Planned ISN Outcomes and Milestones 
Actual ISN Outcomes and Milestones 
Outcome 1. Contribute to increase access to basic social and economic services  
Milestone: 
5,000 students enrolled in FADC 
built/rehabilitated schools or classrooms by 
2014 
Over 90 percent of people in project areas 
with access to improved water 

Partially Achieved. 10,800 people in project areas have been 
provided with access to an improved water source.   

Partially Achieved. As of November 2013, 68 classrooms have 
been rehabilitated and 3,700 students enrolled 

Outcome 2. Increase access to short-term employment in crises affected areas  
Milestones: 
Provide employment to at least 5,000 
beneficiaries among poor segments of the 
population 
Ensure that at least half of beneficiaries are 
women 
Outcome 3. Improved efficient and transparent use of public resources through enhanced public finance 
management 
Milestones: 
A new legal and institutional framework for 
PFM is adopted 

Mostly Achieved. As of November 2013, 96 cash-for-work sub-
projects were implemented, providing direct benefits to 4,839 
individuals.   
Achieved. 51% of beneficiaries are women 

Achieved. A new Public Financial Management Bill (Loi des 
Opérations Financières de l’Etat) was adopted in August 2012. 
The new Law represents a significant improvement as it provides 
more clarity in the roles and responsibility of the federal 
government and autonomous islands in the management and 
accountability of public finances. 

Expenditures for priority sectors compared 
with original approved budget does not 
deviate more than 5% 

Not Achieved. Sectoral classification of the budget was not 
possible for 2013. PEFA PI-2 rated NS 

Outcome 4. Improved management of the public service 
Milestones: 
Personnel database and payroll are directly 
linked to ensure data consistency and 
monthly reconciliation 

Partially Achieved. Government is now paying 89% of civil 
servants through the automated payroll system. 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6: PEFA Indicators, 2007 and 2013 

Indicator 
A. PFM OUT-TURNS: Credibility of the Budget 
P1-01 Aggregate expenditure out-turn compared to original approved budget 
A 
P1-02 Composition of expenditure out-turn compared to original approved budget 
D 
P1-03 Aggregate revenue out-turn compared to original approved budget 
C 
P1-04 
Stock and monitoring of expenditure payment arrears 
D+ 
B. KEY CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES: Comprehensiveness and Transparency 

2007 Score  2013 Score  

B 
NS 
C 
D+ 

C 
D 
D 
C 
D 
C 

C+ 
C 

B 
C 
D+ 
D+ 
D+ 
C+ 
D+ 
D+ 
D+ 

D 
D 
D+ 
D+ 

C 
D+ 
D 

P1-05 Classification of the Budget 
P1-06 Comprehensiveness of information included in budget documentation 
P1-07 Extend of unreported government operations 
P1-08 Transparency of inter-governemental fiscal operations 
P1-09 Oversight of aggregate fiscal risk from public sector entities 
P1-10 
Public access to key fiscal information 

C. BUDGET CYCLE 
C(i) Policy-based Budgeting 
P1-11 Orderliness and participation in the annual budget process 
P1-12 Multi-year perspective in fiscal planning, expenditure policy and budgeting 
C(ii) Predictability and Control in Budget Execution 
P1-13 Transparency of tax-payers' obligations and liabilities 
P1-14 Effectiveness of measures for tax-payer registration and tax assessment 
P1-15 Effectiveness in collection of tax payments 
P1-16 
Predictability in the availability of funds for commitment of expenditures 
P1-17 Recording and management of cash balances, debt and guarantees 
P1-18 Effectiveness of payroll controls 
P1-19 Competition, value for money and controls in procurement 
P1-20 Effectiveness of internal controls for non-salary expenditure 
P1-21 Effectiveness of internal audit 
C(iii) Accounting, Recording and Reporting 
P1-22 Timeliness and regularity of accounts reconciliation 
P1-23 Availability of information on resources received by service delivery units 
P1-24 Quality and timeliness of annual financial statements 
P1-25 Quality and timeliness of in-year budget reports 
C(iv) External Scrutiny and Audit 
P1-26 
Scope, nature and follow-up of External Audit 
P1-27 Legislative scrutiny of the annual budget law 
P1-28 Legislative scrutiny of external audit reports 
D. DONOR PRACTICES 

C 
C 
C 
C 
D+ 
D 

D+ 
D+ 

D+ 
D+ 
D 
D+ 
D+ 
D 
D 
D 
D 

D 
D 
D+ 
D+ 

D+ 
D+ 
D 

D-1  
D-2  

D-3 

Predictability of Direct Budget Support 
Financial information provided by Donors for budgeting and reporting on 
project aid 
Proportion of aid that is managed by use of national procedures 

NA 
Pending 

NA 
D 

Pending 

D 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of Date 
1/14/2014 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management 

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
45.1 

2 
1.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
54.4 

3 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
48.6 

3 
2.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
25.0 

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

Last Five FYs 

20 
131.1 
42.1 
40.1 

2 
22.1 
0.0 
0.0 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 8: Summary of Non-Lending Services 

Product 

Recent completions 

Problem Driven Political Economy Analysis 
Debt Management Reform Plan 
HIPC Completion Point 
Comoros Policy Notes Series 
Flood Impact Assessment 
Political Economy of Civil Service Reform 

Underway 

Public Investment Mgt Policy Note 
Private Sector Development Policy Notes 
Social Policy Notes 
Improving Private Sector Mgt in W&S 
Addressing Problems of Mun. Solid Waste Mgt 
Governance and Anti-Corruption TA 

Planned 

Mapping Service Delivery TA 
Public Expenditure Review 
Debt Management TA 
Poverty and Gender Assessment 
Growth and Employment ESW 

Completion FY 

Cost 
(US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

K,PS 
K,PS 
K,P 
K,P,PS 
K,P,PS 
K,P,PS 

K,PS 

FY13 
FY13 
FY12 
FY13 
FY13 
FY13 

FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 

FY15 
FY15 
FY16 
FY16 
FY17 

125 
97 
50 
60 
105 
100 

66 
75 
185 
200 
333 
50 

100 
300 
50 
300 
300 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 
G,B 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,B 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 9:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

Closed Projects 

22 

IBRD/IDA * 

Total Disbursed (Active) 
          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

Active 
Projects 

 6.99 
 0.00 
 43.34 
 25.16 
 50.34 
 25.16 

 11.93 
 0.00 
 11.93 

Last ISR  

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in 
US$ Millions 

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 

Disbursements 

Project ID 

Project Name 

Development 
Objectives 

Implementation 
Progress 

P102376 
P131659 
P120631 

Overall 
Result 

KM-Economic Governance TAL 
KM-Electricity Sect. Recovery Proj(FY14) 
KM-Emergency Crises Response Project 

S 
# 
S 

S 
# 
S 

Fiscal 
Year 

2011 
2014 
2010 

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm 
Rev'd 

5.3 
5.0 
8.3 

18.6 

3.9 
5.1 
2.9 

11.9 

0.31 
0.03 
-0.23 

0.12 

56 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 10: Trust Fund Mobilization 

Trust Fund Name 

Grant 
Amount 

Avail. 
Balance 

Program 
Source 

Closing 
Date 

Comoros Flood Impact Assessment and Recovery Planning 
(TF013009) 

Improving Private Sector Management of Water Supply 
(TF013644) 

Addressing Challenges of Municipal Solid Waste in Moroni 
(TF014527) 

Improving Private Sector Management of Water Supply 
Phase II (TF015278) 

Emergency Food-Security and Unemployment Support 
through Cash-for-Work (TF097191) 

Coastal Resources Co-Management 
Livelihood (TF098850) 
 Total 

for Sustainable 

110.00 

5.69 

GFDRR 

FY14 

103.50 

1.91 

PPIAF 

FY14 

333.20 

299.74 

GPOBA 

FY15 

66.50 

22.91 

PPIAF 

FY14 

2,600.00 

9.93 

JSDF 

FY15 

2,999.40 
6,212.60 

2,315.86 
2,964.54 

JSDF 

FY15 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 11: Country at a Glance 

58 

 
 
 
59 

 
 
 
 
 
60 

 
 
 
43°30'E

44°00'E

INDIAN

OCEAN

Bangoua Kouni

Chézani

Mitsamiouli

Djomani

Ntsaouéni

11°30'S

MbMbéénini
Mbéni

Hahaîa

Koimbani
Koimbani
Koimbani

Grande
Comore

Itsikoudi

NJAZIDJA

Chamoni
Sidjou

Ntsoudjini

MORONI

Ikoni

Mitsoudjé

Le Kartala
(2360 m) 
Boboni
Boboni
Boboni

Tsangadjou

Pidjani

Kourani
Kourani
Kourani
Dembén
DembDembéénn

Foumbouni

Chindini

C O M O R O S

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

ADMINISTRATIVE SEATS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

MAIN ROADS

11°30'S

44°30'E

COMOROS

12°00'S

12°00'S

Mozambique

Channel

Fomboni

Djoyézi

Moheli

Hoani

Miringoni

MWALI

Ouallah

Ziroudani

Hagnamouda

Nioumachoua

Méa

Sambia

Itsamia
Hamavouna

Magnougni
Kanzoni

Chandzi
Ouénéfou

Anjouan

Jimilimé

Ouani

Hajoho

Mutsamudu

Bimbini

SimaSima
Sima

NZWANI

Ntingi
Moya
(1595 m) 
Pomoni

Bambao

Domoni

Mramani

Salapouni

43°30'E

44°00'E

44°30'E

I

B
R

D

3
3
3
8
9

0

0

5

10

15 Kilometers

5

10

15 Miles

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

D

E

C

E

M

B
E
R
2
0
0
4

 
 
