d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank Group 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 83874-DJ 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR  

THE REPUBLIC OF DJIBOUTI 

FY2014-2017 

March 13, 2014 

Djibouti Country Management Unit 
Middle East and North Africa Region 
International Development Association 

Strategy Unit 
Africa Region 
International Finance Corporation 

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 

This Document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance 
of their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank 
authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Last Country Assistance Strategy (Report No. 47273-DJ): April 30, 2009 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT 
Currency Unit = Djibouti Francs 
US$1 = DjF 177.7 (Exchange Rate Fixed under Currency Board Arrangement) 
Fiscal Year  
(January 1 to December 31) 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AFD 
AfDB 

Agence Française de Développement 
African Development Bank 

CAS 
CAS CR 

CPI 
CPS 
DISED 

Country Assistance Strategy 
Country Assistance Strategy Completion 
Report 
CBD 
Central Bank Djibouti 
COMESA Common Market for Eastern and 
Southern Africa 
Consumer Price Index 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Direction of Statistics and Demographic 
Studies 
Djiboutian Francs 
Djibouti Urban Poverty Reduction 
Project 
East African Community 
Enquête Djiboutienne Auprès des 
Ménages pour les Indicateurs Sociaux 
Energy Sector Management Assistance 
Program 
European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Female Genital Mutilation 

DJF 
DUPREP 

EU 
FDI 
FGM 

EAC 
EDAM 

ESMAP 

IDF 
IFAD 

IFC 
IGAD 

IMF 
IsDB 

JSDF 
MDG 
MDRI 

MENA 
MIGA 

MSMEs 
NATO 

Institutional Development Fund 
International Fund for Agricultural 
Development 
International Finance Corporation 
Intergovernmental Authority for 
Development 
International Monetary Fund 
Islamic Development Bank 

Japan Social Development Fund 
Millennium Development Goal 
Multilateral Debt Reduction Initiative 

Middle East and North Africa 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 

OFID 

OPEC Fund for International 
Development 
PDNA 
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PRODERMO Rural Community Development and 
Water Mobilization Project 
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis 
United Nations Education Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
United Nations Children’s Fund 

PSIA 
UNESCO 

UNICEF 

USAID 

United States Agency for International 
Development 
World Food Programme 

GDP 
GEF 

GFDRR 

GPE 

IDA 
ICT 

Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environmental Facility 

Global Facility for Disaster Reduction 
and Recovery 
Global Partnership for Education 

International Development Association WFP 
Information and Communications 
Technology 

Vice President:  
Country Director: 
Director, Economics & Sustainability: 
Task Manager:  

IDA 
Inger Andersen 
Hartwig Schafer 

IFC 
Jean Philippe Prosper 
Oumar Seydi 

Homa-Zahra Fotouhi 

Adamou Labara 

MIGA 
Michel Wormser 

Ravi Vish 
Persephone Economou 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Preparation of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was led by Homa-Zahra Fotouhi, Adamou Labara, 
and Persephone Economou, under the guidance of Hartwig Schafer, IDA Country Director, Oumar Seydi, 
IFC Country Directior, and Ravi Vish, MIGA Director, Economics and Sustainability. Core team 
members included Aliya Husain, Amanda Green, Piers Merrick, and Mustapha Rouis. Sami Ali, Khaled 
Mohamed Ben Brahim, Mehdi Benyagoub, James Bond, François Boulanger, Stephanie Brodmann, 
Shanta Devarajan, Walid Dhouibi, Safaa El-Kogali, Fatou Fall, Poonam Gupta, Victoria Gyllerup, 
Hassine Hedda, Djibrilla Adamou Issa, Rock Jabbour, Lorraine James, Yolaine Joseph, Moussa Djama 
Kayad, Rima Koteiche, Marc Lixi, Mohamed Medouar, Kadra Mohamed Ali, Kadar Mouhoumed Omar, 
John Nasir, Karine Pezzani, Paul Prettitore, Eric Ranjeva, Salim Rouhana, Ilhem Salamon, Abdoulaye Sy, 
Paolo Verme, Vincent Vesin, Mariam William Guirguis, Noah Yarrow, and Andrea Zanon provided 
helpful input to the CPS.  

 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................... i 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................ 1 
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT ........................................................................................................................ 1 
A. Geography and Society ..................................................................................................................... 2 
B. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook ................................................................................. 3 
C. Poverty and Shared Prosperity .......................................................................................................... 5 
III. 
TOWARD A NEW GROWTH MODEL: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES .................... 6 
A. The New Growth Model and Sources of Growth in Djibouti ........................................................... 7 
B. The Government’s Development Agenda: Vision 2035 ................................................................... 8 
C. Key Development Challenges ........................................................................................................... 9 
IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ............................................................. 15 
A. Lessons Learned from Previous Engagement ................................................................................. 15 
B. Performance of the Current World Bank Program ......................................................................... 17 
C. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy ........................................................................ 18 
D. Fostering Stronger Partnerships ...................................................................................................... 29 
V. MANAGING RISKS .......................................................................................................................... 30 
A. Program-Specific Risks................................................................................................................... 30 
B. Country-Level Risks ....................................................................................................................... 31 
Annex 1: Djibouti CPS FY2014–2017 Results Matrix ............................................................................... 33 
Annex 2: Djibouti’s Progress toward the MDGs ........................................................................................ 39 
Annex 3: Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CAS CR) for Djibouti, FY2009–2012 ......... 40 
Annex 4:  Selected Donors in Djibouti, by Sector ...................................................................................... 67 
Annex 5:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ...................................... 68 
Annex 6:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ........................................................................... 69 
Annex 7:  Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio ...................................................................... 70 
Annex 8:  Djibouti:  Leveraging JSDF for Integrated Support of the CPS ................................................. 71 
Map ................................................................................................................ ………………………...…..80 

 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Djibouti’s geostrategic location in the Horn of Africa offers important opportunities for economic 
growth and development. Economic growth has accelerated in recent years, and the country possesses 
natural assets and geographical advantages that could support more diversified growth in the future. 
Djibouti’s economy is currently driven by the country’s state-of-the-art port complex, which is among the 
most sophisticated in the world. Trade through Djibouti’s port is expected to grow rapidly in parallel with 
the expanding economy of its main trading partner, Ethiopia. In addition, Djibouti is endowed with 
natural assets for the development of tourism, untapped marine resources that could support growth in 
artisanal fishing, and a significant infrastructure of undersea telecommunications cables on which it could 
draw to develop new service industries. Energy trade could also be a source of growth for the country. 

Harnessing the country’s human and economic potential to reduce poverty and enhance shared 
prosperity will require a new growth model, as current capital-intensive and public sector-dominated 
approaches are unsustainable. The increased growth of the past decade has relied in part on one-time 
events such as an economic resurgence after the political turmoil of the 1990s, the establishment of 
foreign military bases, and significant inflows of foreign investment that financed the construction of the 
new port and hotel infrastructure. Yet this growth pattern has not alleviated high levels of poverty or 
unemployment. Although poverty figures are difficult to pinpoint due to data limitations, available 
evidence indicates that poverty is widespread and worsening in the face of the current drought—the worst 
in 60 years. About 48 percent of Djibouti’s population is unemployed, and estimates suggest that the 
unemployment rate rises above 70 percent for young people under the age of 30. Longer-term, sustainable 
growth will depend on diversifying the economy beyond the port and the public sector, and on creating 
jobs.  

To take advantage of opportunities for more diversified economic growth and poverty reduction in 
Djibouti, the country will need to take action to address key development challenges on two broad 
fronts. First, Djibouti needs to take steps to address vulnerabilities such as high poverty and 
unemployment, deficits in human development indicators and social service delivery, limited access to 
basic infrastructure, and high natural disaster risks. Second, there is a need to strengthen the business-
enabling environment through better-quality and more affordable energy and telecommunications services 
as well as improvements to the investment climate and governance framework.  

This approach is embedded in the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
Djibouti during the period FY2014–2017. The CPS is anchored in the Government of Djibouti’s Vision 
2035, a long-term development plan that focuses on economic integration, governance, and human 
development. The overarching objective of the CPS is to support the government’s vision, working to 
reduce extreme poverty and build the foundations for shared growth by harnessing the country’s human 
and economic potential. This objective reflects the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme 
poverty and promoting shared prosperity and is in line with the MENA Regional Framework, which aims 
to strengthen governance, inclusion, jobs, and sustainable growth. The CPS rests on two pillars—reducing 
vulnerability and strengthening the business environment—while focusing on institutional strengthening 
and gender as cross-cutting themes. Progress toward expected CPS outcomes will be monitored through a 
realistic, measurable results framework (Annex 1). 

This is the first joint World Bank Group strategy prepared for Djibouti, demonstrating the deepening 
engagement with national authorities, civil society, the private sector, and development partners. The 
strategy has been defined cooperatively by the International Development Association (IDA), the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). 
Even when combined, IDA, IFC, and MIGA resources represent only a small fraction of the total 

i 

 
 
 
development assistance available to Djibouti. As such, the value of an integrated World Bank Group 
strategy lies in the Group’s commitment to “bundling” its expertise and financing, transferring global 
knowledge, supporting institutional capacity development, and providing timely and agile implementation 
support to the government’s reform efforts. 

The CPS aims to leverage the Bank Group’s modest financial resources for Djibouti by supplementing 
a focused country program with regional and global resources. The CPS assumes an indicative IDA 
envelope of US$25 million under IDA17. 1 Given the transition to credit-based financing, trust funds are 
expected to play a particularly important role in implementing the CPS program and catalyzing 
complementary interventions by development partners. Drawing on past success in leveraging IDA 
resources through trust funds, the country team will seek to make innovative use of these resources, while 
taking care to avoid overtaxing the country’s limited institutional and implementation capacity. 
Opportunities for capacity building will be sought actively through a targeted program of knowledge 
activities, including support to the collection and development of statistics to help strengthen the 
understanding of poverty and wealth distribution in Djibouti.  

Three principles have guided the preparation of the CPS, based in part on lessons learned in 
implementing the previous CAS and aided by the existence of a new Bank office in Djibouti. First, the 
strategy is selective, focusing on areas where reforms are possible and where the Bank Group has a 
comparative advantage within the broader community of Djibouti’s development partners. The current 
portfolio, which makes up the bulk of planned interventions, is well aligned with the strategic approach of 
the CPS. Selection of additional interventions has been limited to those that represent clear government 
priorities and fit within the Bank’s twin goals. Second, the CPS builds on past successes, in particular on 
positive outcomes in the social sectors, which can be attributed to clear sector goals backed up by well-
specified programs, regular monitoring of outcomes, and flexible responses to changing needs. Third, the 
strategy sets out a more realistic results framework, tailored to the likely outcomes of specific 
interventions on which progress is measurable and monitored regularly. 

Satisfactory implementation of the CPS is subject to a number of country-level and program-specific 
risks. At the program level, Djibouti’s fluid governance environment and frequent changes in leadership 
could interrupt program implementation or lead to fluctuations in reform commitment. Implementation of 
some CPS interventions could be stalled by the inclusion of innovative, but time-consuming, elements of 
behavioral change, such as adaptation of nutrition practices and increased female participation. Low 
capacity in project implementation units could slow or even hinder program implementation, and the level 
of donor coordination required to administer multidonor programs could lead to delays or overtax client 
capacity. At the country level, the Djiboutian economy is vulnerable to natural disasters such as floods, 
earthquakes, and severe and prolonged droughts, and to external shocks such as rising food and fuel 
prices. With relatively low budgetary and institutional capacity, the government could face challenges in 
implementing the strategy. In addition, there is a risk that elite capture and patronage could adversely 
affect project design and implementation. Although Djibouti’s internal politics have been relatively stable 
in recent years, social tensions exist and the risk of political instability remains. Finally, despite stable 
relations with its neighbors and international allies, Djibouti’s location in a region that has experienced 
many wars and episodes of civil unrest points to the risk of a worsening regional security environment, 
which would affect conditions in the country. While not all of these risks can be addressed through Bank 
interventions, the Bank’s presence on the ground through a newly opened country office and close 
monitoring of the situation should enable the Bank to respond quickly to adjust the program if needed.  

1 Amounts are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on: (i) total IDA resources available; (ii) the country’s 
performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA assistance (grants/credits) and the 
allocation deductions associated with MDRI annual debt service foregone; (iv) the performance, other allocation 
parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA borrowers; and (v) the number of IDA-eligible countries. 

ii 

 
 
                                                      
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) presents the World Bank Group’s proposed program 
for Djibouti during the period FY2014–2017. The CPS is anchored in the Government of Djibouti’s 
Vision 2035, a long-term development plan that focuses on economic integration, governance, and human 
development. The government’s vision and this CPS reflect the understanding that Djibouti’s current 
capital-intensive, public sector-dominated growth model is no longer sustainable and that new approaches 
are needed to address current vulnerabilities and to accelerate economic growth and job creation.  

2. 
The overarching objective of the CPS is to support the government’s Vision 2035, working to 
reduce extreme poverty and build the foundations for shared growth by harnessing the country’s 
human and economic potential. This objective reflects the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending 
extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. The CPS rests on two pillars: (i) reducing 
vulnerability; and (ii) strengthening the business environment. These pillars are aligned with the World 
Bank’s Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Regional Framework, which aims for enhanced, shared 
prosperity and reduced poverty through governance, inclusion, jobs, and sustainable growth. The strategic 
focus of the proposed CPS builds on the lessons learned in implementing the Bank’s previous Country 
Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY2009–2012. Progress toward expected CPS outcomes will be monitored 
through a realistic, measurable results framework (Annex 1), and outer-year programming will be defined 
through a mid-stream CPS Progress Report to maintain program flexibility in an uncertain environment. 

3. 
This is the first joint World Bank Group strategy prepared for Djibouti, demonstrating the 
deepening engagement with national authorities, civil society, the private sector, and development 
partners. The strategy has been defined cooperatively by the International Development Association 
(IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
(MIGA). Even when combined, the resources of these organizations represent only a small fraction of the 
total development assistance available to Djibouti. The value of an integrated World Bank Group strategy 
lies in the Group’s commitment to “bundling” its expertise and financing, transferring global knowledge, 
supporting institutional capacity development, and providing timely and agile implementation support to 
the government’s reform efforts. 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

4. 
Djibouti’s geostrategic location in the Horn of Africa offers important opportunities for 
economic growth and development, but harnessing the country’s human and economic potential will 
require a new growth model. Economic growth has accelerated in recent years, and the country possesses 
natural assets and geographical advantages that could support more diversified growth in the future. 
Resources such as arable land and water are scarce, however, and the economy is overly dependent on 
foreign direct investment (FDI), rents from foreign countries’ military bases, and revenues from its world-
class port complex. Djibouti is a lower-middle-income country, with a per-capita income of about 
US$1,430 in 2011, yet estimates suggest that 41.9 percent of the population lives in extreme poverty 2 and 
unemployment is alarmingly high, especially among young people. Recent growth has not translated into 
reduced poverty or shared prosperity. To achieve its economic potential, Djibouti will need to address key 
vulnerabilities and develop a platform for sustainable, diversified, private sector-led growth. 

2 Extreme poverty, defined according to the cost of a basic basket of food that provides the 2,115 calories per day 
needed for an adult, was estimated at 41.9 percent in 2012. Household consumption has not been surveyed since 
then, but the results of a 2010 governance survey of 700 households suggest that this rate has not decreased over the 
last decade. See Section IIC for analysis of the incidence—and measurement—of poverty in Djibouti. 

1 

 
 
                                                      
A. Geography and Society 
5. 
Djibouti is one of the smallest countries in Africa. It covers an area of 23,200 square kilometers 
and is home to a population of about 864,617 (2011). As in other small states, the small size of Djibouti’s 
economy limits its ability to diversify production and increases its reliance on foreign markets, making it 
more vulnerable to external market downturns and hampering access to external capital. With less than 
1,000 square kilometers of arable land (0.04 percent of the country’s total land area) and an average 
annual rainfall of only 130 millimeters, Djibouti depends completely on imports to meet its food needs. 
Faced with this scarcity, the country’s traditionally nomadic people have settled primarily in urban areas, 
and approximately 71 percent of the population lives in cities—58 percent in the capital, Djibouti-Ville, 
alone.  

6. 
Strategically located at the southern entrance to the Red Sea, Djibouti forms a bridge between 
the Middle East and Africa. The country is adjacent to some of the world’s busiest shipping lanes and, 
since the war between Ethiopia and Eritrea from 1997 to 2000, it has become the main sea-access route 
for landlocked Ethiopia and its market of 90 million inhabitants. Owing to its proximity to the Persian 
Gulf, Djibouti hosts military bases for France, the United States, Japan, and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO), as well as other foreign forces that are located in the country to support anti-piracy 
efforts. Given the country’s geostrategic location and infrastructure, it plays an important role in MENA 
and could benefit from regionally focused approaches to economic growth, though efforts at regional 
cooperation and integration have thus far been largely ad hoc in nature. 

7. 
Djibouti has remained relatively peaceful in recent years, unlike other countries in the region, 
but there are underlying tensions that are exacerbated by high poverty, high unemployment, and cross-
border threats from Al-Shabaab. 3 The last presidential election was held in 2011, following a change in 
the constitution that allowed the incumbent president, Ismail Omar Guelleh, to run for a third term. 
Although Djibouti has had a multiparty system since 1991, the voting system that was in place until last 
year excluded small groups, and the opposition could not sit in parliament. In November 2012, the 
National Assembly approved a new voting law based on proportional representation. For the first time 
since 2003, the opposition participated in parliamentary elections in February 2013. According to 
published results, the opposition won 10 seats in parliament. The opposition contested the results and has 
not yet participated in parliament. 

8. 
Social tensions could worsen as the number of unemployed graduates continues to grow. There 
continues to be room for greater citizen participation and youth inclusion. The country’s population is 
relatively young, with nearly 40 percent of Djiboutians under the age of 15, but the ability of these young 
people to serve as an engine of growth and poverty reduction is challenged by severely limited 
employment options (paragraph 21). Recent increases in FDI (paragraph 14) have had only a minimal 
impact on job creation and poverty reduction.  

9. 
These challenges are compounded by the widespread consumption of qat, a leaf that serves as 
a mild stimulant when chewed. Nearly 90 percent of Djibouti’s male population chews qat, leading to 
adverse social, economic, and health effects on the population. 4 Estimates suggest that Djiboutians spend 
about 20 to 30 percent of their disposable income on qat, which comes second only to food expenses and 
well ahead of spending on education (5.4 percent) and health (4.3 percent). It is common for users to 
spend several hours per day consuming it, thereby reducing worker productivity. Its effect on health is 

3 Al-Shabaab is a militant Islamist organization based in Somalia, which has recently become a cell of Al-Qaeda. 
4 World Bank. 2011. Understanding the Dynamics of Qat in Djibouti: Social, Economic and Health Aspects. Report 
No. 62823-DJ (May). 

2 

 
 
                                                      
both direct, causing high blood pressure and tooth decay, for example, and indirect, by crowding out 
household spending on basic needs such as food and medicine. 

B. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook 

10. 
Economic activity in Djibouti is driven by port-related pursuits such as transit trade with 
Ethiopia and transshipment activities. The telecommunications, construction, and tourism sectors have 
experienced strong growth in recent years, now accounting for close to 75 percent of GDP and employing 
most private sector workers. Economic growth, which averaged 4.5 percent per year during 2009–2012, 
reached an estimated 5 percent in 2013 (Figure 1). Inflation is expected to remain fairly well contained, 
with the Consumer Price Index (CPI) falling from an average of 3.7 in 2012 to an estimated 2.5 in 2013.  

11. 
The fiscal situation is projected to have weakened slightly in 2013 (Figure 2). After a marked 
improvement between 2009 and 2010, the deficit has grown gradually and is estimated to have increased 
from 2.7 percent of GDP in 2012 to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2013. Some of the deficit in 2013 was offset 
by US$185 million in revenues (13 percent of GDP) earned from the sale of the government’s 23.5 
percent stake in the holding company for Djibouti’s ports. Excluding expenditures financed by the 
proceeds of privatization, the fiscal balance shows a surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP. Financing of the fiscal 
deficit relies on external sources, with a growing but still limited role for domestic financing. External 
debt is high, at 49.2 percent of GDP in 2013, and borrowing costs are expected to rise. A Debt 
Sustainability Analysis carried out by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 2013 suggests that 
Djibouti remains at high risk of debt distress. Stress tests show that external debt sustainability is most 
vulnerable to an economic slowdown or a devaluation of the currency. Risks also include the projected 
increase in external debt and vulnerabilities attached to nonconcessional financing from emerging lenders, 
which would substantially increase the country’s debt-to-GDP ratio. 

Figure 1: Growth and Inflation, % change 

Figure 2: Public Finances, % of GDP 

6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

CPI Inflation (right axis)

Real GDP growth (left axis)

Source: Djibouti authorities and IMF estimates. 

40

30

20

10

0

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Total revenues and grants
Capital expenditure

Current expenditure
Deficit (right axis)

Figure 3: Money and Credit, % change year-on-year 

30

20

10

0

-10

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Credit to the private sector

Broad money

Source: Djibouti authorities and IMF estimates. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
The Central Bank of Djibouti (CBD) has a good track record of stimulating the economy and 
helping to finance it. Signaling a recovery in economic activity after the slowdown in 2009–2010, broad 
money grew by 8.6 percent in 2013 following an increase of 15.1 percent in 2012. Credit to the private 
sector is expected to have grown by 8.5 percent in 2013, up from 2.2 percent the previous year (Figure 3). 
The IMF recently highlighted the need to build supervisory and regulatory capacity in critical areas such 
as credit risk analysis, cross-border activities, macro-prudential regulation, and Islamic banking. The 
CBD is expected to issue a number of directives on Islamic banking and to introduce a liquidity ratio. 

13. 
The financial sector has developed rapidly, but there is a need to further strengthen 
supervision capacity and financial inclusion. The financial sector has expanded with the introduction of 
Islamic financial instruments and the opening of accounts for small savers. Eleven banks are in operation, 
with total assets reaching 100 percent of GDP in 2012. Djibouti’s banking system has performed well and 
does not appear to pose systemic risks in the near term, with return on equity at 28 percent and liquid 
assets exceeding 60 percent of total assets in 2012. Domestic financial intermediation is limited in scope, 
however. Credit to the private sector has risen gradually, now representing over 80 percent of credit, but it 
remains concentrated. Only about 5 percent of small and medium enterprises received credit.5 Consumer 
and short-term credit dominates, while medium-term and long-term credit remains marginal.  

14. 
Djibouti’s external position has deteriorated (Figure 4) as a result of a significant increase in 
the level of imports associated with the country’s economic recovery. The current account deficit is 
estimated to have widened to about 13.1 percent of GDP in 2013 from 5.1 percent in 2010. Imports grew 
by 18 percent per year on average, in nominal terms, during 2011–2013, as compared to 13 percent for 
exports. This deficit has been financed in part by significant FDI inflows, which are expected to have 
risen from 2.4 percent of GDP in 2010 to 18.6 percent in 2013. Djibouti requires significant reserves for 
imports of food, fuel, and manufactured goods, and to meet full coverage of money issued under the 
currency board management. It is estimated that official reserves increased to US$365 million in 2013 
from US$218 million in 2009, averaging well over three months of imports during that period (Figure 5). 
These expected increases in FDI and official reserves reflect the proceeds of recent privatization 
initiatives; projections on the basis of this one-off inflow should be treated cautiously. The real effective 
exchange rate fell by about 4 percent in 2011–2012, as declining food and fuel prices led to lower 
inflation. The continuing decline in inflation should help maintain the moderate speed of depreciation. 
The IMF is taking the lead in supporting the government to assess and manage the macro-fiscal impact of 
the country’s risk exposures. 

Figure 4: The External Sector  

                                Figure 5: International Reserves  

s
r

a

l
l

o

D

S

U

f

o

s

n
o

i
l
l
i

M

1000

800

600

400

200

0

25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

P

D
G

f

o

t

n
e

c

r

e
P

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Exports (left axis)
FDI (right axis)

Imports (left axis)
CA balance (right axis)

2009

2010
2011
2012
Reserves in millions of US$ (left axis)
Reserves in month of imports (right axis)

2013

Source: Djibouti authorities and IMF. 

5 World Bank and IMF. 2010. Financial Sector Assessment, Djibouti (December).  

4 

 
 
 
                                                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. 
Djibouti’s medium-term economic outlook is favorable, but there remain significant risks to 
growth. Real GDP growth is projected to reach 6 percent per year in 2014–2016, driven by strong FDI 
inflows and public investment. Inflation is expected to remain stable at about 2.5 percent per year. The 
main risks to growth and macroeconomic stability are fuel and food price shocks, adverse economic or 
security developments in neighboring countries, and domestic social and political instability.  

C. Poverty and Shared Prosperity 
16. 
Analysis of poverty and growth data in Djibouti is made difficult by the weak quality of data 
and statistics, and the World Bank has been working with the government to improve the information 
base that will underlie a better understanding of the well-being of the country’s citizens. The poverty 
data compiled by the Directorate of Statistics and Demographic Studies (DISED) have been constructed 
using three rounds of the Enquête Djiboutienne Auprès des Ménages pour les Indicateurs Sociaux 
(EDAM-IS 1996, 2002, and 2012). These are the only available figures for Djibouti and are being used by 
the government and international institutions. However, these surveys are not exactly comparable because 
of changes made to the census used to construct the sample, the sampling methodology, the questionnaire, 
and the consumption aggregate. Moreover, the poverty lines being used are high by international 
standards (Box 1). As the Bank was only recently granted access to the micro-level data, it is not yet 
possible to assess with confidence either the poverty situation in Djibouti or its evolution over time. 
Alternative data sources that could have been used to make inferences about these issues, such as national 
accounts or population statistics, are not very reliable either. DISED does not produce national accounts 
statistics, but the African Development Bank (AfDB) has been providing support and, more recently, the 
government has requested World Bank assistance in this area. 6 Population statistics are outdated and 
inconsistent with the data produced by the EDAM-IS surveys. Given these challenges, figures on poverty 
and wealth distribution must be interpreted in the light of a weak data base and the above caveats.  

Box 1: Enhancing the Measurement of Poverty and Shared Prosperity in Djibouti 
The poverty lines used to measure poverty incidence in Djibouti are high by international standards. 
Because DISED participates in the international purchasing power parity (PPP) project, it is possible to estimate 
that the absolute poverty line in 2012 was equivalent to 4.6 PPP $/day and the relative poverty line to 10.1 PPP 
$/day—much higher than the standard value of 1.25 PPP $/day used by the World Bank for international 
comparisons of extreme poverty. Both poverty lines were constructed in 1996 and have been updated using the 
official CPI, though this index is currently under scrutiny. 
The main technical challenge in the short term is the creation of a reliable, comparable database of poverty 
statistics. Djibouti will need to undertake a full analysis of the EDAM-IS micro survey data to ensure 
comparability over time. Revising the CPI, with which the government has requested Bank technical assistance, 
will help accurately portray the country’s poverty status and dynamics. This will be necessary for measuring 
shared prosperity, which requires comparable surveys at two points in time to establish the degree to which 
incomes have grown among the bottom 40 percent of the population. 
Second, there is a need to better understand the relation between GDP growth and growth in household 
spending. In addition to reassessing EDAM-IS data, this will require validating GDP growth figures and better 
understanding macro-micro economic relations. The country’s wealth, which depends on the port and foreign 
military bases, does not appear to trickle down to the rest of the economy and to the population. 
Finally, it will be important to renew efforts to measure the welfare of particular population groups and to 
track changes over time. Djibouti’s population includes refugees, nomads, and homeless people, who are 
difficult to capture in censuses, challenging to reach with social protection programs, and unlikely to participate 
in the formal economy. Yet given the country’s small population, changes in welfare among these groups can 
have important effects on overall welfare measurements. 

6 The Bank has supported the statistics office in submitting a proposal to the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity 
Building to strengthen the system of national accounts, update the CPI, and improve the comparability of poverty 
and welfare statistics over time. 

5 

 
 
                                                      
17. 
According to DISED’s latest welfare report, the incidence of poverty in Djibouti remains high 
despite moderate economic growth over the last decade. The report suggests that, after dramatic 
increases in both absolute and relative poverty between 1996 and 2002, absolute poverty has declined 
only slightly from 42.2 percent in 2002 to 41.9 percent in 2012, while relative poverty has grown from 74 
percent to 79.4 percent in the same period (Table 1). DISED figures suggest that poverty levels vary 
widely across regions. Outside the capital, seven out of ten Djiboutians fall below the absolute poverty 
line, and nine out of ten under the relative poverty line. Gender is not a major factor in the distribution of 
poverty. Absolute poverty within female-headed households (18.4 percent of total households) is 41.8 
percent, as compared to 41.9 percent within male-headed households. The incidence of relative poverty is 
65.3 percent in female-headed households and 70.3 percent in male-headed households. This is true for all 
regions. No figures are currently available on income growth among the bottom 40 percent of the 
population.  

Table 1: Government of Djibouti Estimates of Absolute and Relative Poverty 
EDAM1-IS 1996 
EDAM2-IS 2002 EDAM3-IS 2012 
       9.6 
42.2 
41.9 
      41.1 
74.0 
79.4 
100,229 
114,096 
169,137 

198,222 

216,495 

371,630 

Absolute poverty 
Relative poverty 
Absolute poverty line per capita 
per year (DJF) 
Relative poverty line per capita 
per year (DJF) 

Source: DISED. 2012. Profil de la pauvreté en République de Djibouti. Ministère de L’Economie et des finances  
charge de l’industrie et de la planification, Direction de la statistique et des études démographiques. 

18. 
Despite the data limitations, it is clear that Djibouti is a very poor country and that recent 
economic growth has not benefited the population equitably. Poverty has been exacerbated by drought 
conditions since 2007—the worst in 60 years. The drought is estimated to have affected at least half the 
rural population, with annual economic losses of 3.9 percent of GDP over the period 2008–2011 and a 
substantial flow of refugees from neighboring countries that also suffer from drought. It is estimated that 
Djibouti is currently hosting over 21,000 refugees and 4,200 asylum seekers, about 70 percent of whom 
are women and children and the majority of whom have fled conflict in their countries of origin—mainly 
Somalia, Ethiopia, and Eritrea.7 Agricultural production is constrained by a lack of water resources, soil 
salinity, and limited pastoralist traditions among what were historically nomadic people. At least 20 
percent of Djibouti-Ville’s population remains in a state of food crisis, and three-quarters of rural 
households are severely or moderately food insecure. As all food items are imported, increases in 
international food prices are transmitted directly into domestic food prices. This further affects Djibouti’s 
poor people, who spend up to three-quarters of their income on food. In the absence of reliable income 
data, trends in social indicators and access to basic infrastructure (paragraphs 31–35) help elucidate the 
status of poverty and shared prosperity in Djibouti.  

III. 

TOWARD A NEW GROWTH MODEL: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 

19. 
In 2012, recognizing the need for a diversified, sustainable growth path, the Government of 
Djibouti requested World Bank assistance in conducting a study of the potential sources of economic 
growth. This joint effort aimed to develop a long-term vision for the country’s economic development 
based on a thorough analysis of the current situation and trends. The result, A New Growth Model for 

7 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 2014. “2014 country operations profile – 
Djibouti.” Online at http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/page?page=49e483836, accessed February 3, 2014. 

6 

 
 
 
                                                      
Djibouti, sets out an action plan for generating economic recovery and growth in the country. The 
findings of the study can be summarized in three strategic messages: (i) the current growth model is 
unsustainable; (ii) Djibouti’s economic potential remains fundamentally untapped; and (iii) to realize its 
potential, Djibouti must change its governance framework. This new growth model became the basis for 
Djibouti’s Vision 2035 statement, and is the lens through which this CPS views Djibouti’s development 
opportunities and challenges. Its findings offer a way forward for building on recent economic 
developments in Djibouti, drawing on the country’s relative stability, excellent port, and sectors of 
potential growth. Taking advantage of these opportunities will require addressing key vulnerabilities and 
strengthening the business climate and governance environment. 

A. The New Growth Model and Sources of Growth in Djibouti 
20. 
Djibouti’s capital-intensive growth model is unsustainable. The increased growth of the 2000s 
came after a decade of significant output decline in response the political turmoil of the 1990s. Per-capita 
GDP in 2010 remained 20 percent below the 1990 level. Moreover, Djibouti’s recent growth is linked to 
substantial inflows of foreign investment that financed the construction of new port and hotel 
infrastructure. As is common in small states, the public sector has long dominated the national economy, 
with the government budget representing an estimated 36.1 percent of GDP in 2012 and a strong role for 
public enterprises in key sectors such as electricity, transport, real estate, and telecommunications. Given 
significant fiscal constraints, however, developing the private sector will be crucial to promote and sustain 
a more inclusive pattern of growth, provide job opportunities for young people, and reduce poverty.  

21. 
Current growth patterns will not create enough jobs to address the country’s dire and systemic 
unemployment. About 48 percent of the overall population is unemployed, and estimates suggest that the 
unemployment rate rises above 70 percent for young people under the age of 30. The labor market is 
largely informal; only about 44,000 employees worked in the formal sector in 2010, 44 percent of whom 
worked in the public sector. Even where there are jobs, there is a gap between the skills needed by 
employers and the type of skills and training received by prospective employees. Recent economic 
growth has failed to generate enough job opportunities to reduce unemployment, and the medium- and 
long-term prospects are troubling. The pace of job creation will need to double in order to even begin to 
decrease unemployment levels, and demographic pressures will only intensify in the coming years, as a 
young and increasingly well-educated population enters the labor market.  

22. 
Djibouti needs a new economic model that focuses on generating employment and supporting 
poverty reduction and shared growth in sectors with the greatest growth potential. The new growth 
model study identified, in consultation with government officials, four sectors where Djibouti has a 
comparative advantage and the potential for substantial job creation: transport and logistics, tourism, 
fisheries, and telecommunications. 

23. 
The transport and logistics sector is the backbone of Djibouti’s economy, based on the 
country’s remarkable deep-water port complex, which has few precedents in Africa. Over the last 
decade, in partnership with the Emirate of Dubai, the Government of Djibouti has progressively expanded 
its port facilities with new oil and container terminals at Doraleh (the latter supported through a US$427 
million investment guarantee from MIGA, see paragraph 62), a bulk terminal in the old port, the Djibouti 
Dry Port, and the PK-12 logistics zone. The Djibouti Free Zone was established in 2004 as a hub for 
attracting diversified private investment and jobs. It has created an attractive business environment with 
lower taxes and a one-stop shop for administrative procedures, but with limited effects on job creation 
and product diversification due to the high cost of electricity and labor (paragraph 42). The port 
contributes substantially to the national economy, generating direct revenues in the range of 
US$65 million to US$90 million per year (20 to 25 percent of government revenues) and creating about 
15,000 direct and indirect jobs (10 percent of the actively employed population). Nearly 85 percent of 

7 

 
 
traffic in the port of Djibouti is related to transit shipping for Ethiopia, and recent port and road 
improvements have made the Djibouti–Addis Ababa trade corridor more attractive to Ethiopian 
merchants than corridors running to Somalia and Sudan. The Djibouti–Ethiopian railroad shut down 
completely in 2010; construction of a new railway—through a loan from the Exim Bank of China in 
2013—should start soon. Trade through Djibouti’s port is expected to continue growing rapidly in 
response to economic expansion in Ethiopia, although it is unclear how many jobs this will create for 
Djiboutians given that Ethiopia subsidizes trucks on this route. Developing potential trade with South 
Sudan could further expand port activities.  

24. 
The tourism sector is one of the most promising for job creation. Djibouti welcomes about 
50,000 tourists a year, most of whom are business travelers tied to the foreign military bases. Tourism’s 
contribution to growth and employment remains modest, with only 4,500 people working in the sector 
today. However, Djibouti is endowed with natural assets for the development of tourism, including 
marine life of great beauty, unique geological landscapes, and a rich cultural and archeological heritage. 
Many of these sites could be eligible for UNESCO classification. Tourism focused on the Red Sea is 
especially dynamic, as evidenced by the increasing popularity of scuba diving in Sharm el-Sheikh and 
Hurghada in Egypt. Djibouti could position itself as a first-class tourist destination in the region by 
focusing on three key elements: (i) business and recreational tourism in the capital; (ii) swimming and 
dive complexes on priority development sites at the seaside; and (iii) eco-conscious discovery tourism at 
archeological and prehistoric sites. According to Bank staff simulations, Djibouti could attract up to 
500,000 tourists each year by 2030 and generate up to 30,000 direct jobs. 

25. 
Though artisanal fishing currently plays a minor role in the economy, Djibouti has substantial 
marine resources that are underutilized. The fisheries sector employs about 2,600 people. The volume of 
catches unloaded is relatively small at 1,800 tons, with most of the yield sold on the domestic market. The 
authorized exploitable potential is estimated at more than 30,000 tons, however. Market demand is strong 
and diversified, and domestic fish consumption is growing steadily, in tandem with tourism and changing 
eating habits. There are opportunities for exports to Ethiopia, the Gulf countries, and Europe. Developing 
Djibouti’s marine resources through boat acquisition, skills training, and exploration of new fisheries 
could raise the total catch above 5,000 metric tons by 2020, creating more than 3,000 direct jobs. 

26. 
Djibouti is one of only three remaining African countries (along with Ethiopia and Eritrea) to 
have a monopoly in the telecommunications sector, and despite positive trends, access to 
telecommunications services lags well behind the rest of Africa. The country’s only operator, Djibouti 
Télécom, is fully owned by the government, with revenues in excess of US$80 million (7 percent of 
GDP). The company employs about 1,000 people, a high figure given the low number of subscribers. 
Mobile telephone and Internet services are expensive and of poor quality, with low penetration rates at 20 
percent and 6 percent, respectively. Some parts of the country, especially in the north, are largely 
underserved. Only 3 percent of households have Internet access at home. These deficiencies severely 
hinder Djibouti’s competitiveness, as high-quality services are necessary to solidify its position as a 
regional hub, attract foreign investors, and promote economic diversification. Paradoxically, Djibouti has 
a powerful but largely underutilized infrastructure of undersea cables. Djibouti Télécom sells the excess 
capacity abroad, bringing in US$22 million in revenues in 2012. The government is considering issuing a 
new mobile license, opening the mobile and Internet markets, and extending the network to the entire 
country. Djibouti has significant potential to use its existing infrastructure to develop offshoring activities 
such as call centers and back-office functions.  

B. The Government’s Development Agenda: Vision 2035 

27. 
The government’s long-term approach to development is encapsulated in the recently completed 
Djibouti Vision 2035. In addition to its three cross-cutting themes—promoting women’s conditions and 

8 

 
 
reducing gender inequality, supporting youth, and protecting the environment—the vision statement 
focuses on five pillars representing the country’s key development challenges:  

• Peace and national unity: social justice, equity, and a culture of peace; a cultural identity and a 
national conscience; and a defense policy that guarantees the security of people and assets; 
• Good governance: strong institutions; a strengthened democracy based on good governance as a 
social norm; justice system modernization; capacity building in the administration and e-
government; strengthening civil participation and civil society; the media as instruments of good 
governance; consolidation of the business environment and strengthening of private initiatives; 
and the prevention and repression of corruption; 
• A diversified and competitive economy with the private sector as its engine of growth: diversified 
growth, with the private sector driving a new growth model; a positive macroeconomic policy; an 
adequate financing strategy that preserves financial equilibrium; financial market development; 
supply chain improvements; strategic partnerships; a judicious global and integrated development 
plan of the national territory; and a global employment policy; 
• Consolidation of human capital: ensuring the well-being of the population; reducing poverty 
through social actions; developing a global sanitation policy; education system improvements; a 
food security and nutrition strategy; a housing policy adapted to the national socio-cultural 
environment; defining and implementing a national population policy; and promoting artistic and 
cultural creativity; and  
• Regional integration: capitalizing on Djibouti’s strategic location in the Horn of Africa through 
infrastructure and regional economic initiatives; developing commercial integration and a service 
platform in the subregion; commercial integration in the Intergovernmental Authority for 
Development (IGAD), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), and the 
East African Community (EAC); a regional maritime outlet and service platform; and a stronger 
national strategy of international cooperation. 

28. 
Implementing Vision 2035 will require coordinated assistance from Djibouti’s development 
partners. The government plans to present its vision document to development partners in early 2014, 
after which it will be launched formally. The government has requested World Bank support in 
formulating and costing a rolling five-year strategy and action plan to implement Vision 2035. The CPS 
approach and interventions will respond flexibly to the timing and content of this strategy and action plan 
as it develops. The Bank team will make use of the mid-term CPS Progress Report to further specify the 
CPS program, including its proposed use of IDA17 resources, in line with the government’s strategy. 
Given the country’s income constraints, implementing the strategy for accelerated growth and 
employment promotion8 will require substantial support from both traditional and nontraditional donors.  

C. Key Development Challenges 

29. 
To take advantage of opportunities for more diversified economic growth and poverty 
reduction in Djibouti by implementing the government’s vision, the country will need to overcome 
several key development challenges. Action is needed on two broad fronts. First, Djibouti needs to take 
steps to address vulnerabilities such as high poverty and unemployment, deficits in human development 
indicators and social service delivery, limited access to basic infrastructure, and high natural disaster 
risks. Second, there is a need to strengthen the business-enabling environment through better-quality and 
more affordable energy and telecommunications services as well as improvements to the investment 
climate and governance framework.  

8 Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Promotion de l’Emploi (SCAPE). 

9 

 
 
                                                      
Addressing vulnerabilities 

30. 
Djibouti faces serious challenges in protecting poor and vulnerable households against shocks 
and the risk of irreversible loss of human capital. Existing social protection programs are not well 
targeted, and their coverage remains low (0.8 percent of GDP for non-subsidy social safety nets). The 
share of (non-subsidy) social safety net beneficiaries is the same in the richest quintile as in the poorest 
quintile. Untargeted tax breaks on fuel benefit mainly those who are well off; according to IMF estimates, 
there is significant leakage of diesel and gasoline price reductions, and households in the highest income 
quintile receive 12 times more of these benefits than those in the two poorest quintiles combined. 
Efficient social protection and education programs linked to employability will be particularly important 
given low rates of economic activity: in 2012, only 30 percent of Djiboutians over the age of 15 were 
gainfully employed in the labor market, with the remainder inactive or unemployed. 
31. 
Despite recent progress in the education and health status of Djibouti’s population, the country 
lags behind on human development indicators. Djibouti ranks 164th out of 187 countries on the 2013 
Human Development Index 9 and is unlikely to meet most of its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs, 
Annex 2). Women and girls face particular challenges given deep-rooted gender inequalities in access to 
services, opportunities, and voice (Box 2). 

Box 2: Gender Equality in Djibouti 
Gender inequalities in access, opportunities, and power relations persist. Social and cultural norms 
sometimes limit women’s access to productive resources, economic opportunities, and participation in decision-
making bodies. These inequalities are exacerbated upstream by inadequate access to basic social services, and 
downstream by inadequate job skills. Employment prospects remain far better for male job seekers.  
Only 37 percent of women aged 15 to 64 participate in the labor market, as compared to 69 percent of men. 
Women make up about 27 percent of the nonagricultural workforce and 31.7 percent of informal workers. 
Though the agriculture sector remains limited countrywide, the fishing industry—in particular, marketing or fish 
farming—could provide an alternate source of income for women, but its potential is hampered by inadequate 
infrastructure and material, limited access to financing, and a lack of training and organizational capacity.  
Women play a growing role in government but remain underrepresented in management and decision-
making posts. The lower house of parliament is subject to legislated quotas for the number of women. Seven of 
the 65 seats are currently filled by women.  
Gender has been integrated into several national frameworks and sectoral programs, including the Strategic 
Framework to Fight against Poverty, the National Strategy for the Integration of Women, and the recently 
elaborated National Gender Policy. In 2002, the government enacted a Family Law that enhances the protection 
of women and children and unifies the legal treatment of all women. These initiatives have yielded mixed 
results, however, owing in part to limited budget allocations and weak local technical capacity on the supply side 
and lack of information, high illiteracy, and absence of appropriate legal assistance on the demand side. 
The World Bank is undertaking a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) and a Poverty and Gender 
Study to fill the analytical and knowledge gaps related to gender in Djibouti, and to help inform the design and 
implementation of Bank Group interventions under this CPS (paragraphs 65, 74). 

Sources: Politique Nationale Genre. 2011. Ministère de la Promotion de la Femme et du Planning Familial, Chargé des Relations 
avec le Parlement, FNUAP, UNESCO, PNUD, ONUSIDA; UNICEF. 2011. Djibouti: MENA Gender Equality Profile, Status of 
Girls and Women in the Middle East and North Africa.  

32. 
Access to, and coverage of, education have improved considerably over the past decade, but the 
sector continues to face challenges in quality and relevance. Between 2008 and 2010, the number of 
classrooms in public basic and secondary schools increased by 22 percent, and the number of students 

9 United Nations Development Programme. 2013. Human Development Report 2013. New York: UNDP. 

10 

 
 
 
                                                      
grew by 15 percent. Gross primary enrollment stood at about 70 percent in 2012, 10 though with a 21 
percent difference between the richest and poorest quintiles of the population. The repetition rate in basic 
and secondary public schools is 4.7 percent. Primary school learning outcomes are quite low, however, as 
shown on math and French language exams. A gender analysis of the formal and non-formal education 
system reveals low levels of education and training of girls and women. 11 Recent gains have been 
important, including free and compulsory schooling up to age sixteen, free meals, and distribution of 
school supplies to families who send their daughters to school. Yet education of girls still lags behind that 
of boys, with a small but persistent gap between male and female enrollment ratios.12 Limiting factors 
include travel distances, household poverty, helping with household chores, early marriages—particularly 
in rural areas, and parents’ limited participation in school management. 

33. 
The country’s health status has improved in recent years, but health indicators remain among 
the lowest in the world. Important progress has been achieved in maternal and child health (Table 2), but 
mortality rates are still among the highest in the MENA region. High fertility rates, poor provision of 
emergency obstetric care, and the persistence of harmful traditional practices such as female genital 
mutilation13 negatively affect women’s health. HIV prevalence is higher for adult women than for men, at 
3.3 percent and 2.5 percent, respectively. 14 Recent improvements in the delivery of health services, in the 
availability of providers and drugs, and in management capacity have strengthened the sector, but are not 
yet sufficient to achieve the MDGs.  

Table 2: Maternal and Child Health Indicators Over the Last Decade 
2002 
2012 
546 
  383 
124 
    68 
  40 
    87 
  45 
    93 

Indicator 
Maternal mortality ratio, per 100,000 live births 
Child (under-five) mortality, per 1,000 live births 
Medically assisted delivery, % 
DPT3 vaccinations, % of children 12-23 months of 
age vaccinated before 12 months of age 
HIV/AIDS prevalence, % of pregnant women 15-
24 years old 
Number of paramedics enrolled in the High 
Institute of Health Sciences 

2.9 

515 

     1.4* 

1,098 

*Data from 2010.  
Sources: PAPFAM 2002 and 2012 Health Surveys. HIV data are based on MOH 2010 Annual Report. 

34. 
In Djibouti-Ville, home to 58 percent of the country’s people, a majority of the population lives 
in substandard housing and about one-third in slums, which are expanding rapidly due to population 
growth and migration. There is a critical lack of housing supply, and even the narrow middle class has 
difficulty finding adequate housing, due in part to high construction costs. Poor neighborhoods in the 
older part of the city lack basic infrastructure, and living conditions are unsanitary. In the sprawling slums 

10 UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Depending on the population denominator used, the gross enrollment rate for 
2013 could be as high as 78.5 percent (MENFOP Annuaire Statistique 2012-13).  
11 The literacy rate for women 15-24 years old is 47.5 percent overall, dropping to 14.2 percent in rural areas. 
UNICEF. 2007. Analyse de la situation des femmes et des enfants. 
12 World Bank gender statistics estimate gross primary school enrollment at 56 percent for girls and 62 percent for 
boys in 2010. At the secondary level, the rates dropped to 31 percent and 40 percent, respectively. Female-to-male 
ratios in primary, secondary, and tertiary enrollments were 90, 79, and 67 percent, respectively, in 2010.  
13 FGM, though illegal since 1994, is still widely practiced. In 2008, it was estimated that 93 percent of women aged 
15 to 49 years had undergone some form of FGM, performed traditionally on girls between 7 and 10 years old. See 
EDIM (Enquête Djiboutienne à Indicateurs Multiple) Rapport final 2007. 
14 Recencement Général de la Population et de l'Habitat (RGPH). 

11 

 
 
                                                      
of Balbala, the water supply is provided mostly by truck, and electricity is relatively limited. 
Transportation is made difficult by high density. Shelters are made primarily of temporary materials, and 
the poor quality of construction increases exposure to risks such as fire and flooding, while providing 
inadequate protection from the hot, arid climate. The poorest communities were by far the most affected 
during the April 2004 floods, for example, when more than 100 people died and 20,000 houses were 
damaged. Urban management is hampered by institutional inefficiencies, including weak local 
governance and low capacity among public actors to mobilize and engage communities. 

35. 
Djibouti’s rural population faces severe constraints in access to basic infrastructure, 
particularly power and drinking water. Half of Djibouti’s population does not have access to electricity, 
as a result of high tariffs, high connection costs, and an electricity grid that covers only Djibouti-Ville and 
its outskirts. It is estimated that 20 percent of the population has no access to potable water and that more 
than 70 percent of the rural population and its herds do not have access to water within a reasonable 
distance. During the three- to four-month dry season, the lack of access to water constitutes a major 
constraint to human and livestock mobility, and to the proper use of the limited and sparsely distributed 
agro-pastoral resources. The traditional techniques used by pastoral communities to cope with high levels 
of aridity and relative scarcity of fodder resources are threatened by the degradation of natural resources, 
largely as a result of overgrazing in areas where water is more easily accessible.  

36. 
Approximately 33 percent of Djibouti’s population lives in areas of high hazard risk. With less 
than 331 m3 of freshwater per capita in 2011, the country is classified as severely water poor. 15 It averages 
only 130 mm of rainfall per year, a figure that is low compared to Eastern Africa’s annual average of 
250 mm and that is expected to drop to 100 by the end of the decade. Rainfall in Djibouti’s driest region, 
Obock, averages only 50–100 mm a year. Djibouti has neither permanent rivers nor freshwater lakes, and 
less than 5 percent of total rainfall replenishes the water table because of evaporation.  

37. 
Djibouti is highly vulnerable to multiyear droughts that result in water scarcity for livestock, 
irrigation, and domestic uses, as well as to frequent flash floods that follow extended drought periods. 
Over one-third of Djibouti’s economy is vulnerable to flood and drought. The current drought, for 
instance, has affected more than 120,000 people in rural areas (50 percent of the rural population and 
about 15 percent of total population), resulting in economic losses equivalent to an average of 3.9 percent 
of GDP per year between 2008 and 2011. The greatest losses are in agriculture, livestock, and water, 
totaling US$96 million. Djibouti’s water crisis is exacerbated by rapid demographic growth, refugee 
inflows, and climate change. The recent drought has had particularly negative implications for women, 
compounding the burden of activities that are central to women’s role as primary caregivers, including 
fetching water, collecting cooking material, preparing food, and caring for children and the elderly.  

38. 
Djibouti is highly vulnerable to earthquakes and secondary effects such as tsunamis and 
landslides. An earthquake hazard and risk assessment conducted by the World Bank in 2013 indicates 
that nearby active tectonic faults can produce earthquakes of high intensity. A seismic event of magnitude 
6.75 could potentially cause several thousand fatalities, with direct economic losses as high as US$2 to 
3 billion. One-fifth of the economy is exposed to these risks, but it does not appear that Djibouti has any 
retention or transfer financial risk instruments in place. These preliminary results indicate that losses 
would largely overcome all national social, environmental, financial, and economic capacities and 
resiliency, compromising recovery and requiring substantial international assistance. Implementation of 
integral risk management measures is critical to avoid at least the most extreme scenarios. 

15 According to the World Health Organization definition of <1000 m3/yr/per capita. 

12 

 
 
                                                      
Strengthening the business-enabling environment 

39. 
Djibouti’s private sector remains embryonic and poorly organized. The country’s private sector 
encompasses approximately 3,000 companies, of which approximately two-thirds are individually owned 
with one wage earner. 16 These micro enterprises operate mostly in the trade and services sectors and tend 
to lack formal structure. Only 141 firms with valid licenses reported annual revenue in excess of 
US$100,000 in 2010, and 62 reported revenue over US$1 million. The private sector’s lack of depth 
reflects weaknesses in entrepreneurship.17 Few new businesses achieve significant growth. Local 
operators believe that entrepreneurship in Djibouti is motivated mainly by short-term opportunities, 
government contracts, or specific commercial operations. As a result, micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) are not able to tap into the opportunities available to large-scale contractors.  

40. 
Spurring private sector development and diversifying Djibouti’s sources of growth will require 
overcoming the deep structural barriers imposed by a complex and burdensome business environment. 
In Doing Business 2014, Djibouti ranks 160th of 189 economies on the overall ease of doing business 
(improved from 171st in 2013), as compared to Mauritius at 20th, Ethiopia at 125th, and Yemen at 133rd. 
Djibouti’s performance on the component parts of this index varies widely, from relatively good 
performance on facilitating cross-border trade (60th) and paying taxes (66th) to low performance on access 
to credit (180th) and protecting investors (182nd). Despite recent improvements, Djibouti’s low ranking 
reflects serious deficiencies in the business environment, which are confirmed by economic operators in 
the country.  

41. 
Business startup procedures have improved in recent years, but regulatory, tax, and legislative 
barriers remain. As reflected in its improved ranking on the ease of starting a business (from an adjusted 
rank of 188th on the 2013 index to 127th in 2014), Djibouti has simplified registration formalities and 
eliminated the minimum capital requirement for limited liability companies. Yet the cost of registering a 
business, at 185 percent of per-capita income, is 1.8 times higher than in Ethiopia and 2.8 times higher 
than in Yemen. The tax system is regressive and does not favor small enterprises.18 Comprehensive 
reform of business taxes will be essential in unleashing Djibouti’s private sector potential. Commercial 
legislation is fragmented and outdated. A national commission formed in 2007 is working to modernize 
the commercial code, incorporating the many disparate laws that are currently in effect and bringing the 
commercial legal framework in line with international standards.19 

42. 
Private sector growth is held back by the high cost of factors such as labor, electricity, and 
telecommunications. Despite relatively low worker productivity, labor costs are high in Djibouti. For 
example, an unskilled worker earns US$300 per month on average, as compared to US$70 in Ethiopia, 
US$100 in Egypt, and US$170 in Mauritius. Electricity tariffs, at US$0.32/KWh, are twice the African 
average, owing in part to the heavy reliance on expensive imported diesel fuel. Power outages are 
frequent, requiring the purchase of generators to ensure regular business operations. Electric bills account 
for approximately 25 percent of business expenses in Djibouti, hindering national competitiveness and 
industrial development, notably in the DFZ. In a 2010 governance survey, the majority of companies cited 
electricity as the most significant business constraint. The financial performance of the state monopoly 
Electricité de Djibouti, is poor, requiring heavy government subsidies. Generation capacity is below what 
is needed for economic growth, though an interconnection with Ethiopia, completed in 2011 and available 

16 Private companies reporting at least one wage earner, registered at the Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale. 
17 Between 2006 and 2011, the National Agency for the Promotion of Investment recorded 150 investment projects 
(new projects and extensions), 64 percent local and 36 percent foreign.  
18 In particular, the business license tax is calculated on a lump-sum basis, regardless of company size. This tax has 
been eliminated in many countries, as it deters business creation and favors the informal sector. 
19 These include COMESA, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), and 
L’Organisation pour l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affairs (OHADA). 

13 

 
 
                                                      
during part of the year, has helped meet growing demand, and the country has good potential to develop 
geothermal resources. There may also be potential to develop interconnections with Saudi Arabia and 
Yemen, as well as the potential sale of excess geothermal capacity, if the latter is confirmed. Although 
telecommunications rates are decreasing, they remain high compared to other developing countries. 
Internet connection fees are particularly expensive; a high-speed connection costs US$63 per month in 
Djibouti, more than twice the US$31 per month charged in Ethiopia.20 Fixed and mobile broadband prices 
in Djibouti represent 22 percent and 77 percent, respectively, of per-capita GNI per month. Due to the 
prohibitive cost and low service quality, access to telecommunications services is extremely limited 
compared to other African countries. In 2012, the mobile penetration rate remained low at 22.7 percent, 
and Internet usage remained at 8.2 percent.  

43. 
To exploit its economic potential to the fullest, Djibouti needs to improve its governance 
framework significantly. Djibouti suffers from major deficits in most dimensions of governance (Figure 
6). Access to information and freedom of the press are limited. There is no freedom of information law, 
and the constitution makes no mention of the right to information. Corruption remains problematic. 
Djibouti ranked 94th out of 176 countries on Transparency International’s 2012 Corruption Perceptions 
Index. Property rights are insecure, as reflected in Djibouti’s low ranking (133rd of 189 economies) on 
registering property in Doing Business 2014. At 12.9 percent of the property value, registration costs in 
Djibouti are more than twice the MENA regional average of 5.9 percent. Accountability is weak 
throughout the service delivery chain, across sectors, and citizens have little voice with respect to service 
delivery performance. Strengthening governance in Djibouti will require improving legislative 
frameworks, especially for private sector activities; enhancing budget transparency and national accounts; 
strengthening accountability networks and the monitoring and evaluation of reforms, with civil society 
participation; expanding training and capacity building for public sector officials and institutions; and 
strengthening the courts. From an institutional perspective, the New Growth Model study identified two 
main problems: the lack of legal security and inadequate public policy planning and execution. 

Figure 6: Dimensions of Governance Over Time in Djibouti 

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Voice &
Accountability
Political Stability &
Absence of Violence
Government
Effectiveness
Regulatory Quality

Rule of Law

Control of Corruption

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

44. 
 An effective and efficient justice sector is an important cornerstone of good governance, and 
Djibouti’s judicial system is in need of reform. Resources are insufficient, there is no judicial training, 
independence and impartiality are lacking, accountability is limited, and the system moves slowly. 
Domestic and international businesses express reservations about the justice system’s ability to protect 
their rights and resolve disputes fairly. 21 Investors have watched with concern as foreign businesses were 
ordered to pay heavy fines, and recent decisions on unilateral cancellation of contracts and 

20 Basic rate for a one-megabyte asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL). 
21 According to Doing Business 2014, it takes an average of 1,225 days, or 3.3 years, to resolve a commercial 
dispute between two companies, from the time a lawsuit is filed until final payment. 

14 

 
 
 
                                                      
reconsideration of tax breaks have contributed to the sense of legal insecurity. All court facilities are 
located in the capital, and the judiciary does not do well in reaching the country’s most vulnerable. The 
government has launched a judicial reform strategy, established commercial courts, and passed legislation 
to provide legal aid services to poor people, juveniles, and persons with HIV, but the effectiveness of 
these measures will depend on appropriate financing, personnel, and capacity. 

45. 
Public policy planning and execution suffer from weak strategic and operational planning 
instruments in key sectors. This weakness is compounded by the absence of reliable data. Moreover, a 
lack of clarity in public policies poses challenges for informed, coordinated, and accountable decision 
making. Instead of offering investors a comprehensible framework, for example, the policy for attracting 
investments to Djibouti is limited to welcoming project developers and signing memoranda of 
understanding. This context discourages serious investors who are interested in developing long-term 
projects in Djibouti, and who are key to realizing the country’s growth potential.  

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

A. Lessons Learned from Previous Engagement 
Outcome of the Previous CAS 

46. 
 The previous CAS, covering FY2009–2012, focused on three strategic pillars and proposed 
US$24.2 million in IDA grant support. The three pillars were designed to: (i) promote growth by 
improving the business environment, including eliminating constraints and reducing the cost of factors of 
production such as electricity, telecommunications, and finance; (ii) support access to basic social 
services by improving access to and quality of education and health services, and strengthening social 
protection and direct support to the poorest; and (iii) support better governance and public sector 
management through economic policy discussion and technical assistance to strengthen the budgetary 
process and monitoring and evaluation. 

47. 
As discussed in the CAS Completion Report (CAS CR) for the 2009–2012 strategy (Annex 3), 
solid progress was achieved toward most major expected program outcomes. Program performance was 
rated moderately satisfactory, with notable achievements in education and health and important steps 
forward on energy and expenditure transparency. Progress toward targets in telecommunications, business 
regulation, financial sector reform, social protection, and monitoring and evaluation was more gradual. In 
some cases, momentum was slowed by weak implementation capacity, delays in implementing relevant 
programs, or lack of dedicated operational support. Other areas, such as social protection, are beginning 
to make headway now that planned programs are finally under implementation.  

48. 
The CAS CR rated the Bank’s performance moderately satisfactory. The design of the CAS 
program was relevant to the country context at the time, emphasizing government ownership, selectivity, 
and flexibility. Strategy implementation was successful in mobilizing resources to scale up successful 
interventions and respond to evolving needs. As a result, the country’s IDA allocation was nearly doubled 
through trust funds. However, gaps in the design of the results framework introduced a lack of clarity 
between objectives and instruments in some sectors and left room for insufficient follow-through on 
monitoring and evaluation. The Bank team has responded proactively to amend weaknesses in portfolio 
management, but there is a need for improved follow-up on analytical work and technical assistance.  

49. 
Lessons from the CAS CR have informed the development of the CPS for FY2014–2017. First, 
the Bank program builds on the current appetite for reform in key areas such as governance and private 
sector development, working from analysis undertaken jointly with the government for the New Growth 

15 

 
 
Model study. Drawing on the success of education and health outcomes under the previous CAS, 
expected CPS outcomes have been aligned closely with specific operational activities to ensure dedicated 
Bank support and encourage regular monitoring of progress indicators. Second, capacity building remains 
fundamental in designing and implementing Bank projects. Design of the CPS has emphasized flexibility 
in programming and in the preparation and effective dissemination of technical assistance and analytical 
work in response to evolving country needs. Third, the Bank’s limited financial assistance must be 
leveraged with resources from trust funds and other development partners; the CPS has sought to build on 
the Bank’s positive experiences in this area, such as the successful mobilization of trust fund financing in 
response to the current drought. Finally, given capacity constraints and persistent weaknesses in the 
collection and management of key national statistics, and based on the experience under the previous 
CAS, the CPS will be highly selective, as reflected in the strategy’s guiding principles (paragraph 68) and 
in the simplified results framework (Annex 1), which focuses on key indicators that are clearly specified, 
measurable, realistic given the project pipeline, and set up for regular monitoring and evaluation.  

Stakeholder Consultations 

50. 
A CPS Preparation Workshop was held with the Government of Djibouti and World Bank staff 
in November 2012. Geared toward jointly developing the proposed CPS program, the workshop was 
guided by the New Growth Model study and by the lessons learned in implementing the last CAS. 
Participating ministers and key government officials from all sectors were vocal about their appreciation 
for the coordinated partnership approach adopted to elaborate the CPS. They underlined the need for 
improved coordination across government agencies, among development partners, and between the 
Government of Djibouti and the Bank, including more frequent portfolio reviews of Bank activities. 

51. 
In June–July 2012, 220 stakeholders in Djibouti were invited to provide their opinions on the 
Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a client survey. Participants were from government, 
civil society, media, bilateral and multilateral agencies, the private sector, and academia. A total of 
118 stakeholders (54 percent), representing a wide range of groups and sectors, participated in the survey. 
This was the first survey of its kind in Djibouti. Findings will be used to benchmark the Bank’s 
performance (Box 3), and the survey will be repeated in three years to help determine the degree to which 
perceptions and attitudes have changed as a result of the opening of a Bank country office in Djibouti.  

Box 3: Key Findings of the Djibouti Client Survey 2012 
One of the biggest challenges reported by stakeholders was that the World Bank did not have an office in 
Djibouti. This was identified as the Bank’s greatest weakness. Stakeholders felt strongly that the Bank should 
play a significant role in Djibouti’s future development efforts. While a majority of respondents believed that 
the Bank’s most important instrument in Djibouti was investment lending, and the Bank was valued most by a 
plurality of respondents for its financial resources, the survey findings suggest that capacity development and 
training are valued highly, as is the Bank’s technical assistance.  
Education, health, jobs, trade, the domestic private sector, and governance and anticorruption were 
consistently identified as top development priorities. Stakeholders felt that poverty was best resolved through a 
focus on jobs and education. Around one-third of respondents felt that the Bank should emphasize governance 
and anticorruption in its research and knowledge services. In some priority areas, such as education and health, 
the Bank’s work was viewed positively. The Bank was considered far less effective, however, in the 
agriculture/rural sector, jobs, and governance and anticorruption. Respondents also expressed concerns about 
the Bank’s speed and flexibility.  
One-quarter of respondents believed that reforms failed or were slow to take place because of inadequate 
participation from citizens and civil society. While respondents felt strongly that the Bank collaborated well 
with government and, to a lesser degree, with donors, the Bank received low ratings on its collaboration with 
country stakeholders outside of government. 

16 

 
 
 
52. 
In September 2013, consultations were held with civil society in the capital city and in the 
northern areas of Obock and Tadjourah. These consultations complemented those carried out regularly 
as part of the implementation of Bank projects, including on urban poverty reduction, rural community 
development, and social protection. In general, participants felt that the Bank had not engaged enough 
with civil society. In particular, they were keen to receive direct funding from the Bank and asked that 
government agencies use nongovernmental organizations more systematically and more regularly for the 
implementation of Bank projects. The Bank is including citizen engagement tools in ongoing and new 
projects and will redouble efforts to engage with CSOs (paragraph 93). 

B. Performance of the Current World Bank Program 
53. 
Overall portfolio performance is satisfactory. The Bank’s Djibouti portfolio comprises seven 
projects, with a net commitment value of about US$56.9 million and a total undisbursed balance of about 
US$39 million as of November 2013. This is complemented by a trust fund portfolio encompassing four 
activities, for a total of about US$11.6 million and an undisbursed balance of US$10.3 million. As this is 
a new trust fund portfolio, about half of this amount was approved in late FY2010 and the remainder in 
June 2013. With the exception of one project, the Djibouti portfolio consists of new approvals and 
projects with effectiveness dates of 2011 or later. Project outcomes under the previous CAS were 
satisfactory on balance and, though portfolio performance declined over the course of CAS 
implementation, it has begun to rebound in response to proactive interventions. The portfolio comprises 
one problem project, the Power Access and Diversification Project, which was recently restructured. Low 
implementation capacity requires a highly selective program, which is emphasized in this CPS, as well as 
closer and more regular supervision of projects, which the country team has addressed by increasing 
project supervision budgets. 

54. 
A joint financial management, disbursement, and procurement training workshop for Project 
Implementation Units (PIUs) in Djibouti was successful in resolving a number of issues that were 
delaying project implementation. Held in March 2013, the three-day workshop brought together all PIU 
staff to explain the Bank’s fiduciary processes and address implementation bottlenecks and delays due to 
capacity and other constraints. The workshop enabled all projects to be transitioned to e-disbursement, 
increasing the disbursement ratio, significantly improving the quality of withdrawal applications, 
allowing funds to flow smoothly to the PIUs, and closing four lapsed loans. A subsequent portfolio 
review was conducted in September 2013 to continue to strengthen the capacity of PIU staff and expedite 
project implementation. The review identified four challenges. First, while project execution has 
improved in the last six months, insufficient planning and a lack of familiarity with Bank rules continues 
to cause procurement delays. The new, locally hired Bank procurement specialist will work closely with 
the PIUs to build their capacity. Second, the government’s recent decision to increase the number of 
signatories on disbursement requests from two to three has created an additional hurdle. Third, there is a 
need for closer and better coordination between line ministries and government agencies. Fourth, the 
government needs a strong monitoring and evaluation system to complement Bank supervision, a task 
that is being addressed by the Ministry of Finance.  

55. 
Use of country public financial management systems in Bank-funded projects is limited to 
certain commitments and payment controls as a result of continuing fiduciary challenges in Djibouti. 
The accounting system falls short of international practice, with issues ranging from the calculation of the 
treasury balance and control of resource allocations, to timeliness and integrity of general accounts. The 
Ministry of Finance is trying to address these concerns through an integrated financial management 
information system to be rolled out by early 2014. This system will permit the maintenance of standard 
accounting records for ministries, thus enhancing fiscal transparency. The Chamber of Accounts, 
Djibouti’s supreme audit institution, intends to align its law more closely with international standards and 
has volunteered to assess its performance using a new measurement framework developed by the 

17 

 
 
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. The Bank expects to support the government in 
these areas through further policy dialogue and technical assistance. Because the sustainability of these 
reforms depends largely on the availability of a skilled workforce, the Bank will look for opportunities to 
partner with Djibouti in developing the accountancy profession and general financial reporting practices. 

56. 
A Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Report, conducted in 2011, highlighted key 
implementation challenges. Although Djibouti’s public financial management system is governed by an 
elaborate legal and regulatory framework, the report indicated a need for improvements in the budget 
preparation process, the medium-term expenditure framework, cash management in the context of a 
treasury single account at the central bank, procurement management, state accounting, internal audit, and 
external audit. The Bank will monitor developments in the public financial management system with a 
view to identifying opportunities to expand the use of those systems in the context of Bank operations. 

57. 
Djibouti’s new procurement code, prepared with World Bank technical assistance and 
promulgated in July 2009, has addressed the main weaknesses raised in the 2004 Country 
Procurement Assessment and Review and aligned the country’s procurement framework with 
international good practices. Bank technical assistance was offered within the framework of an 
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant (US$357,000), which aimed to strengthen the country’s 
legislative, institutional, and manpower capacity in the area of public procurement by: (a) updating the 
Procurement Code and harmonizing procedures; and (b) increasing transparency and efficiency in the 
Commission National des Marchés Publics and the control bodies and improving the local private sector's 
competitiveness when seeking government contracts. Implementation of the new procurement code faces 
significant weaknesses, however, including: (i) a lack of awareness of the new procurement code among 
public entities; (ii) delays in contract signings due to administrative procedures; (iii) delayed procurement 
implementation under Bank-funded projects as a result of delayed bid opening; (iv) lack of publicly 
available procurement plans to enable broader private sector participation in tenders; and (v) weak 
procurement implementation and management capacity (as highlighted in the 2011 Country Portfolio 
Performance Review).  

58. 
The Bank has continued to provide procurement support to Djibouti. This support has taken the 
form of workshops, on-the-job training, and day-to-day guidance on Bank procurement guidelines and 
procedures, standard bidding documents, and requests for proposals. The Bank has tailored procurement 
arrangements to conditions in Djibouti. The new procurement specialist in the country office will help 
improve response times and build capacity in PIUs and among country counterparts. In addition, as a 
small state, Djibouti would be eligible to benefit from special procurement arrangements, which would be 
agreed upon during project implementation. In these cases, at the request of the borrower/beneficiary, the 
Bank may agree to specific procurement arrangements as set forth in Situations of Urgent Need of 
Assistance or Capacity Constraints: Simplified Procurement Procedure. 22   

C. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy 

59. 
The overarching objective of the CPS for FY2014–2017 is to support the Government of 
Djibouti’s Vision 2035, working to reduce extreme poverty and build the foundations for shared growth 
by harnessing the country’s human and economic potential. This objective reflects the World Bank’s 
twin goals of reducing extreme poverty, as measured by the percentage of people living with less than 
US$1.25 per day, and promoting shared prosperity, as measured by income growth among the bottom 40 
percent of the population. The Djibouti CPS rests on two pillars: (i) reducing vulnerability; and (ii) 

22 These special arrangements are made possible by the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Investment Project 
Financing (OP10.00), paragraph 11, which is triggered in emergencies and crises, in fragile and conflict-affected 
states, and in cases of national or subnational fragility, including small states. 

18 

 
 
                                                      
strengthening the business environment. These pillars are aligned with the Bank’s MENA Regional 
Framework, which aims to increase governance, transparency, accountability, and citizen participation; 
accelerate private sector inclusive economic growth; create jobs; and increase social and economic 
inclusion.  

60. 
Recognizing the critical importance of the private sector and diversified growth in Djibouti’s 
future development, the CPS embodies a joint strategy for the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA. Enhanced 
IFC/IDA collaboration will allow Djibouti to tap into its economic potential more effectively, bringing 
together efforts to address key development challenges with the exploration of investment opportunities 
in growth sectors. The relevant regional and global experience that the World Bank Group possesses in 
each of these areas, together with each institution’s specific mechanisms and comparative advantages, 
will give Djibouti access to a breadth of integrated development solutions, resources, and instruments in 
both the public and private sectors. Similarly, CPS implementation will involve close coordination with 
MIGA, of which Djibouti has been a member since January 2007. Djibouti ranks 20th among MIGA 
clients in terms of exposure. Working together with the IFC, MIGA will continue to support Djibouti’s 
efforts to attract foreign private investors, including from the region and the developing world, through 
the provision of guarantees for noncommercial risk. This support aligns with MIGA’s MENA Initiative, 
announced in June 2011, according to which the agency has mobilized capacity of up to US$1 billion in 
new guarantees for cross-border investment within the region. MIGA remains committed to supporting 
sustainable projects with high development impact in sectors aligned with the broader World Bank Group 
strategy, including through its Small Investment Program, and is exploring a possible business 
development mission to Djibouti early in the CPS cycle. 

61. 
IFC’s engagement in Djibouti centers on investment climate reforms. This reform program 
serves as an entry point for IFC’s collaboration with the Djiboutian authorities, given the government’s 
strong focus on improving the country’s Doing Business indicators. An assessment of the country’s credit 
market and credit information sharing system was undertaken in 2009, and IFC shared with the 
government its recommendations on options and implementation steps for building a private/public credit 
reporting infrastructure in Djibouti. Although IFC has not yet made investments in Djibouti, it has 
evaluated several options and will continue to seek opportunities for potential investments in areas 
identified as having the greatest growth potential (paragraph 88). 

62. 
By supporting a new container terminal, MIGA has allowed Djibouti to grow its transshipment 
business. In December 2007, MIGA put forward a US$427 million investment guarantee for the 
development, financing, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of the new container terminal at 
Doraleh, a sizeable project with respect to Djibouti’s economy. The ten-year guarantee against the risks of 
transfer restriction, war and civil disturbance, expropriation, and breach of contract has helped the banks 
mitigate perceived political risks, enabling the project sponsors to raise medium-term, cross-border 
project financing. The project supported the development of Djibouti’s port sector and reinforced its 
position as Ethiopia’s preferred transit port for its growing international trade. Dividends and royalty 
payments in relation to this project are contributing to government revenues. The port has generated new 
direct and indirect employment and training opportunities and is helping to strengthen the domestic 
economy through links to local enterprises and spillover effects emanating from increased trade and 
economic activity. 

The CPS assumes an indicative IDA envelope of US$25 million. The amounts for FY2014-

63. 
17 are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on: (i) total IDA resources available, (ii) the 
country’s performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA assistance 
(grants/credits) and the allocation deductions associated with MDRI annual debt service foregone; (iv) the 
performance, other allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA borrowers; and (v) the 
number of IDA-eligible countries.  

19 

 
 
64. 
Trust funds have played an important role in the Bank’s program in Djibouti and are fully 
integrated into the CPS. Trust funds have leveraged Bank resources and catalyzed complementary 
interventions by other donors, for example US$30 million mobilized from the international community 
following the Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) prepared through a grant from the Global Facility 
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). Trust funds have also complemented Bank projects; for 
example, GFDRR grants to build resilience to climate change have been integrated closely with the 
Bank’s work on urban poverty reduction. Trust fund resources have made possible the development of 
pilots to inform the design of Bank projects, as in the case of a Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) 
crisis response grant that supported the provision of short-term employment opportunities in poor 
communities while offering community-based nutrition support for women and children. Recognized for 
its innovative approach, the JSDF pilot was scaled up with IDA funds and its lessons are being integrated 
into a proposed follow-on JSDF grant on piloting models of livelihood opportunities. The Bank is 
currently pursuing JSDF funding for an integrated package of projects on livelihood, sanitation, and local 
service delivery (paragraph 76). The Bank’s Djibouti country team will continue to seek opportunities to 
mobilize trust fund resources to complement the IDA envelope. These grant resources will be especially 
critical during this CPS period, following the country’s transition to IDA credits.   

65. 
Knowledge activities will include a poverty and gender assessment and extensive support to the 
collection and development of statistics. A Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) and a Poverty and 
Gender Study, with gender as a core theme, are planned to fill the analytical and knowledge gaps in this 
area, and emerging findings from these studies will inform the design and implementation of 
interventions planned under this CPS. Opportunities for capacity building will be sought actively through 
south-south exchanges, particularly in strengthening procurement and audit functions through IDF grants 
that will build capacity and help improve governance and transparency. The Bank will provide just-in-
time analysis in the form of short technical and policy notes to respond to country needs, for example 
through an ongoing study on rural electrification. Finally, at the government’s request, a roundtable will 
be organized in early 2014 to bring in experts from select countries such as Mauritius, Panama, Cape 
Verde, Rwanda, and the United Arab Emirates, to share the lessons learned on their path to development.  

66. 
Recognizing the country’s important regional role, the CPS will seek opportunities for Djibouti 
to participate in regional initiatives, both in MENA and in Africa more broadly. For example, the 
proposed telecommunications operation (paragraphs 67 and 85) will create the institutional environment 
needed to facilitate Djibouti’s potential role as a regional telecommunications hub. In addition, the Bank 
is looking into the possibility of tapping into regional IDA funds to support a feasibility study with regard 
to electric power interconnections with Saudi Arabia and Yemen. The success of regional cooperation and 
integration schemes is imperative, not only for economic development, but also for internal and regional 
peace and stability. Finally, the fact that the IGAD trading bloc is based in Djibouti may offer prospects 
for strengthening regional approaches to economic growth. 

67. 
Djibouti will be included in the World Bank Group’s initiative for the Horn of Africa, which is 
currently under preparation. Given the region’s geostrategic location, it is uniquely positioned to supply 
itself and the economies of the Gulf and South Asia with food and energy. Despite strong economic 
growth in many of the region’s countries, however, there remains an increased risk of acute food crisis 
and regional fragility, owing to environmental and demographic changes, low levels of basic services, and 
high instability. These challenges underscore the need to work on a long-term, systematic approach to 
building the resilience of vulnerable countries and populations. The Horn of Africa initiative will support 
a limited number of transformative operations that focus on the region’s underlying challenges and have 
strong country ownership. The main objectives of the proposed regional approach are to: (i) reduce 
vulnerability in mobile and refugee populations through collective cross-border action; (ii) improve 
regional connectivity through support for cross-border infrastructure investments focused on the 
information and communications technology (ICT) and transport sectors, and to facilitate cross-border 

20 

 
 
trade; and (iii) support the regional development of the extractive industries through support to skills, 
policy, and infrastructure development. These key objectives will be achieved through: (a) human 
development, particularly support to a regionally coordinated safety net program; (b) connectivity, 
including the development of an international backbone (for example, reinforcement of the Djibouti-
Addis line); (c) regional oil pipeline development (for example, South Sudan–Ethiopia–Djibouti); and (d) 
knowledge support (such as IGAD’s climate change and adaptation strategy development).  

68. 
Three principles have guided the preparation of the CPS, based in part on lessons learned in 
implementing the previous CAS and aided by the existence of a new Bank office in Djibouti. First, the 
strategy is selective, focusing on areas where reforms are possible and where the Bank Group has a 
comparative advantage within the broader community of Djibouti’s development partners. The current 
portfolio, which makes up the bulk of planned interventions, is well aligned with the strategic approach of 
the CPS. Selection of additional interventions has been limited to those that represent clear government 
priorities and fit within the Bank’s twin goals (Table 3). Until now, Bank assistance focused on the social 
sectors, with good results in improving health and education indicators but less success in reducing 
poverty (Annex 3). Under this CPS, as agreed with the government, direct support to poor and vulnerable 
people will continue through ongoing interventions in the social sectors, while new interventions will 
focus on parallel improvements in the investment climate with a view to reducing poverty by attracting 
investment, generating jobs, and creating an environment conducive to shared prosperity. Second, the 
CPS follows the principle of building on past successes, in particular on positive outcomes in the social 
sectors, which can be attributed to clear sector goals backed up by well-specified programs, regular 
monitoring of outcomes, and flexible responses to changing needs. Third, the strategy sets out a more 
realistic results framework, tailored to the likely outcomes of specific interventions in which progress is 
measurable and monitored regularly. 

69. 
The CPS will focus on institutional strengthening and gender as cross-cutting themes. 
Institutional development and capacity building are critical to improving economic management and 
service delivery in Djibouti. Institutional capacity is low and the governance environment is fluid, with 
frequent changes in ministers; reform commitment often resides in a particular minister and can be 
affected by ministerial turnover. Throughout the CPS program, interventions will encompass efforts to 
strengthen institutions, build capacity, and improve sector regulations across both strategic pillars. In 
addition to capacity building activities included in each project, this agenda will be tackled head-on in an 
education project designed to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Education (paragraph 77), two 
IDF grants to strengthen procurement and audit functions in relevant institutions (paragraph 65), and 
GFDRR support for better preparedness and response to floods and climatic changes (paragraph 82). 
Gender will also be an area of focus across the CPS program. The Bank is currently responding to gender 
needs directly or indirectly in various sectors. For instance, a “workfare plus” program targets pregnant 
and lactating women, and an urban poverty reduction project aims to ensure that women make up at least 
half of the expected beneficiaries of infrastructure subprojects. Moving forward, in the context of Bank 
support for improved statistical capacity in Djibouti, the elaboration and regular collection of gender-
disaggregated data will help the Bank to more strategically set priorities for developing a comprehensive 
approach to empowerment. The planned PSIA and Poverty and Gender Study could be a vehicle for these 
efforts, for example (paragraph 74). 

70. 

Progress toward CPS objectives will be monitored on the basis of a simplified results 
framework that links outputs and outcomes to country development priorities. The results matrix 
(Annex 1) focuses on a select set of clearly specified, measurable indicators that reflect the expected 
outcomes of the Bank Group’s ongoing and near-term portfolio in Djibouti. The intention is to 
concentrate on indicators that will be monitored in the course of project implementation and that can 
reasonably be achieved during the CPS period. Preparation of a CPS Progress Report, planned for 

21 

 
 
FY2016, is expected to help the country team evaluate mid-term progress and make needed course 
corrections to ensure flexibility and maximize the relevance and effectiveness of interventions. 

Pillar One: 
Reducing 
Vulnerability 

Pillar Two: 
Strengthening 
the Business 
Environment 

Lending 

Technical 
Assistance 

Table 3: Indicative CPS Program for FY2014–2017  
Ongoing 
New under CPS 
• Social Safety Net Project (FY12) 
• Urban Poverty Reduction Project II 
• Strengthening Institutional Capacity 
(FY14) 
and Management of the Education 
• Social Safety Net Project - 
(FY12) 
Additional Financing (FY15) 
• Improving Health Sector Performance 
• Rural CDD and Water 
(FY13) 
Mobilization - Additional 
• Urban Poverty Reduction Project 
Financing (FY16) 
(FY09) 
• Rural CDD & Water Mobilization 
(FY11)  
• Employment and Human Capital 
(JSDF) (FY10) 
• Djibouti: Community-Driven 
Workfare, Health, and Human Rights 
(NTF) (FY12) 
• Piloting Nutrition/Workfare for SSN 
(SIEF TF) (FY14) 
• Access to Quality Education Project 
(GPE) (FY14) 
• Djibouti Natural Disaster Risk 
Assessment and Monitoring Program 
(GFDRR) (FY10) 
Knowledge • Pirate Trails: Tracking the Illicit 
Financial Flows from Pirate Activities 
off the Horn of Africa (FY14) 
• Understanding the dynamics of Qat in 
Djibouti: Social, Economic and Health 
Aspects (FY11) 
• Geothermal Power Generation (FY14) 
• Power Access and Diversification 
(FY06) 

• Strategic engagement funded by 
the JSDF: Three interlinked 
proposals to support safety nets, 
urban infrastructure and 
governance (FY14 & FY15) 
• Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity 
Building (FY14) 

• Rural Electrification Study (FY14) 
• PSIA: Reforming Social Safety 
Nets in Djibouti  (FY14) 
• Poverty and Gender Study (FY14) 

• Governance for Private Sector 
Development (IDA and IFC, 
FY15) 
• Telecoms Project (FY15) 
• PPIAF grants in telecoms (FY14) 
• Support to legal and institutional 
PPP framework (PPIAF) (FY14)  
• FIRST Project (FY14)  
• Support to improving Doing 
Business indicators (with IFC) 

Lending 

Technical 
Assistance 

• PPIAF grants in energy (FY12) 
• PPIAF grants in telecoms (FY12) 
• FIRST Project (FY13)  

Knowledge • New Growth Model Study (FY12) 
• Port Study (FY12) 
• Transport Study (FY13) 
• Indexed Based Insurance for Herders 
(FY13) 
• IFC Support to improving Doing 
Business indicators 
• IFC Support for Introduction of 
Leasing 
• MIGA 10-year guarantee for Doraleh 
container terminal 

Guarantee 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pillar One: Reducing Vulnerability 

71. 
The first pillar of the CPS will seek to support the government’s efforts to alleviate poverty and 
boost shared prosperity by reducing the vulnerability of Djibouti’s population directly through 
improvements in social protection and disaster risk mitigation, as well as indirectly through 
enhancements to education, health, and basic infrastructure services. In line with the government’s 
sectoral strategies, Bank-funded operations on education, health, and rural and urban development will 
focus on enhancing service delivery, while also helping the government to enhance its monitoring 
capacity at the sectoral level. Citizen engagement will be mainstreamed into operations to collect 
feedback from users on services provided and respond in order to enhance service quality. In particular, 
the CPS program will aim to address the following challenges: (i) the inadequate targeting of 
beneficiaries of safety net programs and difficulties in ensuring that benefits reach the poorest and most 
vulnerable; (ii) the lack of institutional capacity in the Ministry of National Education and Vocational 
Training, which holds back the delivery of efficient and effective education services; (iii) the weak quality 
of maternal and child health care and communicable disease control programs; (iv) the lack of access to 
basic infrastructure, including water and agro-pastoral resources in rural communities and water and roads 
in poor urban areas of Djibouti-Ville; and (v) the country’s poor resilience to climate change and natural 
disasters. These challenges will be addressed through the achievement of the following five outcomes: 

Outcome 1.1:  Improved institutional capacity to reach the poorest and most vulnerable and 
increase their access to short-term employment opportunities 

72. 
The CPS aims to help strengthen social protection systems in Djibouti, which have low 
coverage and are not well targeted and thus miss opportunities to reach the country’s poorest and most 
vulnerable. In helping the government achieve greater efficiency in its social protection programs, the 
Bank will support the government in understanding the effectiveness of the current (targeted and 
untargeted) social safety net. Bank interventions will focus on four key areas: (i) strengthening targeting 
through the creation of a unified registry of poor and vulnerable households; (ii) strengthening the 
information base on which social protection programs draw; (iii) providing integrated support for 
employment creation and nutrition interventions; and (iv) piloting innovative approaches to reduce 
vulnerability at the community level. 

73. 
Creation of a unified registry of poor and vulnerable households will be critical to better target 
poor and vulnerable populations. The proposed CPS will assist in conceptualizing and developing such a 
registry as a single platform used by all social assistance programs, resulting in significant cost savings 
and substantial improvements in targeting the poorest households. Preliminary analysis of the targeting 
effectiveness of current social safety net programs shows that there is considerable leakage and that a 
proxy means test would improve targeting. The Bank is providing technical assistance financed by the 
Nordic Trust Fund to further support the conceptualization of this approach. Once the registry is 
operational, the Bank will work with donors to mobilize funds to increase the targeting efficiency of 
social assistance programs and their coverage of poor and vulnerable households. The proposed scale-up 
of the Social Safety Net Project (paragraph 75) will help establish the registry as a credible instrument for 
protecting poor and vulnerable people and will allow for targeted payments such as compensation for 
welfare losses caused by fuel and food price reforms. 

74. 
To help strengthen the information base that underlies the design and implementation of 
Djibouti’s social protection programs, the CPS aims to support the government in gaining a deeper 
understanding of reform options for improving safety net targeting and of the potential impact of these 
reform options on poverty. With support from the PSIA Trust Fund, the Bank will conduct a poverty and 

23 

 
 
 
social impact analysis to shed light on the inefficiencies of the current social safety net, examine possible 
policy reform options (such as tax reform with regard to fuel products), and analyze the potential impact 
of these reform options. A Poverty and Gender Study will include gender as a core theme and examine 
whether past growth has trickled down to households and contributed to reducing poverty. These efforts 
will be strengthened by planned technical assistance on improving statistics in all areas of the economy, 
including but not limited to poverty and employment. The government has requested World Bank 
assistance in updating the CPI, and this work will be undertaken in close coordination with efforts by the 
AfDB to support the government in updating the 2012 poverty profile. The government’s statistics office 
is planning to set up a working group to coordinate donor efforts in this area, in which the World Bank 
Group will participate. 

75. 
 In addition to strengthening the targeting of safety net programs, the CPS aims to provide 
integrated support to the design and implementation of employment creation and nutrition 
interventions to improve the quality of life of poor and vulnerable populations in Djibouti. Building on 
the social protection strategy that was prepared with World Bank technical assistance and validated by a 
wide set of stakeholders, the pilot “workfare plus” program (US$3 million in JSDF financing) has been 
scaled up through an IDA-financed Social Safety Net Project (US$5 million IDA). Approved in June 
2012, this innovative program seeks to increase the efficiency of nutritional interventions by leveraging 
the effect of short-term additional income on child nutritional status. The program focuses on the critical 
first 1,000 days of life, combining a workfare component targeted to pregnant women and mothers of 
children aged 0–2 with community-based nutrition activities. The program includes rigorous impact 
evaluation, which will contribute to the still-insufficient literature on cost-effective interventions for 
improving early child nutrition and development in low-income and fragile contexts. The collection of 
data for the quantitative evaluation and in-depth qualitative work are being financed through the Strategic 
Impact Evaluation Trust Fund. The social protection strategy postulates the scale-up of this program for 
certain target groups, as well as the provision of cash transfers where appropriate. The proposed scale-up 
will help build a menu of suitable social assistance measures and support the government in achieving 
greater coordination and defragmentation of ongoing programs and initiatives. 

76. 
Building on these experiences, the proposed CPS program seeks to pilot innovative approaches 
to reduce vulnerability at the community level by building sustainable livelihood opportunities in urban 
and rural areas, targeted to women and young people. The Bank is coming forward with three 
interlinked proposals for JSDF funding for an integrated package of projects encompassing livelihood 
opportunities, sanitation improvements, and local-level service delivery for a total of US$9 million in 
grants (Annex 8). Once funding is secured, these programs will be pursued in a coordinated manner. The 
projects seek to help create short- and long-term job opportunities and to support grassroots communities 
to elicit change where needed. These interventions will complement or further inform the Bank’s ongoing 
engagement on safety nets, urban infrastructure, and governance through enhanced service delivery 
mechanisms and resultant effects on transparency and accountability.  

Outcome 1.2:  Strengthened management of the education system 

77. 
Building on the Bank’s successful record of support to Djibouti’s efforts to strengthen quality 
and access in education, the CPS will focus on strengthening education sector management efficiency 
and accountability. Djibouti’s new National Education Strategy for 2010-2019 aims to establish an 
efficient education system with a focus on results, to guarantee a higher-quality education, and to expand 
the role of technical and vocational education and training. This results-based approach will require 
efforts to strengthen the capacity and tools available to education sector authorities in managing the 
education system, particularly in light of the reorganization of sector ministries that took place in May 
2011. The CPS will support the government’s efforts to implement the National Education Strategy by 
helping to put in place key building blocks without which broader efforts to strengthen quality and focus 

24 

 
 
on results cannot succeed. These building blocks include introducing results-oriented management tools 
and practices—such as annual work plans and annual statistical reports with key sector indicators—that 
will promote greater efficiency and accountability as a means to reinforce the institutional organization 
and systems of the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training. This will be accomplished 
through the Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Management of the Education System Project (US$6 
million IDA), which became effective in January 2013. 

Outcome 1.3:  Improved utilization of good-quality maternal and child health care services and 
communicable disease control programs 

78. 
CPS support to the health sector will focus on strengthening service delivery in maternal and 
child health care services and communicable disease control programs, targeting health improvements 
in key populations with a view to improving Djibouti’s overall health indicators. Support in this area 
will continue the Bank’s past assistance in strengthening health sector performance and will align with the 
government’s implementation of its second National Health Development Plan for 2008–2012, which 
focuses on sector management, quality, financing, human resources, and availability and rational 
management of drugs. Approved in April 2013, the Improving Health Sector Performance Project (US$7 
million IDA) aims to support improved performance in child health services such as immunization and 
treatment of malnutrition; maternal care services such as prenatal care, family planning, and obstetric 
services; and prevention and treatment of communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and 
malaria. In addition, the project will work to strengthen health system management through support for 
capacity improvements in the Ministry of Health. This initiative builds on the Bank’s role since 2001 as 
the principal donor in the health sector generally, and on HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria control in 
particular. 

Outcome 1.4:  Increased access to basic infrastructure in disadvantaged rural and urban areas 

79. 
The CPS will support Djibouti’s poor rural communities, which are facing the impact of 
changes in climate (less frequent and more intense rainfall) and social organization (increasing 
sedentarization), through efforts to improve access to water and strengthen rural livelihoods. Access to 
drinking water, both for people and livestock, is a challenge in Djibouti’s rural areas and has become even 
more problematic under current drought conditions, especially as traditionally nomadic populations have 
become more sedentary over time. The CPS will support improvements in water access through the Rural 
Community Development and Water Mobilization Project (PRODERMO, US$5.83 million IDA), which 
was launched in 2012 to increase rural communities’ access to water and enhance their capacity to 
manage water and agro-pastoral resources in project areas, using a participatory approach to community-
based development. Additional financing of US$3.0 million for PRODERMO, secured in response to the 
persistent drought conditions, will aim to improve access to water and strengthen rural livelihoods 
through income-generating activities in fisheries and handicrafts. The community-based approach 
integrates technical and livelihood mechanisms. Both women and men are targeted and participate 
actively. A Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization Project (US$7 million IDA) is 
expected to be presented for approval in FY2016. Its objective is to consolidate and scale up 
PRODERMO’s achievements in order to increase resilience to drought and climatic change, reduce food 
insecurity, and improve the livelihoods of households living in the targeted areas. The project would also 
introduce innovative approaches, such as an emphasis on enhancing the value-added of agricultural, 
livestock, and fish production. Financing from trust funds and other donors that target the same 
population, mainly the European Union (EU), AfDB, International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD), and World Food Programme (WFP), will be sought. 

80. 
The CPS will maintain and expand assistance to the urban and housing sector, focusing on the 
poorest and most vulnerable neighborhoods of Djibouti-Ville. Quartier 7 (Q7) is the largest and densest 

25 

 
 
old neighborhood of Djibouti city, with 25,000 inhabitants living on 0.56 square kilometers. It presents a 
microcosm of the country’s significant challenges with respect to poor access to services and wide social 
disparities. The Bank aims to help tackle urban poverty in three ways: (i) providing essential public 
infrastructure to reduce the impact of poverty, boost economic opportunities (including for women), and 
improve economic resilience23 by preventing flooding (through drainage) and water-borne diseases 
(through sanitation), and providing better access to city jobs (through roads) and spaces for community 
education and recreation; (ii) improving social cohesion and job opportunities through community 
development and vocational training, focusing on young people; and (iii) piloting the use of local, labor-
intensive construction techniques. The Bank’s efforts in this area have been channeled through the first 
Djibouti Urban Poverty Reduction Project (DUPREP I), a multidonor initiative launched in 2008 (US$3 
million IDA). Additional financing for DUPREP I (US$2.9 million IDA), approved in 2010, will help 
scale up the project’s impact through additional economic and social community development activities 
within Djibouti-Ville’s Quartier 7. 

81. 
The proposed program will deepen efforts to ensure sustainable access to urban services 
through complementary interventions in infrastructure, institutional strengthening, and social 
development. The Second Urban Poverty Reduction Project (DUPREP II) will build on and scale up the 
work undertaken through DUPREP I to build resilient urban infrastructure in Quartier 7. In addition to 
targeting Djibouti’s poorest urban populations, the project will focus on improving participation and 
strengthening institutions to sustain urban development efforts. DUPREP II will deepen engagement with 
citizens to promote voice, transparency, and social accountability throughout the project cycle and 
beyond, and to ensure the participation of women and young people in all phases of project design and 
implementation. This will not only benefit the Quartier 7 neighborhood, but will also have important 
demonstration effects for other urban neighborhoods. The CPS expects to complement this work with 
JSDF-financed support to upgrade individual sanitation across Djibouti-Ville’s poorest neighborhoods. 
With financing from Norway and GFDRR, the Bank is also supporting the government’s efforts to 
improve access to housing among urban poor people through the preparation of a national housing 
strategy. This work will increase urban resilience to recurrent natural hazards touching mostly the poorest.  

Outcome 1.5:  Improved assessment of natural disaster risk and vulnerability 

82. 
The CPS will continue to support Djibouti’s shift to a proactive, multisectoral disaster risk 
management platform as a means to reducing the vulnerability of the poor, including against recurrent 
floods, droughts, seismic events, food insecurity, water shortages, climate change, and other external 
shocks. The Djiboutian authorities, in partnership with the Bank, have scaled up disaster risk management 
activities through a US$2.5 million GFDRR Country Program, 24 including a multisector risk assessment 
and communication platform that is enabling the country to expand its meteorological stations across the 
country, complete its national emergency planning, integrate risk management and climate change 
adaptation into university curricula, establish an early warning system, and systematize risk assessment. 
The CPS will support the second phase of this program, to be launched in early 2014, focusing on the 
completion and operationalization of the risk assessment and communication platform. In addition, the 
Bank will support the government in assessing the effectiveness of the PDNA process and designing a 
recovery framework that will help Djibouti absorb future disaster shocks. Djibouti’s request for GFDRR 

23 The economic appraisal showed that the package of infrastructure investments would have a positive and 
significant impact on property values, which are often residents’ only asset and are crucial to economic resilience. 
24 GFDRR has chosen Djibouti as one of its priority countries in implementing its mandate to reduce natural disaster 
risks, as foreseen by the Hyogo Framework for Action. Selection of priority countries was based on their high 
vulnerability to natural hazards and low economic resilience to cope with disaster impacts, including anticipated 
climate change and variability. 

26 

 
 
                                                      
membership was accepted in May 2013, which will enable the country to benefit more systematically 
from the experience and knowledge accumulated in GFDRR. 

Pillar Two: Strengthening the Business Environment 

83. 
The second pillar of the CPS will support the consolidation of gains achieved in infrastructure 
services, private sector development, and governance, with a renewed focus on strengthening the 
targeting of Djibouti’s job creation, energy, and telecommunications programs in support of the 
government’s efforts to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity. In particular, the CPS program will 
seek to reduce the barriers to business growth and investment by: (i) working to reduce the costs of 
electric power by improving the government’s capacity to assess the commercial viability of geothermal 
energy and addressing the tenuous financial viability of the energy utility, Electricité de Djibouti; (ii) 
helping to improve access to telecommunications by addressing the limited coverage and high cost of 
Internet services; and (iii) improving the quality of the business environment. These challenges will be 
addressed through the achievement of the following three outcomes: 

Outcome 2.1:  Improved access to affordable electricity through stronger capacity to assess the 
commercial viability of geothermal resources, increased connections, and reduced energy utility 
losses 

84. 
The proposed CPS will support the government’s strategy for improving access to electricity by 
helping to reduce electricity losses, develop potential geothermal energy resources, and define a rural 
electrification strategy—all with the aim of addressing the major business constraint posed by high 
electricity tariffs in Djibouti. The Power Access and Diversification Project (US$7 million IDA) was 
launched in 2005 with a view to: (i) increasing access to electricity service in the poorest areas of 
Djibouti-Ville through the extension and rehabilitation of the grid; (ii) diversifying the sources of 
electricity production by investing in a wind farm in Arta; and (iii) improving the efficiency of the 
electrical utility, which despite high tariffs has required regular budgetary support from the government, 
through the deployment of smart meters and technical assistance. The project has been restructured twice 
to maximize its efficiency and sustainability. The wind farm component was dropped after it became clear 
that its budget allocation was insufficient to attract bidders. This enabled the emergency purchase of 
heavy fuel oil for power generation in the face of historically high petroleum prices, which would have 
driven the electricity utility to bankruptcy, save for US$28 million in support from the Government of 
Djibouti. The project was supplemented by additional financing of US$6 million in 2010, to support the 
costs associated with scaling up efforts to expand access to electricity among poor people, as well as to 
develop and implement a smart meters pilot project, and US$5.2 million in 2012, to reduce the negative 
effects of drought on water pumping in rural areas and increase resilience to natural disasters by setting 
up security stocks of petroleum products that could be used, in the event of a regional drought, for water 
pumping. Approved in June 2013, the Geothermal Power Generation Project (US$6 million IDA, US$6 
million GEF) is a multidonor initiative that will assess the commercial viability of, and develop, 
geothermal resources in the Lake Assal region. As part of this project, well test protocols will be 
designed, executed, independently reviewed, and certified. A rural electrification study will help the 
government develop a strategy to improve access to clean and affordable electricity in rural Djibouti.  

Outcome 2.2:  Improved access to quality broadband services at a reduced price  

85. 

The CPS will support the government’s ICT strategy and strengthen Djibouti’s role in the 
region by helping to strengthen competition, deliver higher-quality services, and create jobs through 
effective private sector participation and the development of offshoring capabilities. The proposed 
support to the ICT sector will be phased. The first phase, a proposed IDA-funded telecommunications 
operation (US$2 million IDA), will help the government improve the legal and regulatory framework, 

27 

 
 
manage the strategic repositioning of Djibouti Télécom, and manage the complex process of defining and 
selling a new license to an international (facilities-based) operator. This new license will bring healthy 
competition to the mobile and Internet sectors, improve the quality of service, and eventually increase the 
mobile phone penetration rate to more than 60 percent. If sector improvements were to encourage the 
arrival of a second operator in the market, this would be expected to create around 250 jobs directly and 
more than 500 jobs indirectly, not counting the short-term opportunities brought about by the 
development of the second operator’s infrastructure across the country. For the past two years, Djibouti 
Télécom has been trying to encourage the creation of small enterprises in the sector, but one operator 
cannot generate enough work for these enterprises to be profitable. The second phase will assist the 
government in establishing call centers, each of which could create between 700 and 1,000 jobs 
immediately, and up to 5,000 jobs over five years, in particular for women. 25 In addition, the operation 
will support the development of fiber optic backbones at both the national and the regional level so as to 
solidify Djibouti’s position as a hub in eastern Africa.   

Outcome 2.3:  Improved investment climate in selected areas 

86. 
The CPS will seek to address constraints to private investment in Djibouti, working to improve 
the business-enabling environment by streamlining business startup procedures, simplifying contract 
enforcement, and supporting business formalization. These interventions will build on a strong program 
of ongoing advisory support. Following the preparation of a Doing Business reform memorandum in June 
2010, the IFC team has been helping the Djiboutian authorities to implement some of the memorandum’s 
recommendations. Under the CPS, the IDA and IFC teams will enhance their support to the government 
through technical assistance and equipment and software support. In addition, the CPS outlines initial 
areas of coordinated World Bank Group operational support, most notably to strengthen critical aspects of 
Djibouti’s investment climate, including: (i) improved access to financial services through the creation of 
a guarantee fund and modernization of payment systems; (ii) judicial reform as it relates to the resolution 
of commercial disputes; and (iii) support for business environment reforms in key areas measured by 
Doing Business. IDA and IFC initiative will jointly support regional integration by strengthening cross-
border trade through technical assistance to improve the quality and timeliness of trade services and 
support for the establishment of a one-stop shop for business creation. These objectives will be pursued 
under the proposed Governance for Private Sector Development Project (US$2 million IDA, US$300,000 
IFC).  

87. 
The CPS will seek to strengthen access to finance through the establishment of a leasing 
regulatory framework. Under the CPS, IFC will help the Djiboutian authorities to draft a regulatory 
framework for leasing, including a law and central bank supervision directives. This work will be 
accompanied by capacity building activities to support key stakeholders, including training provided to 
leasing companies, banks, accountants, the judiciary, and tax authorities in applying the new leasing 
regulations, as well as awareness-raising efforts among small- and medium-sized enterprises and 
equipment suppliers. 

88. 
The CPS will promote investment in sectors with high growth potential. The Bank Group hopes 
to leverage the potential synergies among IDA and IFC portfolios to support policy reform and directly 
encourage foreign investment in the country, focusing on the sectors highlighted in the New Growth 
Model study as most promising for economic growth and job creation: tourism, fisheries, transport and 
logistics, and telecommunications. IFC will continue to seek ways to support financial institutions in 

25 For instance, the future strategic partner of Djibouti Télécom, a recognized international operator, could establish 
a call center as part of the conditions of the request for proposals. This would have two advantages: first, the 
operator would benefit from the proximity of this service to its customers, and second, the establishment of such a 
service would benefit from the connectivity and investments immediately available through Djibouti Télécom. 

28 

 
 
                                                      
reaching out to small and medium enterprises more efficiently and effectively. Drawing on its expertise 
on business environment and investment climate improvements, IFC will offer technical assistance on 
regulatory reform, focusing initially on regulations measured by Doing Business and other investment 
climate indicators. The IFC team will offer targeted recommendations for improving and facilitating 
processes such as starting companies, transferring property, obtaining construction permits, and paying 
taxes. The IFC will stand ready to provide implementation support, as well as a communication strategy 
to help implement these recommendations on the ground. 

89. 
Djibouti is receiving support through the Bank’s financial sector strengthening (FIRST) 
technical assistance program. The ongoing Modernization of the Payments System and Credit Reporting 
Infrastructures Project supports the modernization of payment and credit reporting infrastructure through 
the development of a national strategy, including functional requirements for payment and credit 
reporting systems, improvement of the legal and regulatory framework, and implementation of oversight 
frameworks for both payment and credit reporting systems. A new grant of US$250,000 will seek to 
increase access to credit for MSMEs through the operationalization of a MSME Partial Credit Guarantee 
Scheme in Djibouti. 

D. Fostering Stronger Partnerships 

90. 
Though a formal framework for donor coordination is not yet in place in Djibouti, the small 
size of the donor community facilitates regular sharing of information. This collaboration has led to 
parallel financing of programs in several sectors (paragraph 92). Preparation of the PDNA was carried out 
in record time in late 2011 by bringing together a team of multisectoral specialists from the World Bank, 
EU, United Nations, United States Agency for International Development (USAID), IGAD, and Arab 
Academy to assist the government with drought assessment and recovery. The PDNA enabled the 
organization of a technical south-south exchange between Djibouti, Kenya, and Mozambique to share 
experience on drought mitigation and drought-resilient agriculture. 

91. While the government is moving forward on establishing a donor coordination mechanism, the 
Bank office in Djibouti organizes regular coordination meetings. These meetings take place on a 
monthly basis and are attended by Bank sector colleagues on mission in Djibouti and partners on the 
ground. The meetings provide the opportunity to discuss and identify common implementation challenges 
and coordinate interventions. With the aim of formalizing and strengthening donor coordination in the 
country, the government is setting up an aid coordination mechanism led jointly by the Ministry of 
Finance and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. At the request of the government, the Bank will co-lead one 
of the pillars, though the exact arrangements are still being determined. This mechanism will help to 
strengthen information sharing, allowing for more robust and structured coordination among development 
partners. 

92. 
Implementation of the CPS will be undertaken in close coordination with development partners 
at the sectoral level (Annex 4), recognizing the role of external aid in helping Djibouti reduce poverty, 
enhance shared prosperity, and achieve its long-term growth potential. In the social protection sector, 
the Bank is working closely with the World Food Programme on food distribution and school feeding 
programs, with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) on programs for HIV-positive orphans and 
rural community kindergartens, and with religious organizations such as Al Wamy, Diwan az-zakat, and 
Caritas on small-scale social assistance programs. The Bank is collaborating closely with the IMF and the 
AfDB on the PSIA and on support to the statistics office. The Bank is a member of the local education 
donor group and prepared the current education project in consultation with the Agence Française de 
Développement (AFD), UNICEF, and USAID. In the urban sector, the Bank’s preparation of DUPREP I 
leveraged the entry of other donors, including AfDB, AFD, and the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), 
who now provide complementary support to the government’s program for a total of US$28.5 million. 

29 

 
 
The Bank, UNICEF, and other education sector actors cooperated closely in preparing the 2014–2016 
Education Action Plan and on the pending Global Partnership for Education Grant (US$3.8 million). 
Donor coordination has been strong in the energy sector. IDA’s contribution to the Geothermal Power 
Generation Project is being cofinanced by the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), AFD, 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), Global Environment Facility (GEF), and 
AfDB. Bank interventions in the health, agriculture, and rural development sectors also complement the 
activities of bilateral and multilateral organizations. More recently, China, India, and Arab countries have 
stepped up lending to Djibouti. In 2013, for example, Djibouti contracted two large loans from China for 
a water pipeline from Ethiopia and for the Djibouti-Addis railway. The Saudi Fund is financing the 
Tadjourah port.    

93. 
Under the CPS, the Bank Group will seek to strengthen partnerships with civil society. A 
Country Citizen Engagement Analysis will be conducted to assess the governance challenges and 
opportunities posed by citizen engagement activities within the portfolio. The assessment will be tailored 
to the fragile country context and will include a mapping of local social intermediaries. This will enable 
the design of tools that are context-specific and sustainable over time. An update of the country citizen 
engagement ICT assessment will be carried out, focusing on options for integrating ICT-based citizen 
engagement tools where appropriate. Scaling up consultations throughout project preparation and 
monitoring will help empower citizens to voice their demand for better services and monitor the use of 
public resources. Depending on the context, the following citizen engagement mechanisms may be 
considered: grievance redress mechanisms; project monitoring, reporting, and tracking mechanisms; 
beneficiary feedback on project satisfaction; geo-referenced citizen reports; and citizen report cards. This 
approach is expected to be piloted in the proposed DUPREP II project, which will employ citizen 
engagement activities to help foster community voice and ensure greater responsiveness to citizen needs 
throughout project implementation. An integrated citizen engagement platform that allows for citizen 
monitoring of project activities will be developed to help track beneficiaries’ satisfaction regularly. This 
process will improve citizens’ access to, and monitoring of, various urban services in the project. 

V. MANAGING RISKS 

94. 
Satisfactory implementation of the Bank Group’s partnership strategy is subject to a number of 
risks, both country-level risks and program-specific risks. While not all of these risks can be addressed 
through Bank interventions, the Bank’s presence on the ground through a newly opened country office 
and close monitoring of the situation should enable the Bank to respond more quickly to adjust the 
program to changing circumstances. The presence of a Bank office in Djibouti has already yielded 
dividends, helping the Bank engage in continued dialogue with counterparts to achieve mutually 
satisfactory solutions to varying perspectives on program design. Going forward, the new country office 
will continue to offer opportunities for regular engagement on the part of the Resident Representative 
with government counterparts and representatives from the private sector, development partners, and civil 
society. This engagement will continue to be complemented by sector staff who visit regularly in the 
course of project implementation. Preparation of a mid-stream CPS Progress Report will allow a more 
formal opportunity to update this risk assessment and, if needed, adjust the program accordingly. 

A. Program-Specific Risks 
95. 
Governance challenges. Djibouti’s governance environment is fluid, with frequent changes in 
leadership. The Bank Group will seek to mitigate this risk through continued dialogue with key sector 
counterparts at all levels, achieving broad-based consensus on reform priorities, program design, and 
implementation mechanisms. All decisions made in relation to Bank projects will be documented in aide-
memoires, implementation status reports, and other official documentation, and filed according to 

30 

 
 
standard Bank procedures for easy reference after the fact. If needed, project interventions can support 
stakeholder reviews with the aim of clarifying roles and responsibilities in a given reform implementation 
activity.  

96. 
The slow pace of behavioral change. The ongoing Social Safety Net Project supports the 
improvement of nutrition practices among women and young children, which can take time and is 
ultimately in the hands of participants. This risk has been mitigated through careful implementation of the 
project’s pilot phase, through which the implementing agency has gained experience and cross-sectoral 
collaboration has been established at the ministerial level. The design has proven successful, and the Bank 
will continue to provide thorough supervision with a view to eliciting similarly successful results in the 
main program. The CPS also places a special emphasis on strengthening the basis for gender 
empowerment in Djibouti, including several outcomes and targets aimed at expanding women’s and girls’ 
participation. Achieving these targets will include an element of behavioral change on the part of both 
women and men in Djibouti, which will be tackled over time. In addition to setting targets realistically, 
the CPS will mitigate this risk by implementing awareness raising and capacity development activities 
and tracking gender-disaggregated indicators to assess progress and make adjustments over time.  

97. 
Capacity constraints. Low capacity in PIUs could slow or even hinder program implementation. 
The Bank Group will seek to mitigate this risk by continuing to insist on sufficient standards for project 
implementation, procurement, and financial management, together with regular efforts to strengthen 
counterpart capacity to manage these standards. Such efforts could include hands-on support through 
regular supervision and appropriate supervision budgets, as well as twice-yearly workshops on 
procurement, disbursement, and financial management issues that pose systemic challenges. The Bank 
will work to ensure that PIUs have sufficient staff with the skill sets needed to tackle these aspects of 
project implementation, including sector expertise and accounting and financial management skills. It is 
recognized that PIUs may be further challenged by the planned introduction of new financing 
instruments, such as results-based financing (for example, in the health sector). Experience from other 
countries shows that this risk can be mitigated successfully through gradual scale-up, technical assistance, 
and training, and the CPS will adopt this approach. Finally, the innovative Social Safety Net Project 
requires its PIU to supervise implementation activities on the part of nongovernmental organizations, 
which themselves face capacity limitations. To mitigate this risk, the PIU uses a management information 
system to monitor inputs, outputs, and performance It has drawn up performance-based contracts with the 
nongovernmental organizations, with which it holds monthly meetings, and has hired staff to ensure 
regular supervision on the ground. 

98. 
Nascent donor coordination mechanisms. The level of donor coordination required to streamline 
international assistance through multidonor programs and parallel financing could lead to delays or 
inadvertently overtax limited client capacity.  While multidonor assistance efforts are intended to ease the 
burden on the government posed by overlapping or inconsistent donor programs, it will be important to 
ensure regular communication among donors and with government counterparts so as to minimize delays 
and avoid introducing coordination costs to project implementation. Cofinancing arrangements 
envisioned under the CPS are expected to be administered by the Bank Group, while some smaller 
contracts will be implemented through parallel financing. To mitigate this coordination risk, the Bank will 
ensure that PIU staff have the necessary expertise and that regular communication mechanisms are built 
into cofinanced programs. 

B. Country-Level Risks 
99. 
Vulnerability to natural disasters and external shocks. Most households in northwestern 
pastoral areas and southeastern border areas face acute food insecurity due to low rainfall, and in 
Djibouti-Ville, poor households are still coping with the effects of large seasonal expenses. As 

31 

 
 
demonstrated by the current prolonged drought, natural disasters can affect the implementation of Bank 
Group programs, especially in rural areas, and shed light on areas in which Bank Group support could be 
aligned more effectively to address the needs of the Djiboutian people. As in its response to the drought, 
the Bank Group will carefully monitor the situation on the ground and, should a natural event arise, act 
quickly to amend its program support in a manner that continues to work toward CPS goals while 
responding to emerging needs. This risk can be mitigated by addressing vulnerability more directly, 
including to natural hazard risks. External technical assistance and financial support will help mitigate the 
impact of future shocks, including CPS support for rural water access, urban poverty reduction, disaster 
risk management mechanisms, and attraction of private investment in potential growth sectors. 

100. Relatively low budgetary and institutional capacity. The government could face challenges in 
implementing the strategy because public service delivery is vulnerable to risks associated with weak 
procurement, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation systems. The government is keen to 
make public financial management more transparent and more effective. The Bank Group is working to 
ensure simple project design and will support the government’s efforts to improve implementation 
capacity through capacity building and technical assistance activities. 

101. 
Potential for elite capture and patronage. To mitigate this risk, the Bank Group will ensure that 
the stringent criteria and processes laid out in the operations manual are enforced through internal 
controls and audits. Furthermore, the Bank Group will work to put in place communication and feedback 
mechanisms to ensure that all stakeholders understand the procedures and their rights in order to 
guarantee transparency. More broadly, the CPS program intends to support targeted improvements in key 
areas of governance and accountability that affect the program as a whole, responding flexibly to 
emerging needs as program implementation proceeds and looking for entry points to engage in further 
dialogue as appropriate.  

102. Enduring social tensions and risk of political instability. Although Djibouti’s internal politics 
have remained relatively stable in reason years, the results of the February 2013 parliamentary election 
were contested by the opposition, with ensuing demonstrations, clashes with the police, and incarceration 
of several opposition leaders and civilians. Together, political tensions and social inequalities could lead 
to further instability in the country, disrupting CPS program implementation by possibly making some 
project areas difficult to access and diverting the attention of key counterparts. Although this risk is 
largely exogenous, the recent opening of a country office in Djibouti will greatly enhance the Bank’s 
ability to monitor country-level risks and maintain a constructive dialogue with the government in order 
to anticipate these potential risks and make necessary program adjustments.  

103. Regional security. Djibouti’s location in the Horn of Africa, a region that has experienced many 
wars and episodes of civil unrest, could pose risks to the implementation and sustainability of the CPS 
program. Djibouti’s relations with neighbors and international allies are stable, and the country is on good 
terms with Ethiopia, its most important neighbor. There is a risk, though, that regional security conditions 
could worsen, which would affect conditions in the country. It is likely that such a situation would lead to 
fiscal unsustainability due to increased spending on defense and internal security, as well as the additional 
service needs of the refugee population, as is currently the case with the thousands of Somali refugees. 
These conditions would affect the Bank’s ability to implement its programs. This risk will be closely 
monitored throughout the CPS period, and program adjustments will be made if necessary.  

32 

 
 
Country 
Development 
Goals 

Improve social safety 
net programs 

Annex 1: Djibouti CPS FY2014–2017 Results Matrix 

Development Challenges 
addressed by CPS 

Expected CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

World Bank Group Program 
and Partners 

Pillar One:  Reducing Vulnerability 

• Inadequate basis of targeting 
of beneficiaries of safety net 
programs  
• Difficulties ensuring that the 
benefits reach the poorest and 
most vulnerable 

Crisis Response Social Safety Net 
project (P130328) 

Human Capital Social Safety Net 
Project (P120588) 

Poverty and Social Impact Analysis: 
Strengthening Safety Nets in Djibouti 
(P148622) 

Gender and Poverty ESW 

1.1 Improved institutional capacity to reach the 
poorest and most vulnerable and increase their 
access to short-term employment opportunities 
1.1.1 Beneficiary cards distributed through the social 
registry  
Baseline:  No (2013)        
Target:     Yes (2017) 
1.1.2 Proxy means-tested benefits introduced   
 Baseline: No (2013) 
Target:    Yes (2017) 
1.1.3 Employment in labor-intensive community works 
and services increased (person-days) 
Baseline:  15,000 (2013) 
Target:      400,000 (2017) 
1.1.4 Female employment in labor-intensive community 
works and services increased (person-days) 
Baseline: 7,500 (2013)  

Target: 200,000 (2017)  

1.1.5 Poverty and gender monitoring system improved 
through the strengthening of statistics and the carrying 
out of a poverty and gender diagnostic. 
Baseline:  No (2013) 
Target: Yes (2017) 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Develop human capital 
through the 
improvement of health 
indicators and the 
quality of education 

• Need for enhanced 
institutional capacity in the 
Ministry National Education 
and Vocational Training to 
ensure more effective delivery 
and monitoring of education 
quality  
• Low utilization of maternal 
and child health care services 
and communicable disease 
control programs 

Strengthening Institutional Capacity 
and Management of the Education 
System (P123315) 

Education Access and Quality 

Improving Health Sector Performance 
Project (P131194) 

Partners: WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA 
and WFP, as well as multilateral and 
bilateral organizations: AfDB, IsDB, 
AFD, USAID, and Italian Cooperation. 

1.2 Strengthened management of the education 
system  
1.2.Annual education statistical reports produced with 
key national indicators (cumulative number), including 
gender disaggregated data, to support education 
management 
Baseline:  1 (2013) 
Target:     3 (2017) 
1.3 Improved utilization of good-quality maternal 
and child health care services and communicable 
disease control programs  
1.3.1 Share of women giving birth in a facility assisted 
by qualified personnel increased (%) 
       Baseline:  53% (2013) 
       Target:      65% (2017) 
1.3.2  Share of children fully immunized before their 
first birthday increased (%) 
       Baseline:  83% (2013) 
       Target:      89% (2017) 
1.3.3 Share of HIV-positive pregnant women receiving 
antiretroviral therapy according to protocol increased 
(%) 
Baseline:  12% (2013) 
Target:      37% (2017) 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
Revitalize and 
strengthen rural 
development and 
implement a policy of 
development of cities 
without slums 

• Scarce water and agro-
pastoral resources in rural areas 
• Lack of access to water and 
roads in poor urban areas of 
Djibouti-Ville, specifically 
within Quartier 7 

Rural Community Development and 
Water Mobilization 
Project/PRODERMO (P117355) 

Urban Poverty Reduction Project 
(P088876) 

Second Urban Poverty Reduction 
Project (P145848) 

Partners: IFAD, EU, FAO  

1.4 Increased access to basic infrastructure in 
disadvantaged rural and urban areas 
1.4.1  Number of rural households with more secure 
access to drinking water within a reasonable travel time 
(two hours roundtrip) increased in project areas 
(number) 
Baseline:   1,026 (2013) 
Target:      2,350 (2017) 
1.4.2   Number of income-generating activities financed 
by the project for women 
Baseline:   0   (2013) 
Target:      30 (2017) 
1.4.3 Share of properties in Quartier 7 within 50m of 
surfaced roads (including drainage and street lighting) 
increased (%) 
Baseline:  50% (2013) 
Target:     80% (2017) 
1.4.4 Share of Quartier 7 residents of all age groups 
benefiting from improved community development 
subprojects and services increased (%) 
Baseline:  10% (2013)       
Target:      30% (2017) 
1.4.5 Share of women among subproject beneficiaries in 
Quartier 7 (%) 
Baseline: 0% (2013) 
Target:    50% (2017) 
1.4.6 Share of funded subprojects completed by 
women’s associations (%) 
Baseline: 0% (2013) 
Target:    50% (2017) 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
Strengthen the 
country’s capacity to 
address disaster risks 

• High vulnerability to climate 
change and natural disasters  
• Lack of information system 
on disaster risks and mitigation 
measures 
• No current platform for 
assessment and communication 
of natural disaster risk and 
vulnerability 

1.5 Improved assessment of natural disaster risk and 
vulnerability 

1.5.1  Implementation of Comprehensive Approach to 
Risk Assessment in Djibouti and risk assessment 
platform in place 
Baseline:  No (2013) 
Target:     Yes (2017) 
1.5.2 Recently established risk management platform 
being used to monitor sectoral vulnerabilities to natural 
hazards and shocks 
Baseline: Not in use (2013) 
Target: Sectoral risk data being integrated into the 
platform by relevant ministries on an annual basis 
(2017) 

GFDRR Grant  

Partners: EU, FAO, WFP, UNDP, 
UNESCO, UNFPA, USAID, WHO 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Pillar Two:  Strengthening the Business Environment 

Improve the efficiency 
and effectiveness of the 
economy by 
modernizing and 
strengthening 
infrastructure 

• Limited capacity to assess 
commercial viability of 
geothermal energy  
• Tenuous financial viability of 
energy utility, despite high tariffs 

Exploit opportunities in 
new technologies of 
Information and 
Communication (NTIC) 

• No strategy in place to guide 
telecommunications sector 
development 
• Low penetration of mobile and 
Internet services 
• Low-quality broadband network  
• High connection and service 
costs  

2.1.  Improved access to affordable electricity 
through stronger capacity to assess the commercial 
viability of geothermal resources, increased 
connections, and reduced energy utility losses   
2.1.1 Bank support to a full-fledged geothermal power 
generation feasibility study provided 
Baseline:  No (2013) 
Target:     Yes (2017) 

2.1.2 Well test results independently reviewed and 
certified 
Baseline:  No (2013) 
Target:     Yes (2017) 
2.1.3 People provided with access to electricity by 
household connections  
Baseline:  14,800 (2013) 
Target:     22,800 (2014) 
2.1.4  Electricity losses reduced due to the deployment 
of smart meters (% of total billed in selected 20 kv 
feeder)  
Baseline:  12% (2011) 
Target:      3% (2014) 

Program under development; expected outcomes to be 
identified in CPS Progress Report 

Geothermal Power Generation Project 
(P127143) 

Power Access and Diversification 
Project (P086379) 

Partners: AFD, AfDB, EU, 
OPEC/OFID 

PPIAF (new) 
IDA Project (new) 

Partners: AFD (potentially) 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Promote a diversified 
and competitive 
economy with the 
private sector as its 
engine of growth 

• Private sector growth is held 
back by the high cost of inputs 
such as labor, energy, and 
telecommunications  
• Despite high labor costs, 
worker productivity is low 
• Major deficits in nearly all 
areas of governance—including 
public policy clarity and 
consistency, justice and security 
of property, and corruption and 
accountability—have a 
dampening effect on investment 
• Absence of flexible, alternative, 
mid- to long-term financing 
models 

2.3 Improved investment climate in selected areas 
2.3.1 Business start-up process streamlined (number 
of days) 
Baseline:  37 days (2013) 
Target:     10 days (2017) 

2.3.2 Number of days for the commercial chamber 
to issue a ruling in commercial litigation   

Baseline: 400 (2013) 
Target: 60 (2017) 

PSD Project 
Governance AAA 
IFC support for improving Doing 
Business indicators 
IFC support for introduction of leasing 
framework 
MIGA Guarantee for Doraleh Container 
Terminal 

Partners: IMF 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Djibouti’s Progress toward the MDGs 

MDG 
MDG 1:  Halve between 1990 and 
2015, the proportion of people 
who suffer from hunger 
MDG 2: Ensure that by 2015, 
children everywhere will be able 
to complete a full course of 
primary schooling 
MDG 3: Eliminate gender 
disparity in primary and 
secondary education in all levels 
of education by 2015 

MDG 4: Reduce by two-thirds 
between 1990 and 2015, the 
under-five mortality rate 
MDG 5: Reduce by three quarters, 
between 1990 and 2015 the 
maternal mortality ratio 
MDG 6: Have halted by 2015 and 
begun to reverse the spread of 
HIV/AIDS and malaria and other 
major diseases 

MDG 7: Halve by 2015 the 
proportion of people without 
sustainable water access to safe 
drinking water and basic 
sanitation 

Status in Djibouti 
Underweight prevalence (under 5 years)  
1989: 20% 
2010: 23% 
Net enrollment 
2011: 45% 

Gender parity index for enrollment/ 
attendance in primary and secondary 
education 
2012: 0.9 (primary) 
2012: 0.8 (secondary) 
Under-five mortality rate 
1990: 122 
2010: 90 
Maternal mortality ratio 

2012: 383 
HIV prevalence 
2012: 0.1 (male) 
2012: 0.3 (female) 
Percent of children under 5 with fever 
receiving anti-malarials 
2009: 1% 
Percent of children under 5 sleeping 
under insecticide-treated bed nets 
2008/09: 20% 
Percent using improved drinking water 
sources 
1990: 78% 
2010: 88% 
Percent using improved sanitation 
facilities 
1990: 66% 
2010: 50% 

39 

 
 
 
 
Annex 3: Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CAS CR) for 
Djibouti, FY2009–2012 

Date of CAS:  March 30, 2009 
Period covered by CAS CR:  FY2009–FY2012 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

The objective of this Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CAS CR) is to evaluate the 
World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Republic of Djibouti for the period FY2009–
2012. The CAS CR assesses: (i) program performance in influencing the CAS outcomes as laid out in the 
results matrix; and (ii) the World Bank’s performance in designing and managing the implementation of 
the program, in line with the implementation of Djibouti’s National Initiative for Social Development 
(INDS) for 2008–2012. In addition, the CAS CR seeks to draw lessons to guide the design and 
preparation of the forthcoming Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2014–2017. This CAS CR is 
based on discussions within the country team, feedback from government counterparts, and a review of 
key documents. 26  

Following a thorough review of CAS implementation, the country team has rated both program and 
Bank performance moderately satisfactory. 27 The program saw solid progress toward most major 
outcomes, though in some cases momentum was slowed by weak implementation capacity, delays in 
implementing relevant programs, or lack of dedicated operational support. The Bank’s program design 
was relevant to the country context at the time, emphasizing government ownership, selectivity, and 
flexibility, and its implementation was successful in mobilizing resources to scale up well-performing 
interventions and respond to evolving needs. However, gaps in the design of the results framework 
introduced a lack of clarity between objectives and instruments in some sectors and left room for 
insufficient follow-through on monitoring and evaluation. The Bank team has responded proactively to 
amend weaknesses in portfolio management and design a realistic results framework for the new CPS, 
and has placed a Resident Representative in Djibouti to strengthen dialogue, project implementation 
support, and results monitoring on the ground. 

II.  PROGRESS TOWARD LONGER-TERM DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

The CAS for FY2009–2012 was anchored in the INDS, the country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Paper (PRSP), which set forth key development targets such as boosting economic growth to 7 percent 
per year and reducing poverty to 28 percent by 2012. The INDS rested on four pillars: (i) ensuring 
macroeconomic stability and creating conditions for strong and sustainable economic growth; (ii) 
developing human resources and improving access to basic services, notably for women and youth; (iii) 
promoting the harmonious development of rural and urban areas; and (iv) improving governance and 
strengthening public sector management. The IMF-World Bank Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN) on the 
INDS, completed in September 2008, acknowledged progress made in better prioritizing goals and 
drawing lessons from the shortcomings of the first PRSP. It suggested that the INDS could be enhanced 
by: (a) strengthening the poverty analysis, which suffered from a paucity of accurate and reliable data; (b) 
further elaborating on the financing of the public spending program, which could potentially challenge 

26 Key reference documents include the CAS for FY2009–2012, Project Documents, Implementation Status and 
Results Reports, Implementation Completion and Results Reports, trust fund progress reports, and portfolio reviews.  
27 Ratings are based on the October 2012 guidelines for preparation of CAS CRs. See World Bank. 2012. Guidance 
to Staff on the Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report. Operations Policy and Country Services 
Department. October. According to these guidelines, a moderately satisfactory rating suggests that “the program 
achieved good progress toward most major expected outcomes. No major shortcomings were identified.” 

40 

 
 
                                                      
debt sustainability; (c) placing more emphasis on measures to promote equitable economic growth; and 
(d) taking action to make public administration reform operational. Attachment 4 highlights INDS 
results. 

Djibouti’s economy enjoyed solid growth of about 4.6 percent per year on average between 2005 and 
2012 (Table 1). In 2011, despite one of the worst droughts in 60 years, it is estimated that the economy 
grew at 4.4 percent. This growth pattern was made possible by the return to political stability after years 
of interethnic civil strife in the 1990s, consistent Bank support to Djibouti over the period 2005-2011 and 
the increased use of Djibouti’s port services for rapidly growing Ethiopian trade and of military bases 
established by France, the United States, and Japan. In 2012, the growth rate is estimated to be 4.8 
percent. 

National Accounts 
GDP (US$ millions) 
Growth rate (%) 
Fixed capital investment (% 
GDP) 
    Of which: Private 
                     Public 
Inflation (%) 
Public Finance (% GDP) 
Revenue and grants 
    Of which: Revenues 
Current expenditure 
Capital expenditure 
Overall balance (commitments) 
External Sector  
Exports (US$ millions) 
Imports (US$ millions) 
Foreign Direct Investment (% 
GDP) 
Official external debt (% GDP) 
Sources: IMF, World Bank. 

2008  
(actual) 

2009  
(actual) 

2010  
(actual) 

2011  
(actual) 

2012 
(estimated) 

983 
5.8 
46.7 

32.9 
13.8 
12.0 

41.9 
20.0 
25.4 
13.8 
2.6 

369.1 
-703.6 
23.8 

60.2 

1.049 
5.0 
35.5 

18.3 
17.2 
1.7 

37.0 
20.1 
24.3 
17.2 
-4.6 

399.4 
-578.3 
9.5 

59.8 

1.129 
3.5 
19.8 

8.1 
11.7 
4.0 

35.5 
20.2 
24.3 
11.7 
-0.5 

359.0 
-504 
2.4 

56.1 

1.238 
4.5 
24.6 

13.5 
11.1 
5.1 

34.4 
20.3 
24.1 
11.1 
-0.7 

420 
-674 
6.3 

52.3 

1.354 
4.8 
26.4 

13.4 
13.0 
3.7 

34.5 
18.5 
24.2 
13.0 
-2.7 

457 
-725 
8.1 

49.2 

Despite economic growth, the overall business climate remains poor. In the joint World Bank-
International Finance Corporation Doing Business survey report for 2012, Djibouti ranked 170th out of 
183 countries on ease of doing business, down from 153rd out of 181 countries in 2009. 28 Problem areas 
included the high cost of starting a business and weak protection of investors (Attachment 5). Expensive 
and unreliable power and telecommunications services were cited as major constraints to private 
investment. The report had a significant impact on the authorities, as evidenced by the inclusion of 
private investment as a central focus of the government’s Vision 2035. The authorities have requested 
Bank-IFC support in specific areas measured by the Doing Business indicators. This increased attention 
is already beginning to bear fruit, as Doing Business 2014 ranks Djibouti 160th of 189 economies on 
overall ease of doing business. The country has made significant improvements on business registration 
in particular, as reflected in a new ranking of 127th in this area, up from an adjusted rank of 188th in 
Doing Business 2013.  

28 The Doing Business methodology was adjusted in Doing Business 2012, so these rankings are not directly 
comparable. But they give a general sense of Djibouti’s deterioration in this area. 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Despite strong growth in recent years, real per-capita GDP has not yet rebounded to 1990 levels. Per-
capita GDP (in constant 2000 US dollars) deteriorated significantly from US$1,389 in 1990 to US$856 in 
2002, before rising to US$954 in 2011 and to about US$1,560 in 2012 thanks to relatively strong 
economic growth. Social indicators are below average considering Djibouti’s lower-middle-income 
status. Extreme poverty is estimated to affect over 40 percent of the population, though available data are 
unreliable, and unemployment remains high at 48.4 percent in 2012.29 Djibouti ranked 165th out of 187 
countries on the United Nations Development Programme’s Human Development Index for 2011, as 
compared to 149th out of 177 countries in 2008. Djibouti is unlikely to meet most of its Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs).  

There is a continuing need to strengthen governance in Djibouti, both in the use of resources and in the 
delivery of services to the population. The government has launched several initiatives to improve 
transparency, and these need to be further improved and consolidated. The Bank carried out a governance 
and anticorruption survey in 2010, the results of which indicated that access to public services (for both 
households and firms) is often hampered by problems such as bribery, and that these problems are more 
serious in some regions of the country (Arta and Ali Sabieh). The survey revealed that 58 percent of 
household heads and 41 percent of entrepreneurs did not trust the justice sector. In June 2012, drawing on 
these results, the Ministry of Justice and World Bank co-organized a judicial reform workshop that led to 
the identification of priority reform areas, some of which will be addressed under the investment climate 
and private sector development activities that form part of the Bank’s upcoming CPS. 

In June 2012, Djibouti concluded a three-year Extended Credit Facility (ECF) arrangement with the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Program performance was considered broadly on track. In 
February 2012, the IMF approved the government’s request for additional financing to meet a shortfall 
due to the increase in global commodity prices and the drought in the Horn of Africa. This brought the 
total disbursed amount to US$33.9 million. 

III.  PROGRAM PERFORMANCE 

The CAS for FY2009–2012 was discussed by the World Bank’s Board of Directors on April 30, 2009. 
In alignment with the government’s INDS, the CAS was framed around three strategic themes: (i) 
supporting growth through efforts to strengthen the business environment, with a focus on reducing 
constraints and costs to private sector development, especially in the power, telecommunications, and 
financial sectors; (ii) supporting access to basic social services and human development by increasing 
access to and quality of education and health services and strengthening social protection and direct 
support to poor people; and (iii) supporting governance and public sector management through policy 
dialogue and technical assistance to strengthen the budget process and improve monitoring and 
evaluation.  

Overall performance on the CAS program is rated moderately satisfactory. Solid progress was achieved 
toward most major expected outcomes, with notable achievements on the education and health agendas 
and important steps forward on energy and expenditure transparency. Progress toward targets in 
telecommunications, business regulation, financial sector reform, social protection, and monitoring and 
evaluation was slower to materialize during the CAS period, though several of the expected results have 
since been achieved. In some cases, momentum was slowed by insufficient operational support for weak 
implementation capacity. Other areas, such as social protection, are beginning to make headway now that 
planned programs are finally under implementation. The remainder of this section will briefly review 

29 Official unemployment figures are derived from the most recent household survey, la troisième Enquête 
Djiboutienne Auprès des Ménages pour les Indicateurs Sociaux (EDAM3-IS), conducted in 2012. 

42 

 
                                                      
program performance by CAS theme. Details are provided in the self-evaluation summary matrix 
(Attachment 1). 

Theme 1:  Supporting Growth 

Reducing constraints and associated costs to private sector development (Outcome 1.1). This outcome 
focused on the high cost of electricity and telecommunications services, the cumbersome and expensive 
procedures involved in starting a business, and weaknesses in the financial sector. Access to electricity 
has increased modestly, including in targeted poor areas, and electric losses were reduced from 21 
percent to 12 percent in 2011. There were no reductions in unplanned electricity outages during the CAS 
period, though these reductions have since taken place. The electric utility’s operating costs have not yet 
been reduced. The slow progress in implementing reforms in the power and water utilities can be 
attributed in part to the fact that such reforms were not within the scope and budget of the Bank-
supported projects in the sector, and in part to the absence of a champion for these reforms. Competition 
in telecommunications services has not increased, as required institutional reforms have been identified 
but not agreed upon. There have been some improvements in business regulation, including the 
enactment of a new Commercial Code in 2009, but the time required to open a business remained at 
about 37 days in 2012, as in 2009. Since the end of the CAS period, however, the number of days it takes 
to register a business has dropped sharply to about 17 days in 2013, boosting Djibouti’s ranking on ease 
of starting a business from 188th (adjusted) in Doing Business 2013 to 127th in Doing Business 2014. The 
planned Financial Sector Assessment Program was completed in FY2012, and the IMF has taken the lead 
in following up on its recommendations.  

In addition to the activities originally planned under the CAS, a New Growth Model report was 
presented to the government in June 2012 as a key element in the policy dialogue to improve Djibouti’s 
growth performance. The report concludes that Djibouti’s present growth model is unsustainable due to 
the acute social crisis represented by extremely high unemployment. It explores the country’s growth 
potential in four sectors (tourism, fishing, transport and logistics, and telecommunications) and indicates 
that improving governance is key to unleashing Djibouti’s potential. The report was widely disseminated 
in country, and the government has agreed to the findings in the four sectors and indicated its 
commitment to improve governance.  

A transport and logistics study was also completed and presented to the government in June 2012. This 
study concluded that the transport and logistics sectors would have limited potential to alleviate 
unemployment owing to the capital-intensive nature of port activities, Ethiopia’s domination of key 
trucking corridors, and ongoing efficiency improvements that lead to job reductions. It noted that 
Djibouti’s economic future in the sector would lie in efficiently serving trade corridors to the Horn of 
Africa and remaining the primary gateway for Ethiopia. 

Theme 2:  Supporting Access to Basic Social Services and Human Development 
Increasing access to quality basic education (Outcome 2.1). Access to education has improved, 
including for girls, as reflected by an increase in gross primary enrollment from 62 percent in 2008 to 70 
percent in May 2012 according to the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and by a steady ratio of 96 girls to 
100 boys over the same time period. There has been some progress in improving educational efficiency, 
with primary cycle completion rates improving from 2005 to 2009. Primary school repetition rates 
dropped below 5.4 percent in 2008, representing partial progress toward the CAS target, but rebounded to 
9.8 percent in 2011 following the discontinuation of the primary school exit exam, which unleashed such 
an influx of students into capacity-constrained middle schools that students had to repeat the last year of 
primary education in order to ease the bottleneck. This also affected the primary cycle dropout rate, 
which fell to below 1.2 percent in 2009 before increasing to 2.9 percent in 2011, while remaining below 

43 

 
the CAS target of 3 percent. Efforts to strengthen school quality centered on teacher training, textbook 
availability, and parent-teacher partnerships, and CAS targets were largely surpassed. 

Improving access to and quality of health services (Outcome 2.2). Djibouti made important strides 
toward key health sector outcomes over the CAS period with Bank support, thus contributing to the 
country’s progress toward its MDGs. Regarding maternal and child health, the maternal mortality ratio 
declined from 546 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2002 to 383 in 2012, and the under-five mortality rate 
dropped from 124 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2002 to 68 in 2012, in both cases nearly meeting CAS 
targets. The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate among pregnant women aged 15–24 has decreased to 1.4 percent 
in 2010, as compared to 2.9 percent in 2002. Health facility staffing improved. The CAS results 
framework included an outcome on containment of an avian flu outbreak, but none occurred during the 
relevant period.  

Strengthening social protection and direct support to the poor (Outcome 2.3). Concrete progress toward 
this CAS outcome has been challenging to assess given that several relevant interventions are only now 
beginning to be implemented. The Employment and Human Capital Social Safety Net Project, launched 
in 2010 with funding from a Japan Social Development Fund grant, is supporting community-driven and 
participatory approaches to social safety net creation, including short-term job opportunities and nutrition 
sensitization programs. Preparatory activities such as identification of beneficiaries, development of 
potential work opportunities, and implementation of a management information system have made good 
progress, but works did not begin until after the end of the CAS period. The Bank supported the 
development of a Social Safety Nets Strategy, in part to guide donor coordination in the sector. A Social 
Safety Net Project, developed under the Crisis Response Window and approved at the very end of the 
CAS period, became effective in January 2013. Since then, baseline surveys have been conducted, and 
enrollment of beneficiaries has begun. A framework for providing social assistance to poor people has 
been developed, but the institutional framework for social security has not yet been set up. The Rural 
Community Development and Water Mobilization Project (PRODERMO) became effective in January 
2012 and began to work during the CAS period toward targets on community development structures, 
improved water access, and increased agriculture and livestock production. Some progress has been made 
on range management since the close of the CAS period, but improvements in livestock production will 
depend on the availability of water from subprojects that will be implemented over the course of the 
project, up to 2016. There has been no recent flood in key areas identified in the CAS, thus implying a 
reduction in flood risk in those areas. 

Theme 3:  Supporting Governance and Public Sector Management 
Improving expenditure transparency (Outcome 3.1). Solid progress was made toward transparency 
improvements set out in the CAS. The public procurement code was revised to bring the legal framework 
in line with good practice and promulgated in July 2009, and a series of implementing decrees and 
regulations have been completed. There remain some weaknesses in implementation, however, including 
a lack of awareness among public entities, procedural delays, capacity shortfalls, and remaining gaps in 
transparency, such as (i) lack of publicly-available procurement plans resulting in a weak participation of 
the private sector in public tenders and (ii) non publication of contract awards. These two transparency 
measures have been introduced by the new procurement code. To help address these concerns, the Bank 
has continued to provide on-the-job training and day-to-day operational guidance and has added a 
procurement specialist to the country office staff. Audit reports were produced annually and made 
available upon request but not publicized by the government. The government’s most recent audit report, 
produced after the end of the CAS period, has been finalized and submitted to the National Assembly; it 
is expected to be sent to the President in early 2014 and published in the official gazette by the end of 
January 2014. 

44 

 
Improving monitoring and evaluation (Outcome 3.2). Efforts to strengthen monitoring and evaluation 
met with mixed results during the CAS period. The population census was completed in 2009 and its 
demographic data made available to the public. The results of the household poverty assessment, 
launched in 2012, are available for use in updating poverty indicators; further results in this area are 
expected in 2014. While a national accounts system has not yet been established, the government has 
shown clear interest in doing so. In June 2012, the Ministry of Finance organized a roundtable meeting 
with development partners to discuss how to improve the country’s national accounts system. The Bank 
stands ready to assist in the rapid production of estimates of GDP and its components. Despite slight 
capacity improvements and the identification of monitoring indicators, the system in place to monitor and 
evaluate progress toward INDS goals is not operational.  

IV.  WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE 

Overall, World Bank Group performance under the CAS is rated moderately satisfactory. The strategy 
emphasized country ownership and aid harmonization by aligning closely with the government’s INDS. 
Its design was highly selective at the CAS outcome level, taking into account limited government 
capacity and limited IDA resources, and allowed the country team plenty of room for flexible 
adjustments in response to changing circumstances. However, the results framework could have been 
improved through stronger linkages between CAS outcomes and progress indicators, together with better-
specified baselines and targets. On the implementation side, the Bank team made good use of additional 
financing and other funding sources to scale up successful interventions and adjust to evolving needs, 
though in some areas this expansion may have overtaxed weak government capacity for implementation 
and monitoring. As detailed below, the Bank team was successful in mobilizing additional resources from 
trust funds and adjusting Bank support to new circumstances, such as the drought of 2011. Project 
outcomes were satisfactory on balance and, though portfolio performance declined over the course of 
CAS implementation, it has begun to rebound in response to proactive interventions. The Bank’s program 
supervision has been broadly effective, though there have been some limitations in follow-through on 
monitoring and evaluation, owing in part to the lack of staff on the ground on a day-to-day basis. A sound 
program is in place for the follow-on CPS, which will build on the progress made under the CAS and 
strengthen focus on key areas that did not receive sufficient attention in the past but now enjoy a stronger 
appetite for reform, including governance and private sector development. Regular monitoring and 
follow-up will be made easier by the recent establishment of a field office.  

Strategy and Program Design 

The CAS for FY2009–2012 was designed with the lessons of the previous CAS in mind. The principal 
message of the completion report on the CAS for FY2006–2008 was that the follow-on strategy should 
be highly selective, focusing on enhancing competitiveness and improving the provision of basic services 
in a sustainable way. In response, the CAS for FY2009–2012 set out four guiding principles: (i) aligning 
the CAS to the government’s INDS; (ii) emphasizing selectivity in program interventions; (iii) building 
on the success of the ongoing portfolio; and (iv) leveraging IDA grants through close coordination with 
other donors, keeping in mind the Bank’s comparative advantage. This design was relevant to the 
situation in Djibouti at the time, characterized by limited government implementation capacity in a small 
state together with a relatively small IDA envelope. The intervention areas laid out in the CAS were 
closely aligned with the government’s INDS in an effort to maximize government ownership, though 
there were some areas (such as governance) in which follow-through remained slow.    

Though the CAS did achieve an important degree of selectivity, focusing narrowly on six key 
outcomes, there remained some areas in which the CAS program as originally designed was not 
backed up by concrete program interventions. For example, objectives with regard to reducing 
constraints and associated costs to private sector development focused too heavily on direct support to the 

45 

 
power sector. While the interconnection with Ethiopia in 2010 somewhat reduced Djibouti’s heavy 
reliance on expensive fuel supplies, this benefit was only felt during the summer season. Yet the Bank 
was in no position to help the power utility invest in efficient power plants. This should have been 
accomplished with private sector participation, with the Bank employing its comparative advantage to 
help the utility become more efficient. Additional financing was sought to increase access to electricity 
among underserved populations and to improve the power utility’s efficiency, but institutional reforms 
were needed to support efficiency improvements. It was not clear that continued investment of scarce 
IDA resources in the power sector would be the best way to help Djibouti pursue its growth agenda. 
Similarly, proposed technical assistance to the telecommunications sector did not materialize in large part 
because of uncertain government commitment to telecommunications reforms at that time, although 
ongoing dialogue in the sector has convinced the government of the need to move rapidly with sector 
reforms and the Bank is planning a telecommunications project in the CPS period.  

The country team introduced an important element of flexibility into the CAS program, offering just-
in-time technical assistance and analytical work in response to evolving country needs. Most notably, 
the Bank presented a New Growth Model report and a transport and logistics study to support the 
government’s agenda on removing deep-seated constraints to growth. The Bank also provided on-
demand technical assistance to the government in developing a vision for 2035, in formulating a new 
consumer price index to assess inflation, and in defining new estimates of GDP and its components. In 
the social sectors, the Bank prepared notes on curbing the HIV/AIDS epidemic and on reproductive 
health and provided technical assistance to develop a strategy on social safety nets.  

The results framework was too ambitious overall and suffered in some areas from unclear objectives 
and a lack of connection between outcomes, targets, and instruments. While the results framework 
succeeded in keeping things simple at the CAS outcome level, the specification of targets and 
intermediate outputs did not sufficiently take into account the time needed to put projects into operation 
in Djibouti. This was the case in the social protection sector, for example. Despite attempts to limit the 
number of indicators, the results matrix remained complex in comparison to local monitoring and 
evaluation capacity. Some indicators (such as those on financial sector reform, the business climate, and 
utilities’ institutional reform) were included in the matrix without being explicitly attached to a 
corresponding activity in the CAS program, thus easily falling off the monitoring radar over the course of 
strategy implementation. Targets in the telecommunications sector could not be met during the CAS 
period due to the absence of a champion within government. The small TA activity carried out in 2009 
provided the government with a detailed diagnostic of the telecom sector and recommendations that 
provided the back drop for a dialogue, and the Bank has successfully re-engaged in the sector, bringing in 
the necessary expertise and financing to support key reforms.  

The risks identified in the CAS were well managed and remain relevant today. The CAS drew attention 
to Djibouti’s narrow economic base and dependence on external financing and foreign direct investment 
from partner countries that were themselves experiencing global downturn. These factors continue to 
underline the need for more competitive port services and greater overall economic diversification. 
Though Djibouti was less heavily affected by the Arab Spring than other countries in the region, the risk 
of civil unrest remains in the light of widespread poverty, unemployment, and corruption. The CAS 
successfully mitigated the risks posed by the Bank’s limited financial assistance by leveraging significant 
resources from trust funds and other development partners. This type of leveraging will continue to be 
important going forward, with due attention to limitations to the government’s absorptive capacity.   

Program Implementation 

The FY2009-2012 CAS lending program, which included indicative IDA financing of US$24.2 
million, was delivered largely according to plan. The main exception was the proposed technical and 

46 

 
vocational education project, which was dropped in favor of: (i) catalytic fund financing in the amount of 
US$4 million to ensure continuity of support for and scaling up of successful primary education 
initiatives; and (ii) a new project on Strengthening the Institutional Capacity and Management of the 
Educational System, including in the area of technical and vocational education. During the CAS period, 
additional financing was approved to scale up successful interventions and incorporate additional 
activities that were being implemented under the HIV/AIDS, Malaria, and Tuberculosis Control Project 
(May 2009); on Urban Poverty Reduction (June 2010) to finance additional economic and social 
community development activities in Quartier 7; and on Power Access and Diversification (June 2010), 
to scale up successful project activities on increasing electricity access and efficiency.  In response to 
acute drought conditions in 2011, US$13.2 million in financing from IDA’s Crisis Response Window 
was approved for three projects in Djibouti: (i) additional financing for the Power Access and 
Diversification Project (US$5.2 million) to reduce the negative effects of the drought on water pumping 
in rural areas by developing urban oil and diesel stocks; (ii) additional financing for the Rural 
Community Development and Water Mobilization Project (PRODERMO) (US$3 million) to scale up 
activities to enhance rural water access and water management capacity, and to expand into new areas 
that were particularly affected by the drought; and (iii) and emergency Social Safety Net Project (US$5 
million) to support short-term employment and improved nutrition practices among poor and vulnerable 
groups. Total IDA support for the CAS program amounted to US$27.93 million.  

The Bank team was highly successful in mobilizing additional resources from trust funds and 
adjusting Bank support to new circumstances, such as the drought of 2011. The CAS program 
envisioned five activities to be supported by Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grants and other trust 
funds for a total of US$3.74 million. In its implementation, the CAS program drew upon two IDF grants 
and 12 other trust fund sources supporting 21 activities for a total of just over US$12.3 million. Areas of 
support included monitoring and evaluation, aid coordination, infrastructure (including energy), 
education, social protection, disaster management and climate change, and governance and anticorruption 
(Attachment 6).  

Project outcome ratings have been considered to be broadly satisfactory. The country team completed 
three Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs) and one interim ICR during the CAS 
period. Project outcomes were rated moderately satisfactory for the Flood Emergency Rehabilitation 
Project (October 2009) and the Second School Access and Improvement Project (June 2012), and the 
interim ICR for the Primary Education Support Program financed by the Education for All–Fast Track 
Initiative Catalytic Fund (March 2009) rated the outcome as satisfactory. The ICR for Food Crisis 
Response Development Policy Grant (December 2010) rated the outcome satisfactory, citing the 
emergency project’s coverage of the government’s budget shortfall, which supported the country in 
maintaining fiscal and macroeconomic stabilization, ensuring food supply and improving access to water, 
strengthening the statistical basis for policy development, and launching a dialogue on improving social 
safety nets and nutrition that ultimately led to a new operation, the Employment and Human Capital 
Social Safety Net Project, in 2010. Despite these successes, the ICR noted that it was difficult to 
determine whether the operation had passed through tax reduction in the form of lower prices for affected 
foods.  The ICR for the Health Sector Project (December 2012) rated the outcome as satisfactory. 

A Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) for the Food Crisis Response Development Policy 
Grant, prepared by the Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) in April 2012, deemed the 
project’s outcome to be unsatisfactory. This rating was determined on the basis of what the PPAR 
deemed to be modest progress toward the project’s objectives, together with questions about the extent to 
which the overall progress achieved could be attributed to the project itself. The country team felt, 
however, that the PPAR’s ratings focused too heavily on actual macroeconomic results and not enough 
on what the macroeconomic situation might have been without the operation. The project, which was the 
only mechanism for crisis response at the time (given the absence of an effective social safety net that 

47 

 
could be scaled up), provided fiscal space for the government to implement its food crisis response 
program. Moreover, the consumption of tax-exempted items increased while overall food expenditures 
decreased, implying that tax-exempted items became relatively more affordable. Though causality cannot 
be clearly attributed, the PPAR’s analysis of price data alone fails to capture the possibility that prices 
may have increased more steeply without the tax exemption.  

Portfolio performance deteriorated over the CAS period (Table 2), but has begun to turn around 
thanks to proactive attention to key implementation issues. The November 2011 CPPR concluded that 
targeted client support was needed in three areas: addressing weak capacity in project management and 
monitoring and evaluation, providing training to overcome inadequate experience with World Bank 
fiduciary and procurement requirements, and removing bureaucratic bottlenecks (such as delayed 
contract signing or slow release of funds by relevant government agencies). Discussions around the 
CPPR also brought to light areas in which the Bank team could improve its support for portfolio 
implementation, including the high turnover of task managers, lack of adequate handover as projects 
changed hands, and insufficiently clear communication between task managers on the Bank side and 
project managers on the client side, especially on bureaucratic requirements. The CPPR process 
identified monitoring indicators by which to measure progress in addressing these issues (Attachment 7). 
Finally, the CPPR found trust fund implementation to be relatively slow in Djibouti as a result of weak 
management capacity, interagency coordination issues, lack of procurement and financial management 
experience, and high turnover among staff in the country’s project management units. A follow-up to the 
CPPR in March 2012 found that significant progress had been made in strengthening project management 
capacity, improving disbursements, increasing the timeliness of processing and release of funds, and 
speeding up contract approvals. Together, these changes have contributed to recent implementation 
progress and improvements in portfolio performance.   

Table 2: Djibouti Portfolio Highlights 
FY2009 
FY2010 
    4 
    4 
  3.9 
  4.9 

Indicator 
Number of projects under implementation a 
Average implementation period (years) b 
Problem projects a, c 
     % of total, by number 
     % of total, by amount 
Projects at risk a, d 
     % of total, by number 
     % of total, by amount 
Disbursement ratio (%) e  

FY2011 
    5 
  4.7 

20.0 
22.9 

FY2012 
    5 
  2.4 

20.0 
13.4 

60.0 
79.3 
14.5 

20.0 
13.4 
 23.6 

  0.0 
  0.0 

  0.0 
  0.0 

25.0 
23.8 
53.4 

25.0 
19.6 
24.5 

Notes: a/ As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance; b/ Average age of projects in the Bank’s 
country portfolio; c/ A problem project is one for which implementation progress is unsatisfactory and/or 
development objectives are not likely to be achieved; d/ Projects at risk are those at risk of not meeting 
development objectives, including both actual and potential problem projects; e/ Ratio of disbursements during 
the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the beginning of the year, including only 
investment projects. 
Source: CPPR, November 2011.  

During program implementation, more attention could have been focused on monitoring results. As 
mentioned above, some indicators included in the CAS results matrix were not directly linked to an 
established program monitoring framework and were thus not closely followed over the course of 
strategy implementation. There was no framework in place to ensure regular monitoring of CAS 
outcomes outside the context of project implementation. Though a decision was taken to forego the 
preparation of a CAS Progress Report, in light of the small size of the country program and following the 
experience under the CAS for FY2006–2008, taking the time to conduct a mid-term review of the 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
program and its objectives may have afforded the team an opportunity to further streamline the results 
matrix and adjust targets to provide a more realistic picture of expected implementation progress. 

The country team was successful in preparing relevant, just-in-time knowledge products, but at times 
fell short in following through on dissemination and dialogue. For example, a public expenditure 
review (PER) was prepared and a governance and anticorruption survey conducted in support of the CAS 
outcome on improving expenditure transparency. Yet the PER was not discussed with the government 
during the CAS period, and there was little follow-up on either the government or the Bank side in 
response to the results of the governance and anticorruption survey. On monitoring and evaluation, 
though the CAS made clear that addressing deficiencies in the statistical system would require a 
comprehensive approach, no such approach was proposed and progress was limited. In the area of 
telecommunications, a policy note issued in March 2009 emphasized that Djibouti’s ambition to become 
a regional hub for transport and services would be undermined by the public monopoly on all segments 
of the market. The note proposed reform options, on which there is now follow-up.   

Though there was no formal framework for donor coordination in Djibouti during the CAS period, the 
small size of the resident donor community facilitated regular sharing of information. The World Bank 
had no country office at the time, but managers and task team leaders communicated closely with 
development partners during regular visits to Djibouti and at their headquarters. This collaboration led to 
the parallel financing of the Urban Poverty Reduction Project by the Agence Française de 
Développement, African Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, and World Bank. Similarly, the 
Education for All–Fast Track Initiative Catalytic Fund, managed by the World Bank and financed by 
France, the United States Agency for International Development, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the 
Agence Française de Développement, the Arab Development Fund, and the World Bank, has brought 
donors together around a common agenda in the education sector. Moreover, the World Bank financed 
the coordination of education sector activities through its education project. In 2010, the World Bank 
secured an IDF grant to help strengthen aid coordination and management capacity within government 
institutions in charge of designing, managing, and monitoring public investment projects and external 
resources, with the aim of effectively and transparently coordinating and managing development 
assistance flows in support of donor coordination. 

IV.  LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE CPS 

• 

It will be important to consider political economy factors. While a formal political economy 
analysis may not be appropriate given the fluidity of the current context, informal monitoring and 
close engagement can assist in understanding Djibouti’s slow progress in transitioning from a 
state-dominated economy to a more open one, as well as why some reform areas have gained 
more traction than others and how the Bank can best position itself to support reforms that are 
more likely to yield effective results. For example, the new CPS program should strive to build 
on the current appetite for reform in key areas such as governance and private sector 
development.  In this context, the placement of a Resident Representative in the field has allowed 
a good understanding of political economy factors and provided opportunities to more reliably 
assess areas of support that are more likely to maintain traction within the political economy 
environment. 
• The lack of a Bank office in Djibouti during the CAS period hampered the country team’s 
ability to effectively manage and monitor progress toward results on the ground. Delivery of 
the CAS program and implementation follow-up was affected by the limited implementation 
capacity on the ground and the absence of an effective mechanism to follow up in between 
supervision missions. 

49 

 
• Mixed progress on the growth agenda demonstrates the importance of aligning CAS outcomes 
to specific operational activities that fall within the Bank’s comparative advantage and thus have 
a good chance of moving forward. More general outcomes and targets may be useful goals, but 
without targeted assistance under the strategy and regular monitoring under linked programs, it is 
difficult to assess or even maintain progress toward those goals. Given the fluid environment in 
Djibouti, flexible responses to changing circumstances are crucial to ensure continued 
momentum. Under the CAS period and in the year since its conclusion, the country team has 
sought to focus intervention efforts and results targets on high-priority, realistic goals, including 
through the additional focusing enabled by additional financing operations and restructuring of 
ongoing programs. 
• Good progress in the education and health sectors can be attributed to clear sector goals 
backed up by well-specified programs, regular monitoring of outcomes, and flexible responses 
to changing needs. In education and health, going forward, it will be important to ensure that the 
progress made thus far is sustainable with a lower level of donor financing. In other sectors, this 
points to the importance of confirming and/or supporting similar strategic clarity and careful 
program design in other sectors of Bank support. 
• Modest progress on governance and public sector management points to the need for more 
comprehensive programming and more strategic follow-through on the part of the country 
team. Given the significant emphasis placed on the need for improved governance in the New 
Growth Model report, it will be important for the Bank and government to agree on an action 
plan for achieving rapid results in key areas of the governance agenda and on improving 
monitoring and evaluation capacity.  
• Slow progress on some indicators across the CAS program points to the importance of 
defining a strategy’s expected outcomes and measurement indicators realistically, on the basis 
of ongoing and early-period interventions. The strategy’s results framework should focus on 
results that are receiving attention under programs that are already in place or that will be 
addressed in interventions that come on stream early in the strategy period, in order to avoid 
setting expectations that are too high given the lead time needed to bring a project to full 
operation. The full results expected from later-period projects cannot reasonably be expected to 
be achieved by the end of the four-year country strategy cycle.  
• Given current capacity constraints in Djibouti, together with weaknesses in the collection and 
management of key national statistics, it will be critical to ensure that the results framework is 
highly simplified, focusing only on key indicators that are clear, measurable, and set up for 
regular monitoring and evaluation. Each outcome should be underpinned by an accurate 
baseline and a realistic target that takes into account implementation time frames in Djibouti. It 
would be useful to put in place a mechanism by which the government and the Bank can jointly 
monitor progress on an annual basis. Preparation of a CPS Progress Report may help the country 
team evaluate mid-term progress and make needed course corrections to maximize the relevance 
and effectiveness of interventions. Support for broader monitoring and evaluation capacity will 
also be important to strengthen the overall information base in the country, as well as 
institutional and staff capacity for data collection and analysis.  

50 

 
CAS Outcome/Cluster 
of Outcomes and 
Outcome Indicators 
(baselines and targets) 

Annex 3, Attachment 1: Summary of CAS Self Evaluation  

Status and Evaluation Summary Lending and Non-lending 
Activities that Contributed 
to the Outcome 

Lessons and 
Suggestions for the 
New CAS 

Pillar One: Supporting Economic Growth 

• Access to electricity increased 
modestly, including in targeted poor 
areas: achieved 
• Unplanned electricity outages 
reduced: not achieved during CAS 
period, but has since been achieved 
• Electric utility’s operating costs 
reduced: not achieved  
• Electric losses reduced from 21% to 
12% (12% in 2011): achieved 
• Number of days to open a business 
reduced: not achieved during CAS 
period, but has since been achieved, 
dropping from 37 days throughout the 
CAS period to 17 days in 2013 
• Competition in telecommunication 
increased: not achieved, as required 
institutional reforms have been 
identified but not agreed upon 
• Financial sector assessed in order to 
address any stability and structural 
issues: achieved 

Outcome 1.1: Reducing 
constraints and associated 
costs to private sector 
development  

Partially achieved 

Though access to electricity 
improved, progress on CAS 
outcomes related to 
business registration and 
telecommunications was 
slowed by the fact that 
support for and 
measurement of these 
outcomes were 
insufficiently integrated 
into Bank interventions on 
the ground. 

Additional work was 
completed, through the 
New Growth Model, to help 
identify and design further 
interventions to support 
economic growth by 
reducing constraints to 
private sector development. 

Additional financing for Power 
Access and Diversification 
Project (in June 2010 and again 
in June 2012) 

Trust Funds: Energy sector 
assessment; Feasibility 
assessment of solar rural 
energy; Geothermal power 
generation program 

Assessment of customs along 
Djibouti Ethiopia Corridor; 
Regulation of private port 
operators 

Additional economic and sector 
work: New Growth Model and 
Transport and Logistics studies 

Several indicators could 
not be achieved during 
the CAS period, as there 
was no related activity in 
the program (two concern 
the power utility, one the 
business environment and 
one the telecoms sector). 

There are indicators 
without baselines or 
targets (number 2 and 3 
for instance), which make 
it difficult to assess the 
extent of progress. 

Not enough emphasis 
was placed on making the 
electric utility more 
efficient through 
restructuring so as to 
become more attractive to 
private investors. 

New Growth Model and 
Transport and Logistics 
studies offer an excellent 
basis for dialogue on 
policy reform. 

51 

 
 
CAS Outcome/Cluster 
of Outcomes and 
Outcome Indicators 
(baselines and targets) 

Status and Evaluation Summary Lending and Non-lending 
Activities that Contributed 
to the Outcome 

Lessons and 
Suggestions for the 
New CAS 

Pillar 2: Supporting access to basic social services and human development 

Additional financing under 
EFA-FTI (October 2010) and 
new project for strengthening 
institutional capacity and 
management in the sector (June 
2012) 

Good progress achieved 
in the sector; ensuring 
that this success is 
sustainable will be 
important going forward 

TF: EPDF 

Additional financing for health 
project (May 2009) 

CAS outcome indicators 
should not be set at the 
level of the MDGs, but 

Outcome 2.1: Increasing 
access to quality basic 
education 

Achieved 

Good progress in 
expanding access and 
improving quality in the 
education sector can be 
attributed to clear sector 
goals, well-specified 
programs, regular 
monitoring of outcomes, 
and flexible responses to 
changing needs. 

Outcome 2.2: 
Improving access to 
and quality of health 

• Total GER in primary to increase 
from 68% in 2008 to 75% by 2012 
(note: the correct baseline in 2008 
should have been 62%, so the 
proposed 75% in 2012 was over 
ambitious.  The actual increase was 
from 62% in 2008 to 70% in 2012) 
and ratio of girls to boys to increase 
from 0.70 to 0.87 (0.96 in 2012): 
achieved 
• Percentage of children completing 
primary schooling without repeating 
to increase from 53% to 83% for both 
boys and girls (75.6% overall and 
72.9% for girls): partially achieved 
• Primary cycle repetition rate to drop 
from 4% to 2% (grew to 9.8% in 2011 
following discontinuation of primary 
school exit exam): not achieved 
• Primary cycle dropout rate to drop 
from 5% to 3% (2.9% in 2011): 
achieved 
• 90% of teachers to receive 
continuing training: achieved 
• Teacher-parent partnerships 
introduced in half of schools by 2012: 
achieved 
• Reduction of child mortality rate to 
65 per 1,000 live births in 2012 (68 in 
2012): partially achieved 

52 

 
Status and Evaluation Summary Lending and Non-lending 
Activities that Contributed 
to the Outcome 

Lessons and 
Suggestions for the 
New CAS 

TF:  Knowledge and learning 
grant and Nutrition 

closer to the development 
outcomes of Bank-
supported activities. 

Good progress made in 
the health sector; 
ensuring that this success 
is sustainable will be 
important going forward 

• Reduction of maternal mortality rate 
to 350 per 100,000 live births in 2012 
(383 in 2012): partially achieved 
• HIV prevalence rate among 15-24 
year old pregnant women stabilized at 
2% (1.4% in 2010): achieved 
• Improvement of staffing of all 
health facilities by qualified health 
workers (at least 1 qualified/trained 
health personnel in 90% of facilities): 
achieved 
• Avian flu outbreaks (if they occur) 
contained: (no outbreak; not 
applicable) 

CAS Outcome/Cluster 
of Outcomes and 
Outcome Indicators 
(baselines and targets) 

services 

Achieved 

Access to and quality of 
health services improved 
over the CAS period, as 
evidenced by improved 
health outcomes and 
improved staffing of health 
facilities. As in education, 
good progress in the health 
sector can be attributed to 
clear sector goals, well-
specified programs, regular 
monitoring of outcomes, 
and flexible responses to 
changing needs. 

53 

 
 
 
CAS Outcome/Cluster 
of Outcomes and 
Outcome Indicators 
(baselines and targets) 

Outcome 2.3: 
Strengthening social 
protection and direct 
support to the poor 

Not achieved 

Progress toward the social 
protection outcome was 
slowed by the fact that 
relevant programs were 
only approved toward the 
end of the CAS period; 
advancements are now 
being made toward these 
goals and will be supported 
and monitored under the 
next CPS. 

Status and Evaluation Summary Lending and Non-lending 
Activities that Contributed 
to the Outcome 

Lessons and 
Suggestions for the 
New CAS 

TF: Employment and Human 
Capital Social Safety Net 
(September 2009); and Crisis 
Response Window SSN project 
(June 2012) 
Additional financing for urban 
project (June 2010) 
Rural Community 
Development and Water 
Mobilization Project (June 
2011) and additional financing 
(June 2012) 
Natural disaster risk assessment 
and management; Drought 
post-disaster needs assessment; 
Pursuing low regret climate 
adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction options. 

Some progress was 
achieved in establishing 
the project and SSN 
systems, with expected 
impact on target 
indicators. 

The three TFs for disaster 
management have been 
most useful for preparing 
a mitigation strategy and 
mobilizing resources 
from CRW to address the 
severe effects of the 2011 
drought. 

The lack of progress 
during the CAS period 
points to the importance 
of focusing a strategy’s 
expected outcomes and 
measurement indicators 
on results that are 
receiving attention under 
ongoing programs or 
those that will come on 
stream early in the 
strategy period; results 
expected from later-
period projects cannot 
reasonably be expected to 
be achieved. 

• 8,000 labor-intensive jobs created: 
not achieved; program is now 
underway and has been restructured to 
reflect a more realistic target of 4,000 
jobs created; as of December 2013, 
1,700 jobs have been created and the 
target is expected to be achieved in 
December 2014. 
• 10% of residents in selected areas 
benefit from community development 
sub-projects: not achieved during the 
CAS period, but has since been 
achieved 
• Framework for providing social 
assistance to the poor developed: 
achieved 
• Institutional framework of the social 
security set up: not achieved 
• Occurrence of floods in selected 
areas reduced: no recent flood; not 
applicable 
• Agriculture and livestock 
production in selected areas increased: 
not achieved due to the PRODERMO 
program’s delayed start (effective 
January 2012). Since then, there has 
been some progress on range 
management through set-aside and 
resending of 10 units over 4,000 
hectares. Progress on livestock has 
been slower, as it depends on the 
availability of water from subprojects 
that are scheduled over the project 
period up to 2016. 

54 

 
CAS Outcome/Cluster 
of Outcomes and 
Outcome Indicators 
(baselines and targets) 

Status and Evaluation Summary Lending and Non-lending 
Activities that Contributed 
to the Outcome 

Lessons and 
Suggestions for the 
New CAS 

• Use of rainwater/wadis water in 
small scale agriculture and livestock 
increased: not achieved due to 
PRODERMO’s delayed start; target 
values for rehabilitation and creation 
of new irrigated areas are set for 
FY2014 and FY2016, respectively. 

Pillar 3: Supporting governance and public sector management 

Outcome 3.1: 
Improving expenditure 
transparency 

Partially achieved 

CAS targets on expenditure 
transparency were 
achieved, save for the 
publication of audit reports 
by government.  

• Public procurement law approved 
by Parliament: achieved 
• Audit reports annually produced 
and publicized by Government: 
partially achieved; the most recent 
audit report, produced after the end of 
the CAS period, is expected to be 
published at the end of January 2014. 

TF: Strengthening governance 
and anti-corruption agenda 
IDF for aid coordination 

PER (draft in June 2012) 

Governance agenda is 
moving slowly but 
beginning to gain 
momentum, owing to a 
renewed focus on the part 
of the government.  

The opening of a Bank 
office in Djibouti has 
provided an opportunity 
for more regular 
assessment of political 

55 

 
 
CAS Outcome/Cluster 
of Outcomes and 
Outcome Indicators 
(baselines and targets) 

Status and Evaluation Summary Lending and Non-lending 
Activities that Contributed 
to the Outcome 

Lessons and 
Suggestions for the 
New CAS 

economy factors that 
influence the governance 
agenda and help identify 
areas of fruitful 
engagement. 

Progress in this area is 
slow, owing in part to the 
fact that support for 
M&E improvements was 
not embedded into Bank-
supported interventions 
beyond the IDF grant. 
Support under the follow-
on CPS will need to be 
more systematic. 

Targeted capacity 
building needs to go 
hand-in-hand with 
technical assistance to 
address deficiencies in 
statistical capacity. 

IDF for monitoring and 
evaluation 

Outcome 3.2: 
Improving monitoring 
and evaluation 

Not achieved 

Monitoring and evaluation 
continues to be problematic 
due to the limitations in 
government statistics 
production and statistical 
capacity. The government 
has recently requested 
World Bank assistance in 
this area.  

• Basic INDS Monitoring and 
evaluation system adopted: not 
achieved due to weak government 
capacity 
• Demographic data of the Population 
Census available: achieved  
• Regular surveys conducted: 
partially achieve, such as the EDAM-
3 surveyed 
• National Accounts produced 
annually: not achieved due to 
capacity constraints during CAS 
period, but work is underway through 
Bank support to strengthen statistical 
capacity 
• Poverty indicators updated (if new 
household survey data available): 
survey data available for use in 
updating indicators, but not yet 
achieved; further results expected in 
2014 with the production of updated 
poverty indicators 

56 

 
Annex 3, Attachment 2: Planned (and Additional) Lending Program and Actual Deliveries  
FY2009-FY2012 

CAS PLAN (03/30/2009) 

FY 

Project 

2009 Health Sector (Additional 
Financing) 
2010 Energy Access II 
2011 Water & Small Scale Rural 
Development 
2012 Education & TVET 

IDA 
(US$ mil) 
7.0 

6.2 
5.0 

6.0 

STATUS 

Status 

Actual (approved May 2009) 

Actual (approved May 2010) 
Actual (Approved June 2011) 

Actual (Approved June 2012) for 
Strengthening Institutional Capacity & 
Management in Education Sector 
Urban Poverty Reduction (Additional 
Financing) (Approved June 2010) 

IDA 
(US$ mil) 
7.00 

6.20 
5.83 

6.00 

 2.90 

Total Planned & Delivered (2009-
24.2 
27.93 
2012) 
Additional Deliveries (under the Crisis Response Window (CRW) Fund) During the CAS Period  
Project 
CRW 
Status 
CRW 
(US$ mil) 
(US$ mil) 
5.20 

FY 

2012 

Power Access & Improvement (Addt’l 
Financing)--Approved June 2012 
Rural Community Dev &  Water 
Mobilization (Addt’l Financing)—Approved 
June 2012 
Employment and Human Capital Social 
Safety Net (Approved June 2012) 
Total CRW delivered in FY2012 
Total CAS period (FY2009-FY2012) 

3.00 

5.00 

13.20 
41.13 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3, Attachment 3a: Planned Trust Funds/IDFs and Actual Deliveries (FY2009-FY2012) 

CAS PLAN (03/30/2009)  

FY 
2009 

Project 
US$ mil 
IDF: Support to Aid Coordination (Recipient-executed) 
0.35 
EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund Grant (Recipient-executed) 
2.00 
2010 GFDRR: Risk Mapping for Djibouti (Recipient-executed) 1.00 
PPIAF: Solid Waste Collection (Recipient-executed) 
0.19 
SEETF: Social Safety Net (Recipient-executed) 
0.10 
2011 GPOBA: Potable Water Services 
0.10 
Total Trust Funds/IDFs delivered in CAS period (FY09-12) 

Status 
US$ mil 
Actual (Effective April 2010) 
0.42 
Actual (Effective Oct 2010)) 
4.00 
Actual (Effective Feb 2011) 
0.90 
Actual (Effective August 2011) 
0.40 
Actual JSDF (Effective Sept 2010) 3.64 
Not delivered 

9.36 

Status 

Annex 3, Attachment 3b:  Planned Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY2009-FY2012) 
CAS PLAN (03/30/2009)  
FY 
Economic & Sector Work/Technical 
Assistance (TA) 
2009 FSAP 
2010 Qat Awareness 
PER 
2011 Poverty Assessment 
FY 
Technical Assistance (TA) 
2009 Energy Sector Assessment 
2010 Telecommunications and ICT 
Governance and Anti-Corruption 
2011 Support to Sectoral Reforms 

Actual (FY12) 
Actual (May 2011) 
Actual (June 2012) 
Not delivered 
Status 
Actual (Nov 2009)--Least Cost Electricity Master Plan 
Not delivered 
Actual (July 2010) 
Actual (June 2012) New Growth Model and Transport 
& Logistics 
Additional Non-Lending Delivered During the CAS Period  
Actual (effective July 2009) 
Actual (effective January 2010) 
Actual (effective September 2010) 

2010 SUN: Nutrition  
RSRC: Employment for the poor TA 
2011 TFESSD: Pursuing Low Regret Climate 
Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction Options 
PPIAF: Regulation of Private Port Operators 
Reproductive Health 
2012 TFF: Assessment of Customs along the Djibouti-
Ethiopia  
GFDRR: Drought Post Disaster Needs 
Assessment  
PPIAF: Energy Sector Assessment  
PPIAF: Feasibility Assessment for Solar Rural 
Energy  
ESMAP: Geothermal Power Generation 
HRBF: Knowledge and Learning Grant  

Actual (effective March 2011) 
Actual (Effective April 2011) 
Actual (Effective July 2011) 

Actual (effective September 2011) 

Actual (Effective December 2011) 
Actual (Effective February 2012) 

Actual (Effective March 2012) 
Actual (effective March 2012) 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3, Attachment 4: Results of the National Initiative for Social Development  
(Initiative Nationale pour le Développement Social, INDS) 

1. The government prepared a short note on the implementation of the 2008–2012 INDS. Out of 454 
priority actions, 20 percent have been completed, 50 percent are underway, and 30 percent have not 
yet been started. Significant investments were made in the roads sector, resulting in a 17 percent 
increase in the length of the network. Urban roads have been expanded. Thanks to investment in 
telecommunications, Djibouti is now connected with a large number of countries in Eastern and 
Southern Africa. Electricité de Djibouti invested in new thermal power plants due to increased 
demand. Interconnection with Ethiopia was completed, and the feasibility of geothermal and solar 
power is under review by the government.  

2. The health sector benefitted from investment in facilities and equipment. The school network was 
significantly expanded. Regarding housing for lower-income groups, a total of 4,329 lots were 
developed and 1,403 housing units completed. An environment code was adopted in 2009. 

3. A new Constitution was adopted in 2010 to strengthen democracy. The presidential term was reduced 
to 5 years. Djibouti adhered to the African initiative for peer review. The capacity of control and 
oversight institutions was reinforced. A new Commercial Code (Code de Commerce) was adopted. 

59 

 
 
Annex 3, Attachment 5: Doing Business in 2009-2014   

Doing Business 
Overall rank 
Starting a business 
Construction permits 
Employing workers 
Getting electricity 
Registering property 
Getting credit 
Protecting investors 
Paying taxes 
Trading across borders 
Enforcing contracts 
Closing a business 
Resolving bankruptcy 

2009 
153 
173 
99 
137 

134 
172 
177 
61 
35 
159 
132 

2010 
163 
177 
102 
151 

140 
177 
178 
65 
34 
161 
135 

2011 
158 
175 
125 

140 
176 
179 
60 
38 
160 
137 

2012 
170 
179 
142 

143 
148 
177 
179 
70 
37 
160 

141 

2013 
171 
185 
145 

142 
148 
180 
181 
67 
41 
161 

142 

2014 
160 
127 
157 

144 
133 
180 
182 
66 
60 
163 

147 

Sources: International Finance Corporation and World Bank. Doing Business 2009  to Doing Business 2014.  

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amount 
286,330 
420,570 
900,000 
3,640,000 
4,000,000 

9,246,900 

30,000 
75,000 
123,000 
459,275 
400,600 
28,305 
125,000 
344,323 
281,956 
220,000 
76,935 
174,000 
99,825 

TFF 
PPIAF 
GFDRR 
PPIAF 
PPIAF 
ESMAP 
HRBF 
FTIE 
EFAFTI 
GPF 
SUN 
RSRC 
GFDRR 

7/11 
8/11 
9/11 
12/11 
2/12 
3/12 
3/12 
9/08 
3/09 
7/09 
210 
1/10 
4/10 

3/12 
6/12 
9/12 
10/12 
10/12 
8/12 
3/13 
8/11 
9/12 
4/12 
4/12 
4/12 
6/11 

TFESSD 

9/10 

6/12 

200,000 

JSDF 
PPIAF 

12/10 
3/11 

12/14 
6/12 

360,000 
74,500 
3,072,718 

Annex 3, Attachment 6: Trust Funds (as of June 30, 2012) 

Trust Fund Name—Recipient-Executed 
Monitoring and Evaluation System Project 
Strengthening Aid Coordination and Management Capacity 
Natural Disaster Risk Assessment and Monitoring System 
Crisis Response: Employment and Human Capital Social Safety Net 
EFA FTI Catalytic Fund Additional Financing 

Source 
IDF 
IDF 
GFDRR 
JSDF 
EFAFTI 

Effect. Closing 
8/08 
2/12 
4/10 
4/13 
2/11 
11/12 
9/10 
12/14 
10/10 
9/12 

TOTAL 

Trust Fund Name—Bank-Executed 
TFF-Assessment of Customs along Djibouti-Ethiopia Corridor 
Private Sector Involvement in Solid Waste Collection # Phase 2 
Drought Post Disaster Needs Assessment (GFDRR: Track III TA Core) 
Energy Sector Assessment 
Feasibility Assessment for Solar Rural Electrification 
Geothermal Power Generation Program 
Knowledge and Learning Grant 
EPDF For Djibouti 
EFA FTI Supervision Costs For Djibouti 
Strengthening the Governance and Anti-Corruption Agenda 
Djibouti Nutrition 
Employment for the poor TA 
Natural Disaster Risk Assessment and Monitoring System 
Pursuing Low Regret Climate Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction 
Options in the Republic of Djibouti 
Supervision-Crisis Response: Employment And Human Capital Social 
Safety Net 
Regulation of Private Port Operators 

TOTAL 

61 

 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
Annex 3, Attachment 7: CPPR Key Monitoring Indicators (Nov 2011 – June 2012) 

Indicators/Baseline and Targets 
1.  INDICATOR: Experienced key staff in charge of implementing Bank-
financed projects 
Baseline: 
Weak project implementation capacity. 
Target: 
Strengthened capacity of key project staff (both Bank TTLs and Project 
implementing staff). 
2.   INDICATOR: Dedicated staff in charge of project monitoring & 
evaluations (M&E) 
Baseline: 
No dedicated staff to focus on Monitoring and Evaluation. 
Target: 
Every Project Implementation Unit to have an M&E dedicated staff. 
3.   INDICATOR: Strengthened fiduciary experience of staff in charge of 
project implementation 
Baseline:   
Difficulty in completing withdrawal applications (WAs); Submission of 
late Audit Reports; country procurement standards not in line with WB 
procurement guidelines; and WB not providing adequate fiduciary 
training to PIU staff.  
Target: 
Adequately trained relevant PIU staff; Acceptable WAs submitted to the 
World Bank; Audit Reports submitted on time; and All PIUs use 
acceptable procurement standards that are in line with WB guidelines. 
4.  INDICATOR: Reduced bureaucratic bottlenecks 
Baseline:  
Delays in Ministry of Finance releasing funds to PIUs for project 
implementation; National Tender Board (NTB) requiring several different 
entities to sign a contact; and delays in Bank TTLs to providing pertinent 
responses to PIUs, in particular no-objections. 
Target: 
Streamlined requirements by NTB for contract signing; timely release of 
funds by Ministry of Finance for project implementation; and timely 
response to pertinent queries relating to project implementation and WB 
TTLs issue no-objections within 72 hours. 

Status 

ongoing 

Not yet accomplished 

Date: 
11/21/2011 
Date: 
11/30/2012 

Date: 
11/21/2011 
Date: 
11/30/2012 

Date: 
11/21/2011 

Date: 
11/30/2012 

Ongoing--relevant  training 
took place in Apr & Jun 
2012 

Date: 
11/21/2011 

Date: 
11/21/2012 

Partially achieved by March-
May 2012—NTB still 
expected to minimize the 
delays in contract signing. 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3, Attachment 8: Objectives and Outputs of Non-lending Activities 

Annex 2 

A. Recipient-Executed Trust Funds 

1. Monitoring and Evaluation Systems Project. The IDF was signed in August 2008. The purpose of 
the grant was to help Djibouti set up a Monitoring and Evaluation System for the INDS. The system 
was initially expected be established in the Technical Permanent Secretariat in the Prime Minister's 
office. The Secretariat of State for National Solidarity was created in 2009 and took over 
responsibility for INDS monitoring and evaluation, which delayed project implementation. IDEA-
International, a Canadian consultancy, was recruited to establish and operationalize an M&E system 
to better assess progress made under the INDS. The contract was signed in May 2011 for a cost of 
US$165,000. 

2. The consultants prepared three reports, the first one on how to operationalize an M&E system in 
November 2011. It assessed needs for additional capacities in five ministries and agencies (Ministry 
of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Social Development Agency 
and Ministry in charge of gender issues and family planning). In December 2011 the consultants 
issued two reports, one on an M&E plan for INDS, which included a model for a results framework. 
The last report included a manual of procedures. There is no indication of any follow-up to the 
consultants’ reports. 

3. Strengthening Aid Coordination and Management Capacity. An IDF grant was signed in April 
2010 to strengthen the capacity of institutions in charge of design, management, and monitoring of 
public investment projects and aid—in particular, the External Financing Department of the Ministry 
of Economy and Finance and the Public Procurement Agency. A draft assessment report was 
prepared by a consultant in January 2012. However, little was achieved. Progress was extremely slow 
due to lack of capacity and shortage of staff in the PIU. 

4. Natural Disaster Risk Assessment and Monitoring System. A GFDRR grant was signed in 
February 2011. The objective of the grant is to develop a comprehensive and sustainable system to 
assess, communicate, and monitor risks associated with natural disasters in Djibouti. This system will 
enable the identification and quantification of risk and the calculation of potential economic losses, 
which are essential for decision making and represent a first step in establishing an effective disaster 
risk management program. The disaster risk management action plan was updated. The 
meteorological agency is in the process of acquiring five automatic weather stations to systematize 
data collection and provide reliable hazard information to decision makers. Finally, the World Bank 
e-learning infrastructure is being transferred to the University of Djibouti to help it become an 
independent provider of disaster risk management learning. 

5. Crisis Response: Employment and Human Capital Social Safety Net. The JSDF grant was signed 
in September 2010. The objective of the grant is to pilot an innovative integrated safety net for the 
poor and vulnerable households. The safety net combines a workfare program with social assistance 
for nutrition using a community-driven and participatory approach. Consultants have been recruited 
to (i) prepare a program of labor-intensive works in urban and rural areas; (ii) train Ministry of 
Health staff and NGOs who will be responsible for the nutrition component; and (iii) complete data 
collection for the finalization of the baseline survey.  

63 

 
6. ETA-FTI Catalytic Fund Additional Financing. The additional grant was signed in October 2010. 
The objective of the grant is to: (i) further expand access to basic education, especially in rural areas 
and for girls; and (ii) enhance the quality of education, especially by increasing teacher training and 
the availability of textbooks.  

B. Bank-Executed Trust Funds 

7. TFF-Assessment of Customs along Djibouti-Ethiopia corridor. The TFF grant was signed in July 
2011. The objective of the grant is to assess the performance of Ethiopian and Djiboutian customs 
along the trade corridor and recommend how to address identified issues. A consultant report issued 
in September 2011 identified key issues and provided a sound basis for a better understanding of 
these issues by the governments and the Bank.  

8. Private Sector Involvement in Solid Waste Management. The PPIAF grant was signed in August 
2011.  A first phase was implemented, but given the large amounts of funding programmed by other 
donors for solid waste management (about EUR 13 million), it was decided after this first phase to 
refocus the assistance on helping the waste management agency (OVD) to better prepare for these 
large projects, which will include promotion of small-scale private sector collection and sorting 
services. 

9. Drought Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PNDA). The GFDRR grant was signed in September 
2011. The objective of the grant is to assist the government in quickly assessing the impacts of 
drought on the economy while identifying recovery and mitigation needs per sector, to establish the 
costing of response options in the short and medium term, and to inform the development of the 
recovery framework. It also aims to provide inputs to the government in designing a drought and risk 
management strategy for the reduction of present and future hydric deficit periods and their 
associated and related hazards, including the identification, prioritization, and costing of new 
emerging activities associated with the recovery efforts proposed after the current dry period. The 
Djibouti PDNA was validated by the Government of Djibouti in April 2012. The quick completion of 
the PDNA enabled the mobilization of Crisis Response Window emergency funding of US$13.2 
million for short- to medium-term drought mitigation efforts. This helped contribute additional 
financing for three projects. 

10. Energy Sector Assessment. The PPIAF grant was signed in December 2011. The objectives of the 
grant are to: (i) assess the cost and timing through which Djibouti’s existing generating plants can be 
refurbished or renewed to meet projected demand; (ii) refine the 2009 least cost master plan with the 
introduction of Djibouti’s best investment strategy derived through the build new versus refurbish 
existing power plant analysis and then identify which of the least cost infrastructure investments can 
be effectively financed and managed through a PPP; and (iii) review and propose changes to 
Djibouti’s legal and regulatory practices that will be necessary to allow and encourage PPP 
participation in electric infrastructure projects that have been identified in the refinement of the least 
cost master plan. Consultants have been recruited and work is underway. 

11. Feasibility Assessment for Solar Rural Electrification. The PPIAF grant was signed in February 
2012. The objective of the grant is to assess the most viable and sustainable rollout option available 
to electrify 25 villages in both peri-urban and rural areas. Work is underway. 

64 

 
12. Geothermal Power Generation Program. The ESMAP grant was signed in March 2012. A Project 
Appraisal Document was prepared for a Geothermal Power Generation Project. The project was 
being designed to finance the exploration phase and the tendering process for the development of a 
50 MW geothermal power plant in Lake Assal, which would be financed by private investors. 

13. Knowledge and Learning Grant. The HRBF grant was signed in March 2012. The objectives of the 
grant are to: (i) create a common knowledge base from which clients, key stakeholders, and task 
teams can better understand various results-based financing instruments and assess their 
appropriateness to improve health outcomes in Djibouti; and (ii) provide the necessary tools for 
designing and implementing a results-based financing health program in Djibouti. 

14. EPDF. The FTIE grant was signed in September 2008. The objectives of the grant were to: (i) 
support preparation of a three-year Education Sector Development Plan (based on the 10-year 
strategy for 2000-2010); (ii) help build capacity to analyze issues related to the education and training 
sector and develop knowledge and consensus on sector issues and policy priorities among all 
stakeholders; (iii) develop better monitoring and evaluation systems to provide reliable information 
to policymakers and strengthen accountability functions; and (iv) strengthen donor partnerships. 

15. A number of studies, reports, planning documents, and workshop summaries have been produced 
during the CAS period, including: (i) a subregional seminar on competency-based approaches in 
developing textbooks; (ii) technical assistance for the development of a website for the University of 
Djibouti; (iii) participation of ministry staff in a regional workshop on skills development; (iv) 
technical assistance for curriculum reform at the secondary level; (v) a national action plan for 
developing the technical and vocational education sector; (vi) a social assessment of the education 
sector; and (vii) an assessment of early childhood development. 

16. Strengthening the Governance and Anti-Corruption Agenda. The GPF grant was signed in July 
2009. The objective of the grant is to identify the governance and anticorruption areas that need to be 
addressed and to formulate concrete actions in close coordination with all stakeholders. A consultant 
(CERTI) carried out a survey in 2010. In its report of January 2011, the consultant concluded that 
payment of bribes was used frequently to gain access to services such as electricity, building permits, 
or import licenses. A majority of households do not trust the justice system. The survey does not 
provide a solid basis for preparing a governance and anticorruption agenda, although a follow-up 
workshop on judicial reform has identified priority reform areas, some of which will be addressed 
under the investment climate and private sector development activities that form part of the Bank’s 
upcoming CPS.  

17. Nutrition. The SUN grant was signed in February 2010. The objective of the grant is to help the 
Government of Djibouti to develop effective strategies and action plans for its nutrition program, to 
incorporate key activities in ongoing projects, and to identify financing gaps. A nutrition strategy was 
developed and an action plan was prepared and is being implemented. 

18. Employment for the Poor. The RSRC grant was signed in January 2010. The objective of the grant 
is to help scale up and improve the design and effectiveness of the Social Development Agency’s 
workfare program through the provision of technical assistance. The work is underway. 

65 

 
19. Pursuing Low Regret Climate Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction Options. The TFESSD 
grant was signed in September 2010. The objective of the grant is to reduce the adverse effects of 
climate variability and change and natural hazards on Djibouti’s communities through low-regret 
actions. The ongoing work aims to: (i) strengthen and systematize meteorological data collection, 
quality control, and dissemination across various ministries and relevant agencies/academic 
institutions; (ii) improve contingency planning for dealing with the impact and aftermath of extreme 
weather events; (iii) develop training seminars and simulations for most vulnerable communities 
(including role-play exercises to improve preparedness); and (iv) provide continuous support to 
participating agencies by an international consultant. 

20. Regulation of Private Ports Operators. The PPIAF grant was signed in March 2011. The objective 
of the grant is to: (i) develop the government’s awareness of issues related to the regulation of private 
port operators (quality of service, fees, and institutional aspects); and (ii) suggest solutions by helping 
to design a modern and efficient regulatory system. In the long term, this would help the government 
strengthen the competitiveness of Djibouti ports, in particular for Ethiopian transit traffic. The 
consultant diagnosed the current issues, made recommendations, and suggested a detailed action plan 
to enhance the regulation of the port sector. He presented his draft report during a workshop in 
Djibouti in April 2012, which was attended by government officials and port authorities, as well as 
private port operators. The final version of the report was delivered in June 2012. 

66 

 
 
67 

Annex 4:  Selected Donors in Djibouti, by Sector 

France

Ge rmany

Japan

USA

EU

IMF

World 
Bank 
Group

AfDB

Islam ic 
De v. 
Bank

OPEC- 
OFID

IFAD

UNDP

UNICEF

FAO

UNHCR

IOM WFP

UNFPA WHO UNESCO

UNAIDS

UNIDO

OHCHR

1

W a te r

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

2

Sanita tion

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

3

Urba in De ve lopment

X

X

X

X

X

4

Environment - Cl ima te Change

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

5

Disa ste r Prepa redne ss

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

6

Ene rgy

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

7

Humanita rian Aid

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

8

Agriculture

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

9

Live stock and fishe rie s

X

X

X

X

10

He a lth

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

11

Educa tion

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

12

Sa fe ty ne ts

X

X

X

X

13

Culture and Socia l De ve lopment

X

X

14

Chi ldren / Youth

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

15

Gende r

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

16

Priva te Se ctor

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

17

Comme rce 

X

18

Te le com

X

X

19

Infra stucture

X

X

X

20

Transport

X

X

21

Migra tion-Asylum

X

X

22

Justice

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

23

Democra cy and Gove rnance

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

24

Ma cro-e conom ics and planning

X

X

X

X

X

X

25

Capa city Bui lding

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Bilateral *

Donors

Multilateral

* Bi la te ra l include s a ctivite s of both the Emba ssie s and the re spe ctive 
de ve lopment coope ra tion agencie s.

 
 
 
Annex 5:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management 

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

5 
4.7 
20.0 
22.9 
60.0 
79.3 
14.5 

5 
2.4 
20.0 
13.4 
20.0 
13.4 
23.6 

7 
2.5 
14.3 
28.9 
42.9 
46.2 
15.7 

7 
2.8 
14.3 
28.9 
42.9 
46.2 
6.6 

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by 
Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 
80 

19 
173.8 

Last Five 
FYs 

2 
35.1 

47.4 
27.2 

50.0 
28.5 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

Closed Projects 

20 

IBRD/IDA * 

Total Disbursed (Active) 
          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + 
Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + 
Closed) 

 16.47 
 0.00 
 103.10 
 21.16 
 119.57 
 21.16 

 39.11 
 0.00 
 39.11 

Active Projects 

Project ID 

P130328 
P127143 
P131194 

P127144 
P086379 
P117355 

P088876 
P123315 
Overall Result 

Project Name 

DJ Crisis Response-SSN project 
DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project 
DJ Improving Health Sector Performance 
DJ-GEF Geothermal Power Generation 
Prgrm 
DJ-Power Access and Diversification Proj 
DJ-Rural CDD & Water Mobilization 
DJ-URBAN POVERTY REDUCTION 
PROJECT 
Strengthening Institutional Capacity and 

Difference 
Between 
Expected and 
Actual 

Disbursem
ents a/ 

Fiscal Year 

IDA GRANT 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

2012 
2013 
2013 

2013 
2006 
2011 

2008 
2012 

5 
6 
7 

18.2 
8.83 

5.9 
6 
56.93 

4.46 
6.02 
6.65 

7.92 
7.10 

1.52 
5.45 
39.11 

0.86 

-0.07 

-3.56 
1.16 

-1.35 
0.37 
-2.60 

6.04 

6.04 

Frm 
Rev'd 

2.39 
1.16 

1.71 

5.26 

Last PSR  

Supervision Rating 
Develop
Impleme
ment 
ntation 
Objectiv
Progres
es 
s 

S 
# 
# 

S 
# 
# 

# 
MU 
S 

MS 
MS 

# 
MU 
MS 

MS 
MS 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7:  Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio 30 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014* 

Original Commitments (US$m) 

IFC and Participants 
IFC's Own Accounts 
only 

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts 
only 

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only 

* Data as of October 01,2013 

30 This table is empty because IFC currently has no investments in Djibouti. As and when such investments are launched, this table will be amended in a CPSPR or in 
the follow-on CPS. 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Annex 8:  Djibouti:  Leveraging JSDF for Integrated Support of the CPS 

I. 

BACKGROUND 

Djibouti has a population of about 864,617 in 2011 and a growth rate of about 4.8 percent in 2012. It is poorly 
endowed with natural resources and has limited arable land, rainfall and water. With less than 1,000 km2 of arable 
land (0.04 percent of 23,200 km2) and an average annual rainfall of 5.1 inches, the country has a chronic food 
deficit and is totally dependent on imports to meet its food needs. As a result, Djibouti is highly sensitive to 
external shocks such as spikes in food and fuel prices and natural disasters such as floods and droughts. 
Furthermore, the country’s economy is dependent on Foreign Direct Investments (FDI), foreign countries’ military 
bases, and port services, which capitalize on the country’s strategic location at the southern entrance to the Red 
Sea.  Land-locked Ethiopia is the primary customer of Djibouti’s port handling services. Moreover, the port’s 
location and function as a key refueling and transshipment facility for one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes, 
adds to the regional and global strategic importance of this small, arid country.  

Djiboutihas remained relatively peaceful in recent years, unlike other countries in the Region. There has been no 
major unrest in 2012, although some public discontent persists, underpinned by widespread poverty and 
unemployment, pervasive patronage, and perceived corruption.  

Identification and provision of sustainable livelihood opportunities in poor communities is critical in a 
country with extremely high poverty rates and limited resources. Djibouti faces multiple development challenges 
and the recent economic growth did not have a significant impact on unemployment or poverty. In spite of a 4.8 
percent growth rate between 2005 and 2012, unemployment remains high at 48.4% in 2012 (Source: EDAM-3). 
Unemployment among youth, women and in rural areas is higher than among the adult population and in urban 
Djibouti. At the same time, women’s labor force participation is very low. 

Almost 99% of urban dwellers have access to a water source, yet only 63% of urban residents have access to 
improved sanitation facilities, and many of Djibouti's urban dwellers live in substandard housing. This is 
exacerbated by a lack of institutional capacity to design community participation programs in service delivery. 
About 77 percent of Djibouti’s residents live in urban areas, with an estimated 567,000 in the City of Djibouti. 
Over 41.2% of the population in extreme poverty, and national unemployment exceeds 48.4%, with 
unemployment in some low-income urban areas and amongst youth exceeding 70% 31. Cities are growing at 1.98% 
per annum (mainly informally and in high risk exposed areas), yet many urban areas are in poor conditions with a 
low level of access to infrastructure and social services. The prevalence of informal urban growth is leading to 
poor health indicators, low levels of educational achievement, high rates of illiteracy, and high unemployment.  
Without an appropriate response, urban growth is likely to exacerbate effects of poverty and environmental 
damage (with increased exposure to health hazards).  

To realize its potential, Djibouti must address governance issues.  Djibouti suffers from a major governance 
deficit in all dimensions.  For example, the Bank’s World Governance Indicators score Djibouti poorly on voice 
and accountability, effectiveness of government and rule of law.  Access to information is limited, and there are 
limitations on freedom of expression and of the media. This governance deficit, coupled with the high electricity 
cost and lack of appropriate infrastructure, continues to undermine private sector investment and job creation, for 
example by limiting FDI and local investment. To escape the vicious cycle of poverty and unemployment and to 
preserve social stability, Djibouti must make a radical break with the current governance model by introducing 
greater transparency and accountability in the public sector, and improving delivery of public sector services, in 
order to gradually win back the private sector’s trust.  The recently-completed Djibouti Vision 2035 strategy aims 
to address some of these gaps.   

31 World Bank Databank. 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
II. World Bank Engagement in Djibouti 

The last Country Assistance Strategy covering FY09-12 had three main pillars and proposed $ 27 million in IDA 
support (grants).  The three pillars were: (i) promote growth by improving the business environment (eliminating 
constraints and the reducing the cost of factors of production such as electricity, telecoms, and finance); (ii) support 
access to basic social services (improving access and quality of education and health services, strengthening social 
protection and direct support to the poorest); and (iii) support better governance and public sector management (through 
economic policy discussion and TA to strengthen the budgetary process and monitoring and evaluation). 

As reported in the CAS Completion Report (CAS CR) for the 2009–2012 strategy (Annex 3), solid progress was 
achieved in most major programs. Program performance was rated moderately satisfactory, citing notable 
achievements on the education and health agendas and important steps forward on energy and expenditure 
transparency. Progress toward targets in telecommunications, business regulation, financial sector reform, social 
protection, and monitoring and evaluation was slower. In some cases, momentum was slowed by weak 
implementation capacity, delays in implementing relevant programs, or lack of dedicated operational support. 
Other areas, such as social protection, are beginning to make headway now that planned programs are finally under 
implementation. There also is a continuing need to strengthen governance in Djibouti, both in the use of resources and 
in the delivery of services to the population. 

The current IDA portfolio for Djibouti comprises seven projects with a net commitment value of about US$57 
million and undisbursed balance of about US$40 million.  The current portfolio is relatively new and focuses on 
social safety nets, energy, rural community development, urban poverty reduction, health and education.    In terms 
of Trust Funds, 5 Recipient-Executed Trust Funds (one of which is from JSDF) became effective in FY09-12 for a 
total of $9.25 million.  

Djibouti became an IDA III country as of July 1, 2012; therefore IDA financing under the CPS will take the 
form of credits rather than grants.  Although IDA credit terms still include a 35 percent grant element, the shift 
away from full grants will negatively impact the already high level of external debt.  Indeed, Djibouti did not meet 
the criteria established in 2004 for debt relief and it did not benefit from either HIPC or the follow-on MDRI. 
According to the latest IMF DSA Djibouti  continues to be at high level of debt distress. Institutional development 
and capacity building are key aspects to mitigate the effects of this debt distress and improve economic 
management.  Therefore, a key part of the CPS strategy is to link IDA involvement across the two pillars to 
sustainable institutional development and capacity building. 

III. 

Djibouti Country Partnership Strategy (CPS 2014-2017) 

The new IDA terms coupled with the lessons learned in the previous CAS implementation both dictate the need for 
increased selectivity in the proposed CPS.  Therefore, the proposed program: (i) is more strategic and realistic than 
in the past, focusing on areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage and where there is appetite for reform; 
(ii) emphasizes strengthening sector regulations as a cross-cutting theme in the two pillars to support private sector 
development and job creation; and (iii) builds on past successes, in particular on the positive outcomes in the social 
sectors. In addition, following the opening of a new Bank Field office in Djibouti in September 2012, the new CPS 
program is guided by close coordination with other development partners on the ground. 

The overarching objective of the World Bank Group engagement will be to support the Government’s efforts to 
address governance challenges and impediments to private sector development to foster domestic and foreign 
investment, accelerate economic growth, and create jobs.  The strategy will rest on two pillars which are aligned 
with the MENA Regional Framework that aims for enhanced shared prosperity and reduced poverty through the 
drivers of governance, inclusion, jobs, and sustainable growth.  These are: (1) reducing vulnerability; and (ii) 
strengthening the business environment.  The IFC will work closely with the Bank on the second pillar.  MIGA, 
following their successful engagement with the Doraleh port, will continue to look for opportunities to engage in 
Djibouti.  

72 

 
 
Trust Funds have played an important role in the Bank’s program in Djibouti and are fully integrated into the CPS.  
The team will continue to seek mobilization of trust fund resources to complement the small IDA envelope.  The 
need for these grant resources will be even more critical during the CPS period following the country’s transition 
to IDA credits.    

IV. 

Leveraging financing for maximum impact--using the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) 

The Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) is a unique instrument at the World Bank that is designed to provide 
grants in support of community-driven development and poverty reduction programs that serve to enhance 
productivity, increase access to social and community services and infrastructure, and improve the living 
conditions of poor and vulnerable groups in eligible client countries of the World Bank Group.   

Since Djibouti is one of the JSDF eligible countries, the CMU  is working with the JSDF Secretariat to seek ways 
of harmonizing the delivery and impact of grant funding in a capacity constrained environment.  The Bank’s FY14 
program for Djibouti will be guided by the 2013-2016 CPS which focuses on enhanced shared prosperity and 
reduced poverty through the drivers of governance, inclusion, jobs, and sustainable growth.  The CPS pillars are: 
(1) reducing vulnerability; and (ii) strengthening the business environment.   

To focus on addressing vulnerabilities in the country at the community level, an integrated package of proposed 
projects encompassing livelihoods, health sanitation, and service delivery (through the strengthening schemes) is 
being proposed to the JSDF program by the CMU: Piloting Models of Livelihood Opportunities ($3 million); 
Improved Sanitation Pilot ($3 million); Improved Service Delivery at the Local Level ($3 million).  These 
proposals are key to achieving the goals as set forth in the CPS for Djibouti and focus on Pillar I as described 
above. Moreover, they are also focused on improving governance, transparency and accountability through 
enhanced service delivery mechanisms.  These interventions will complement or further inform the Bank’s 
ongoing engagement in safety nets, governance, and urban infrastructure.  

Women’s issues are cross-cutting theme in all three proposed projects. The disadvantaged status of women is 
evident in a number of socio-economic indicators in Djibouti.  These include low literacy and school enrollment 
rates, low labor force participation and high unemployment rates, high female mortality due to high fertility, 
anemia caused by malnutrition, and limited access to health facilities.  In addition, the severe drought of the last 
few years has had a particularly negative implications for women:  they are a vulnerable segment of the population 
given their often disadvantaged status; and the burden of household chores, including fetching water, seeking 
cooking material, food preparation and caring for children and elderly, lies primarily on women, as primary 
caregivers. Gender inequalities also translate in terms of access, accessibility, opportunities and power relations. 
Social and cultural roles burden particularly women limiting their access to productive resources, and inclusion in 
economic opportunities and decision making bodies. These inequalities are exacerbated upstream by the lack of 
adequate accessibility to basic social services and downstream by inadequate job skills adapted to market needs. 
Specifically, women and children are mostly affected by bad hygiene practices in households due to limited access 
to improved sanitation; this is exacerbated by frequent flooding which pose additional health hazard on houses not 
equipped with improved sanitation infrastructure.  Additionally, the legal system has yet to enable women to 
exercise and enjoy fully fundamental rights. 

The grants are complementary and inter-linked.  For example since one of the core functions of the “maisons 
de la justice” referenced above will be public information, they could target information related to the other Bank 
programs, where relevant. Improving the delivery of legal information and counseling services will also be crucial 
for the beneficiaries of the livelihood project, which – among others – supports the development of producer 
groups in the artisan sector that would be organized with the intention of aggregating different steps of the value 
chain, including procurement of inputs as well as distribution (bulk purchasing and bulk sales). Access to legal 
information is a necessity for sustainable livelihood activities. Furthermore, the livelihood project seeks to 
mobilize community members around activities of joint interest, facilitating peer formation, and providing basic 
life skills and capacity building, such as basic literacy. The facilitators could provide information on the functions 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
of the “maisons de la justice” to reduce the barriers youth and women face in accessing such legal services. Both 
the livelihoods project and the sanitation project will promote human capital development and will benefit from 
cross-fertilization of ideas, training curricula, and employment/livelihood opportunities.  

These projects are very much consistent with our ongoing work in the country.    The three proposals are in 
sectors in which we have had successful engagement with the government. The Bank has ongoing engagement in 
safety nets, governance, and urban infrastructure.  For example, the  proposed livelihoods project will go one step 
further than our existing project and pilot different models of sustainable livelihoods opportunities, tailored to 
women and youth in urban and rural Djibouti. Further, the sanitation activity will complete ongoing efforts to 
improve living conditions in urban areas focusing on the interior of households. 

These projects will ensure mechanisms of sustainability after closure.  In the sanitation project, the fact that 
communities are co-financing the upgrading of their sanitary infrastructure will increase the ownership and the 
willingness to sustain investments. Further, the activity will train builders to maintain those assets and potentially 
create micro-enterprises that will undertake maintenance and rehabilitation works.  The livelihood project's 
sustainability will be enhanced through two separate avenues. First, the community-based group formation and 
livelihood services, once established, can be sustained without external support because they are managed directly 
by the community (local facilitator and voluntary participation by participants) and are low-cost. Second, the 
planned group-based cash transfer is expected to have a catalytic effect for promoting livelihoods of the poor 
through the national social protection system. If the positive results from other countries can be replicated, the 
project's institutional architecture can provide a key mechanism for follow-up investments by the national 
government or other development partners. With regards to the service delivery project, integrating local 
community members in the implementation of services will reduce costs.  Providing enhanced public information 
and counseling/mediation services at the local level will reduce the number of cases filed in courts, thus reducing 
MoJ expenses.  Together these factors will make services more effective and lower-cost, and thus more 
manageable for the MoJ.   

The donor community is very small in Djibouti and those who are active have relatively small and limited 
resources.  In addition to the UN system, Djibouti benefits from support from the African Development Bank, the 
Islamic Development Bank, JICA, AFD, USAID, and the EU.  While some of these donors participate in these 
sectors and the Bank coordinates closely with them on a number of projects, the resources are insufficient to tackle 
the enormous challenges facing Djibouti: poverty, unemployment, drought, lack of natural resources, to name a 
few.    Trust fund resources have been provided by GFDRR, EFA, JSDF, among others. 

V. 

Results 

Each project team will actively monitor a set of core indicators and results to be achieved during the life of the 
projects.   At the aggregate level, results to be monitored are:   

• Number of beneficiaries that receive training and capacity building 
• 
Increase in the number of days of employment through project interventions 
• 
Increase of income of target beneficiaries 
• Number of beneficiaries that are linked with formal financial institutions 
• 
Improved sanitation and health conditions in selected urban areas via replacing traditional pitfalls with 
sanitary latrines.  
Increase in the integration of residents of poor communities in the design and implementation of services, 
leading to better quality and more sustainability of services, while empowering local communities. 
• Feedback mechanisms related to delivery of key public sector services will allow citizens of poor 
communities to monitor and evaluate delivery. 

• 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each project team will carry out a mid-term review of the project and a brief summary note will be provided to the 
JSDF. 

VI. 

Timeline 

Subject to Japan’s approval, this integrated intervention will be implemented in 4 years starting in FY14. An 
impact evaluation will draw lessons from these pilot projects and inform decision-makers on the right course of 
actions to help resolve Djibouti’s systemic development constraints. 

VII. Budget 

Piloting Models of Livelihood Opportunities 
Djibouti Improved Sanitation Pilot 
Improving Legal Information and Counseling Services 
at the Local Level 
Total Budget 

$3,000,000 
$3,000,000 
$3,000,000 

$9,000,000 

VIII. Annexes 
These 3 concept notes are attached as Annex 1 in this synthesis report. 
Annex 2 is the visibility strategy. 
Annex 3 is the CAS Completion Report. 

ANNEX 8, Attachment 1:  Individual Project Proposals 

The specific projects are detailed below:  

Djibouti: Piloting Models of Livelihood Opportunities:   

Identification and provision of sustainable livelihood opportunities in poor communities is critical in a country with 
extremely high poverty rates and limited resources. Djibouti faces multiple development challenges and the recent 
economic growth did not have a significant impact on unemployment or poverty. In spite of a 4.8 percent growth rate 
between 2005 and 2012, unemployment remained high at 48.4% in 2012 (Source: EDAM-3). Unemployment among 
youth, women and in rural areas is higher than among the adult population and in urban Djibouti. At the same time, 
women’s labor force participation is very low. 

The proposed PDO is to improve the livelihoods for women and youth in poor communities by increasing human and 
social capital and enhancing financial inclusion.   The project will be implemented by the Djibouti Social Development 
Agency (ADDS) . 

Two ongoing crisis response operations (pilot financed by JSDF grant and scale-up by IDA funds) seek to provide 
short-term employment opportunities in poor communities (mainly in urban Djibouti) while at the same time providing 
a community-based nutrition intervention for pregnant and lactating women and pre-school children. This innovative 
JSDF-financed pilot project has been recognized for its innovation through a number of awards at the World Bank (e.g. 
“Knowlympics” silver medal and Vice Presidency award). At the same time, the initial lessons learned from this 
integrated social safety net are the basis for the proposed “Piloting models of livelihood opportunities” project. For 
example, experience from the ongoing pilot project shows that the overwhelming majority of women choses to work if 
75 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they are given the opportunity. These women understand that access to sustainable livelihood in poor communities is 
crucial to avoid irreversible damage due to malnutrition and thus improve the human capital of the next generation 
(e.g., 33% of children under the age of five are stunted, 31% are underweight). Under the crisis project they are only 
able to work 50 days, but they are receiving access to a bank account and are accumulating small savings.  

The proposed project will go one step further and pilot different models of sustainable livelihoods opportunities, 
tailored to women and youth in urban and rural Djibouti. The project’s target population (youth and women) has not 
been at the focus of attention in the past but their empowerment and access to income has important implications for 
the human capital development for the next generation.   

The proposed project is innovative in that it marries strategies for human development with targeted interventions for 
economic empowerment. First, rather than focusing on beneficiaries as individuals, the project adopts group-based 
livelihood promotion strategies, recognizing the importance of social capital, intra-group solidarity and the 
complementarity of knowledge and skills within a group as a mechanism for reducing vulnerability and enhancing 
resilience. Second, the project emphasizes the direct link between basic human and social capital and employment 
promotion, recognizing that sustainable livelihoods cannot be created unless households also have basic literacy skills 
and adopt healthy practices in terms of nutrition, healthcare, early child development, etc. Third, the proposed project 
would pilot a new mechanism to enhance financial inclusion for the people at the bottom-of-the-pyramid without 
access to conventional microfinance. Finally, the proposed project would be the first in Djibouti to provide support to 
the artisan sector along the entire value chain, an approach that has proven highly successful in other regions (e.g. 
South Asia). 

The project’s geographic scope would include, in an initial phase, three regions in Djibouti, namely the capital city 
Djibouti-Ville, the northern region of Tadjoura, and the southern region of Dikhil and/or Ali Sabieh. The targeting of 
these regions is based on the following criteria: a) most concentrated number of the extremely poor; b) a mix of urban, 
peri-urban, and rural areas; c) existing economic activities and traditional skills; and d) physical accessibility and 
availability of basic infrastructure in order to facilitate the implementation of the pilot project.  

Expected number of beneficiaries:  The project will support approximately 6000 direct beneficiaries at the bottom of 
the pyramid to access sustainable income-generating activities, assuming a total unit cost per beneficiary of US$500. 
Beneficiaries will be youth between the ages of 12-29 as well as women. 

Key Results/Achievements include: 
• 6000 beneficiaries receive training and capacity building (at least 60% female) 
• 2000 beneficiaries that have accessed funds through the project and are linked with formal financial institutions (at 
least 50% female) 
• 20% average increase in income of target beneficiaries receiving access to project funds   
• 50% increase in sales by targeted producer associations  
The grant activities will be designed to support the CPS goals of better service delivery and reduced vulnerability. The 
project will support service delivery by local governments and the community by providing livelihoods and by 
expanding key services for human capital development (primarily health and education/training) to the poor and 
vulnerable groups in Djibouti. 

Djibouti Improved Sanitation Pilot:   

77 percent of Djibouti’s residents live in urban areas, with an estimated 567,000 in the City of Djibouti. Over 41.2% of 
the population lives in extreme poverty, and national unemployment exceeds 48%, with unemployment in some low-

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
income urban areas and amongst youth exceeding 70% 32. Cities are growing at 1.98% per annum (mainly informally 
and in high risk exposed areas), yet many urban areas are in poor conditions with a low level of access to infrastructure 
and social services. The prevalence of informal urban growth is leading to poor health indicators, low levels of 
educational achievement, high rates of illiteracy, and high unemployment.  

Without an appropriate response, urban growth is likely to exacerbate effects of poverty and environmental damage 
(with increased exposure to health hazards). Almost 99% of urban dwellers have access to a water source, yet only 
63% of urban residents have access to improved sanitation facilities, and many of Djibouti's urban dwellers live in 
substandard housing. This is exacerbated by a lack of institutional capacity to design community participation 
programs in service delivery.  

The World Bank is currently engaged in the urban development agenda in Djibouti via two main set of activities: (i) 
the First and Second Djibouti Urban Poverty Reduction Project (DUPREP and DUPREP II) 33, designed to address 
poverty issues in Quartier 7, the largest and one of the poorest neighborhoods in the city; and (ii) The National 
Housing Strategy aiming at improving access to housing – and upgrading household conditions – for the poorest 
segments of the Djiboutian population.  

The PDO of this activity is to improve the access of urban residents to improved sanitation. The project is located 
selected urban areas of Djibouti, with a initiated pilot to start in Quartier 7 (Q7), one of the poorest neighborhoods in 
Djibouti ville and the most populated (25000 inhabitants).  PDO objectives will be met through (i) Awareness 
campaigns, and (ii) putting in place a scalable pilot program for access to improve household sanitation in selected 
urban areas.  

• 

Key  Results/Achievements include:  
• 
Increasing citizens’ awareness with regards to the importance of investing in individual sanitation (building 
sanitary latrines), through showcasing successful pilots in schools, and health centers among other public 
locations. 
Improved sanitation and health conditions in selected urban areas via replacing traditional pitfalls with sanitary 
latrines.  
• Reducing the negative environmental impacts of non-sanitary latrines, which contaminate underground water 
bodies through infiltrations.  
• Reduction the cost of upgrading household sanitation due to the pilot activity.  
• Developing needed skill-sets and expertise for scaling-up of the activity as well as the development of the related 
value chain (materials production, design, construction and maintenance…).  
• Creation of a revolving fund where reimbursements will help scale-up activities, as well as additional 
donors/country contributions.  
• Creation of short and long term job opportunities.  
The proposed activity is consistent with the CPS, particularly the pillar on reducing vulnerability.   The project 
supports Human Development and access to basic services (increasing access to basic urban services and directly 
supporting the urban poor). The grant activities will be designed to support the goals of better service delivery and 
reduced vulnerability in the Djibouti Country Partnership Strategy 2014-2017. This will be specifically supported 
though increased awareness and improved community and household access to proper sanitation, reducing health 
hazards and engaging the community around improved hygiene practices.  

32 World Bank Databank. 
33 The IDA financed operation is one of the constituents of the country’s urban poverty reduction program. 

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Improving Legal Information and Counseling Services at the Local Level  

With court facilities located solely in Djibouti Ville, a large percentage of the population is virtually cut-off from 
services.  Even poor people in the capital face obstacles in access services, due primarily to lack of awareness of 
services, and how to access them, and limited financial ability to pay associated fees. Consistent with global trends, 
most poor citizens do not necessarily need access to courts to resolve disputes, with most cases being addressed 
through information and counseling services.  Such services, when administered effectively, can reach more 
beneficiaries than courts proceedings with lesser associated costs.  They also can help prevent unnecessary backlogs in 
courts, reducing the burdens on judges and court administration staff.  At present, the Government of Djibouti provides 
no comprehensive services related to public information and counseling.    

The proposed PDO is to improve delivery of legal information and counseling services in poor communities, which 
currently remain mostly outside the reach of many public sector services.   The objective will be achieved through the 
establishment of pilot ‘maisons de la justice’ located within poor communities (urban, peri-urban and rural) and staffed 
by government officials and local community members to provide both information and counseling services on key 
civil matters.  Using local community members in the development and delivery of services can aid in improving the 
quality and sustainability of services, while empowering local communities.  This program is linked with the CPS as it 
seeks to improve overall governance in the public sector, and more specifically enhance justice sector services and the 
rule of law at the local level.  It also focuses on addressing service delivery and poverty in poor and vulnerable 
communities.  This program will also link with the JSDF-funded program ‘Enhancing Delivery of Community-Driven 
Legal Aid’ in Jordan in order to share knowledge and experience.   

The ‘maisons de la justice’ can provide the following services: 

• 

• 

Information and counseling on administrative and civil procedures that correspond to priority services for the 
poor (access to social benefits, family law, civil registration, access to personal documents, labor and housing 
issues) 
Information on the provision of key public sector services, allowing poor citizens to track and evaluate extent 
and quality of service delivery 
• Receiving and addressing complaints related to non-delivery of public sector services 
• Mediation and negotiation services for civil (non-criminal) disputes  
• Collecting and analyzing data on delivery of key public sector services and complaints against public sector 
agencies, and identifying problematic services, to inform reforms of services and amendment of 
legislation/regulations 

Key Results and Achievements include the following: 

• 

• Provision of information and counseling services to members of poor communities. This will allow citizens to 
resolve disputes and undertake administrative procedures more cheaply and effectively, while reducing the 
burdens on courts. Based on similar work elsewhere, the number of beneficiaries for counseling could reach 
6000 persons and public information to 7500 persons over a three year period.   
Integration of residents of poor communities in the design and implementation of services, leading to better 
quality and more sustainability of services, while empowering local communities 
• Citizens of poor communities will be better informed about the rights and services to which they are entitled, 
and the mechanisms for exercising these rights and accessing services   
• Feedback mechanisms related to delivery of key public sector services will allow citizens of poor communities 
to monitor and evaluate delivery  
• The Ministry of Justice and other public sector entities will have access to better data and analysis on which to 
advise policy and service delivery reforms 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 8, Attachment 1:  Visibility Strategy 

Communication and Visibility Plan for Japan Social Development Fund 

The three Djibouti projects 34 ensure the visibility of Japan vis-à-vis beneficiaries as well as  other donors throughout 
the life cycle of each project as per agreement. From their inception, these projects showcase donor visibility through 
print and media campaigns; printing the donor logo on physical interventions and all written materials such as reports, 
publications, banners, leaflets, brochures and manuals.  

Once the proposed projects are approved by the JSDF for funding, a communication and visibility strategy will be 
formulated in line with the JSDF Policy Document.      

These activities are all elaborated below to give a clearer picture on how Japan Social Development Fund’s (JSDF) 
/Japanese government as well as World Bank visibility will be reflected throughout the proposed project.  The logo 
(usually the Japanese national flag) and the JSDF motif will be used, as per the JSDF policy. The projects will make 
every effort to ensure that:  

• General communication activities: The Government of Djibouti and the World Bank will add the statement that 
“The grant which financed this (name of activity) was received under the Japan Social Development Fund which is 
financed by the Government of Japan” to all its official communications related to the projects being funded. 

• Publications, brochures, leaflets, etc:  All official written material will include appropriate branding and indicate 
that the activities in question have received funding from the Government of Japan and are supported by the World 
Bank 

• Training programs, seminars, workshops:  Information items used during stakeholders events financed by the JSDF 
grants will indicate the donor logo, provided it does not interfere with common practice by the government 
counterparts (to ensure government ownership). 

• Press releases/conferences and TV/Radio campaigns: The WB will liaise with the relevant JSDF-officer (and 
Embassy of Japan or JICA counterpart as needed) and ensure that press releases  include that funding was provided by 
the Government of Japan as well as the amount of the Japanese funding. If press conferences or TV/Radio campaigns 
are planned, the WB will liaise with the JSDF office  Embassy of Japan, or JICA, as appropriate to identify a person 
who will represent the Government of Japan.      

• Supervision missions: Visiting WB missions will inform the Embassy of Japan and JICA of ongoing activities and 
the progress achieved under the project. Members of the Embassy of Japan and JICA will also be invited to join 
supervision missions as well as visits of project sites.

34 Piloting Models of Livelihood Opportunities; Improved Sanitation Pilot; and Improved Service Delivery at the Local Level.   

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
P l a i n o f
P l a i n o f
P l a i n o f
G o b a a d
G o b a a d
G o b a a d

Plateau
Plateau
Plateau
of Dakka
of Dakka
of Dakka

P l a i n o f
P l a i n o f
P l a i n o f
H a n l e
H a n l e
H a n l e

P l a i n o f
P l a i n o f
P l a i n o f
G a g a d e
G a g a d e
G a g a d e

G R A N D
G R A N D
G R A N D

B A R A
B A R A
B A R A

B A R A
B A R A
B A R A

P E T I T
P E T I T
P E T I T

Daddato
Daddato
Daddato

Randa
Randa
Randa

ArtaArta
Arta

Mouloua
Mouloua
Mouloua

As Ela
As Ela
As Ela

Modahtou
Modahtou
Modahtou

Galafi
Galafi
Galafi

Loyada
Loyada
Loyada

Hol Hol
Hol Hol
Hol Hol

Ali Adda
Ali Adda
Ali Adda

Ambado
Ambado
Ambado

ChEbelley
ChEbelley
Chebelley

DayDay
Day

MalahMalah
Malah

Dikhil
Dikhil
Dikhil

'Ali Sabieh
'Ali Sabieh
'Ali Sabieh

Goubetto
Goubetto
Goubetto

Damerjog
Damerjog
Damerjog

O B O C K
O B O C K
O B O C K

' A L I
' A L I
' A L I
S A B I E H
S A B I E H
S A B I E H

A R T A
A R T A
A R T A

D J I B O U T I
D J I B O U T I
D J I B O U T I

T A D J O U R A H
T A D J O U R A H
T A D J O U R A H

D I K H I L
D I K H I L
D I K H I L

Yoboki

Sagallou

Dorra

Khôr ‘Angar

Obock

Tadjourah

DJIBOUTI

S O M A L I A

E T H I O P I A

E R I T R E A

REP. OF
YEMEN

Sartai 

B

a

l

l

i

D
o
u
b
i

e

 Gobaa d 

C

h

e

i

k

e

t
i

B

e y a d e 

 Hol Hol 

A m b o uli 

G u l f o f A d e n

Lake
Abbé

Lake
Assal

G u l f

 o f

T a d j o u r a h 

To 
Assab

To 
Bati

To 
Berbera

To 
Dira Dawa

1783 m

42°E

43°E

12
42°E

43°E

12°N

11°N

12°N

11°N

DJIBOUTI

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0 4 8 12 16

0

4

8

16

20 Miles

20 Kilometers

IBRD 33396R

JUNE 2007

D J I B O U T I

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

REGION CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

REGION BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

 
 
 
 
 
