d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Country 
Partnership

FOR THE PERIOD 2013–2017

Strategy for

India

THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 
Partnership

FOR THE PERIOD 2013–2017

Strategy for

India

THE WORLD BANK GROUP

Acknowledgments

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration of the Indian authorities in the preparation 
of this Country Partnership Strategy. The preparation of the document involved extensive discussions with 
government representatives at the federal and state levels, as well as civil society. The strategy is the result 
of a team effort that relied on knowledge, experience, and guidance from individuals across the World Bank 
Group. We thank them for their contributions. 

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. As The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its 
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial purposes as long as full 
attribution to this work is given. 

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank 
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;  
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank .org.

iv

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Foreword

This India Country Partnership Strategy for the World Bank Group comes at a moment where both India 
and the World Bank are at important points in their history : India has crossed the threshold to become a 
middle-income country and is poised to lift millions out of poverty in years to come, in all likelihood more 
than any other country in the world. The World Bank Group has committed itself to the goal of eliminating 
extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. For our team it was clear that our strategy should 
aim squarely at supporting India’s and the World Bank Group’s shared goal to eliminate poverty. We therefore 
analyzed what would be the best ways of maximizing the impact of growth in India on poverty alleviation. We 
did this by comparing the per formance of Indian states over the last decade and analyzing why those states 
that lifted more people out of poverty succeeded in doing so. We also looked at historic per formance  of 
other large federal countries at times when they had long periods of sustained growth and lifted many people 
out of poverty. And we took India’s own 12th Five-Year Plan as our basis, as both our goals are fully aligned. 
Through this work we came to a number of important  shifts compared to previous strategies:

1. In order to help eliminate poverty, we should shift our resources (limited though they are in comparison to 
India’s needs) to where the battle against poverty must be won: in India’s low income states;

2. We should see India’s rapid rural to urban transformation as a tremendous opportunity, both for agriculture 
and for poverty alleviation and competitiveness;

3. All parts of the World Bank Group - IBRD, IDA, IFC, MIGA - should  work  as one, not by accident but by design;

4. We should not be content just to provide financing. Our limited resources can only have meaningful 
impact when they bring something new that can be tested and after that rolled out in other programs. 

With our partners in the Government of India, we hope to use this strategy as the basis for a continued 
strong engagement with India for years to come. In order to justify the resources that this requires, we 
understand that our primary focus should be on using the available resources in the best way possible and 
faster. Development in India is a rapidly moving process, so anyone who wishes to contribute to it must 
move fast. We also understand that we need to keep learning to adjust to India’s unique and complex path 
and to understand some of the fundamental challenges the country faces: How will cities become sources of 
competitiveness and efficiency? How will India keep growing rapidly and have enough water and energy to 
keep that growth going? How can India lift more people out of poverty faster without them being at risk of 
falling right back when a family member gets sick?

We will not answer these questions alone, and these are not the only questions that need answering. But we 
will work hard to add our experience and knowledge to help answering them and others.

I am grateful to all those who contributed to this strategy, in the Government of India, IFC, MIGA, IBRD and 
IDA. We all understand that this is just a document. The hard work starts now.

Onno Ruhl
Country Director, India

v
v

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17vi

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Contents

1. 

Executive Summary / 2

Achievements and remaining challenges / 3
A vision for India in 2030 / 4
Development challenges / 6
The World Bank Group program / 7

2. 

Introduction / 10

3.  Achievements / 12

4.  Vision: India in 2030 / 16

5.  Challenges / 20

Platform for growth / 21
Spatial transformation / 24
Human potential / 27

6.  World Bank Group India Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) / 30
Strategic engagement area 1: Integration / 33
Strategic engagement area 2: Transformation / 40
Strategic engagement area 3: Inclusion / 48

7.  

Implementing the WBG Country Partnership Strategy / 56

Guiding principles of engagement / 56
Lessons from country strategy 2009-12 / 59
Current WBG portfolio / 60
Collaboration and partnerships / 62

8.  

Financing the strategy / 64

9.  Monitoring of results / 68

10.  Managing risks / 70

List of tables

Table 7.1. Low-income and special category states / 57

List of boxes

Box 3.1. India and the WBG: A unique relationship spanning six decades / 14
Box 4.1. Government vision: India’s 12th Five-Year Plan / 17
Box 5.1. India’s economic outlook / 22
Box 6.1. Health in India / 51
Box 6.2. Addressing gender issues / 53

vii

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Partnership Strategy for India: FY 2013–17

List of figures

Figure 4.1. Poverty and prosperity in India in 2030 / 18
Figure 5.1. Correlates of fast economic growth: the rate of urbanization / 25
Figure 5.2. Correlates of shared prosperity : off-farm employment in rural areas / 26
Figure 6.1. India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes / 32
Figure 8.1. Impact of IDA Graduation on India, by IDA Replenishment, IDA15-19 / 65
Figure 8.2. Annual IDA and IBRD lending to India, FY09-24 / 66

Country strategy annexes

Annex 1: CPS results framework / 73
Annex 2: Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals / 80
Annex 3: Poverty in India / 85
Annex 4: IFC indicative non-lending activities / 88
Annex 5: Overview of main trust funds activities / 92
Annex 6: Country financing parameters / 96
Annex 7: Government of India Project Screening Criteria / 97
Annex 8: Consultations Held to Inform the Preparation of the CPS / 99
Annex 9: The Indian statistical system / 107

Standard annex tables

Annex A2: India at a glance / 110
Annex B2: Selected indicators of Bank portfolio per formance and management / 115
Annex B3A: CAS Annex B3A - IBRD/IDA Program Summary : India / 116
Annex B3B: IFC investment operations program / 118
Annex B4: Summary of World Bank Knowledge Services - India / 119
Annex B5: Social indicators / 123
Annex B6: Key economic indicators / 125
Annex B7: Key exposure indicators / 129
Annex B8A: Operations portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)  / 130
Annex B8B: India: Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio / 135

viii

 
The last Country Strategy (CAS) Report No. 46509 was discussed by the Board on November 14, 2008, and the last 
CAS Progress Report (CASPR) Report No. 58433 was discussed by the Board on December 14, 2010. 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

US$1 = Rupees (Rs.) 54.57 as of March 7, 2013

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

April 1—March 31

WORLD BANK FISCAL YEAR

July 1—June 30

IBRD/IDA  
Vice President: Isabel Guerrero 
Country Director : Onno Ruhl 
Task Team Leader : Dorota Nowak 

MIGA  
Vice President: Michel Wormser  
Director : Kevin Lu 
Task Team Leader : Paul Barbour 

IFC
Vice President: Karin Finkelston
Regional Director : Thomas Davenport
Task Team Leader : Gunjan Gulati

Abbreviations and Acronyms 

FDI 
GAAP 

AAA 
BRICS 
CAS 
CPS 
CTF 
DFID 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa
Country Strategy 
Country Partnership Strategy
Carbon Trust Fund
United Kingdom Department for 
International Development 
Foreign Direct Investment
Governance and Accountability Action 
Plan
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product
GFATM Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis, and 
Malaria
GSDP 
gross state domestic product
GST 
Goods and Service Tax
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired 
Immunodeficiency Syndrome
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development
Integrated Child Development Services

IBRD 

ICDS 

Dollar amounts ($) are U.S. dollars.

ICT 

IDA 
IFC 
IT 
LIS 
M&E 
MDG 
OECD 

PMGSY 
PPP 
PRI 
RWSS 
SBL 
SPPB 
SSA 
UN 
WBG  

information and communication 
technologies
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Information Technology
low-income state
monitoring and evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
public-private partnership
Panchayati Raj institution 
rural water supply and sanitation
Single Borrower Limit
Special Placement Private Bonds
Sarva Shiksa Abhiyan
United Nations
World Bank Group

1

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–171. Executive Summary

India is uniquely placed to help reduce global poverty and boost prosperity. The 
country has the largest number of poor people in the world, as well as the largest 
number of people who have recently escaped poverty but are still vulnerable to 
falling back . India’s encouraging results in recent years on the dual challenges of 
fighting poverty and boosting prosperity justify strong support for India as a key 
part of the global effort to bend the arc of history by accelerating the decline in 
poverty. India’s per capita income remains low, and its development challenges 
are deep and complex. As the country strives to bring about quicker and deeper 
changes, this strategy lays out an approach for the World Bank Group to support 
India in achieving even more ambitious results in the near future. Aware that 
World Bank Group finances will always be modest compared to India’s challenges, 
that support can be a catalyst for change at this crucial time. For that reason, this 
strategy makes the case for continued high levels of World Bank Group financial 
support for India.

2

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Achievements and remaining challenges

India’s economic and human development is one of the most significant global 
achievements of recent times. Between 2005 and 2010, India’s share of global 
GDP increased from 1.8 to 2.7 percent, and 53 million people were lifted out of 
pover ty. Growth has steadily accelerated over time, showing resilience even in 
the aftermath of the global crisis. In the last decade, India’s economy expanded 
at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, placing it in the top 10 of the world ’s 
fastest growing nations. Expor ts account for 21.5 percent of GDP, three times 
more than in 1990, and net inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) make 
up another 1.6 percent. India is home to globally recognized companies in 
pharmaceuticals, steel, and space technologies, and the country is a leader in 
the use of information technologies for e -government purposes and public 
service delivery. In line with these transformations, India is now among the top 
10 percentile of fast growing nations and has become a prominent global voice. 
Progress on human development has been remarkable; life expectancy more 
than doubled from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 and adult literacy more 
than quadrupled, from 18 percent in 1951 to 74 percent in 2011.

While India has made significant progress in reducing absolute pover ty, it 
remains home to one -third of the global poor. On the positive side, India has 
already achieved the first M illennium Development Goal (MDG 1) by halving 
the propor tion of people living on less than $1.25 a day. Most notably, rural 
pover ty has decreased by 14 percentage points, and the less well-off are 
increasingly reaping the benefits of shared prosperity, with consumption 
growth of the bottom 40 percent rising to catch up with average consumption 
growth. But with GDP per capita at $1,410 in 2011, India remains at the bottom 
of the group of middle -income countries. More than 400 million people still 
live in pover ty. With population growth, the absolute number of poor people 
actually increased in some of India’s poorest states between 2004–05 and 
2009–10, with pover ty rates three to four times higher than those of the most 
advanced states—Haryana, Kerala, and Punjab. 

Despite rapid economic growth and positive human development, Indian 
society remains highly segmented and income inequality is rising. Inequalities 
vis-à-vis disadvantaged groups such as so-called scheduled castes, scheduled 
tribes, and women persist. Structural inequalities have kept entire groups 
trapped, unable to take advantage of oppor tunities that economic growth has 
offered. While much progress has been made in education, health, maternal 
mor tality, and fer tility, gender inequality remains high. The ratio of girls to boys 
has decreased steadily over the last fifty years—a trend associated with the 
“missing women” phenomenon; it is par ticularly low in some of India’s more 
advanced states. 

A m idd le c lass is emerging, but on ly a f if th of the popu lat ion has f irm ly 
escaped vu lnerab i l ity. Even above the thresho ld for the Wor ld Bank Group’s 
g loba l ind icator of shared prosper ity (def ined as consumpt ion growth of 
the bottom 40 percent of the popu lat ion) , a large number of peop le have 
consumpt ion leve ls that are ver y c lose to the pover ty l ine. Many of Ind ia’s 
new ly non-poor, espec ia l ly in rura l areas, rema in vu lnerab le and m inor 

India is home to 
globally recognized 
companies in 
pharmaceuticals, 
steel, and space 
technologies, and the 
country is a leader in 
the use of information 
technologies for 
e -government 
purposes and public 
service delivery. 
In line with these 
transformations, India 
is now among the 
top 10 percentile of 
fast growing nations 
and has become a 
prominent global 
voice. 

3

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Helping India address 
its development 
challenges is central 
to the World Bank 
Group’s goal of 
reducing poverty 
and boosting shared 
prosperity. 

shocks— i l lness, natura l d isasters, poor crop y ie lds, indebtedness— can eas i ly 
push them be low the pover ty l ine. Peop le who are no longer vu lnerab le 
are def ined as those l iv ing in househo lds w ith an income that is at least 
tw ice the pover ty l ine. Ind ia’s cont inued progress is not on ly s ign if icant 
for its peop le, espec ia l ly those st i l l l iv ing in pover ty, but a lso for the g loba l 
ach ievement of the MDGs. He lp ing Ind ia address its deve lopment cha l lenges 
is centra l to the Wor ld Bank Group’s goa l of reduc ing pover ty and boost ing 
shared prosper ity. 

A vision for India in 2030

The overarching objec tive of the Wor ld Bank Group’s Countr y Par tnership 
Strategy (CPS) for the per iod FY2013–17 is to suppor t pover ty reduc tion and 
shared prosper ity in India . That objec tive is closely aligned with the vision for 
development outlined in the countr y ’s 12th Five -Year Plan (FY2013–17) , which 
calls for “faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth” focusing on pover ty 
reduction , group equality, regional balance, empowerment , environmental 
management , and employment . I t foresees annual GDP growth of 8 .2 percent , 
with all states growing faster than they did under the 11th Plan . I t envisions 
a reduc tion of the pover ty rate by 10 percentage points, building on the 
generation of 50 million new work oppor tunities in the non-farm sec tor and 
an increase in the average schooling of the population to seven years. The 
Plan also targets the elimination of gender and social gaps in schooling, a 
decline in the infant mor tality, and a gradual improvement of the ratio of gir ls 
to boys. 

4

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Continued rapid economic growth is a precondition for pover ty reduction and 
shared prosperity. I ts role cannot be overstated. Before the industrial revolution 
India was one of world ’s wealthiest countries, accounting for more than a 
quar ter of global GDP, but by the time of Independence in 1947 its economy 
was universally stagnant. Since then the country has emerged out of the low 
“H indu rate of growth,” and has the potential to become a global economic 
powerhouse once again. But growth will also have to be more inclusive than in 
the past. If growing numbers of people are to benefit from economic growth, 
regardless of their gender, caste, or state of residence, more will be needed. 
Although India has done better than most countries in terms of economic 
growth, the degree of pover ty reduction associated with one percentage point 
of GDP growth has been less than in countries such as Brazil and China. 

Although India has 
done better than most 
countries in terms 
of economic growth, 
the degree of poverty 
reduction associated 
with one percentage 
point of GDP growth 
has been less than 
in countries such as 
Brazil and China. 

The diverse experience of Indian states is revealing of what could be 
accomplished—and what would be realistic—in striving to attain the 
overarching objectives of the CPS. Some states have done better than others 
in terms of economic growth; others have done better in terms of pover ty 
reduction and reducing vulnerability. Differences are to be expected in the 
shor t term, but these differences have persisted over extended periods. The 
CPS scenarios to 2030 are predicated on the observed per formance between 
2005-2010, a period of high growth and pover ty reduction. Two scenarios are 
presented in the CPS:

•	

Base scenario. Under the base scenario, India’s GDP growth rate, as well as 
the speed at which the numbers of poor and vulnerable people decline for 
every percentage point of growth, remain the same as in 2005–2010. In this 
scenario, the GDP growth rate would be sustained at 8.2 percent. Income 
per capita would reach $5,283 in 2030 at 2010 prices, compared with $1,375 
in 2010, pover ty would drop from 29.8 to 12.3 percent, and the share of 
people above the vulnerability threshold would increase from 19.1 to 33.6 
percent.

•	 Ambitious scenario. Under the ambitious scenario, India sustains rapid GDP 
growth in the base scenario but improves its per formance to that of the 
best-per forming state at the 80th percentile of the distribution in terms of 
pover ty reduction and reduced vulnerability. Over the period 2005–2010 
those states were Rajasthan and Karnataka, respectively. Matching, at 
the national level, the per formance of these high-achievers would be an 
extraordinary accomplishment. Under the ambitious scenario, the pover ty 
rate would decline to 5.5 percent, and the share of people who are no 
longer vulnerable would reach 41.3 percent.

Ind ia has the potent ia l of mak ing a dramat ic contr ibut ion to pover ty 
reduc t ion and shared prosper ity g loba l ly. In pr inc ip le, the new g loba l target 
to “bend the arc of h istor y ” cou ld be atta ined through a comb inat ion of 
successes across other countr ies. But it is un l ike ly that th is w i l l happen 
un less Ind ia cont inues to make substant ia l inroads. The CPS scenar ios to 
2030 a lso revea l the imp l icat ions of Ind ia’s susta ined, h igh growth on the 
number of peop le l iv ing be low the pover ty l ine and above two pover ty 
l ines or the vu lnerab i l ity l ine (those no longer vu lnerab le of fa l l ing into 
pover ty) . I f the base scenar io were rea l ized, the number of g loba l poor 

5

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17wou ld fa l l by 191 m i l l ion and the number of peop le above the vu lnerab i l ity 
l ine wou ld increase by 277 m i l l ion . I f the amb it ious scenar io were rea l ized, 
the cor respond ing f igures wou ld be 304 and 394 m i l l ion . The former is 
comparab le to Ch ina’s contr ibut ion to g loba l pover ty reduc t ion over the last 
two decades and the latter amounts to ra is ing to prosper ity the equ iva lent of 
the comb ined present popu lat ions of France, Germany, I ta ly, Japan , and the 
Un ited K ingdom .

Development challenges

India’s recent development exper ience shows that achieving the ambitious 
vision by 2030 will require addressing a wide range of challenges. With a 
young population and 8 million people enter ing the labor force ever y year, 
India could reap a substantial demographic dividend, but there could also be 
considerable stress if employment oppor tunities are not commensurate with 
expectations. At present only 16 percent of the workforce der ives its income 
from regular wage employment, and more than 50 percent are engaged in 
agr iculture. The female labor force, already low as a propor tion of the total 
labor force, decreased from 34 to 29 percent between 2000 and 2010, with 
the drop being par ticular ly marked for women at higher levels of education. 
Constraints across three main areas could make India miss its potential 
demographic dividend: 

•	

Platforms for growth. Infrastructure needs are massive. Only 20 percent 
of the national highway network is four-lane, por ts and airpor ts have 
inadequate capacity, and trains move ver y slowly. One -third of the rural 
population lacks access to an all-weather road. Road safety is a growing 
concern in a countr y that is adding new dr ivers at a record pace. An 
estimated 300 million people are not connected to the national electr ical 
gr id, and those who are face frequent disruptions. The manufactur ing 
sector remains underdeveloped and has grown at a pace that is below 
expectations. The size distr ibution of firms in India is character ized by a 
“missing middle,” which is a source of concern given that small and medium 
enterpr ises are typically an impor tant source of wage employment. 
Improving and maintaining a healthy investment and business climate is 
also crucial to growth. 

• 	 Manag ing spat ia l transformat ion . The number of urban centers has grown 
from about 5 ,000 in 2001 to 8 ,000 in 2011 , and 53 c it ies a lready have a 
popu lat ion in excess of one m i l l ion . There is a need to accommodate 
an add it iona l 10 m i l l ion urban dwe l lers ever y year and to prov ide them 
w ith adequate bas ic ser v ices. Success at meet ing th is cha l lenge has 
so far been par t ia l. The number of s lum dwe l lers increased from 75 
m i l l ion in 2001 to 93 m i l l ion in 2011—a quar ter of the urban popu lat ion . 
The rura l space is not we l l connec ted to c it ies, resu lt ing in weak va lue 
cha ins for agr icu ltura l produc ts and an insuff ic ient creat ion of off-farm 
emp loyment . A lthough ha lf of the Ind ian popu lat ion der ives its income 
from agr icu lture -re lated ac t iv it ies, agr icu ltura l output has grown be low 
government targets. 

At present only 
16 percent of the 
workforce derives its 
income from regular 
wage employment, 
and more than 50 
percent are engaged 
in agriculture. The 
female labor force, 
already low as a 
proportion of the 
total labor force, 
decreased from 34 to 
29 percent between 
2000 and 2010, 
with the drop being 
particularly marked 
for women at higher 
levels of education.

6

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The development 
of a vibrant 
manufacturing sector 
requires reforming 
outdated labor laws, 
improving access 
to land, removing 
pervasive red tape 
and increasing access 
to finance.

•	 Human development potential. Health outcomes compare poorly with 
those of countries at similar levels of development. At 65.4 years, life 
expectancy is more than 5 years lower than the world average. Malnutrition 
rates remain high: 40 percent of the world ’s malnourished children live 
in India. Maternal and infant mor tality as well as fer tility rates remain 
high compared with those of other growing economies in Asia. Out-of-
pocket health expenditures are among the highest in the world and make 
households, especially the very poor, highly vulnerable to health shocks. 
Primary education has been largely universalized, but progress on learning 
outcomes has been limited. Secondary education is the new bottleneck . At 
4.4 years, educational attainment is low, and India still accounts for one -
third of all illiterate people worldwide. Enrolment rates for grades 9–12 are 
just 40 percent; of those enrolled, approximately 15 percent drop out and 
one -third fail their examinations. Inequity in all dimensions, including caste 
and gender, is a major concern.

The World Bank Group program

To help India address these challenges, the CPS will contribute to three 
main engagement areas: integration, transformation, and inclusion. Effective 
engagement will require actions at the national level, at lower levels of government, 
and through partnerships with the private sector, civil society and development 
partners.

•	

•	

Integration. The focus is on physical connectivity and the strengthening 
of market mechanisms. India’s infrastructure needs cannot be addressed 
through public investments alone. A tested model for pr ivate par ticipation 
exists for highways and electr icity generation, but elsewhere failures are 
many, suggesting that more needs to be done to assess viability gaps 
and identify adequate r isk-transfer mechanisms. Reforms are needed 
in the power sector, where low energy pr ices, expensive coal (central 
to producing electr icity in India), and inefficiencies in transmission and 
distr ibution are cr ippling the system. The development of a vibrant 
manufactur ing sector requires reforming outdated labor laws, improving 
access to land, removing pervasive red tape and increasing access to 
finance. Greater regional and global integration is cr itical to open up 
market oppor tunities and foster competition. Intraregional trade would 
increase from the current $5 billion to $20 billion if restr ictions to trading 
with neighbors were removed.

Transformation. The goal is to reap the benefits from agglomeration in 
parallel with raising agricultural productivity. India’s urban development 
is hampered by the fragmentation of service delivery across a range of 
uncoordinated agencies. Local bodies in urban areas need to become 
institutionally stronger and increase their capacity to mobilize financial 
resources. In rural areas, stressed natural resources, inadequate technology, 
underdeveloped extension services, and limited access to credit contribute 
to the lack luster per formance of the agricultural sector. At present, in urban 
areas, pover ty is highest in secondary cities, where the growth of wage 

7

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17A special effort should 
be made to ensure 
access to education 
for underprivileged 
children, retain 
girls in secondary 
education, and open 
opportunities in 
higher education for 
all youth. 

•	

employment has been disappointing. But if they were properly developed, 
secondary cities could become the linchpin between urban and rural 
areas. Spatial transformation also implies an efficient use of India’s limited 
resources, in par ticular land, forests, and water, as well as a shift towards 
climate resilience. 

Inclusion. The ambition of the program is to promote human development 
and strengthen social programs, so that economic integration and spatial 
transformation generate inclusive growth. In relation to health, this requires 
better accountability arrangements in service delivery, adequate regulation 
and oversight of private health care providers, and expanded coverage of 
health insurance among disadvantaged groups. In education, incentives and 
community participation are needed to reduce absenteeism. A special effort 
should be made to ensure access to education for underprivileged children, 
retain girls in secondary education, and open opportunities in higher education 
for all youth. A focus on learning outcomes is warranted across all levels of 
education. Meanwhile, social programs should be better targeted and delivered 
in ways that improve coverage and efficiency. Improving access to finance and 
social protection can also help households, especially the poor, benefit from 
economic growth. 

Across all three areas of engagement, a focus on improved governance, 
environmental sustainability, and gender equality is envisioned. IFC’s efforts to 
strengthen India’s private sector also cuts across all three areas.

The implementation of the CPS program will be guided by the Government ’s 
approach to work ing with multilateral institutions: “Innovation Impulse with 
Investment ” (see Annex 8). The approach lays out the Government ’s vision of 
how best to use the financing and exper tise from multilateral institutions to 
address India’s development challenges and places significant impor tance on 
the value -added of the World Bank ’s program that goes well beyond financing. 
The Government wants World Bank suppor t for projects that have a systemic or 
transformational impact, those that help innovate and pilot new approaches, 
and finally those that introduce innovative financing instruments and leverage 
resources. The approach provides an impetus towards work ing together 
to shape a pipeline of projects that takes advantage of the World Bank ’s 
international exper tise, while addressing financial sustainability and overall 
funding for the CPS program. Adherence to these principles will result in greater 
country-led program selectivity. 

Guided by this approach, the World Bank will rebalance its por tfolio toward 
state -level activities and, within that segment, toward low-income and special 
category states. Delivering on the overarching goals of the CPS also requires 
a strong focus on low-income states, where a majority of the poor and the 
vulnerable live. Other major economic powers, such as the United States 
and the European Union, have experienced an unambiguous long-term 
convergence in living standards across their constituent par ts. In India, by 
contrast, divergence across the states has remained the norm. Convergence 
is suppor ted by economic integration, and this in turn requires policies at 
the national level. But it can also be suppor ted through a greater emphasis 
on policy reforms and investments in the low-income states themselves. 

8

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 There is growing 
demand to learn 
from India’s diverse 
development 
experience. India 
is emerging as 
a key provider 
of development 
experience in South–
South knowledge 
exchange and 
investment capital. 

Moreover, India’s seven low-income states are now growing faster than the 
average. Investments in those states thus have higher economic returns than 
investments elsewhere. The impact is even greater when considering the 
payoffs in pover ty reduction. IFC will continue to expand its investments and 
advisory program in the low-income and nor theast states. Engagement under 
the CPS will focus on extensive capacity building, technical assistance, analytical 
work , and knowledge exchanges that underpin lending operations. 

The World Bank Group can help India realize the CPS vision to 2030, building 
on a strong par tnership in development stretching back 60 years. Since the 
first IBRD loan to the Indian Railways in 1949, India has made extensive use 
of financing, knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance from the 
World Bank Group. Over these six decades, IBRD, IDA, and IFC financing to India 
reached approximately $160 billion at 2010 prices—far more than any other 
country. But the World Bank Group has also benefitted enormously from the 
par tnership. India has been home to major innovations in development, from 
the Green Revolution to the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee program to the promotion of the right to information. There is 
growing demand to learn from India’s diverse development experience. India 
is emerging as a key provider of development experience in South–South 
knowledge exchange and investment capital. 

Although the World Bank Group’s contributions to the government ’s overall 
development financing is small, its suppor t can be catalytic and transformative 
when financing is combined with knowledge and experience. To make a 
meaningful contribution on the assault on pover ty, especially in low-income 
states where over 200 million of India’s poor reside, the volume of suppor t from 
the World Bank Group should be about $5 billion per year. However, World 
Bank Group estimated financing levels could average about $4 billion annually 
during the CPS period, when one includes India’s purchase of Special Private 
Placement Bonds, IFC financing and assumes that India receives transitional IDA. 
At their first IDA17 replenishment meeting in Paris, IDA Deputies broadly agreed 
with the proposal that India receive transitional suppor t after it graduates from 
IDA; a final decision will not be taken until the end of 2013, including on the 
volume and terms of transitional suppor t. While transitional IDA suppor t would 
help boost World Bank Group financing, it still falls shor t of levels needed and 
net flows from IDA and IBRD combined turn negative by FY2018. 

9

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
2. Introduction

The overarching goals of the World Bank Group India Country 
Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) are to help India accelerate poverty 
reduction and increase shared prosperity, so that more and more people, 

regardless of gender, caste, or whether they live in villages or cities, or in low-
income or more advanced states, can enjoy the benefits of more balanced 
growth and development. With one-third of the world’s poor people, India 
is central not only to the World Bank Group’s goal of reducing poverty and 
boosting shared prosperity, but also to the world’s progress toward achieving the 
Millennium Development Goals. 

India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty during 

the last two decades. It has already achieved the first Millennium Development 
Goal by halving (to less than 30 percent) the proportion of people whose income 
is less than $1.25 a day. The less well-off are increasingly reaping the benefits of 
shared prosperity, with a considerable narrowing of the gap between average 
consumption growth and growth of the bottom 40 percent. Most notably, rural 
poverty has decreased by 14.5 percentage points. Given that India is predominantly 
rural, however, a huge concentration of the nation’s poor people (four out of every 
five) still live in rural areas. 

10

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Gender inequality 
remains high 
despite progress in 
education, health, 
maternal mortality, 
and fertility. The ratio 
of girls to boys has 
decreased steadily 
over the last 50 years 
and is particularly low 
in some of the more 
advanced states and 
urban areas.

Poverty remains widespread. With population growth, it has proved difficult to 
reduce the number of poor at a rapid pace; 400 million Indians still live in poverty.1 
Poverty rates also vary significantly across and within states. Each of the seven low-
income states2 has poverty rates that are two to three times higher than those of 
the more advanced states. Poverty reduction in the poorest states—which are also 
the most populous—has been slow (Annex 3). Higher-income states also have 
pockets of extreme poverty ; Karnataka’s per capita income, for example, varies 
nearly five-fold across districts.

India’s rapid growth in the last decade has not benefited everyone 

uniformly. India’s consumption inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient is 
0.34 and is on the rise, with widening disparities between urban and rural areas. 
Despite accelerated social mobility and urbanization, Indian society remains 
exclusionary, and income inequality alone does not reflect the depth and range 
of social inequities. Structural and persistent inequalities by gender, caste, and 
tribe persist, and indicators of poverty and human development for these groups 
lag behind those of the general population. Poverty rates are especially high 
among scheduled tribes (46.1 percent in 2009–10), and scheduled castes (40.8 
percent). Literacy rates for males and females from scheduled castes are 67 and 
42 percent respectively, compared to the all India average of 82 and 65 percent. 

On a range of human development indicators, India lags behind 

world averages. The country ranks 134 out of 187 on the UN’s 2011 Human 
Development Index. At 65.4 years, life expectancy is more than 5 years lower 
than the world average, and persistently high rates of malnutrition contribute 
to other health problems and undermine productivity. At 4.4 years, educational 
attainment is low, and India still accounts for one-third of the globe’s illiterate 
people. Gender inequality remains high despite progress in education, health, 
maternal mortality, and fertility. The ratio of girls to boys has decreased steadily 
over the last 50 years and is particularly low in some of the more advanced states 
and urban areas.3

Lifting people out of poverty is not enough. Even above the threshold for 

the World Bank ’s global indicator of shared prosperity (defined as consumption 
growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population), a large number of people, 
especially in rural areas, have consumption levels that are very close to the 
poverty line. These vulnerable people live on more than $1.25 and less than $2.50 
per day or between one and two official poverty lines.4 Minor shocks—illness, 
poor crop yields, indebtedness, high inflation—can easily push them below 
the poverty line. Poverty reduction efforts need to be accompanied by social 
protection initiatives to protect people from falling back into poverty. The end 
goal is to increase shared prosperity—that is, to increase the number of people 
who are not poor, who are socially included, and who are reasonably secure. 

1. World Bank estimate of people living on $1.25 or less per day in PPP terms.
2. 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh.
3. 
The so-called child sex ratio measures the number of girls per 1,000 boys aged 0–6. In India the ratio has decreased steadily over the last three 
decades from 962 in 1981 to 914 in the 2011 census.
 The official poverty line for India (currently under revision) is set at the equivalent of $1.17 per person per day in PPP terms. The unofficial lower 
bound of prosperity is set at two poverty lines. This choice is based on two independent but coincident local criteria. The National Commission for 
Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector classifies all population groups in five categories, and those between one and two poverty lines are considered 
“vulnerable”. The threshold to pay personal income tax is such that a family of five, with one taxpayer, would also be close to two poverty lines. 

4. 

11

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–173. Achievements

Despite the large remaining challenges, India’s development is one 
of the most significant global achievements of the 20th century. Over 

the last two decades, progress toward many of the M illennium Development 
Goals has been creditable given the sheer scale of the challenge. In addition 
to halving pover ty (MDG1), India has universalized primary education 
(MDG2). By 2015, India is also likely to halve the number of people without 
sustainable access to safe drink ing water and achieve gender parity at all 
levels of education, while also mak ing strong progress in fighting infectious 
diseases, such as AIDS, tuberculosis, and polio and achieving environmental 
sustainability. India has been free of polio for two years now. Life expectancy 
has more than doubled from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 but remains 
low compared with other countries. Adult literacy more than quadrupled from 
18 percent in 1951 to 74 percent in 2011. Widespread famines are a thing of 
the past, even when the monsoon fails, although chronic malnutrition remains 
pervasive. While maternal mor tality has been reduced by 33 percent over ten 
years, almost 20 percent of all maternal deaths worldwide still occur in India, 
and much faster progress on the MDGs per taining to child mor tality and access 
to sanitation facilities (Annex 2). 

The WBG has contributed to India’s development achievements, 

contributing where and when it was most needed. Since the first IBRD loan to 

12

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17the Indian Railways in 1949, India has made extensive use of WBG financing, 
knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance to tack le fundamental 
developmental challenges and build a modern economy (box 3.1). Over 
60 years, India has benefited from approximately $160 billion IBRD/IDA/
IFC financing at 2010 prices)—far more than any other client country. In the 
process, the WBG has learned a lot. Many of its current policies, practices, and 
think ing about development have been influenced by its experience in India.

In the last decade, 
India grew faster than 
92 percent of the 
world’s nations. Real 
GDP expanded by 1.5 
percentage points per 
year during 2005-10.

Rapid economic growth over the past ten years has contributed to 
this substantial reduction in poverty and progress on MDGs. In the 

last decade, India grew faster than 92 percent of the world ’s nations. Real 
GDP expanded at an average annual rate of 7.3 percent between FY2003 
and FY2012, helping the country reduce pover ty (at the official pover ty line) 
by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005–10. India also weathered the 
2008–09 global crises relatively well, with GDP growth slowing somewhat to 
6.7 percent in FY2008–09 and rebounding strongly to 8.4 percent in the two 
subsequent years. Although growth in FY2011–12 slowed to a nine -year low of 
6.5 percent, India remains one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. 
Recent reforms of diesel pricing, foreign direct investment in the retail sector, 
and public sector disinvestment plans have helped to improve the investment 
climate. 

Growth has been in double digits for some states—well above the 

all-India average. Under the 11th Five -Year Plan, some of India’s low-
income states grew at a record pace, with Bihar (one of the poorest states) 
outper forming even the most advanced states. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and 
Uttar Pradesh—all low-income and highly populous states—have also grown 
rapidly, with their gross state domestic product growing significantly faster than 
India’s overall GDP. 

Recent Government policy reforms are intended to translate economic 
growth into palpable improvements in living standards. The Government 

has promoted rights-based development policies through the 2005 Right to 
Information Act, a 2005 right-to-work measure (par t of the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act), and the 2009 R ight to Education 
Act. The roll-out of the Unique Identification Document will give a legal identity 
for all residents of India and improve the delivery of social services. The R ight to 
Public Service Act, which grants citizens recourse when the state fails to deliver 
basic services in a timely fashion, has been enacted in several states, and similar 
legislation is being prepared at the national level. 

More and more Indians participate in the democratic process. The 73rd 

Amendment Act of 1993 introduced wide -ranging reforms of panchayati raj 
institutions (local governing bodies) that play a central role in India’s effor ts 
at democratic decentralization and rural self-government. The measure 
reserved seats in panchayati raj institutions for women and people from 
scheduled castes and tr ibes. More recently, the Government empowered 
women politically by expanding to 50 percent the number of seats for women 
in local governments and state assemblies. India’s civil society is vibrant 
and ver y active, with aspirations to play a greater role in policy mak ing and 
implementation. Each year the R ight to Information Act generates several 

13

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Box 3.1. 
India and the World Bank Group: A unique relationship spanning six decades

The International Development Association (IDA) has contributed to improving outcomes in health, education, and rural devel-
opment, with cumulative assistance totaling close to $43.5 billion since 1961 (current prices). It supported India’s efforts to tackle 
polio, tuberculosis, leprosy, river blindness, and HIV/AIDS, improving the lives of millions of people and contributing immensely 
to global efforts to control these diseases.a WBG financing (particularly credits from IDA) and technical assistance played a key 
role in the Green Revolution—a landmark in India’s development that freed the country from dependency on food imports, 
turning it into a net food exporter and helping millions escape poverty. And in education, IDA together with the European Union 
and United Kingdom’s Department for International Development played an important role in universalizing primary education. 
Likewise, both IBRD and IFC have contributed to the development of India’s financial sector. The Housing Development Finance 
Corporation—India’s leading source of housing finance, has now mainstreamed long-term financial instruments for the middle 
class. India is now one of the few developing countries where a middle-class family can borrow long-term (up to 25 years) for 
housing without government subsidy. IBRD/IFC financing of more than $4 billion, coupled with capacity building, has helped 
PowerGrid evolve into the world’s third largest transmission utility. 

a. A Collaborative Partnership: India and IDA, Government of India (2013)

Accountability 
institutions have 
become more 
assertive, as indicated 
by their active 
role in uncovering 
instances of fraud 
and corruption. And 
the general public is 
increasingly vocal in 
demanding enhanced 
accountability. 

million requests for information disclosure from ordinar y citizens, media, 
and research scholars; it has proved to be an effective instrument in fighting 
corruption and red tape. 

The Government has pushed forward on the governance agenda, 
recently introducing a series of reforms and programs. Corruption in 

India remains a concern, according to a draft national anticorruption strategy 
released by the Central Vigilance Commission.5 Since 2009, the Government 
has rolled out a per formance management system under which each ministry 
or depar tment has to prepare and disclose a results framework . The system 
has already been replicated in six states. The national e -governance program 
will improve the accessibility of government services for everyone and at 
affordable costs. Corporate governance has been enhanced through the 2010 
mandatory guidelines for central public sector enterprises, and public financial 
management is being strengthened by the newly introduced Central Plan 
Scheme Monitoring System—a real-time track ing system for plan expenditures, 
and by initiating electronic transfer of funds for social protection programs. 
The Government has introduced a national public procurement bill, and across 
India e -procurement is being rolled out aggressively. Accountability institutions 
have become more asser tive, as indicated by their active role in uncovering 
instances of fraud and corruption. And the general public is increasingly vocal 
in demanding enhanced accountability. 

India is an emerging global power and a prominent voice for 

development. India is an impor tant player in the global information-
technology revolution, and is on the frontier of using IT for e -government 
and for the delivery of services. I t is home to globally recognized companies 
that have become global industry leaders in pharmaceuticals, steel, and 
space technologies. India has become a prominent voice in global forums, 
advocating for the establishment of a new “BRICS Bank ,” as well as increased 

5. 

Central Vigilance Commission. Draft National Anti-Corruption Strategy (2010).

14

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Governments in 
developing countries 
have been keen to 
learn from India’s 
successful experience 
in public policy, social 
and development 
programs, local 
governance 
for improved 
accountability 
and services, and 
building an enabling 
framework for private 
sector–led growth. 

capital to enable multilateral development banks to meet the infrastructure -
financing needs of the developing world. Recently, India has been one of the 
most vocal advocates for expanding the role of multilateral institutions to help 
countries reach the MDGs, finance developing countries’ infrastructure and the 
development of human resources, manage global financial crises, and ensure 
a balanced, prosperous, and inclusive economy. With the ratification of the 
UN Convention on Anti-Corruption in 2011 and full membership in the OECD 
Financial Action Task Force on money laundering in 2010, India is increasingly 
active in the global governance agenda. 

The world continues to learn from India’s remarkable development 

experience. India has been an impor tant source of learning and innovation 
for other countries (developing and industrialized alike), for development 
practitioners and policymakers, and for multilateral institutions such as IDA. 
Governments in developing countries have been keen to learn from India’s 
successful experience in public policy, social and development programs, 
local governance for improved accountability and services, and building an 
enabling framework for private sector–led growth. Rural livelihood projects, 
for example, have been replicated in other par ts of the world. There is growing 
demand to learn from India’s thematically diverse and tested development 
practices, and India is emerging as one of the main providers of development 
experience in exchange of South–South knowledge and investment capital. In 
the past four years, India has shared its development experience in agriculture, 
education and sk ills development, health care, information and communication 
technology, inclusive business models, and public-private par tnerships.

15

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–174. Vision: India in 2030

Before the industrial revolution, India was one of world’s wealthiest 

countries, contributing 27 percent to global GDP.6 On gaining independence 
after two centuries of colonization, however, India’s economy was stagnant. 
During the ensuing 65 years it worked to escape from the low “H indu rate of 
growth,” to rebuild the foundation of a modern economy, and, in recent years, 
to become one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. 

Today India is among the largest economic powers in the world. At market 

exchange rates, its share of world GDP has increased by 50 percent in the past 30 
years from 1.8 to 2.7 percent and is expected to reach 11 percent by 2050. India is 
also a net contributor to global demand. India’s economic growth over the past 
30 years, at 6.2 percent, has been twice that of the world. Its ratio of exports to 
GDP has tripled since 1990 to 21 percent, and its share of world imports has more 
than doubled over the past decade. India is the fourth-largest destination for FDI 
among developing countries, with net FDI inflows at 1.7 percent of GDP. Look ing 
forward, the national vision for development is detailed in the 12th Five-Year Plan 
(FY2013–17) (box 4.1).

6. 

Angus Maddison, The World Economy : Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD, 2004.

16

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Box 4.1. 
Government vision: India’s 12th Five-Year Plan

Faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth is the overarching objective of the Government ’s development strategy. 

Faster growth. Topping the Government ’s agenda is to remove domestic constraints to growth so as to spur investment and 
reverse the recent downward trend. Under the 12th Plan, India aims to increase its GDP at an average annual rate of 8.2 percent, 
while aspiring to return to its full growth potential of 9 percent per year by the end of the Plan period. Annual growth rates of 4 
percent in agriculture and 10 percent in manufacturing—both important sources of employment and livelihood—are required 
to achieve the target. Productivity increases in the public and private sector, in micro, small and medium enterprises, among 
farmers, and in large companies are expected to help India realize its potential. Growth will also benefit from improvements 
in the business climate and in governance at all levels, from a massive increase in infrastructure investment (power, 
telecommunications, roads, airports, railways, ports), and from better use of technology for innovative solutions to the country ’s 
most daunting development challenges. All states are expected to contribute. It is envisioned that on average each state will 
grow at a rate higher than that achieved under the 11th Plan. Urbanization is also central to India’s inclusive growth objective, as 
it is an important source of economic efficiencies and employment. The urban development strategy focuses on strengthening 
five “enablers of urbanization”: governance, planning, financing, capacity building, and innovation. 

Sustainable growth. Staying on a high growth trajectory will require more effective management of natural resources, as rapid 
growth continues to put pressure on India’s water, land, and forests. Management of India’s dwindling water resources is 
especially critical and requires measures to induce industry, farmers, and households to use water more efficiently. Rational 
pricing, especially for commercial, industrial, and agricultural purposes, is necessary, as are regulatory measures and their 
enforcement to limit water pollution. Effective land management and acquisition is a major bottleneck for the development of 
industry and infrastructure. The Plan recognizes that environmental sustainability is no longer a peripheral issue and must be 
mainstreamed and “addressed squarely.” A land-management strategy will be developed to strengthen land acquisition and 
resettlement and rehabilitation processes, rationalize land use in urban areas, and promote farmland titling and leasing. The 
Government is also committed to reducing the intensity of greenhouse gas emissions by 20–25 percent by 2020 against a 2005 
baseline, and to adding 30,000 MW of renewable energy capacity. 

Inclusive growth. Inclusiveness has many dimensions. It is as much about ensuring that growth benefits the very poor and 
socially excluded groups (women, scheduled castes and tribes, and the disabled), as it is about more-balanced growth across the 
country to help low-income states catch up with their more advanced neighbors. Inclusiveness also involves empowerment and 
participation. It means greater attention to inequality—both in outcomes and opportunities—and ensuring access to good-
quality education and healthcare. In education, the mean years of schooling are targeted to increase to seven years, and higher 
education will be expanded and better aligned to the skills needed in a fast-growing and fast-changing economy. Jobs are 
central to the inclusion story, and 50 million new work opportunities in the non-farm sector are envisioned under the 12th Plan. 
Efforts will be made to eliminate gender and social gaps in school enrolment at all levels. On health, the infant mortality ratio 
is targeted to decrease to 25 per 1,000 live births and the maternal mortality rate to 100 per 100,000 live births, while the ratio 
of girls to boys is expected to rise 914 to 950. By the end of the Plan period, undernutrition of children up to three years of age 
should decrease to 27 percent from the 2005–06 level of 40 percent.

India has the potential to—once again— become one of the largest 
economies in the world, while reducing pover ty and vulnerability, 

by increasing shared prosperity. The dependency ratio will fall from 
55 percent of the work ing-age population in 2010 to 47 percent in 2030 , 
allowing for a higher output per capita even if output per worker was to 
remain constant . Savings rates are likely to r ise as the relative share of the 
work ing-age group expands, allowing for faster capital accumulation . (Annex 
B6 , Figure B6 .1) Even in the aftermath of the global cr isis, gross domestic 
capital formation has been sturdy, never falling below 34 percent of GDP. The 
average schooling of the population aged 25 years and above is expec ted to 
increase from 4 .4 years in 2010 to 6 .0 years in 2030 . Total factor produc tivity 
has grown by around 2 .5 percent per year, and this rate could increase as 
markets integrate fur ther and workers shift from low- to high-produc tivity 
jobs. While less than 30 percent of the population lived in cities in 2010 , the 

1717

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Figure 4.1. 
Poverty and prosperity in India in 2030

a. Base scenario

b. Ambitious scenario

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Non-vulnerable

Poor

Non-vulnerable

Poor

Ensuring that 
growth benefits 
all will require 
strengthening the 
implementation of 
economic and social 
programs to better 
target the very poor 
and excluded, pro-
poor policies across 
a range of issues, 
and accelerated job 
creation.

ratio is expec ted to attain 40 percent in 2030 . Combining all these trends, 
an average growth rate around 8 .2 percent per year could in pr inciple be 
sustained over the nex t two decades.

The realization of this potential cannot be taken for granted, however, 
as it will critically depend on decisions to be made in the coming 

years. Maintaining high rates of growth will require continued effor ts to 
remove key structural constraints to growth and increase public investment 
in infrastructure, education and health. The ongoing structural transformation 
of an economy from agriculture to manufacturing, and from rural to urban 
employment, has to be managed effectively ; product markets have to be 
fur ther liberalized, and flexible labor laws introduced. Ensuring that growth 
benefits all will require strengthening the implementation of economic and 
social programs to better target the very poor and excluded, pro-poor policies 
across a range of issues, and accelerated job creation. Finding an approach that 
combines recent rapid growth and inclusiveness of Rajasthan and Karnataka 
may hold the key to faster pover ty reduction and increased prosperity.

What would it take for India to accelerate poverty reduction, decrease 
vulnerability, and increase shared prosperity by 2030? 

In the base scenario7, India would continue on its trajectory of 2005 to 2010, 
during which it has been one of the most rapidly growing economies in the 
world. I ts economy would grow at 8.2 percent per year, and by 2030 income 

The base and ambitious scenarios developed for the India CPS provide a numerical illustration to a long-term vision for India. The objective of 
these scenarios is to provide some back-of-the-envelope estimates of the likely impact of the continuation of India’s recent per formance on 
growth and poverty reduction through 2030. Because the scenarios seek to extend the historical per formance into the future, they are not 
driven by any explicit assumptions about the rest of the world, the types of policies pursued by the authorities, or the specific pattern of growth. 
However, given that India’s recent success in achieving high growth and rapid poverty reduction demonstrated a clear break from history, the 
scenarios implicitly assume that the external and internal enabling environment which was conducive to these developments in 2005-10 will 
continue to be equally stimulating in the future.

7. 

18

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The India of 2030, 
therefore, would 
have 5.5 percent 
of its people living 
in poverty and a 
significant increase 
in the share of the 
population (41.3 
percent) no longer 
vulnerable to falling 
into poverty. 

per capita would reach $5,283 (at 2010 prices), more than triple the 2010 
level of $1,375. The impact on pover ty of such a rate of growth would be 
significant: just one percentage point increase in growth per capita would 
result in a 0.6 percentage -point decrease in pover ty, and a 0.4 percentage -point 
increase in the share of the population not vulnerable to falling into pover ty. 
Approximately 12 percent of the population would live under the official 
pover ty line, compared with 30 percent in 2009–10, and the percentage of 
people who were neither poor nor vulnerable would increase from 19.1 percent 
to 33.6 percent (figure 4.1). 

What would it take for India to “bend the curve”—to decrease poverty 
and increase shared prosperity at a rate significantly above current 
averages? 

In the ambitious scenario, India would continue to grow rapidly at 8.2 percent 
per year. The ambitious scenario would also aim to reduce pover ty and 
vulnerability at a rate close to that of Rajasthan and Karnataka between 2005 
and 2010. Growth elasticity of reducing pover ty would double to 1.2 percent, 
and elasticity of escaping vulnerability would rise to 0.6 percent. The India of 
2030, therefore, would have 5.5 percent of its people living in pover ty and a 
significant increase in the share of the population (41.3 percent) no longer 
vulnerable to falling into pover ty. 

The implications for the rest of the world would be significant. India is central to 
global prospects for “bending the arc of history ” and rapidly reducing pover ty 
and increasing shared prosperity. The global benchmark ing exercise estimates 
that pover ty in India has fallen by 7.2 million people per year8, placing India in 
the 63rd percentile of the distribution of pover ty reduction across countries. If 
India were to move to the 70th percentile, pover ty would decline by 9.2 million 
people per year. Under the base scenario, this would mean that 191 million 
people would be lifted out of pover ty and 277 million people would escape 
vulnerability. Under the ambitious scenario, the corresponding figures would 
be 304 and 394 million, raising to prosperity the equivalent of the combined 
population of France, Germany, I taly, Japan, and United K ingdom today. 

8. World Bank staff calculations.

19

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
5. Challenges

Achieving this vision of India in 2030 will require addressing a wide range 

of development challenges. For India to realize its growth potential of $5,283 
per capita GDP by 2030, it will be necessary to address even more forcefully than 
in the past key structural constraints such as inadequate and poorly maintained 
infrastructure (especially transport and energy), an underperforming manufacturing 
sector, below-target growth in agricultural productivity, and inefficient land use and 
natural resource management.9 With its declining dependency ratio and 8 million 
people entering the workforce annually, India stands to benefit exponentially from 
a demographic dividend. To collect that dividend, however, significant obstacles 
will have to be overcome. India’s rate of job creation is low. Half of the population 
derives its income from agriculture and only 16 percent from wage employment. 
The government estimates that 93 percent of Indian workers are informally 
employed, with limited or no job security and no benefits. Female labor participation 
has decreased and, at 24 percent, remains low compared with other emerging 
economies. To exploit its demographic advantages and attain the ambitious vision 
of India 2030, three broad categories of challenges will have to be addressed: (i) 
strengthening India’s platform for growth; (ii) managing the spatial transformation; 
and, (iii) realizing human potential. A sluggish global economy and the domestic 
economic slowdown may hinder India’s efforts to address some of these issues, but 
only in the short- and medium- term (box 5.1). 

9. 

$93 billion worth of investments was shelved during 2011–12, mainly due to difficulties in obtaining land (CMIE CapEx database). 

20

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Platform for growth

Creating a stronger platform for faster, socially and regionally inclusive, and 
sustained growth will require India to tack le a range of constraints. 

India’s infrastructure gap remains massive and is one of the most 
significant impediments to growth and poverty reduction. Although 

India’s transpor t network is one of the most extensive in the world, accessibility 
and connectivity are limited. Only 20 percent of the national highway network 
(which carries 40 percent of traffic) is four-lane, and one -third of the rural 
population lacks access to an all-weather road. I t is estimated that the transpor t 
sector alone will require an investment of nearly $500 billion (3.6 percent of 
GDP) over the next 10 years.10 Por ts and airpor ts have inadequate capacity 
and often poor transpor t connectivity. Trains move very slowly owing to poor 
maintenance, and the entire railway system is grappling with issues of financial 
sustainability. Poor transpor t safety, especially road safety (133,000 road fatalities 
recorded in 2010), is a growing concern in a country that is adding new drivers 
at a record pace. 

Despite significant achievements in the energy sector, key challenges 

remain. Over the past decade, India has nearly doubled installed generation 
capacity, become a global leader in renewable energy, improved its 
transmission network , developed electricity exchanges, and enacted major 
energy-related legislation. Despite these achievements, an estimated 300 
million people do not have access to electricity, while those who are connected 
to the grid must cope with unreliable supply. Sixty percent of firms resor t to 
costly backup power generation. The sector continues to be hobbled by a 
range of problems—among them energy demand that far outstrips supply, 
below market pricing of electricity, constraints in coal and gas supply that force 
generation stations to operate below capacity, and high rates of loss (technical, 
commercial, and financial) in distribution. The continued unreliability and poor 
quality of electricity supplied to firms and households sap investment and 
growth and reduce India’s competitiveness.

Manufac turing remains underdeveloped and has grown more 

slowly than expec ted. Account ing for just 15 percent of GDP, Ind ia’s 
manufac tur ing sec tor is sma l l compared w ith that of the other BR ICS . Ch ina’s 
manufac tur ing, for examp le, accounts for 34 percent of that nat ion’s GDP. 
Under the 11th Plan , annua l manufac tur ing growth was on ly 7 .7 percent , 
far be low the target of 11 percent . Inadequate infrastruc ture, wh ich 
d ispropor t ionate ly pena l izes sma l l- and med ium-sca le enterpr ises, is one of 
the ma in constra ints to growth in the sec tor. The s ize d istr ibut ion of f irms in 
Ind ia is charac ter ized by a m iss ing m idd le that , in most deve lop ing countr ies, 
accounts for a s ign if icant share of wage emp loyment . Whereas large f irms 
can interna l ize the costs of ded icated infrastruc ture (e.g. , capt ive power or 
water treatment p lants, or even ro l l ing stock) , sma l l and med ium-s ize f irms 
have no access to the f inanc ing that wou ld make it poss ib le to deve lop the ir 

10 

The National Transport Development Policy Committee.

Over the past decade, 
India has nearly 
doubled installed 
generation capacity, 
become a global 
leader in renewable 
energy, improved 
its transmission 
network, developed 
electricity exchanges, 
and enacted major 
energy-related 
legislation. Despite 
these achievements, 
an estimated 300 
million people do 
not have access to 
electricity, while 
those who are 
connected to the 
grid must cope with 
unreliable supply.

21

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Box 5.1. 
India’s economic outlook

Real GDP growth is likely to slow further in FY2012–13 to under 6 percent, significantly below the 9–10 percent growth rates 
recorded just before the financial crisis. Given the continued weakness in high income economies, India’s growth will increasingly 
have to come from domestic sources, which will require resolving key supply-side bottlenecks—among them banks’ high 
exposure to delayed power projects, financially struggling utilities, delayed mining projects, and the cancellation of telecom 
licenses. With a gradual improvement in the global economy and progress on the domestic reform agenda, growth is expected 
to recover to close to 7.1 percent by FY2014–15.

Key Economic Indicators

Real Income and Prices 
(% change)
Real GDP (at factor cost)
Agriculture
Industry
Wholesale Price Index
Consumption and 
Investment (% of GDP)
Consumption
Public
Private
Investment
Public
Private
External Sector
Current Account Balance 
(% of GDP)
Foreign Exchange Reserves 
(US billion) 1/
General Government 
Finances (% of GDP)
Revenue 2/
Expenditure
Deficit 3/
Total Debt

2006/ 
07

2007/ 
08

2008/ 
09

2009/ 
10

2010/ 
11

2011/ 
12

2012/ 
13

2013/ 
14

2014/ 
15
Projections

2015/ 
16

2016/ 
17

9.6
4.2
12.2
6.6

72.6
10.3
62.3
31.3
7.9
23.4

-1.0

9.3
5.8
9.7
4.7

72.4
10.3
62.1
32.9
8.0
24.9

-1.3

6.7
0.1
4.4
8.1

71.8
10.9
60.9
32.3
8.5
23.8

-2.3

8.6
0.8
9.2
3.8

73.7
11.9
61.8
31.7
8.4
23.3

-2.8

9.3
7.9
9.2
9.6

72.5
11.4
61.0
31.7
7.8
24.0

-2.7

6.2
3.6
3.5
8.9

72.8
11.6
61.2
30.6
7.4
23.2

-4.2

5.4
1.0
3.0
7.4

75.3
13.8
61.5
32.0
7.4
24.6

-4.5

6.4
2.0
5.2
7.0

73.1
13.0
60.1
33.1
8.4
24.7

-4.0

7.1
2.0
7.0
6.5

72.2
12.8
59.4
33.3
8.5
24.8

-3.6

7.3
2.0
7.5
6.0

72.9
12.8
60.0
32.1
8.5
23.6

-3.2

7.5
2.0
8.0
5.5

72.9
13.0
59.9
31.2
8.5
22.6

-2.9

191.9

299.2

241.4

254.7

274.3

260.1

238.5

255.9

308.4

340.5

381.9

20.0
25.4
5.4
77.2

21.0
26.0
5.0
74.1

19.4
27.8
8.4
74.6

18.2
28.0
9.8
72.5

18.6
27.7
9.1
67.7

18.4
26.6
8.2
65.9

18.1
26.3
8.2
66.7

18.5
26.1
7.6
66.2

18.5
25.7
7.2
65.3

19.0
26.0
7.0
64.4

19.5
26.0
6.5
63.3

Notes: 1/ Excluding gold, SDR and IMF reserve position.
2/ Excludes receipts from 3G spectrum auctions.
3/ General government deficit, including center and states. 
Sources: Central Statistical Organization, Reserve Bank of India, and World Bank Staff Estimates.

Although depreciation of the rupee and pressure from food and fuel prices could add to the inflation momentum in the near 
term, inflation and the current account deficit are likely to moderate over the medium term. Owing to softer import demand and 
improving export per formance, the current account deficit is expected to decline to 3.6 percent of GDP by FY2014–15.

Although the total subsidy bill exceeded the budgeted amount despite recent reductions in fuel subsidies, the authorities were 
able to limit the central government deficit to 5.2 percent of GDP in FY2012-13, better than the (revised) target of 5.3 percent. 
While the pace of fiscal consolidation remains behind the adjustment path recommended by the 13th Finance Commission, the 
authorities are committed to bringing the deficit down further to 4.8 percent of GDP in FY2013-14 and 3.0 percent by FY2016-
17. However, as deficits remain elevated, debt sustainability could come under pressure. The debt-to-GDP ratio fell from nearly 
80 percent in FY2002–03 to 66 percent in FY2011–12 owing to high nominal GDP growth, fiscal consolidation, and declining 
real interest rates on government debt. Maintaining that ratio in an environment of slower growth and a possible uptick in real 
interest rates will require sustained reductions in fiscal deficits.

India’s long-term prospects remain bright owing to favorable demographics, rising average educational attainments, and 
high savings rates. However, near- and medium-term downside risks are high. During the global financial crisis, higher public 
spending set in at exactly the right time, largely because of the implementation of recommendations of the 6th Pay Commission, 
and the Reserve Bank of India was able to lower policy rates significantly when inflation fell in line with international commodity 
prices. Should India face another global shock in the near future, room for a similar policy response would be much more limited. 
Continued progress on the domestic reform agenda is critical to supporting domestic drivers of growth and returning the 
economy to a high growth trajectory. 

22

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17own ded icated infrastruc ture and, in any case, the sca le of the ir operat ions 
does not make it econom ica l ly feas ib le. Outdated labor laws, inadequate 
access to land, and a dear th of sk i l led workers a l l have contr ibuted to s low 
manufac tur ing growth . Those manufac tur ing ent it ies that are trapped in 
the informa l sec tor have d iff icu lty ra is ing f inance and are constra ined in 
the ir produc t iv ity. The p lethora of necessar y forms, l icenses, inspec t ions, 
and c learances espec ia l ly h inders the growth of sma l l and med ium-s ize 
enterpr ises—wh ich , if un leashed, cou ld be a key dr iver of Ind ia’s econom ic 
growth and an impor tant source of jobs.

Improving and maintaining a healthy investment climate is crucial for 

India’s development. In the af termath of the g loba l f inanc ia l cr is is, Ind ia’s 
gross domest ic sav ings rate dec l ined s ign if icant ly to around 32 percent of 
GDP, constra in ing much-needed investment to address the infrastruc ture 
gap, a l lev iate capac ity constra ints, and ra ise potent ia l output . The reduced 
ava i lab i l ity of domest ic f inanc ing sources, comb ined w ith the need to 
ma inta in h igh investment rates to suppor t and acce lerate econom ic growth , 
h igh l ights the impor tance of a hea lthy investment c l imate that creates 
oppor tun it ies for domest ic and fore ign investors. Po l ic ies that d istor t key 
markets (e.g. , agr icu lture, land, food reta i l, fue l, and so on) have a s ign if icant 
impac t on Ind ia’s investment c l imate. Net inf lows, af ter peak ing at 1 .8 
percent of GDP in FY2008–09 , have averaged about 1 .0 percent of GDP s ince 
then and have fur ther weakened by 22 percent (year-on-year) because of 
g loba l uncer ta int ies. Recent reforms to promote FD I (e.g. , a re laxat ion of 
l im its on fore ign ownersh ip in a ir l ines and med ia , c lar if icat ion of ru les for FD I 
in s ing le -brand reta i l, and a l low ing FD I in mu lt i-brand reta i l in September 
2012) are l ike ly to ra ise investor appet ites and cou ld lead to a strengthen ing 
of FD I inf lows.

India is a diverse country, with poorly integrated markets. To benef it 

from econom ies of sca le, sharpen Ind ia’s internat iona l compet it iveness, 
and improve econom ic growth and income leve ls, there is a need for better 
integrat ion of markets in goods and ser v ices, labor, and f inance. At present , 
the eff ic ient func t ion ing of Ind ia’s domest ic markets is impeded by phys ica l 
and po l icy bar r iers. Poor infrastruc ture—a l im ited nat iona l h ighway system , 
insuff ic ient a ir and water transpor t—trans lates into h igher transpor t costs. 
A cumbersome and mu lt i layered system of taxat ion across states fur ther 
impedes the f low of goods, as do state -spec if ic restr ic t ions on agr icu lture 
trade. A new goods and ser v ices tax , proposed in 2010 but not yet approved, 
is a ma jor Government effor t to stream l ine the unw ie ldy tax system . 
Exper ience among states in the Un ited States and among countr ies in the 
European Un ion—the u lt imate “income convergence mach ine”—shows the 
strong l ink between econom ic integrat ion among confederated states and 
income convergence.11 The more integrated the countr y, the more ba lanced 
the growth .

11 

Robert Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (“Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, 100:2, April 1992) find 
strong convergence among states in the United States, while a 2012 World Bank study finds that economic 
integration has led to convergence among countries in the European Union (see Golden Growth: Restoring 
the Luster of the European Growth Model, Washington DC, World Bank , 2012).

To benefit from 
economies of scale, 
sharpen India’s 
international 
competitiveness, and 
improve economic 
growth and income 
levels, there is a need 
for better integration 
of markets in goods 
and services, labor, 
and finance. 

23

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Although some 
progress has been 
made, South Asia 
remains one of the 
least integrated 
regions in the world 
with regard to 
policy, trade, and 
infrastructure. This 
lack of integration 
directly affects 
India’s economic 
development 
and hampers 
management of 
shared natural 
resources, such as 
cross-boundary river 
basins. 

Faster economic growth has accelerated the degradation of the 
environment and the depletion of scarce natural resources that are 
essential for sustaining growth and eliminating poverty. India’s long-term 

growth is predicated on its ability to address environmental problems such as 
soil erosion, water and air pollution, growing water scarcity, and the declining 
quality of forests. In Northern India the aquifer is receding by an alarming 4 cm 
annually. The challenge is further exacerbated by environmental stresses resulting 
from urbanization processes that are often chaotic, and from development of the 
private sector. The cost of environmental degradation in India was estimated in 
2009 to be 6.6 percent of GDP.12

India and its neighbors have not fully realized their potential for growth 
derivable from further regional and global integration. Although some 

progress has been made, South Asia remains one of the least integrated regions 
in the world with regard to policy, trade, and infrastructure. This lack of integration 
directly affects India’s economic development and hampers management of 
shared natural resources, such as cross-boundary river basins. It aggravates the 
isolation of the underdeveloped northeastern states from trade and transit routes 
and limits access to necessary energy resources, such as oil and power. Estimates 
show that intraregional trade would increase from the current $5 billion to $20 
billion if restrictions on trading with neighbors were removed. India could also 
do more to tap into global markets and better explore the potential for increased 
trade with East Asia and Africa. 

Spatial transformation

India is undergoing a massive rural-urban transformation—one of the 

largest of the 21st century. For the first time since Independence, India has 
seen a greater absolute growth in urban population. The number of towns 
increased from about 5,000 in 2001 to 8,000 in 2011, and some 53 cities now 
have a population exceeding 1 million. Today, 31.1 percent of the population 
lives in cities, and the share is expected to rise to 50 percent in the next 20 years. 
Accelerating urbanization is central to India’s growth, development, and poverty 
reduction (figure 5.1), but it cannot be done without an equally pronounced 
focus on rural development. Rural areas are often poorly connected to cities, 
resulting in weak value chains for agricultural products and slow rates of off-farm 
job creation. While agriculture remains the main source of livelihoods for half the 
population, annual agricultural growth has been below the government target. 

Accommodating the needs of an additional 10 million urban dwellers each 
year will be a strategic policy issue for many years to come. Providing them 

with adequate services such as water, sewerage, drainage, and transportation, and 

12 World Bank estimates, 2009. 

24

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
Figure 5.1. 
Correlates of fast economic growth: the rate of urbanization 

)
t

n
e
c

r

e

p

(

e

t

a

r

h

t

w

o

r

g

l

a

u
n
n

a
a

t

i

p

a
c

r

e

p
P

D
G

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

10

20
30
Urbanization rate

40

50

creating opportunities for further economic development will be a challenge. The 
needs are particularly dire in India’s growing slums. (The population of slum dwellers 
swelled from 75 million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011,13 accounting for a quarter of the 
urban population.) Investments—both public and private—have not kept up with 
demand. Weak urban planning, ineffective regulations governing land management 
and use, and distorted land markets hinder the development of vibrant, livable 
cities. Urban governance is a major issue across all states and cities. Local urban 
bodies are weak and financially unsustainable, with limited capacity to raise their 
own financial resources. Urban service delivery institutions have limited autonomy, 
accountability, and incentives or client orientation. Furthermore, the responsibility 
for financial management and delivery of basic services is fragmented across a 
range of agencies that often are not held accountable and have few incentives to 
perform on a sustainable basis. The linkages between institutions at different levels 
of government—center, state, and local—are weak, resulting in duplication and 
sometimes an inefficient division of labor. For example, investment decisions and 
implementation of urban infrastructure projects are frequently made at the state level, 
while the liabilities (including debt incurred) and responsibility for operations and 
maintenance are left to the local bodies. 

The rapid expansion of cities beyond current municipal boundaries is 

a par ticular concern. The per i-urban areas of the larger Indian cities have 
grown at a faster pace than cities themselves—both in terms of population 
and manufac tur ing. In addition to the challenges faced by most urbanizing 
areas, the largely unplanned development of city outsk ir ts involves changes 
in land use from agr icultural to residential and industr ial/commercial, 
changes in the use of natural resources (deforestation , water depletion and 
pollution) , and land degradation . Urban sprawl has also had a negative 
impact on abutting agr icultural land and livelihoods. Prospec ts for a more 
systematic development of these areas are limited, as many lie beyond 

13 Committee on Slum Statistics, Planning Commission (2011). 

Rural areas are often 
poorly connected to 
cities, resulting in 
weak value chains for 
agricultural products 
and slow rates of 
off-farm job creation. 
While agriculture 
remains the main 
source of livelihoods 
for half the 
population, annual 
agricultural growth 
has been below the 
government target. 

25

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
 
 
 
 
Urban sprawl has 
also had a negative 
impact on abutting 
agricultural land and 
livelihoods. Prospects 
for a more systematic 
development of these 
areas are limited, 
as many lie beyond 
urban administrative 
authority. Second-
tier cities face a 
serious lack of 
basic municipal 
infrastructure, such 
as adequate safe 
drinking water, 
drainage and 
sewerage, and paved 
roads.

urban administrative author ity. Second-tier cities face a ser ious lack of basic 
municipal infrastruc ture, such as adequate safe dr ink ing water, drainage and 
sewerage, and paved roads.14

India’s spatial transformation is likely to result in larger disparities in 
welfare levels—between the rich and the poor, and between rural and 

urban areas. Consumption inequality is on the r ise, with widening dispar ities 
between urban and rural areas. Dispar ities in human development indicators, 
especially as they relate to socially excluded groups are also pronounced. 
While urbanization is inevitable, the persistence of these gaps and inequalities 
is not . The challenge for India will be to develop policies and programs to 
ensure that a large par t of the population—especially the most vulnerable—
is not left behind. India’s spatial transformation also requires the effec tive 
development of the rural economy through the expansion of farm and non-
farm employment and income oppor tunities (figure 5 .2) . Despite the injection 
of huge resources, mainly through centrally sponsored flagship schemes, such 
as the Mahatma Gandhi National Employment Guarantee Ac t (MGNREGA) and 
the National Rural Livelihoods M ission , rural incomes have not grown apace 
with urban incomes, and job creation in the nonagr icultural has been slow.

Figure 5.2. 
Correlates of shared prosperity: off-farm employment in rural areas 

y

t

i
l
i

b

a

r

e
n
u

l

v

n

i

e

g
n

a

h
C

)

n
o

i

t

a

l

u
p
o
p

e
h

t

f

o

t

n
e
c

r

e

p

l

a

u
n
n

a

(

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

0

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Off-farm employment (percent of total employment)

80

India is highly vulnerable to climate change because of high levels of 
pover ty, high population density, heavy reliance on natural resources, 
and an environment already under stress. Under a moderate climate -

change scenar io (an increase in mean annual temperatures of 1 .1 to 2 .3º 
Celsius) , the r isk of increased frequency and sever ity of natural hazards is 
likely to increase, and densely populated cities will be at ex treme r isk . Kolk ata 
is among the six fastest-growing cities wor ldwide that are classified to be at 
ex treme r isk , whereas Mumbai , Delhi , and Chennai are among the ten that 
are classified as high r isk . Overall, India is ranked the second most vulnerable 

14 

Small and medium-size cities are home to 80 percent of India’s poor, and access to services tends to be far more limited than that in India’s large 
cities. Perspectives on Poverty in India: Stylized facts from Survey Data, World Bank (2010). 

26

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greater concentration 
of people and 
economic activity in 
and around India’s 
large cities can also 
have a positive impact 
on the environment 
and climate change 
because cities are 
an important source 
of efficiencies. 
If managed 
systematically and 
with long-term 
planning in place, 
cities can help 
hold down India’s 
emissions and 
improve air quality.

countr y in the wor ld.15 Institutions and mechanisms for enhanced disaster 
r isk management and climate resilience, especially in agr iculture and water-
intensive sectors, are either weak or nonexistent .

While India has a relatively low-carbon economy today, greenhouse gas 

emissions are projected to grow over the next decade. India’s GHG emissions 
propor tional to GDP are on par with the global average, and its per capita 
emissions are among the lowest in the world. However, due to the size of its 
economy, India is the third-largest emitter in the world, and its GHG emissions 
are projected to grow. Energy is key to India’s climate -change challenge, as 
well as its ambition to sustain high growth. The demand for energy, however, 
far outstrips the domestic supply in a country with a poor natural resource 
endowment and foreign sources are costly. To keep emissions from increasing 
at a fast rate, India will have to maximize the use of clean energy and improve 
energy efficiency, tak ing into account higher relative costs. Although densely 
populated areas are often associated with congestion, pollution, and a high 
level of emissions, with potentially significant adverse impact on public health, 
greater concentration of people and economic activity in and around India’s 
large cities can also have a positive impact on the environment and climate 
change because cities are an impor tant source of efficiencies. If managed 
systematically and with long-term planning in place, cities can help hold down 
India’s emissions and improve air quality. 

Agriculture has grown below Government targets. India remains 

predominantly rural, and about half of its population der ives its income 
from agr iculture or related ac tivities. Government stepped-up effor ts to 
develop agr iculture are slowly yielding results ; between 2000-01 and 2010-
11 agr iculture grew at an average rate of 3 .1 per annum . The target for 
the last two five -year plans was 4 .0 percent . Stressed natural resources, 
poor rural infrastruc ture, inadequate technology, limited access to credit , 
underdeveloped ex tension and marketing ser vices, and insufficient 
agr icultural planning at the local level contr ibute to the lack luster 
per formance. Ongoing global food secur ity concerns, pronounced food-pr ice 
volatility, and concerns about climate change all highlight the urgency of 
boosting India’s agr iculture productivity. 

Human potential

As a country with a population of 1.2 billion people (projected 
to increase to 1.5 billion by 2030), India has tremendous human 

potential—a source of immense creativity and innovation. To take full 
advantage of its demographic dividend and to unlock the human potential of 
all its people, India needs to overcome daunting challenges across a range of 
sectors, including health and nutrition, education, social protection, and sk ills 
development. Poor access to water and sanitation puts a huge burden on 
people (par ticularly women and children), who spend a good por tion of each 
day securing sufficient water for the household. 

15 Maplecroft ’s Climate Change Risk Atlas, 2011. Available on www.maplecroft.com 

27

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Although India’s health indicators have continued to improve, 
progress has not matched the country ’s economic growth over 

the past decade. Despite increasing rates of decline, maternal and child 
mor tality rates remain on par with rates in much poorer countr ies, and 
malnutr ition is among the highest in the wor ld. India faces an unfinished 
agenda of tack ling childhood and infec tious diseases and malnutr ition , as 
well as an emerging and r ising burden of non-communicable and chronic 
diseases (India and China vie for the largest number of diabetics in the wor ld) . 
Progress on tack ling communicable diseases such as AIDS , tuberculosis, 
and polio has been significant , but continued attention is needed to secure 
the gains. Poor people are highly vulnerable to health shocks, with medical 
expenses contr ibuting to household pover ty and compromising effor ts to 
improve health outcomes. 

Despite the central government ’s increased focus on and financial 
commitment to health issues, a major challenge is to implement the 

funding effectively. Although public financing for health is expec ted to 
double under the 12th Plan , increased public funding is not enough ; it must 
be accompanied by improved effectiveness of spending at all levels, greater 
access to quality health care, and more effec tive deliver y of health ser vices. 
The many systemic constraints include weak accountability arrangements 
and incentives for per formance, weak quality assurance, a largely unregulated 
pr ivate health care sec tor, limited mechanisms for financial protec tion , and 
weak information and sur veillance systems, combined with inadequate 
use of evidence -based planning, programming, and management . Out-of-
pocket health expenses are high (on average accounting for 70 percent of 
total health spending) and affect poor households dispropor tionately. New 
government-sponsored health-insurance schemes, especially those aiming to 
reach people living below the pover ty line, may make a difference. 

Improving the nutritional status of India’s children is par ticularly 

impor tant. Child malnutr ition remains high , and widespread. India accounts 
for 40 percent (217 million) of the wor ld ’s malnour ished children . The 
var iation across states is par ticular ly str ik ing : The percentage of malnour ished 
children under five years of age var ies from 23 percent in the more advanced 
state of Kerala to 60 percent in the low-income state of Madhya Pradesh . 
Despite India’s impressive economic growth in the past decade, malnutr ition 
has declined ver y little. Stunting rates in India are two to seven times 
higher than those in other BRICS countr ies. While nutr ition has recently 
received increased attention with the restruc tur ing of the Integrated Child 
Development Ser vices scheme, there remain ver y significant programmatic, 
institutional, technical, implementation , and capacity constraints. An effec tive 
multisec toral response is cr itically impor tant and has to go beyond the health 
sec tor to include agr iculture, education , industr y, water, and sanitation .

Access to adequate water and sanitation is critical to improving the 
quality of life and economic potential of all Indians. Although the 

government at the national and state level spends $4 billion annually on 
improving access to rural water supply and sanitation, only one -third of rural 

Although public 
financing for health 
is expected to 
double under the 
12th Plan, increased 
public funding is 
not enough; it must 
be accompanied 
by improved 
effectiveness of 
spending at all levels, 
greater access to 
quality health care, 
and more effective 
delivery of health 
services. 

28

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Access to primary 
education has been 
largely universalized, 
the challenge ahead 
is to improve quality, 
learning outcomes, 
retention, and 
access to education 
by underprivileged 
children, often in very 
remote areas.

households have access to piped water and sanitation.16 The economic impact 
of inadequate sanitation in India is estimated at $54 billion or 6.4 percent of 
GDP in 2006. Most of that cost is attributed to premature mor tality and health-
related costs. The oppor tunity cost for women and children who spend an 
inordinate amount of time securing water for their household each day is huge 
and takes away from time that could be spent on more productive economic 
activities or study. 

India’s efforts to improve access, equity, and quality of education at 
the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels remains a work in progress. 

Now that access to primary education has been largely universalized, the 
challenge ahead is to improve quality, learning outcomes, retention, and access 
to education by underprivileged children, often in very remote areas. As the 
success of elementary education has resulted in demand for education beyond 
elementary level, there is increasing focus on improving access to secondary 
education. O f those children who finish primary education, 83 percent 
transition to the next level. Enrolment rates for grades 9–12 are just 40 percent 
and of those enrolled, approximately 15 percent drop out and one -third 
fail their examinations. While inequities are declining in terms of access and 
par ticipation at all levels of education for all socioeconomic and ethnic groups, 
manifold inequities persist in the type of education facilities and exposure to 
and availability of modern techniques of education. Girls make up 45.6 percent 
of secondary students. 

Jobs are an important component of poverty reduction and a 

cornerstone of development. Over the last two decades, 8 million people 
annually entered the labor force in India. Job creation, which has remained 
relatively flat over a long period, will continue to be a tremendous development 
challenge as India grapples with how best to provide oppor tunities to its 
burgeoning young workforce. At present only 16 percent of the workforce 
derives its income from regular wage employment, and more than half are 
engaged in agriculture. The female labor force, decreased from an already small 
34 to 29 percent of the total labor force between 2000 and 2010. The drop was 
par ticularly pronounced among women with higher levels of education. 

India’s continued economic growth demands more skilled workers 
across many sectors, higher rates of employment, and higher wages. 

The country now faces a massive shor tage of sk illed labor, which stymies 
productivity. Less than 10 percent of the work ing population has completed 
secondary education or above, and too many secondary graduates have sk ills 
and knowledge that are poorly matched with the needs of the labor market. 
The extent and quality of higher-education oppor tunities need to be scaled 
up urgently to sustain high growth of the economy and make it inclusive. 
Empowering youth, especially in rural areas, with sk ills that are better matched 
with the demands of the labor market—informal or formal—will also help 
facilitate migration to city centers where wage jobs are more readily available.

16 

Indian National Census 2011. 

29

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–176. World Bank Group India Country 
Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17)

| Integration | Transformation | Inclusion

A vision of the nation 
as a global economic 
powerhouse where no 
more than 5.5 percent 
of the population 
lives in poverty and 
41.3 percent of the 
population are no 
longer vulnerable to 
falling into poverty. 
It sets out a program 
of engagement—
and makes key 
strategic shifts—
that are designed to 
contribute to India’s 
transformation into 
the India of 2030.

The World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) will 
support the Government’s development goal of growth that is faster, 
more socially and regionally inclusive, and more sustainable as detailed 
in the 12th Five -Year Plan (FY2013–17). The strategy helps India lay the 

foundation for a longer-term vision of India in 2030—a vision of the nation 
as a global economic powerhouse where no more than 5.5 percent of the 
population lives in pover ty and 41.3 percent of the population are no longer 
vulnerable to falling into pover ty. I t sets out a program of engagement—
and makes key strategic shifts—that are designed to contribute to India’s 
transformation into the India of 2030. The strategy builds on India’s recent 
achievements, but also incorporates lessons learned from WBG’s longstanding 
engagement in the country, to develop transformational and innovative 
solutions to tack le India’s most pressing development challenges, especially 
in the poorest, least developed, and most isolated states. I t takes into account 
lessons learned under the previous CAS (FY2009–12) (Annex 2), and is informed 
by findings from multistakeholder consultations, as well as a client-perception 
survey (Annex 9). And finally, the strategy is aligned with the WBG regional 
strategy for South Asia. 

30

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The World Bank 
will work with 
counterparts at 
the national and 
state levels to 
scale up support in 
per formance -based 
public management, 
e -governance, 
public procurement 
and financial 
management, M&E, 
implementation of 
the right to service 
law, strengthening 
India’s anti-corruption 
framework, and 
supporting social 
accountability 
mechanisms.

The strategy ’s overarching goal of rapid poverty reduction and 
increased shared prosperity will be achieved by focusing on three 
broad engagement areas: (i) integration; (ii) transformation; and (iii) 

inclusion (figure 6.1). A focus on improved governance, environmental 
sustainability, and gender equality runs across all three engagement areas. 
On governance, many of the actions required to foster economic integration 
concern public investments and government regulation. Institutional 
development plays a key role in the case of spatial transformation, whereas 
strengthened accountability is critical for social inclusion. More specifically, 
the World Bank will work with counterpar ts at the national and state levels to 
scale up suppor t in per formance -based public management, e -governance, 
public procurement and financial management, M&E, implementation of the 
right to service law, strengthening India’s anti-corruption framework , and 
suppor ting social accountability mechanisms. On environmental sustainability, 
economic integration has impor tant implications for natural resource 
management, whereas the priority in relation to spatial transformation is to 
minimize congestion, improve resource use efficiency, and reduce pollution 
impacts, including greenhouse gas emissions. Effor ts to improve disaster risk 
management help households cope with natural disasters, reducing their 
chance of falling back or deeper into pover ty. Finally, economic integration and 
spatial transformation should lead to greater paid employment oppor tunities 
for women, whereas social inclusion can be promoted by enhancing voice and 
tack ling discrimination

A range of high-level intermediate development objectives provide 
both the rationale for the content of the World Bank Group program as 
well as a clear line -of-site to higher order country goals. Analytical work 

underpinning this CPS shows a strong correlation between select development 
outcomes: human development (infant mor tality), gender equity (female 
job par ticipation), jobs (off-farm employment), urban development, policies 
(business climate) and transfers (public spending) and the three overarching 
goals. The rate of urbanization (as measured by population growth of secondary 
cities) is correlated with economic growth, while creation of jobs (more 
specifically off-farm employment) is correlated with increased shared prosperity. 
Both these aspects are addressed through activities under the rural-urban 
transformation engagement area. Similarly, human development (education, 
health, nutrition and especially, infant mor tality) is strongly linked to rapid 
pover ty reduction. Suppor t under the third engagement area of inclusion will 
aim to help the Government of India ensure inclusive growth by improving 
human development outcomes as well as gender parity.

31

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Figure 6.1. 
India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes

Overarching goals:
Economic growth
Poverty reduction
Shared prosperity

Engagement area: 1
Integration

Engagement area: 2
Transformation

Engagement area: 3
Inclusion

•	 Increased	GSDP	growth	
in low-income& special 
category states
•	 Increased	trade	and	
investments in the region 

•	 Increased	population	of	
secondary cities
•	 Increased	off-farm	
employment 

•	 Improved	access	to	services	
to excluded segment of 
population
•	 Increase	female	labor	force	
participation
•	 Decreased	infant	mortality

C
o
u
n
b

O

t
r

j

y
e
L

c

i

t

o
v
n
e
g
T
e

s
*

-

r

m

C
P
S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

Outcomes:

Outcomes:

Outcomes:

•	 Improved	transport	
connectivity 
•	 Improved	inter-regional	
power transmission 
•	 Improved	market-driven	
sk ills for productive 
employment
•	 Enhanced	private	
investment in low-income 
states 
•	 Strengthened	regional	
integration

•	 Strengthened	institutional	
capacity of urban 
government
•	 Improved	urban	transport	
services
•	 Improved	access	water	
supply and sanitation services
•	 Increased	agricultural	
productivity 
•	 Improved	environment	
protection and biodiversity 
conservation 
•	 Reduced	Greenhouse	Gas	
emissions through energy 
efficiency and renewable 
energy production 

•	 Improved	access	to	
electricity
•	 Strengthened	public	&	
private health-delivery 
systems
•	 Improved	child	nutrition	
delivery systems
•	 Improved	access	&	quality	of	
education
•	 Increased	coverage	of	social	
protection programs
•	 Enhanced	rural	livelihood	
opportunities
•	 Increased	access	to	financial	
services 
•	 Enhanced	disaster	risk	
management system

*Analytical work completed as part of the CPS indicates strong correlation between these country long-term objectives and economic integration, 
spatial transformation and social inclusion. 

32

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
 
Strategic engagement area 1

 INTEGRAT ION 

Enhanced efforts to increase India’s market integration can significantly 

boost India’s economic growth. Better integration would result in more -
balanced growth among Indian states, helping low-income states converge 
more quick ly with their faster-growing neighbors. To benefit from economies 
of scale and increase competitiveness, there is a need to remove physical and 
policy barriers across states (notably the multilayered system of taxation) that 
impede markets from functioning efficiently. India’s massive infrastructure 
gap must be bridged so that people can get to jobs and goods to markets. 
Reforms in the power sector are also needed to rationalize energy pricing 
and improve the capacity and reliability of the generation, transmission, and 
distribution system. Efficient intermediation to channel household savings into 
infrastructure finance is critical to achieving investment targets in infrastructure. 
Mobilizing financing for public-private par tnerships (PPPs) through innovative 
structures and appropriate government suppor t is needed to attract investors. 
The development of a vibrant manufacturing sector—especially small and 
medium-size enterprises—will require reforming labor laws, improving land 
access and management, cutting bureaucratic red tape, and better access to 
financing. As jobs are created, India’s youth will need sk ills and knowledge that 
are better tailored to the needs of a fast-growing economy. 

To benefit from 
economies of 
scale and increase 
competitiveness, 
there is a need to 
remove physical 
and policy barriers 
across states (notably 
the multilayered 
system of taxation) 
that impede markets 
from functioning 
efficiently. 

33

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The capacity of India’s 
railways, especially 
for freight, will be 
expanded in an effort 
to accommodate 
increasing demand 
and to promote the 
use of rail for freight 
transport, thereby 
reducing India’s 
carbon footprint. 

As the largest and most-populous country in the region, India is central 
to many efforts toward regional economic integration and cooperation. 

Despite steady and unprecedented progress, South Asia remains one of 
the least economically integrated regions in the world. Fur ther integration 
with neighbors in South Asia and beyond can contribute exponentially to 
India realizing its 2030 growth potential, while also greatly benefiting other 
countries in the region.17 Possible areas for increased regional collaboration 
include management of common natural resources (most impor tantly water), 
transpor t, and power. Suppor ting the Government to help states converge and 
grow more evenly through improved market integration is one of the main 
development objectives of the WBG strategy for India.

Infrastructure remains a priority for the Government. The 12th Plan’s 

strategy is to develop a more balanced multimodal transpor t network that 
links the nor theast and special-category states to the rest of the country. 
Where possible, public-private par tnerships (PPPs) will be pursued to develop 
national highways and rural roads. The capacity of India’s railways, especially 
for freight, will be expanded in an effor t to accommodate increasing demand 
and to promote the use of rail for freight transpor t, thereby reducing India’s 
carbon footprint. The Government will strive to improve asset management 
and increase efficiency by encouraging competition in the provision and 
maintenance of infrastructure and services. H igher emphasis will be placed 

17 A World Bank study shows that both India and Bangladesh would gain from improve access. World Bank . 2012. Unlocking Bangladesh-India Trade: 
Emerging Potential and the Way Forward.

34

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The potential for 
India to reap returns 
of increased regional 
trade is great, as 
shown by recent 
export growth. India’s 
exports to its South 
Asian neighbors 
increased from $4.6 
billion in FY2005 
to $11.7 billion in 
FY2011. 

on safety (including mak ing transpor t safer for women), energy efficiency, 
environmental conservation, and social impacts. By the end of the 12th 
Plan, all villages will be connected to an all-weather road, most national 
and state highways will be upgraded to a two-lane standard or better, and 
the flagship projects—the eastern and western freight corridors—will have 
been completed. On energy, the Government ’s priority is to ensure energy 
availability, promote energy efficiency, and significantly expand and strengthen 
the transmission network for electricity and oil and gas. The Plan envisions 
increasing energy capacity by an additional 88,000 MW. To do this, sources 
of energy will have to be expanded, notably through the exploration of 
renewable energy (wind and solar) and the implementation of critical corrective 
policies to improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of the system, 
promoting increased investment in domestic hydrocarbon production and 
the implementation of critical corrective policies to improve the financial 
sustainability and efficiency of the system. 

The Government’s regional economic integration goal is focused on 
seizing opportunities for increased trade and investment in South Asia, 
but also in emerging East Asian economies. The potential for India to reap 

returns of increased regional trade is great, as shown by recent expor t growth. 
India’s expor ts to its South Asian neighbors increased from $4.6 billion in 
FY2005 to $11.7 billion in FY2011. Progress has been incremental. For example, 
in 1996 India granted MFN status to Pak istan, which was reciprocated in 2011, 
but still awaiting formalization and a September 2012 India-Pak istan agreement 
to reduce tariffs to no more than 5 percent and to remove all nontariff barriers 
by 2020. In the global arena, the Government aims to engage more proactively 
with the global community at the bilateral, regional, and multilateral levels. The 
Plan notes that energy security and the need to develop long-term and stable 
energy sources are key considerations of India’s engagement with the rest of 
the world. 

Outcome 1.1 Improved transpor t connectivity 

The WBG’s suppor t for the transpor t sector will focus on the reform and 
development of railways, highways, and rural roads, and on improving road 
safety and ensuring asset sustainability. Engagement will be informed by 
lessons learned from the Bank ’s suppor t of ongoing transformative projects 
and in state -level interventions in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Punjab and 
Tamil Nadu. The Bank ’s contribution to rural connectivity will come mainly 
through its suppor t for the Government ’s flagship roads program, the Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY ),18 which now focuses on six low-income 
and special category states, as well as Punjab. Suppor t is likely to evolve into a 
more broad-based engagement that aims to strengthen the overall rural road 
system for the expansion of all-season rural roads. Strengthening institutions, 
enhancing accountability, and building capacities among the various state 
and national highways agencies will be a strategic priority of the Bank . This will 
be accomplished through ongoing state highway improvement projects and 

18 

PMGSY highlights the importance that India’s Government gives to reducing disparities in physical access, encouraging economic and social 
development in rural areas, and adequately funding rural road maintenance. 

35

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Through its proposed 
transmission 
investments in the 
low-income states 
of Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh and through 
the Northeast Power 
Transmission Project, 
the Bank will help 
improve overall 
electricity services 
in states and regions 
with the lowest access 
levels in the country 
and significantly 
increase the power 
exchange between 
states and regions of 
the country.

36

technical assistance to national highway agencies. The WBG will also look for 
oppor tunities to suppor t projects that focus on the integration of low-income 
states, as well as those suppor ting shifts to more efficient modes of transpor t, 
including por ts. 

Outcome 1.2 Improved inter-regional power transmission connectivity

The WBG will support the Government in promoting financially 
sustainable access to electricity by addressing bottlenecks in 
generation, transmission, and distribution at both the state and 

national levels. I t will suppor t Government and pr ivate sector effor ts to 
(i) increase access to modern energy, par ticular ly in low-income states; 
(ii) increase the availability of power to underpin growth while balancing 
sustainability and climate change concerns; and (iii) strengthening institutions 
and financial sustainability in the sector. Three ongoing projects (Rampur 
Hydropower, Har yana Power, and Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectr ic) suppor t 
the provision of sustainable energy by strengthening transmission and 
investing in clean energy. Through its proposed transmission investments in 
the low-income states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and through the Nor theast 
Power Transmission Project, the Bank will help improve overall electr icity 
services in states and regions with the lowest access levels in the countr y and 
significantly increase the power exchange between states and regions of the 
countr y. Technical suppor t for rural feeder segregation will inform Government 
effor ts to design a centrally sponsored scheme on improved rural power 
services. The WBG ’s knowledge and advisor y work will play a prominent role, 
especially technical assistance to strengthen institutional capacity to manage 
the planned five -fold increase in infrastructure investments, and improve 
service deliver y. 

Outcome 1.3 Improved demand-driven skills for productive employment 

The WBG will contribute to the 12th Plan target of providing vocational 
training to 500 million workers by 2022. The ongoing Vocational 

Training and Improvement Project—the largest vocational training project 
in the world—will continue providing training to post-secondary and 
pre -employment–level youth. Assistance for implementing reforms and 
development of the technical vocational education and training sector in 
West Bengal will continue, with replication expected in other states. The 
Technical Education and Quality Improvement Project II ( TEQIP-II), is helping the 
Government reform a large number of institutions. A multiyear programmatic 
analysis of sk ills will explore new models for PPPs in technical and vocational 
education. This work will feed into a multi- sectoral engagement, including IFC, 
to help India scale up its work on building sk ills for the new economy. Analytical 
work on financing, equity, quality, and governance in higher education at the 
national and state level are also being under taken. Bank-suppor ted livelihood 
projects at the state and national level focus on sk ills training for rural youth and 
connecting young people to jobs, often in small and medium-sized cities. IFC is 
par tnering with the National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business 
Development to develop and deliver a country-wide ‘training of trainers’ 
program to address the pressing lack of quality trainers. The program will 
establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business sk ills 

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The program will 
establish a new 
standard of excellence 
for entrepreneurship 
and business skills 
training by improving 
skills and knowledge 
transfer from trainers 
to MSMEs. IFC is also 
working with larger 
private sector firms to 
impart business skills 
to MSMEs in their 
supply chain.

training by improving sk ills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs. 
IFC is also work ing with larger private sector firms to impar t business sk ills to 
MSMEs in their supply chain.

Outcome 1.4 Enhanced private investment in low-income states

Enhancing private investment is important for WBG strategy and is 
at the center of IFC’s engagement in India’s low-income states. IFC 

investments will leverage these states’ strong growth rates, pent-up demand 
and natural resource advantages to address their many development 
challenges—massive pover ty, weak investment climate, low FDI, and 
inadequate infrastructure. Low-income states have high economic potential, 
which makes them attractive to private sector investors, but often weak 
business climate hinder significant levels of private investment. IFC ’s advisory 
service will help catalyze growth in low-income states by improving investment 
climate such as those highlighted in the Doing Business repor t, PPP regulatory 
frameworks and sector-specific policy reform. Two state -level engagements--in 
Odisha and Rajasthan--suppor t Government effor ts to improve the investment 
climate to increase private investment in the states. In terms of investments, IFC 
will invest from its own account and mobilization, in areas such as innovative 
renewable and green projects, processed food, logistics and infrastructure, 
agribusiness, and MSME finance and insurance. Suppor t to the Government 
of Meghalaya will help improve access to finance to households, farmers, and 
micro and small businesses. Ongoing suppor t to the Government of Bihar 
and local tourism investors will improve tourism in the Buddhist Circuit, which 
includes major Buddhist sites and pilgrimage destinations in India and Nepal, 
and generate increased revenue. 

37

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The WBG will continue 
to support regional 
trade in power 
between India and 
Pakistan and India 
and Nepal as well 
as inland water 
transport between 
Bangladesh and India.

Outcome 1.5 Strengthened regional integration 

The WBG will promote regional integration, especially in (i) the integrated 

management of natural resources and regional public goods (such as river 
basins, ecosystems, and wildlife preserves); (ii) the pooling of power resources; 
(iii) trade and transpor t regional facilitation; and (iv) business dialogue. In 
par ticular, the WBG will continue to suppor t regional trade in power between 
India and Pak istan and India and Nepal as well as inland water transpor t 
between Bangladesh and India. Analytical work will underpin dialogue on 
critical regional issues. IFC will help facilitate trade between Bangladesh, India 
and Nepal by strengthening chambers of commerce and associations of 
truckers and freight forwarders and standardize and harmonize procedures 
and documentation, introduce risk management, automation, and create 
oppor tunities for regional peer-to-peer exchanges (through the South Asia 
Regional Integration in Trade and Investment Project). IFC will promote reforms 
to increase intra-regional and global FDI flows, financial infrastructure, trade 
finance, and South–South investments by helping to build par tnerships 
between strong players in emerging economies. The Nepal-India Power 
Transmission and Trade Project (financed by IDA and IFC ) finances construction 
of a cross-border transmission line to increase the trade of electricity between 
these two neighboring countries. MIGA may suppor t critical cross-border 
infrastructure investments.

38

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The WBG will provide 
analytical support 
and non-lending 
technical assistance 
to state governments 
and third-tier local 
governments, 
especially local 
urban bodies, to 
expand their revenue 
bases. Labor laws 
that facilitate the 
movement of people 
to jobs, without 
discrimination 
based on location 
or industry, are 
important.

Finally, the World Bank Group will focus on facilitating the exchange 
of knowledge and experience in a more systematic manner, in the 

region and beyond, so that international good-practice examples can inform 
India’s development while showcasing India’s development successes to the 
rest of the world. The work will involve facilitating knowledge exchanges 
(par ticularly South–South) in which India is increasingly the knowledge 
provider. Three regional pieces of analytical work—on overcoming barriers 
to trade and cooperation, commodity price transmission, and manufacturing 
competitiveness—will be instrumental in sharing knowledge across the 
countries in the region. IFC will provide sector-specific knowledge to Indian 
companies in sectors such as infrastructure, bank ing, and microfinance to 
help them better understand the oppor tunities and risks of investing in other 
emerging markets.

Domestic market integration is a new area of focus under the CPS, and 
will expand to include analytical and technical assistance as well as 
financing in three areas: taxation, procurement, and labor markets. The 

successful implementation of the long-delayed Goods and Services Tax (GST ) 
is central to Government effor ts to integrate the domestic market. Building on 
the implementation of the GST, the WBG is ready to provide policy advice and 
facilitate knowledge exchange with countries, such as Brazil, that have been 
successful in tack ling the same issue. On the fiscal front, the WBG will provide 
analytical suppor t and non-lending technical assistance to state governments 
and third-tier local governments, especially local urban bodies, to expand 
their revenue bases. Labor laws that facilitate the movement of people to jobs, 
without discrimination based on location or industry, are impor tant. And, as 
workers move across state boundaries and from villages to cities, the por tability 
of social security benefits (made easier with the introduction of the unique 
identification number) will assume great impor tance. A multiyear study on 
growth, inclusion and global competitiveness will address issues related to 
the labor market, while parallel programs to suppor t implementation of the 
national manufacturing policy and improvements in the business climate will 
drill deeper. Ongoing technical assistance to the planning commission on 
manufacturing competitiveness will help inform the national manufacturing 
policy and underpin possible state -level operations in the future. As the public 
sector is a major consumer of goods and services produced in the domestic 
economy, reform and standardization of the procurement system at the 
national and state levels are key measures to foster domestic market integration 
and competition. The World Bank will help develop public procurement 
cer tification courses and procurement-related management information 
systems, facilitate network ing among public procurement resource institutions, 
and engagement with audit institutions to under take procurement audits.

39

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Strategic engagement area 2 

TRANSFORMAT ION

The faster a country urbanizes, the faster it grows—and, with the 

r ight policies in place, the faster the same countr y can reduce pover ty and 
increase shared prosper ity. An acceleration of India’s ongoing transformation 
from a largely agrar ian economy to one that depends on an ever-expanding 
manufactur ing sector, and from a predominantly rural to an increasingly urban 
population, would significantly boost India’s potential for growth and pover ty 
reduction. Accomplishing that acceleration will require a focus on both rural 
and urban development, on improving the livability of cities and villages, on 
creating more jobs in manufactur ing and more off-farm jobs in rural India, and 
on improving agr icultural productivity, especially among smallholders. 

Effective, flexible, and accommodating urban planning, land 
management, and land-use regulations are essential to addressing 

the urbanization challenge. Improving the investment climate to induce 
increased pr ivate sector investment (from domestic and foreign sources) and 
improving access to credit will allow small and medium-size enterpr ises—an 
impor tant growth engine in India—to flour ish. This transformation also calls 
for fur ther empower ing local governing bodies—Panchayat Raj institutions 
in rural areas and local urban bodies in cities across India—so that they are 
able to identify and respond to local needs and to plan long-term for a more 

Accomplishing 
that acceleration 
will require a focus 
on both rural and 
urban development, 
on improving the 
livability of cities 
and villages, on 
creating more jobs 
in manufacturing 
and more off-farm 
jobs in rural India, 
and on improving 
agricultural 
productivity, 
especially among 
smallholders. 

40

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17systematic rural-urban transformation. I f developed and managed well, cities 
in India can be a source of greater efficiencies—resulting in more -efficient use 
of natural resources and lower carbon intensity. 

By 2031, it is projected that 600 million people will live in India’s cities. 

Current and future needs and challenges of India’s cities and their burgeoning 
populations, figure prominently in the 12th Plan. Government pr ior ities 
include increasing investment in new urban infrastructure (e.g., expanding 
the metro rail network and the bus rapid transit system); strengthening urban 
governance; strengthening human and organizational capacities; developing 
long-term, strategic urban planning capacities; addressing the needs of the 
urban poor and improving slums; and raising environmental sustainability. 
On urban transpor t, the Government ’s goal is to increase the share of public 
transpor t to at least 50 percent of all motor ized tr ips. Pr ivate, and often ver y 
expensive, urban transpor tation exacts a huge cost on the urban population, 
especially the ver y poor. Universalizing safe dr ink ing water and sanitation 
remains a pr ior ity, as is ensur ing that all Indian cities are free of open 
defecation—a contr ibutor to malnutr ition, as well as a major public health 
r isk . The Government str ives for 100 percent meter ing of water supply and 
24-7 access where possible and feasible. The Jawahar lal Nehru National Urban 
Renewal M ission ( JNNURM) remains the main vehicle for the Government ’s 
urban development and reform. State governments also have their own 
urban development plans. The 12th Plan calls for a ser ies of reforms at the 
national and state level, as well as interventions to strengthen the institutional 
framework . 

The Government recognizes the need for an equally strong focus on 
agricultural and rural development. Under the 12th Plan, agr icultural 

productivity is targeted to grow by 4 percent annually, and irr igated areas 
are expected to increase from 90 million to 103 million hectares. Income 
oppor tunities in agr iculture, which includes hor ticulture, animal husbandr y 
and fisher ies, are expected to expand, while simultaneously creating more 
off-farm employment. Strengthening the implementation of major centrally 
sponsored schemes that cover ever ything from rural employment and social 
secur ity to rural sanitation and water supply is central to the Government ’s 
rural development strategy. Environmental sustainability and the sound 
management of natural resources—air, water, forests, and biodiversity—is 
rapidly emerging as the next major development and policy challenge for 
India, and it is central to the 12th Plan. The Government and organized citizens 
recognize that sustaining a high annual growth rate of 8.2 percent under 
the 12th Plan and beyond will require placing environmental and resource 
management issues front and center in India’s development. 

The WBG’s focus on the rural-urban transformation—and particularly 
on urbanization—represents a significant shift in its strategy, and 

engagement in this area is expected to intensify over the CPS per iod and 
beyond. The strategy will focus on suppor ting the effor ts of national, state, 
and city governments to improve the management and livability of second-
tier (medium-sized) cities as well as larger metropolises. As 85 percent of 
the urban poor live in small and medium-size cities across India, effor ts are 

Universalizing safe 
drinking water and 
sanitation remains 
a priority, as is 
ensuring that all 
Indian cities are free 
of open defecation—a 
contributor to 
malnutrition, as well 
as a major public 
health risk.

41

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The Bank is currently 
developing with the 
Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation an 
Informal Settlements 
Improvement Project 
that will incentivize 
in situ upgrading of 
slums and thereby 
encourage private 
investment in 
the incremental 
improvement of the 
existing housing 
stock. 

likely to contr ibute to the ambitious scenar io’s pover ty reduction target. The 
multi-sectoral engagement will focus on urban management and planning, 
infrastructure and service deliver y, financing systems and frameworks, and 
capacity building at the national, state and city levels. Analytical work to inform 
urban sector policy and initiatives will supplement a growing operational 
engagement. 

Outcome 2.1 Strengthened institutional capacity of urban government 

The WBG ’s work w i l l focus on ( i) strengthen ing urban management , 
infrastruc ture, and ser v ice -de l iver y systems across the urban h ierarchy ; ( i i) 
in s itu s lum upgrad ing ; and ( i i i) se lec t ive deve lopments in metropo l itan 
c it ies. The Bank is cur rent ly deve lop ing w ith the M in istr y of Hous ing and 
Urban Pover ty A l lev iat ion an Informa l Sett lements Improvement Pro jec t that 
w i l l incent iv ize in s itu upgrad ing of s lums and thereby encourage pr ivate 
investment in the incrementa l improvement of the ex ist ing hous ing stock . 
The pro jec t w i l l a im to improve bas ic ser v ices (water, san itat ion , sewage, 
e lec tr ic ity, pav ing, and street l ight ing) , connec t ne ighborhoods to trunk 
infrastruc ture, and mob i l ize commun ity suppor t and par t ic ipat ion . IFC ’s work 
on affordab le hous ing—a re lat ive ly new focus of its engagement in Ind ia—
enta i ls co l laborat ing w ith regu lators, f inanc ia l inst itut ions, and deve lopers 
to exp lore bus iness mode ls that w i l l enab le growth and prof itab i l ity of the 
industr y, inc lud ing suppor t ing governments w ith the struc tur ing of hous ing 
pro jec ts on a PPP bas is par t icu lar ly in low income states. 

42

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Supporting the 
modernization of 
city bus services 
including improved 
fuel efficiency, 
rehabilitation of 
infrastructure, use 
of new technology 
initiatives and 
technical assistance 
for greater 
operational and 
financial viability, 
institutional and 
capacity development 
will be a key aspect 
of the Bank’s urban 
transport strategy. 

Suppor ting PPPs will be central to IFC ’s urban work , par ticular ly to address the 
solid waste management challenges faced across most cities, as well as to help 
government improve its energy efficiency and climate change profiles through 
for example improved street lighting systems and increased renewable energy 
generation. IFC will explore the use of new technologies to address challenges 
in India’s cities through: (i) information technology applications for enhancing 
efficiency in the power, water, solid waste, and gas sectors; (ii) e -governance 
software for public sector and SMEs; (iii) mobile payment and e -payment 
solutions; (iv) smar t meter ing; and (v) e -learning systems and improve digital 
inclusion to benefit more people. In the telecom and information technology 
sectors, IFC will extend selective suppor t to companies offer ing solutions 
targeted at SMEs, banks, financial companies, and educational institutions. 
Lastly, IFC will continue its dialogue with the Government on direct financing 
for credit-wor thy municipal entities through the WBG sub-national lending 
program.19 

Outcome 2.2 Improved urban transpor t services 

Public transport in Indian cities is predominantly run by public sector 
transport monopolies and suffers from poor service quality, inefficient 

operations, deteriorating finances and dramatically declining mode shares. 
Suppor ting the modernization of city bus services including improved fuel 
efficiency, rehabilitation of infrastructure, use of new technology initiatives and 
technical assistance for greater operational and financial viability, institutional 
and capacity development will be a key aspect of the Bank ’s urban transpor t 
strategy. The Global Environmental Facility ’s Efficient and Sustainable City 
Bus Services Project currently under preparation underlies these principles of 
improved efficiency.

Outcome 2.3 Improved access to water supply and sanitation services

Mak ing India’s cities more livable will require improvements in 
the reliability, financial and environmental sustainability, and 
affordability of water supply and sanitation services. Although more 

than 90 percent of the urban population has access to dr ink ing water and 
more than 60 percent to basic sanitation , piped water is only available for 
a few hours per day and raw sewage often over flows into open drains. The 
already stressed water supply and sanitation deliver y system will have to 
be revamped to respond to the urbanization challenge—an additional 
250 million people will migrate to cities in the nex t 20 years. To improve 
ser vice deliver y, the WBG ’s work will focus on strengthening governance 
and institutional arrangements for water supply and sanitation ser vices ; 
piloting ser vice deliver y models that are efficient , accountable, and customer-
or iented (incorporating best prac tices from well-run public companies) ; 
and improving financial sustainability of providers. A successful 24-7 water 
supply pilot will be scaled up in three cities in Karnatak a . IFC will help address 
efficiency and conser vation issues in municipal, agr icultural and industr ial 
water. For example, a new program will focus on water-use efficiency in major 

19 

Financial capacity of urban local bodies, however, is comparatively very weak , with total revenue amount to less than 1 percent of the GDP (as 
compared to 6 percent in South Africa and over 7 percent in Brazil).

43

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17water-intensive commodities such as r ice, and will also help pr ivate sector 
par tners adopt water efficient technologies. Advisor y and implementation 
programs plan to suppor t water audits, business systems diagnostics, 
footpr int assessments, r isk filters, cost-effec tive water technology solutions 
and benchmark ing with industr y good prac tices. Investment oppor tunities 
in water-saving, har vesting and treatment technologies, ser vice deliver y and 
improving operational efficiency will be also explored. Lastly, MIGA stands 
ready to suppor t investors into municipal ser vices either direc tly or through 
local and foreign financial intermediar ies. 

Engagement in rural areas will include the Maharashtra Rural Water 
Supply and Sanitation Project using the new per formance for results 
instrument and a multistate Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) 
project focused on low-income states. In addition to suppor ting the 

decentralization of programs and policies under ongoing RWSS projects, key 
strategic shifts under this CPS include: (i) piloting an array of management 
models for large or multi-village schemes; (ii) suppor ting sustainable RWSS 
programs by link ing Gram Panchayats with higher levels of government and 
strengthening the capacity of Panchayati Raj institutions; (iii) integrating water 
supply and sanitation interventions into catchment-protection schemes, 
household and village environmental sanitation programs, solid waste 
management, and health and hygiene awareness promotion; (iv) piloting 
the use of PPP models for efficient and accountable service provision, and (v) 
institutionalizing and scaling up proven policies and strategies demonstrated 
through var ious Bank-suppor ted projects. 

Outcome 2.4 Increased agricultural productivity

The WBG will engage across five operational business lines: (i) inclusive 

agricultural and rural growth; (ii) technology development and low-carbon 
and climate -resilient agriculture; (iii) food and nutrition security ; (iv) agricultural 
markets; and (v) water and natural resources management; Engagement will 
be underpinned by increasingly deeper and broader analytical work , guided 
largely by findings from the on-going India agriculture productivity study. The 
overall emphasis will be on innovative approaches and systems strengthening. 
Strengthening collective action (especially among women) to facilitate access 
to better economic oppor tunities, and key services will remain a hallmark of 
Bank engagement in India’s rural development. 

With 65 percent of India’s agriculture relying solely on rainfall, 
improving the productivity of country ’s rain-fed agriculture remains 

a challenge. To this end, the Bank will suppor t the National Integrated 
Watershed Management Program in eight states. On irr igated water, the Bank ’s 
strategy is to focus on increasing agr icultural water use efficiency through 
suppor t to ongoing implementation of state level effor ts in Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. More emphasis will be 
placed on strengthening water-related institutions, and building the state and 
national capacity for the management of irr igation systems and decentralized 
management of irr igation tanks. 

The overall emphasis 
will be on innovative 
approaches 
and systems 
strengthening. 
Strengthening 
collective action 
(especially 
among women) to 
facilitate access to 
better economic 
opportunities, and 
key services will 
remain a hallmark of 
Bank engagement 
in India’s rural 
development. 

44

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17A new approach 
to develop the 
agriculture value 
chain using a PPP 
mode will be explored 
as part of the Ministry 
of Agriculture’s 
Million Farmer 
Initiative.

Ongoing implementation of state -level agricultural competitiveness 
projects in Assam, Rajasthan and Maharashtra are instrumental in 
translating increased demand for agriculture products into improved 

farmers’ income. A new approach to develop the agriculture value chain 
using a PPP mode will be explored as par t of the M inistry of Agriculture’s M illion 
Farmer Initiative. IFC advisory services will work towards promoting sustainable 
and inclusive economic growth in the agribusiness sector. To build farmers’ 
capacity, IFC will prioritize demonstration projects in the value chains of private 
sector players in key commodities. IFC suppor ted the government of Punjab 
in pioneering the first grain silos infrastructure on a PPP basis and plans to 
fur ther suppor t the government ’s food security agenda through the scaling up 
of the Food Corporation of India’s silos PPP program across eight to ten states. 
IFC will also provide patient capital to agribusinesses, strengthen agriculture 
products, logistics infrastructure (e.g. warehousing), and promote best practices 
in sustainable farming. 

The WBG will help India develop and disseminate agricultural 

technology. New methods of disseminating technology to the farming 
community, with a greater emphasis on women, will be explored. This may 
require forms of farmer collective action as well as outsourcing of publicly 
funded agricultural advisory services to private sector providers. Analytical 
work will be under taken on the likely impact of climate change on India 
agriculture. This will suppor t India’s effor ts at preparing and implementing 
approaches towards achieving greater agriculture resilience towards climate 

45

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17change (adaptation) as well as towards reducing the carbon growth intensity of 
agricultural growth (power consumption and fer tilizer use (mitigation)). 

Outcome 2.5 Improved environmental protection and biodiversity 
conservation

The WBG will focus on developing effective systems and institutions 
to enable more efficient environment management and reduction 

of resource degradation. This would include interventions in three key 
areas: (i) coastal management; (ii) industrial pollution management; and (iii) 
natural resources (par ticularly water), ecosystems and biodiversity. Effor ts to 
integrate sustainability considerations and lower carbon approaches in project 
design across sectors, but especially in infrastructure, will intensify. On coastal 
management, the Bank will suppor t the simultaneous economic development 
of India’s extensive coast line and preservation of its fragile ecosystems with 
pilots in Gujarat, Odisha, and West Bengal. The new coastal disaster risk 
reduction project in Puducherry and Tamil Nadu will also pilot improvements to 
marine fisheries, par ticularly in inshore coastal areas. On pollution management, 
Bank ’s ongoing Ganga Basin Project will help build the capacity of the National 
Ganga R iver Basin Authority to pilot wastewater collection and treatment, and 
adopt river conservation measures. The Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution 
project is helping deploy technologies and management practices for cleaning 
up toxic legacy sites. 

Outcome 2.6 Reduced Greenhouse Gas emissions through energy 
efficiency and renewable energy production 

The WBG will continue to promote low-carbon growth. The Bank will 

suppor t H imachal Pradesh’s inclusive green growth strategy through a 
ser ies of development policy loans—one of which is expec ted to be funded 
through the Clean Technology Fund. In line with its Climate business strategic 
pr ior ity, IFC investments will continue to suppor t pr ivate companies to move 
to lower carbon growth paths through renewable energy, and energy and 
resource efficiency In recent years, IFC ’s innovative PPP advisor y work in 
India has suppor ted India’s first solar roof-top projec t (Gujarat) and the first 
street lighting energy efficiency projec t in the low income states of Rajasthan 
and Odisha . IFC has also par tnered with financial institutions to expand the 
availability of capital for renewable energy and energy financing. Through its 
Clean Technology Innovation Fund, IFC will be able to invest in clean-tech 
companies, including seed investments in higher r isk sec tors and locations. 
On the advisor y front , IFC will help financial institutions to expand their focus 
on clean energy financing by promoting improved access to finance for low-
income households, strengthening microfinance networks, and introducing 
financial produc ts that enable access to clean energy, water and sanitation 
products. 

Green cities can also be a source of efficiencies. A series of C TF-funded 

projects in India aim to improve energy efficiency of equipment, buildings, 
and industry which improve cities. The proposed projects aim to reduce the 
growth of emissions from energy consumption in the country. Carbon finance 

On pollution 
management, Bank’s 
ongoing Ganga Basin 
Project will help 
build the capacity of 
the National Ganga 
River Basin Authority 
to pilot wastewater 
collection and 
treatment, and adopt 
river conservation 
measures. 

46

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17operation as well as market-based energy efficiency projects such as the Super 
Energy-efficiency Equipment Program (SEEP) suppor t Government effor ts 
to scale up energy efficient programs. The SEEP will create implementation 
structures and under take a pilot to introduce higher efficiency appliances, 
using market-based approaches. The main aim of the project is to reduce 
energy consumption associated with the rapidly growing number of consumer 
electrical appliances over the next decade. Under SEEP sales-based incentives 
for manufacturers to introduce and promote appliances that are 50 percent 
more efficient than currently available alternatives will be provided. The initial 
focus will be on ceiling fans—the second-largest selling appliance in India, with 
annual sales of more than 30 million units, increasing at 6-9 percent per year. 
This program will help create the systems and structures that can be used for 
other appliances and other applications, promoting private sector-led efficiency 
improvements. Based on an ESCO (energy service company) model, IFC ’s 
municipal level energy efficient street lighting projects in two cities aims to 
deepen the market and demonstrate successful models designed city-wide. 

The South Asia 
Infrastructure 
Facility, which 
helps governments 
design projects that 
attract private sector 
participation and 
investments, will 
focus on renewable 
energy, as well 
as water, health 
and agribusiness, 
especially in the low-
income and Northeast 
states.

IFC’s support for the power sector will be guided by its overall strategic 
focus on climate change and GHG emission reductions. To date, IFC 

has made its largest number of renewables investments in India, including 
“first-of-their-type” investments in companies with limited renewable energy 
experience. This will be done by providing them with targeted equity 
investments and debt lines, sharing global exper tise, developing suitable 
E&S standards, and advisory suppor t. Future engagements could suppor t: (i) 
innovative clean technology investments with potential for demonstration 
impact and/or scaling up; (ii) financial sustainability ; (iii) cross-border and South-
South investments (potentially par tnering with MIGA); (iv) renewable energy, 
new business models and new technologies; (v) gas-powered generation; and 
(vi) reduction of transmission and distribution losses through efficiency-linked 
investments. The South Asia Infrastructure Facility, which helps governments 
design projects that attract private sector par ticipation and investments, will 
focus on renewable energy, as well as water, health and agribusiness, especially 
in the low-income and Nor theast states. In the oil and gas sector, IFC will 
continue to provide suppor t for the development of : (i) domestic hydrocarbon 
resources to help lower the dependence on impor ts; (ii) gas transmission to 
facilitate end-user access to gas; and (iii) capacity enhancement for domestic oil 
and gas companies. 

47

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Strategic engagement area 3 

INCLUS ION

Economic integration 
and rural-urban 
transformation can 
benefit a large share 
of India’s population, 
but only if there is 
a stronger focus on 
human development 
and on policies that 
help make growth 
inclusive.

Inclusive growth is a key priority for the Government, as detailed in 

the 12th Five -Year Plan. Ensuring that everyone reaps the benefits of faster 
growth, regardless of social grouping, age, gender, or place of residence 
will require significant improvements in education, health (notably progress 
toward universal health coverage), access to water and electrical power, and 
the creation of meaningful employment and livelihoods oppor tunities. The 
Government ’s 13 large, centrally sponsored schemes for inclusiveness—
covering rural and agricultural development, health and nutrition, education, 
power, water, and urban development—will have to be reformed to drastically 
improve implementation per formance, reduce duplication, create convergence, 
and most impor tant, to improve development outcomes. Economic integration 
and rural-urban transformation can benefit a large share of India’s population, 
but only if there is a stronger focus on human development and on policies 
that help make growth inclusive. For example, a growth strategy that focuses 
on labor-intensive sectors, rather than on sk ill- and capital-intensive ones, and 
on the development of small and medium-size enterprises will help create 
productive employment oppor tunities for India’s poor people and make growth 
more inclusive. 

48

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Providing modern 
energy services for 
lighting and cooking 
is widely recognized 
as an important step 
to ensure energy 
access, especially 
in the rural areas. 
Existing activities will 
support replicable 
and sustainable 
business models for 
off-grid generation 
and supply models 
in lagging states. The 
ongoing India Power 
Sector Diagnostic 
will review progress 
on access to power 
over the last decade, 
including assess 
why household 
electrification lags 
behind village 
electrification, and 
the implementation 
and financial barriers 
to executing rural-
electrification 
projects.

India’s weak health system and poor nutritional outcomes undermine 

its competitiveness. The growing burden of non-communicable diseases 
increases disability among the work ing-age population; malnutrition reduces 
lifetime productivity ; unmanaged health care costs displace more -productive 
investments by the state and by households; and high fer tility rates keep 
women out of the workforce. The main health-related target of the 12th 
Five -Year Plan is greatly reduced rates of maternal and child mor tality. Other 
necessary changes include improving delivery systems by strengthening 
accountability, providing regulation and oversight of private providers of health 
care, and ensuring insurance coverage for more people, especially the very 
poor. 

Outcome 3.1 Improved access to electricity 

Despite increasing dependency on commercial fuels, more than 60 
percent of Indian households depend on traditional sources of energy—

fuel wood, crop residue, biomass, and animal waste. Providing modern energy 
services for lighting and cook ing is thus widely recognized as an impor tant 
step to ensure energy access, especially in the rural areas. Existing activities will 
suppor t replicable and sustainable business models for off-grid generation and 
supply models in lagging states. The ongoing India Power Sector Diagnostic 
will review progress on access to power over the last decade, including an 
assessment of why household electrification lags behind village electrification, 
and the implementation and financial barriers to executing rural-electrification 
projects. The study will also provide a detailed examination of the consumption 
subsidies given to India’s domestic consumers (who represent 25 percent of 
total electricity consumption) through tariffs, and focus on subsidy targeting 
and cost (in terms of fiscal burden). The potential for state -level engagements 
in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to develop business models of generation that 
connect very poor areas to off-grid power will be explored. IFC is under tak ing 
a par tnership with the governments of US and I taly, the Lighting Asia’s India 
program, which was launched in February 2012. This program is expected to 
provide safe, clean and affordable off-grid lighting to two million people in rural 
India by December 2015. IFC is also suppor ting SEWA to promote usage of solar 
lanterns and energy efficient cook stoves; these are key livelihood tools for rural 
households and increase their productivity in their occupations, in addition to 
mitigating climate change.

Outcome 3.2 Strengthened public and private health-delivery systems

A larger share of interventions in the health sec tor will be at the 

state level and focus on strengthen ing inst itut ions and accountab i l ity, 
deve lop ing loca l systems and capac it ies, and address ing government and 
market fa i lures. The ongo ing U ttar Pradesh Hea lth System Pro jec t a ims to 
strengthen p lann ing, human resource management , mon itor ing, supp ly 
cha in management , qua l ity enhancement , and asset management to enab le 
better ser v ice de l iver y for the ent ire popu lat ion of U ttar Pradesh—one of 
the poorest states in the countr y. The pro jec t demonstrates the potent ia l for 
Bank suppor t to ra ise the impac t of pub l ic and pr ivate hea lth expend itures 

49

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The objective of 
WBG engagement 
is to address issues 
constraining the 
development of 
accessible and 
affordable health 
care facilities, 
including access to 
capital for healthcare 
organizations, limited 
tertiary healthcare 
facilities outside of 
Tier I cities, a shortage 
of human resources 
with healthcare skills, 
lesser access and 
awareness about 
medical insurance, 
limited adoption of 
quality programs and 
standard protocols. 

and def ines a strategy for future state - leve l lend ing. A jo int IFC-Bank in it iat ive 
(Hea lth in Ind ia , box 6 .1) w i l l focus on improv ing poor peop le’s access to 
qua l ity hea lth care and reduc ing out-of-pocket expend itures in two low-
income states. IFC is pursu ing both investment and adv isor y pro jec ts in the 
hea lth- care industr y, w ith investments suppor t ing the expans ion of pr ivate 
hosp ita l cha ins in the countr y. I t focuses on n iche areas such as med ica l 
instruments and dev ices, vacc ines, b iotechno logy produc ts, and  
gener ic drugs. 

The objective of WBG engagement is to address issues constraining the 
development of accessible and affordable health care facilities, including access 
to capital for healthcare organizations, limited ter tiary healthcare facilities 
outside of Tier I cities, a shor tage of human resources with healthcare sk ills, 
lesser access and awareness about medical insurance, limited adoption of 
quality programs and standard protocols. An innovative IFC advisory project in 
Bihar is suppor ting automation of Government-to-Person payments to enhance 
efficiency of health workers and doctors by 10-15 percent. Once implemented, 
the project could be replicated across India. IFC is also assisting states to plan 
and prioritize state -wide programmatic initiatives through PPPs in the health 
sector, par ticularly in the areas of payment insurance, health networks by 
clubbing primary, secondary and ter tiary services, and diagnostic platforms for 
state -wide roll out. 

50

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Box 6.1. 
Health in India

The WBG is working to increase poor people’s access to high-quality health care and to reduce out-of-pocket expenditures in two 
low-income states. This effort, which exemplifies the approach recently adopted by the joint IFC–World Bank management team, 
recognizes the critical role that the private sector plays in health care in India. While the joint engagement began with exploring 
opportunities to work together, it has since evolved into a more systematic approach that is identified upfront, planned and 
sequenced over a period of time, drawing on respective advantages of each institution, with clear expected results. Examples of 
current engagement include supporting the state of Meghalaya in implementing a health insurance scheme. The states selected 
for further action will be low-income states in which the World Bank Group is already engaged. 

The building blocks for influencing health outcomes include: service delivery ; financing; governance; medical products and 
technologies; the health workforce; and information systems and analytics. Working with the public and private sectors, the 
intermediate outcomes of Health in India focus on improving access, affordability, equity, and quality, with the overall goal of 
improving health-related outcomes.

The program’s joint business plan identifies priorities based on a three-dimensional framework: impact, feasibility, and expected 
timelines. Its scope is driven by client delivery capacity and resources. The strengths of each institution have been clearly 
identified and a list of proposed joint and complementary interventions drawn up, with appropriate time horizons and results 
indicators (e.g., two pilot PPP transactions, accreditation of ten public and five private hospitals, reductions in out-of-pocket 
expenditures by income and caste levels, and so on).

The Bank-supported 
National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission 
aims to contribute 
to India’s efforts to 
combat high rates 
of malnutrition by 
setting up a network 
of nutrition centers 
that cater to pregnant 
women and children 
up to five years of age 
and by ensuring that 
households get access 
to food.

Outcome 3.3 Improved child nutrition delivery systems

The Bank will—through lending, analytical work and technical 
assistance—support the national government and states in 
strengthening the nutrition policy framework as well as systems and 

capacities to improve nutrition. Although restructuring and strengthening 
the ICDS will be a prime focus, Bank effor ts will also include suppor t for 
multisectoral nutrition actions, both through Government programs and 
through Bank operations in different sectors. Examples include the Bank ’s 
ongoing suppor t for the National Rural Drink ing Water Program and a series of 
state -level rural water supply and sanitation projects, including a new operation 
in low-income states. Improved provision of drinkable water and par ticularly 
sanitation in rural (as well as urban) areas is likely to have a large impact on 
health and nutrition. The Bank-suppor ted National Rural Livelihoods M ission 
aims to contribute to India’s effor ts to combat high rates of malnutrition by 
setting up a network of nutrition centers that cater to pregnant women and 
children up to five years of age and by ensuring that households get access to 
food.

Outcome 3.4 Improved access and quality of education 

The Bank will support Government efforts to improve education 
mainly at the secondary and tertiary levels, with a more pronounced 

focus on quality. Lessons learned from the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Education-
for-All Program will inform this engagement. At the secondary level, the 
implementation of the Rastriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan will suppor t 
Government effor ts to universalize secondary education by 2017. With financial 
and managerial contributions, the Bank will help expand access to, and 
strengthen delivery systems for, quality secondary education, with an eye to 

51

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17A final round of 
support to the 
Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan program 
from the Bank and 
its development 
partners will help 
improve educational 
quality and student 
learning outcomes 
at the primary level, 
incorporating greater 
involvement of the 
private sector.

52

improving on labor-market entry for young adults. Greater attention will be paid 
to teacher training, per formance, and accountability—a prime determinant 
of quality. Using new IC T technologies, the Bihar Teacher Education Project 
will help pilot innovative approaches to teacher education and professional 
development. A final round of suppor t to the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan program 
from the Bank and its development par tners will help improve educational 
quality and student learning outcomes at the primary level, incorporating 
greater involvement of the private sector. IFC ’s education sector strategy 
suppor ts the “sk ills for competitiveness” agenda, especially education projects 
with strategic clients—predominantly larger, for-profit providers with potential 
to grow and operate in several markets move down-market to reach lower-
income households, create centers of excellence, and provide employment 
oppor tunities for sk illed professionals. One of the innovations suppor ted by IFC 
to open up new markets for the private sector is the implementation of PPPs 
for a medical college—500 bed teaching and 100 seat medical—in Meghalaya 
which also has a large replication potential.

Outcome 3.5 Increased coverage of social protection programs

More than 90 percent of the labor force is in the informal sector, 
with inadequate mechanisms to absorb and manage economic risks 

and shocks. The Bank will work to enhance social protection coverage for 
this population, including for health and disability insurance, job transition 
insurance, and protection in old age. Because many programs do not reach all 
of their intended beneficiaries, with significant variation, par ticularly in low-
income states, the Bank will work with states to expand coverage. Increased use 

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Box 6.2. 
Addressing gender issues

Various social and economic indicators in India show significant and persistent gender inequalities. Beginning with the child sex 
ratio and progressing through secondary schooling, labor market participation, marriage, fertility and maternal mortality, Indian 
women and girls fare considerably worse than men and boys. The recent brutal gang rape and death of a 23 year old student in 
Delhi has raised international attention to the pervasive and extreme nature of gender-based violence in India. 

The Bank Group continues to address gender issues across its lending, investment and knowledge activities. The National Rural 
Livelihoods Project mostly targets women, and gender has been included in work on suburban transport, adaptation to climate 
change, employment, and health. The design of the Coastal Zone Management project, for example, was informed by an analysis 
of the issues faced by women and men in fishing communities and other coastal dwellers. Knowledge work included a study 
on social exclusion, which examined the unique disadvantages faced by tribal and scheduled caste women. Work on gender 
inequalities in labor outcomes, and access to and use of infrastructure and services is also ongoing. The Bank will also strengthen 
its gender-based M&E. IFC’s support to microfinance institutions predominantly benefits women, who account for 90 percent 
of borrowers. IFC’s work on Government-to-Person (G2P) payment projects improve women’s access to healthcare services and 
individualized payment services through direct money transfers to their accounts. IFC’s support to the SEWA Bank – owned and 
operated by women for the welfare of self-employed women—enabled it to expand its operations and new products. IFC also 
aims to work with private sector banks to develop and launch financial schemes targeting women owned businesses. The World 
Bank Group is adding new gender initiatives to its operations, including in the micro, small and medium enterprise sector.

But much more can be done by the Bank to engender its investments and empower women economically, socially, and in 
government. Under this CPS, more emphasis will be placed on two “inclusion” priorities: (i) reducing gender disparities in labor 
force outcomes; and ii) strengthening women’s leadership in local government. On female labor force participation much of the 
focus will be on skills development and higher education. Issues related to gender-based violence will be addressed through 
regional work as well as through collaboration with development partners who have extensive experience and knowledge 
in this area. The Bank will expand its analytical work on gender equality, most importantly by preparing the India Economic 
Development Report (InGender) in FY2013, as a follow on to the 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and 
Development. Findings from this gender analysis will be instrumental in strengthening the Bank ’s work on gender issues during 
this CPS and beyond and will support the Government of India’s National Mission for the Empowerment of Women in its analysis 
of the gender impacts of government programs. 

of IC Ts in program delivery and management will form a cornerstone of this 
work , together with capacity building and enhancement of human resources 
at local levels. An example of this approach is the Bihar Integrated Social 
Protection Project, which aims to modernize service standards and operational 
processes in order to deliver better services to more people, while also reducing 
duplication, encouraging the development of harmonized procedures, and 
introducing transparency. Ongoing NLTA suppor ts the Government ’s effor ts 
to cover t many in-k ind subsidies and suppor t programs to cash assistance 
through it new Direct Benefits Transfer initiative.  

Outcome 3.6 Enhanced rural-livelihood oppor tunities

To accelerate India’s effor ts toward inclusive rural growth, the Bank will assist 
national and state authorities in implementing rural-livelihood projects 
across 16 states under the National Rural Livelihood Project (NRLP) as well 
as ongoing state projects in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
and four Nor theastern states. NRLP and state -level interventions (with some 
variation across states) entail a three -pronged approach: (i) improving existing 
livelihoods (work ing with farmers to help them diversify products, lower cost 
of production, and identify stable markets for their goods); (ii) identifying self-
employment oppor tunities and providing both access to credit and technical 
assistance for business development; and (iii) developing sk ills that are better 

To accelerate India’s 
efforts toward 
inclusive rural 
growth, the Bank will 
assist national and 
state authorities in 
implementing rural-
livelihood projects 
across 16 states 
under the National 
Rural Livelihood 
Project (NRLP) as 
well as ongoing state 
projects in Bihar, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, and four 
Northeastern states.

53

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17matched to the needs of the market. Women are the main beneficiaries of the 
projects, a good example of the WBG’s emphasis on gender in India (box 6.2). 
Livelihoods will continue to be a main source of off-farm job creation in rural 
India.

Outcome 3.7 Increased access to financ ial services

The WBG will promote integrated approaches to financial inclusion 
by facilitating access to credit and other financial services to farmers 

and households. Two ongo ing lend ing operat ions (rura l cred it coops and 
sca l ing up of susta inab le and respons ib le m icrof inance) and two p lanned 
operat ions ( low- income hous ing f inance and agr icu lture insurance) w i l l 
be centra l to the Bank ’s response in th is area . The low- income hous ing 
f inance pro jec t w i l l prov ide informa l hous ing f inance for peop le w ithout 
documented income and proper ty r ights, wh i le the agr icu ltura l insurance 
pro jec t w i l l ensure that a greater number of farmers have crop insurance. The 
Bank w i l l he lp m icrof inance inst itut ions integrate respons ib le m icrof inance 
pr inc ip les into the ir work and deve lop new f inanc ia l produc ts for the poor 
such as m icro -pens ions and m icro -hea lth insurance. The rura l l ive l ihood 
programs descr ibed in the prev ious paragraph w i l l cont inue the ir focus 
on expand ing poor househo lds’ access investment and sav ings. IFC ’s key 
ob jec t ive w i l l be to improve the depth and qua l ity of f inanc ia l ser v ices 
through : ( i) f inanc ia l produc t d ivers if icat ion ; ( i i) respons ib le f inance i .e. 
promot ing f inanc ia l awareness among c l ients and transparent repor t ing 
by f inanc ia l inst itut ions ; and ( i i i) suppor t ing de l iver y channe ls us ing new 
techno logy and agents. New approaches to de l iver y of f inanc ia l ser v ices w i l l 

The Bank will 
help microfinance 
institutions integrate 
responsible 
microfinance 
principles into their 
work and develop 
new financial 
products for the 
poor such as micro-
pensions and micro-
health insurance. 

54

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The National Cyclone 
Risk Mitigation 
Project helps 
strengthen the 
capacity of state 
disaster-management 
agencies to mitigate 
the impact of and 
respond to cyclones 
in vulnerable coastal 
states. 

be key in com ing years to expand the last m i le reach . IFC has a lready begun 
work in th is regard w ith Government-to -Person payments and w i l l cont inue 
to work on innovat ion in payments systems, a lternat ive de l iver y channe ls, 
rem ittances, and government payments.

Outcome 3.8 Enhanced disaster-risk management system

The Bank ’s work in th is area has two strands : ( i) he lp ing bu i ld inst itut iona l 
capac ity to prepare for and manage the impac t of natura l d isasters and ( i i) 
he lp ing peop le protec t themse lves from natura l d isasters and recover qu ick ly 
from them . The Nat iona l Cyc lone R isk M it igat ion Pro jec t he lps strengthen 
the capac ity of state d isaster-management agenc ies to m it igate the impac t 
of and respond to cyc lones in vu lnerab le coasta l states. The second phase 
of the pro jec t w i l l focus on Gu jarat , Kera la , Maharashtra , and West Benga l. 
Techn ica l ass istance he lps bu i ld Government capac ity to conduc t r isk 
assessments for geophys ica l hazards and vu lnerab i l it ies, estab l ish bu i ld ing 
and p lann ing standards, and p i lot innovat ive approaches to r isk m it igat ion . 
To m it igate r isks of and vu lnerab i l ity to natura l d isasters, espec ia l ly in coasta l 
areas, the Bank focuses on access to emergency she lter and on evacuat ion 
and protec t ion aga inst w ind storms, f lood ing, and storm surges in h igh-r isk 
areas.

55

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
7. Implementing the WBG 
Country Partnership Strategy 

Guiding principles of engagement 

In addition to India’s 12th Five-Year Plan, the World Bank’s engagement 
is guided by the Government’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment” 

approach, which lays out the Government’s vision of how best to use the 
financing and expertise of multilateral institutions to address India’s development 
challenges. Support should be focused on projects that transform and modernize 
policies and institutions, leverage resources, and pilot new and innovative 
development approaches. Special emphasis will be placed on multi-sectoral 
projects and programs, as well as on creating synergies with existing Government 
programs across sectors. Although access to financing remains important to 
India’s development, the services that come with that financing are particularly 
valued. Those services include the transfer of knowledge and international good 
practices, guidance on reforming processes and systems, and the building of 
capacity for improved service delivery. These principles will be applied jointly by the 
Government and the World Bank to manage the program described in this CPS.

56

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The Government’s approach to working with multilaterals calls for 
a rebalancing of the World Bank portfolio toward more state-level 
activities, particularly in low-income and special category states (table 

7.1). Overall, the aim of that rebalancing will be to raise the share of the Bank ’s 
commitments devoted to direct financing of state projects to 60 percent, of 
which half (30 percent of total lending) will go to low-income and special 
category states. Under the previous CAS, 18 percent of the Bank ’s total lending 
went to these states.20 Under this CPS, the approach for engaging low-income 
and special category states will build on lessons learned from successes and 
failures over the last four years. Initial engagement will include holding high-
level multi-sectoral discussions at the state level, together with the IFC, to 
identify synergies among programs and the mix of instruments that best suits 
the particular circumstances of each state. Specific activities will build on the 
successful approach already adopted in Bihar, which combines extensive 
capacity building, technical assistance, and analytical work that underpins 
lending operations. Past experience also shows the relevance of local knowledge, 
particularly in the context of state-level political economy.

IFC is also intensifying its program in low-incomes states. Its strategy aims 

to ensure that people at the “base of the pyramid” gain greater access to finance, 
infrastructure, and markets, while work ing to formalize the private sector in 
these states. IFC is in the process of expanding its program in Bihar, Odisha, and 
Rajasthan by increasing investments and improving business-climate reforms 
(with a special emphasis on small and medium-size enterprises), enhancing 
certainty and transparency, and reducing business risks. Twenty-two percent of all 
investments and 31 percent of all projects in India were in LISs in FY2009-13Y TD. 
The share of IFC advisory services in LISs tripled from 21 percent in FY2009 to 66 
percent as of February FY2013. Currently, 44 out of 66 advisory projects in India 
involve at least one low-income state. By the end of this CPS period, IFC aims 
to invest approximately $2.3 billion, and facilitate another $1.4 billion in private 
investment in low-income states.

Table 7.1. 
Low-income and special category states (US$)

The approach for 
engaging low-income 
and special category 
states will build 
on lessons learned 
from successes and 
failures over the last 
four years. Initial 
engagement will 
include holding 
high-level multi-
sectoral discussions 
at the state level, 
together with the IFC, 
to identify synergies 
among programs 
and the mix of 
instruments that best 
suits the particular 
circumstances of 
each state. Past 
experience also 
shows the relevance 
of local knowledge, 
particularly in the 
context of state -level 
political economy.

Low-income States
Population 
% Poor
(mn)
103.8
25.5
33.0
72.6
41.9
68.6
199.6
545.1

53.5
48.7
39.1
36.7
37.0
24.8
37.7
39.5

GSDP per 
capita
294 Assam
695 Himachal Pradesh
589 Manipur
555 Meghalaya
676 Mizoram
666 Sikk im
436 Uttarakhand
494 Total

Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Jharkhand
Madhya Pradesh
Odisha
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
Total

Special Category States
Population 
% Poor
(mn)

GSDP per 
capita

31.2
6.9
2.7
3.0
1.1
0.6
10.1
55.5

37.9
9.5
47.1
17.1
21.1
13.1
18.0
29.5

536
1,267
569
866
883
1,715
1,233
792

Notes: GSDP PC has been converted from INR to USD using the period average exchange rate. Total for population weighted average of the group. Total % of 
poor is the HCR for the group. Special category states are mostly northern mountainous states, sparsely populated, and those with high transport costs leading to 
high delivery cost of public services. (as defined in the 13th Finance Commission). IFC also includes West Bengal, but excludes Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. 
Sources: Census 2011, Planning Commission, poverty figures 2009-10, CSO GSDP, 2010-11, MF-IFS exchange rate

20 

Low-income states and special category states also benefit from IDA/IBRD support to multistate projects and centrally sponsored schemes. 

57

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Sharing knowledge 
and international 
good practices 
can help leverage 
public financing by 
improving design, 
implementation, 
and monitoring on 
a national scale. 
The core concept 
in World Bank 
support for centrally 
sponsored schemes 
will be to support 
the Government 
in scaling up 
successful state -level 
interventions into 
national programs. 

Lending to more advanced states will predominantly focus on activities 
that are innovative and transformative. Projects in more advanced 

states can test second-generation approaches, which then can be applied 
to low-income states that often have limited capacity. For example, the pilot 
Beneficiary Verification System for health services, which produces timely 
data, is serving more than 3,000 beneficiaries in Karnataka and may now be 
replicated in the low-income state of Uttar Pradesh. IFC, having led many 
innovative renewable -energy investments in India, will promote the replication 
of its solar rooftop pilot in Gandhinagar in five additional cities in Gujarat and 
develop solar policy recommendations to engage other state governments. 

Support for centrally sponsored schemes and national projects will 
focus on capacity and institution building. Sharing knowledge and 

international good practices can help leverage public financing by improving 
design, implementation, and monitoring on a national scale. The core concept 
in World Bank suppor t for centrally sponsored schemes will be to suppor t the 
Government in scaling up successful state -level interventions into national 
programs. The World Bank has played an impor tant role in such effor ts; in the 
process, it has learned that success is not always guaranteed. Suppor t for the 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Education-for-All Program, for example, has shown 
that successful scaling-up requires significant upfront inputs into improving 
management and fiduciary systems, building national institutions, careful 
supervision, and adjustments along the way. Increasingly, projects will focus 
on helping states implement programs suppor ted by central schemes. The 
complex challenges of bringing development solutions to national scale in a 
large and diverse country like India require a learning par tnership.

Given the size, diversity and magnitude of India’s development 
challenges, selectivity principles are central to World Bank Group 

engagement under this CPS. Selectivity in the India context is primarily 
about the “where” and “how ” of WBG engagement, the former guided by the 
Government ’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment ” approach and the latter 
by management and staff ’s understanding that better collaboration across the 
WBG and sectors is likely to result in improved development outcomes. Unlike 
previous CAS periods, country-led selectivity principles are being applied 
more systematically upstream by Government, and internally by the India 
management team. Such a concer ted effor t is needed to intensify engagement 
in low- income and special category states. Selectivity principles will also be 
applied to IFC ’s engagement in low-income states. IFC will aim to suppor t 
projects/programs that offer scope for scalability. For example, alongside a 
growing number of business and development par tners, IFC is suppor ting 
inclusive business models to expand access to goods, services, and livelihood 
oppor tunities for those at the “base of the pyramid” in commercially viable and 
scalable ways. Such models have huge potential for scale up, and contribute to 
the goals of reducing pover ty and boosting shared prosperity.

58

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
The FY2009-12 CAS 
Completion Report 
found that direct 
lending to low-income 
and special category 
states requires 
long-term support 
for capacity and 
institution building 
and underscores the 
importance of local 
knowledge as well 
as analytical and 
advisory support.

Lessons from country strategy 2009-12

The FY2009–12 CAS Completion Repor t (CASCR) drew implications and 
highlighted recommendations for this CPS21. First, India’s complex and dynamic 
development environment demands a full and integrated toolk it of the WBG’s 
analytic, advisory, convening, and financial instruments. There is ample scope 
for proactive management of knowledge work , including project-embedded 
knowledge and impact evaluations, to ensure continuous innovation and 
learning and to fully integrate and build positive interactions between 
knowledge products and financing. This includes not only bringing global 
best practices to India, but pollinating Indian exper tise through South–South 
knowledge exchange.

Second, the synergy between state and national interventions can make 
significant contributions to enhanced leverage and enhance the impact 

of Bank-supported activities. For example, experience gained at the state 
level (e.g., in programs in education and rural livelihoods) can provide valuable 
design inputs, increasing the relevance of national schemes to varying state 
circumstances while helping to strengthen management systems at both the 
state and national levels. However, the CASCR also found that direct lending to 
low-income and special category states requires long-term suppor t for capacity 
and institution building and underscores the impor tance of local knowledge 
as well as analytic and advisory suppor t. Moreover, replicating successful state 
projects at the national level is more than just scaling up: Upgrading or creating 
new institutions and fiduciary systems at the national level takes time as well as 
willingness to learn and adapt.

Third, the CASCR identified two collaboration challenges that must be 

addressed in the CPS. First, although the need for multi-sector approaches 
is increasingly impor tant if the WBG is to help India make inroads into key 
challenges (e.g., urban, nutrition, water resources), multi-sector activities 
fell shor t under the FY2009–12 CAS. Second, despite recent improvements, 
collaboration between IBRD, IDA, IFC, and MIGA will have to be deepened if 
the potential impact of WBG effor ts is to be fully realized. Such collaboration 
can yield most when all components of the WBG pursue common strategic 
objectives (e.g., a joint approach in a low-income state or on a par ticular 
issue, such as increased investment in climate -change adaptation). Effective 
collaboration should reflect each institution’s relative operational strengths, 
thereby producing a result greater than what each institution could achieve 
independently. PPPs are one area in which experience under the FY2009–12 
CAS demonstrated clearly differing institutional strengths, with IFC ’s transaction 
and business climate experience complementing the policy orientation of 
the World Bank . Given India’s own extensive experience with PPPs, this is a 
promising area for enhanced collaboration.

21 

The full FY2009-12 CAS Completion Report is available online at: www.worldbank .org/en/country/india.

59

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The current IBRD/IDA 
portfolio includes 
net commitments of 
$23.7 billion across 78 
projects. At the end 
of January 2013, IFC’s 
committed portfolio 
contained 219 
projects amounting 
to $4.8 billion, 
including $564 
million syndications. 
MIGA has no 
existing exposure 
in India, but may 
support investments 
into critical areas 
during the CPS 
period through the 
provision of credit 
enhancement. 

Current WBG por tfolio

The CPS builds on a large current portfolio, which will be the main 
source of development results under this CPS. The current IBRD/IDA 

por tfolio includes net commitments of $23.7 billion across 78 projects. O f that 
amount, $16.7 billion is undisbursed, reflecting a relatively young por tfolio 
(38 percent of the total undisbursed amount is for projects approved by the 
Board in the last two years). At the end of January 2013, IFC ’s committed 
por tfolio contained 219 projects amounting to $4.8 billion, including $564 
million syndications. MIGA has no existing exposure in India, but may suppor t 
investments into critical areas during the CPS period through the provision 
of credit enhancement. Por tfolio per formance has varied. The growth of 
the por tfolio in recent years is reflected in the por tfolio per formance as 
measured by standard metrics. The average por tfolio age has gone down 
with the attendant impact on the por tfolio disbursement ratio. The IDA/IBRD 
disbursement ratio22 dropped in FY2012 to 13 percent after peak ing at 27.6 
percent in FY2010, reflecting the retirement of well-disbursing projects and 
the inclusion of new projects into the por tfolio. Disbursements are generally 
expected to be low in the first two years, while project implementation is being 
launched. At the same time—and in some cases—the World Bank may have 
underestimated the implementation challenges of large national and multi-
state projects. 

Lessons from implementation show that starting with smaller initial 
commitments to each program might be better. Experience also suggests 

the wisdom of tak ing earlier action to readjust, restructure, “right-size,” or cancel 
operations that are not per forming well. Teams must be realistic, and willing to 
change course early on in project implementation. 

During the last CAS period, IFC delivered a strong program. During 

FY2009–12, IFC committed $4.5 billion in total financing (including its own 
account and mobilized funds), with nearly 34 percent suppor ting infrastructure. 
Through end February 2013, IFC has committed $822 million in total financing. 
Thir ty-four percent of IFC ’s own account commitments were in equity and 
63 percent were in loans. IFC ’s India por tfolio is per forming well. Investments 
in low-income states have grown from $60 million in FY2009 to $265 million 
in FY13 as of end of February 2013, an increase of 342 percent. The advisory 
por tfolio has grown from $30 million over 42 projects in FY2009 to $55 million 
in 66 projects by end February 2013.

The World Bank and the Government of India are working together to 

improve portfolio management. To address the recent decline in por tfolio 
per formance parameters and accelerate implementation, the Government 
of India and the World Bank have identified major bottlenecks and are 
work ing with project authorities to remove them. Sector- and state -specific 
por tfolio reviews, under taken in cooperation with relevant line ministries, as 
well as reviews of risky and slow-disbursing projects, are held regularly, with 
time -bound action plans, agreed disbursement targets, and close follow up. 
Project restructurings are being carried out more frequently, with around 30 

22 

The ratio of the amount of disbursements in a given fiscal year to the undisbursed balance at the beginning of the fiscal year.

60

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17restructurings, including par tial cancellations, completed in FY2012 alone. 
Discussions are ongoing to “right-size” a few national level operations. New 
projects are being subjected to more -rigorous readiness criteria by the World 
Bank and the Government to ensure improved implementation. In the shor t 
term, these measures have meant that new lending has dropped to allow 
teams to focus on mak ing the existing por tfolio per form better. Continued 
proactive por tfolio management will be needed to turn the per formance of the 
por tfolio around. 

A focus on governance and public financial management will also 
help improve the design and implementation of Bank-suppor ted 

projects. Under the CPS , effor ts will be made to integrate India’s public 
financial management systems and accountability mechanisms (budgeting, 
accounting, public expenditure management , ex ternal auditing, corporate 
governance, r ight to information , and redressal of citizens’ gr ievances) and 
tools (social audits, e -projec t management , and e -monitor ing) into Bank 
operations. The Bank ’s technical suppor t will aim to strengthen program-
level budgeting and implementation of a new char t of accounts to improve 
link ages between spending and per formance. The Bank will also help 
strengthen and scale up the government ’s Central Plan Scheme Monitor ing 
System (CPSMS) , monitor ing of central plan funds by enabling real-time 
track ing of expenditures. Procurement and financial management capacity 
building components in WBG-financed projects will aim to strengthen and 
mainstream countr y systems. Governance and accountability ac tion plans—
required for all Bank operations in India—will continue to help mitigate 
fiduciar y r isks while promoting institutional effectiveness for better ser vice 
deliver y. 

The knowledge portfolio will complement and underpin lending 
operations, especially in low-income and special category states, and 
in relatively new areas of engagement. In a countr y as sophisticated 

and diverse as India, there is no dear th of knowledge providers. The WBG ’s 
value lies in its ability to focus on long-term, complex, multisectoral issues; 
to br ing together exper ience from across the wor ld; and engage deeply in 
policy, program, and project implementation. I ts knowledge is conveyed 
through analytical and advisor y services, impact evaluations, and research 
and embedded in operations and lending. The Wor ld Bank Group also acts as 
a convener, br inging together Indian and foreign policymakers on key policy 
issues, such as clean energy, job creation, and informality, and facilitating 
exchanges of South-South knowledge. The Bank and the Indian Government 
regular ly review the knowledge por tfolio to maximize the strategic relevance 
and timeliness of knowledge products.

The Wor ld Bank Group’s knowledge agenda for FY2013–17 will be guided by 
(i) focusing in-depth analytical work on a few key cross-sectoral questions 
(e.g., growth and inclusion, energy, and urbanization), carr ied out in 
par tnership with local and international institutions; (ii) informing design and 
implementation of future interventions by drawing on impact evaluations 
(e.g., on rural livelihood programs); (iii) responding quick ly and flexibly with 
demand-dr iven technical assistance and just-in-time knowledge suppor t to 
help reform and implementation; (iv) broker ing South-South and across-state 

Under the CPS, 
efforts will be made 
to integrate India’s 
public financial 
management systems 
and accountability 
mechanisms 
(budgeting, 
accounting, public 
expenditure 
management, 
external auditing, 
corporate 
governance, right 
to information, 
and redressal of 
citizens’ grievances) 
and tools (social 
audits, e -project 
management, and 
e -monitoring) into 
Bank operations.

61

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The end goal is to 
deliver an integrated 
package of support, 
especially to low-
income and special 
category states 
that combines 
financing instruments 
knowledge and 
advisory services 
best suited to the 
development needs 
of the each state, 
while building on 
the comparative 
advantage of both the 
World Bank and IFC.

knowledge exchanges; (v) developing flexible programmatic approaches 
to develop analytic and advisor y activities; and (vi) scaling up training 
capacity. Under the CPS, dissemination of knowledge across government and 
nongovernment stakeholders will be enhanced.

At the hear t of the World Bank Group knowledge agenda will be a series of 
stand-alone analytical products that aim to inform public debate around key 
reforms critical to India’s continued high economic growth, pover ty reduction 
and increased prosperity. Topics for such work will be identified over time, 
although work on PPPs, nutrition and acceleration pover ty reduction and 
shared prosperity is likely to commence at the beginning of the CPS period. 
Effor ts will also be made to link country-specific work to regional flagship 
repor ts in areas that suppor t the CPS. The regional flagship on jobs (FY12) 
would suppor t economic integration, upcoming flagship on inequality (FY14) 
will likely feed into work that is relevant to the inclusion engagement area, 
and finally the regional flagship on urbanization (FY15) could inform country-
specific analytical work on India’s rural-urban transformation. 

Collaboration and par tnerships

Exploiting “synergies by design” versus “synergies by chance” will 
enhance the development impact of the WBG’s program. Experience 

during the previous CAS period has shown that effective and planned 
collaboration between the World Bank and IFC is possible in India. A notable 
example of this is the joint financing of the $270 million loan/investment for 
the PowerGrid Corporation of India, which suppor ts PowerGrid ’s access to 
international commercial bank ing markets and leverages the IBRD ’s 18-year 
par tnership. Collaborative work is also underway in the health sector in two 
low-income states (see box 6.2). Under this CPS, collaboration will increase 
significantly through closer interactions at all staff levels and across all relevant 
sectors. As a first step, sessions on operationalizing the CPS across the three 
engagement areas, as well as in focus low-income and special category states 
will be organized. Using the model developed for expanded engagement in 
Uttar Pradesh—one of India’s poorest states—effor ts will be made to identify 
synergies early in the project identification and preparation process, so that 
collaboration is better planned. The end goal is to deliver an integrated package 
of suppor t, especially to low-income and special category states that combines 
financing instruments knowledge and advisory services best suited to the 
development needs of the each state, while building on the comparative 
advantage of both the World Bank and IFC. The proposed state -level 
infrastructure program—identified as one of the five programs for increased 
collaboration—will focus on expanding infrastructure in two states. 

In addition to increased collaboration in focus states, two areas are likely to 
benefit from the “synergies by design” approach: investment climate and 
public-private par tnerships. The World Bank and IFC will work together to help 
the Government to improve the investment climate, where joint economic 
and sector work could be pursued. Similarly, on PPPs, where the World Bank 
(through its economic and sector work and technical assistance) and IFC 
(through its advisory services) could help government and quasi-governmental 

62

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Opportunities to take 
further advantage of 
synergies between 
the Bank Group and 
other development 
partners will be 
pursued in areas 
of mutual interest, 
such as regional 
integration, 
infrastructure 
financing, climate 
change, and 
governance. 

agencies carry out regulatory reforms in sectors where IFC ’s investments 
(and possibly MIGA credit enhancement) could significantly boost private 
par ticipation. Oppor tunities for increased collaboration with MIGA, the World 
Bank Institute, and the Water and Sanitation Program will also be explored. 

The WBG will continue to work in partnership with many bilateral 
and multilateral donors to help India address its most-pressing 

development challenges. Par tnerships take many forms, including the 
pooling of financial resources, knowledge creation and dissemination, capacity 
building, and suppor t for the supervision and implementation of Bank 
operations. Oppor tunities to take fur ther advantage of synergies between 
the Bank Group and other development par tners will be pursued in areas 
of mutual interest, such as regional integration, infrastructure financing, 
climate change, and governance. Several Bank operations are co-funded by 
external donors: Primary and secondary education projects have benefited 
from co-financing from the U.K . Depar tment for International Development. 
The Japan International Cooperation Agency has suppor ted the Dedicated 
Freight Corridor Project and urban development in Karnataka and Tamil 
Nadu. For the Asian Development Bank , the Government of India follows an 
essentially geographic approach to come to a division of labor. The objective is 
to maximize the suppor t from both major MDBs across a range of sectors but 
minimize transaction costs at State level. This approach has worked well and 
given both institutions’ capital limitations, it is really the only viable choice for 
now. Por tfolio reviews of lending and AAA benefit from ADB par ticipation.

The WBG India program has benefited from trust funds. Trust funds 

focusing on global par tnerships and public goods have suppor ted many 
activities in India, most prominently in health. The Global Fund for AIDS, 
Tuberculosis, and Malaria has disbursed almost $800 million in India since 
its inception in 2003. Two donor trust funds—from DFID and AusAid—have 
suppor ted analytical work and capacity building effor ts. In 2009, DFID renewed 
its suppor t, with a contribution of £20 million, increasing that by £6.5 million 
in 2012. Funding has helped leverage the World Bank ’s suppor t to improve 
service delivery, address climate change, and promote inclusive growth and 
governance in low-income states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, 
and Odisha. AusAid is providing $3.4 million through its South Asia Region 
Infrastructure for Growth trust fund to suppor t project preparation. Sixty 
percent of IFC ’s advisory program in India is suppor ted by donor trust funds. 
The US Depar tment of State and Government of I taly contributed a total of $4 
million to the “Lighting Asia India Program. The Netherlands and Japan are other 
major donors. In an effor t to diversify funding sources, IFC advisory is work ing to 
engage with new par tners such as the Gates Foundation on improving health 
services and promoting financial inclusion in Bihar.

63

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–178. Financing the strategy

Financial support for this CPS should be commensurate with the scale 
of the challenge of helping India to accelerate poverty reduction and 

boost prosperity. Although the World Bank Group’s contribution to the 
government ’s overall development is small, the government ’s “Innovation 
Impulse with Investment ” approach means that World Bank Group’s 
involvement can be catalytic and transformative when financing is combined 
with knowledge and experience. Suppor ting the government ’s objective of 
faster and more inclusive growth are three project selection filters: (i) systemic 
or transformational impact; (ii) innovation and piloting of new approaches; and 
(iii) financial leveraging. Government expects World Bank commitments to be 
distributed among low-income and special category states (30 percent), other 
states (30 percent) and national programs and centrally sponsored schemes 
(40 percent). Mak ing growth more inclusive also entails targeting pockets of 
pover ty in more advanced states, where innovative approaches can be piloted 
and later replicated in poorer states. National projects that make substantial 
investments in energy and transpor t, for example, help generate more growth. 

64

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17To make a meaningful contribution to the assault on poverty, the 
Government of India is seeking about $5 billion annually in support 

from the World Bank Group. However, the WBG’s ability to provide such 
levels of financing is uncer tain due to two main factors: India approaching 
its Single Borrower Limit (SBL) for IBRD exposure, currently at $17.5 billion 
and India’s graduation from IDA at the end of FY14. The SBL prevents IBRD 
from being able expand lending to make up for the loss of IDA resources at 
graduation to IBRD-only status. Beginning in FY15, suppor t to India would 
drop precipitously to an annual average of about $600 million IBRD for FY15-
FY17. Look ing at the full CPS period (FY13-17), annual levels of IDA/IBRD would 
average only $1.4 billion. Moreover, total net flows from IBRD/IDA turn negative 
in FY18 due largely to India’s graduation from IDA. (Figure 8.1) Graduation 
also triggers contractual accelerated credit repayments on a large share of 
outstanding IDA debt.23

To ease the hard constraint of the SBL, India has agreed to use its own 
resources to purchase Special Private Placement Bonds (SPPBs). In 2012, 

the Board approved the use of SPPBs by India of up to $4.3 billion. Beginning 
in FY14, this additional headroom would enable India to borrow an annual 
average of $2.4 billion of IBRD/IDA over the CPS period, an additional billion per 
year. 

Although the 
World Bank Group’s 
contribution to the 
government’s overall 
development is small, 
the government’s 
“Innovation Impulse 
with Investment” 
approach means 
that World Bank 
Group’s involvement 
can be catalytic and 
transformative when 
financing is combined 
with knowledge and 
experience.

Figure 8.1. 
Impact of IDA Graduation on India, by IDA Replenishment, IDA15-19

(in ‘000 US dollars)
(no SPPBs, no IDA transitional support)

IDA and IBRD lending to India

7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
-1,000
-2,000
-3,000

IDA15 
(ave.)

IDA16 
(ave.)

IDA17 
(ave.)

IDA18 
(ave.)

IDA19 
(ave.)

IBRD Commitments
IDA Commitments
IBRD/IDA Total Net Flows w/o Transitional Support

Sources: World Bank data (actuals); staff estimates for projections.

23 

India’s graduation from IDA also has implications on net flows because of the contractual IDA credit acceleration clause which would be triggered. 
Due to India’s high outstanding IDA credit balance ($26.4 billion as of December 2012) there will be a significant increase in principal repayments 
by $0.5 billion a year in FY2015-FY20 from $1.2 billion under the current repayment schedule to $1.7 billion. Although transitional IDA support 
would help offset the overall reduction in net flows during the CPS period, they are estimated to become negative in FY18.

65

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Transitional IDA 
support would be 
used to tackle India’s 
unfinished poverty 
agenda as laid out in 
this CPS.

Although India will graduate from IDA at the end of FY14, it is being 
proposed as a candidate to receive transitional IDA support for the 

IDA17 period. Transitional IDA suppor t would be used to tack le India’s 
unfinished pover ty agenda as laid out in this CPS. The terms for transitional 
IDA financing would be harder than those of IDA hard-term lending, but less 
than the fixed rate equivalent of an IBRD loan. Although a final decision on the 
volumes and terms of transitional suppor t will not be reached until late 2013, 
IDA Deputies were broadly suppor tive of the proposal to provide transitional 
IDA suppor t to India presented at the first IDA17 replenishment meeting. 

With the combination of SPPBs and assuming transitional IDA support 
at the levels proposed to Deputies in the March IDA17 replenishment 
meeting, annual commitments for IBRD/IDA could average about $3 

billion over the CPS period. (Figure 8.2). SPPBs would be purchased in FY14 
when India hits the SBL and be used to help finance the lending program laid 
out in Annex B3. IDA levels in FY14 are low because of India’s frontloading 
of IDA and utilizing the remainder of the IDA16 envelope. And, even with 
transitional IDA suppor t, net flows turn negative in FY18.

IFC investments are expected to be around $1 billion annually. IFC 

will maintain its focus on private sector development through multiple 
engagements focusing on inclusion and improving access, enhancing regional 
and global integration, and mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. 
During the CPS period, IFC expects to invest approximately $2.3 billion in the 
low-income states. IFC also expects to invest around $350-400 million direct 
and mobilized financing per annum in infrastructure water, transpor t, telecom 
and IT and IT-enabled sectors. 

Figure 8.2. 
Annual IDA and IBRD lending to India, FY09-24

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0

-2,000

-4,000

CPS Period

FY9

FY10

FY11

FY12

FY13

FY14

FY15

FY16

FY17

FY18

FY19

FY20

FY21

FY22

FY23

FY24

IBRD Commitments

IDA Commitments

IBRD through SPPBs

Possible transition support

IBRD/IDA Net Flows

IBRD/IDA Total Net Flows w/o Transitional Support

Sources: Actuals through FY12 and Staff estimates for projections. 

66

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17World Bank 
Group support 
for an ambitious 
engagement in India 
would necessitate 
the development of 
innovative solutions 
to leverage higher 
levels of financing 
consistent with India’s 
“Innovation Impulse 
with Investment” 
approach. 

Overall average annual WBG financing is estimated to be about $3 
billion from IBRD and IDA (assuming transitional support from IDA and 

use of SPPBs) and $1 billion from IFC. This is still shor t of India’s expressed 
borrowing needs of about $5 billion. Although hypothetical, the impact of 
additional IBRD headroom would help ease the hard constraints of the SBL. If 
management were to recommend, and the Board were to approve, say a $1 
billion increase in the SBL for India, additional lending space of about $500 
million a year for three years would be created. World Bank Group suppor t 
for an ambitious engagement in India would necessitate the development 
of innovative solutions to leverage higher levels of financing consistent with 
India’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment ” approach. 

To maximize potential financing for India, the World Bank is also 
exploring ways of restructuring poorly-per forming projects in the 

portfolio. “R ight sizing” or cancelling par t and restructuring the remainder of a 
poorly-per forming operation can free up resources in the shor t-term, allowing 
for the commitment of resources to higher impact activities. An example is 
the proposed cancellation of the $1 billion IBRD-financed India Infrastructure 
Finance Company, Ltd. (IIFCL), and using the tied up capital for a similarly-sized 
infrastructure project. 

The WBG can play an important catalytic role beyond its own resources to 
help India mobilize long-term financing. To complement existing World Bank 

Group’s existing financial instruments, innovative means to mobilize long-term 
financing can respond to India’s expressed need for help to fill its infrastructure 
financing gap. Strengthening India’s capital markets, developing a long-term 
corporate bond market and enabling securitization of assets are additional 
avenues to explore.

67

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
9. Monitoring of results

The CPS results framework will be the key instrument for monitoring 
the implementation of the WBG country program in India (Annex 1). 

The results matrix presents the priority outcomes of the WBG in India, which are 
aligned with the objectives of the Government ’s 12th Five -Year Plan. The country 
program aims to suppor t the Government in areas where the WBG has a clear 
comparative advantage. I t includes ongoing and indicative lending, advisory 
an analytical activities, technical assistance, and key trust-funded activities for 
FY13-14. The matrix comprises 19 outcomes, expected to be achieved through 
mostly ongoing WBG engagements at the national, state, and local levels. A 
total of 33 indicators—all linked to the ongoing lending and AAA por tfolio—
will be monitored throughout the CPS period. The achievement of CPS results 
will depend to a large extent on ongoing activities and the speed at which new 
programs are developed and implemented. 

The three overarching goals of the CPS: reduced poverty, increased 
shared prosperity and rapid economic growth reflect the CPS vision for 
India in 2030 under the ambitious scenario, a country gradually regaining 

the economic status it once had in history. As such, these are the long-term 
goals, to which the WBG program will strive to contribute in the shor t term or 
over the next five -years. Activities in three broad areas of WBG engagement: 

68

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17integration, transformation and inclusion will in turn contribute to one or more 
of the overarching goals. 

While most activities in the current WBG portfolio contribute to one or 
more of the three overarching goals, the main linkage is through the 
WBG’s increased support to India’s low-income and special category 

states (see Table 7.1). Combined, these four teen states account for about 
half of India’s population, of which 38.6 percent are poor. The WBG financing, 
analytical work and advisory services will therefore aim to contribute to two 
specific high-level country outcomes: increased economic growth as measured 
by GSDP per capita (on average $512.5 in 2011), and decrease in pover ty 
(in 2011 38.6 percent of the total population in 14 LIS and Special Category 
States were poor). Analytical work underpinning this CPS also clearly indicates 
that economic integration across states and countries leads to per capita 
income convergence. Guided by the Government ’s “Innovation Impulse with 
Investment ” approach, the CPS therefore, focuses on India’s low-income and 
special category states in an effor t to contribute to a more balanced growth 
across the country. 

The WBG financing, 
analytical work and 
advisory services 
will therefore aim 
to contribute to two 
specific high-level 
country outcomes: 
increased economic 
growth as measured 
by GSDP per capita 
(on average $512.5 in 
2011), and decrease in 
poverty (in 2011 38.6 
percent of the total 
population in 14 LIS 
and Special Category 
States were poor). 

The results framework will mainly monitor outcomes and indicators at 

the program level. Directly mapped to the WBG program, these outcomes 
(18 in all) and indicators will be tracked and used mid-and end-CPS period to 
assess WBG per formance. Each outcome suppor ts relevant Government goals 
as defined in the Government ’s 12th Plan. A significant depar ture from past 
practice and reflection of continued effor ts at improved collaboration across 
the WBG is the inclusion of common indicators that aggregate IDA, IBRD and 
IFC contributions and program toward program level outcomes. 

CPS program implementation will be tracked and reviewed on a 

regular basis. The CPS results framework will also be reviewed in the context 
of periodic country por tfolio reviews, where progress on—as well as risks 
to—achieving CPS outcomes will be assessed. The Results Integration and 
Monitoring System, a web-based application recently improved and re -
launched, will be used to monitor progress towards achieving CPS outcomes. 
The system will be updated every six month, and updates will be shared with 
Government counterpar ts. A CPS progress repor t will be prepared at midterm 
in FY15 to evaluate progress, assess relevance of CPS outcomes to longer-term 
objectives. The matrix will be adjusted as needed, and new activities will be 
added in response to Government ’s demand throughout the CPS period, but 
especially for FY15 and FY16 activities. 

69

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–1710. Managing risks

Achieving the ambitious vision of India in 2030 entails mitigating significant 
potential economic and political country level risks. Although India’s GDP 

growth is forecast to strengthen modestly to 6.4 percent in the 2013 fiscal year, and 
rise to 7.3 percent in 2015,24 elevated inflation and large fiscal and current account 
deficits will remain concerns. Continued sluggishness of the global economy is 
likely to affect India’s growth prospects in the short-term. Although recent policy 
announcements have helped improve investors’ confidence, the Government will 
need to break the current policy logjam and push through deeper and more difficult 
reforms needed to improve the business climate, increase tax efficiency, and improve 
the efficiency of public expenditures. While general elections will be held in 2014, it 
will be important to recognize that continued progress on the reform agenda will be 
critical to the country ’s progress toward the vision of India in 2030—a country that 
triples its per capita income in just one generation, reduces poverty to 5.5 percent, 
and increased shared prosperity. 

By focusing on economic integration, spatial transformation and social 
inclusion, the CPS mitigates the risk that growth will slow down and 
progress on poverty reduction and human development will be stalled. 

24 Global Economic Prospects, 2013.

70

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The CPS assumes a 
much higher level of 
operational risk than 
did the previous CAS. 
But higher risks often 
entail greater payoffs, 
as reflected in the 
ambitious India 2030 
scenario outlined 
here, one of rapid 
inclusive growth and 
equally rapid poverty 
reduction.

Realizing India’s economic potential requires seizing the demographic dividend 
and this in turn will critically depend on job creation. New entrants to the labor 
force need to find gainful employment for lower dependency ratios to actually 
lead to higher output per capita. Greater economic integration, through physical 
connectivity and the removal of inefficient regulations, is key to boost the creation 
of jobs by the private sector. A successful spatial transformation, including 
agricultural modernization and rapid urbanization, is needed for jobs to become 
more productive. Progress in social inclusion, providing opportunities for everyone 
to live a healthy life, acquire new skills, and access gainful employment, is a pre-
requisite for shared prosperity. The choice of areas of engagement in the CPS is thus 
well geared towards helping India realize its potential. 

At the same time, by shifting the focus to low-income and special category 
states, the CPS assumes a higher operational risk. The CPS assumes a much 

higher level of operational risk than did the previous CAS. But higher risks often entail 
greater payoffs, as reflected in the ambitious India 2030 scenario outlined here, one 
of rapid inclusive growth and equally rapid poverty reduction. A more pronounced 
shift to working in low-income and special category states—states that often have 
weak, systems, capacities and institutions; difficulties in adequately staffing project 
units; poor data collection—may have the effect of delaying project preparation and 
implementation. However, many low-income states are now growing faster despite 
having lower levels of capital than more advanced states. This in turn translates 
into higher marginal returns to investment over time. Low-income states also have 
the highest poverty rates, and some of the lowest human development indicators, 
so that poverty reduction payoffs from successful interventions will be high. The 
“Innovation Impulse with Investment” principles of working on transformational, 
innovative projects and those with high potential for leverage are also inherently 
risky. Compounding that risk, a few areas where the Bank Group has been asked 
to contribute—nutrition, urban development, higher education, and education 
quality—have proven difficult in the past. As the CPS is implemented, it will be 
important to build on the lessons learned from both past successes and failures so as 
to better respond to India’s challenges. Better and planned collaboration across WBG 
and with development partners will help us better identify areas where the WBG can 
add value and put together a mix of instruments that is suited to the needs of India. 

Improving portfolio performance will be a key challenge under the CPS and 
of utmost important for overall discussion on India’s financing needs. Efforts 

will be made to raise portfolio indicators to levels closer to Bankwide averages. Of 
particular concern is the IBRD disbursement rate, which remains low. Throughout 
the CPS, more emphasis will be placed on accurately identifying risks using existing 
tools (e.g., Governance and Accountability Action Plans and the Operational Risk-
Assessment Framework), proposing mitigating measures, and jointly monitoring 
the portfolio to address problems proactively as they arise. An effort to customize 
solutions (in the form of integrated packages of support) to better meet the needs 
of each borrower will help in the management of a riskier portfolio. Ongoing 
Government-WBG efforts to strengthen portfolio performance will have to be 
sustained throughout the CPS period to ensure results of the WBG program and 
its contribution to accelerating poverty reduction and boosting shared prosperity 
across India. 

71

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–1772

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 1

INDIA CPS Results Framework

Overarching Goals
Economic Growth * Poverty Reduction * Shared Prosperity

High level Country Outcomes

Low-income States + Special Category States (Total population: 600 million)

Baseline (2011): GSDP per Capita: US $ 512.5; Percent Poor: 38.6%

Issues and 
Obstacles

CPS Outcomes and 
Indicators

Indicative 
Milestones

World Bank Group Program (Ongoing 
and Indicative)

Government 
Strategic Objectives 
(12th Plan Goals)

Upgrade national 
and state highways 
to the minimum 
two-lane standard

Complete Eastern 
and Western Freight 
Corridors

Most national 
highways need 
upgrading and 
maintenance 
work

Low freight 
train capacity ; 
inadequate asset 
maintenance

Engagement Area 1: Integration
1.1 Improved 
Generation of at 
transport 
least US$300 million 
connectivity in 
in new private 
targeted States
sector capital for 
Core Road Network 
improvement and 
management

• 9000 Km of additional 
State highways 
upgraded and 
maintained in good 
condition in targeted 
states by 2017

340 km of the 
Eastern rail corridor 
(Khurja and Kanpur 
section) completed

Ongoing financing: Assam State Roads; 
Odisha State Roads; Punjab State Roads; 
Karnataka State Highway Improvement 
II; Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor

Indicative financing: Rajasthan Rural 
Road Connectivity ; Tamil Nadu Roads II; 
Kerala Transport II; National Highways 
Interconnectivity ; Gujarat Highways II; 
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor II

Knowledge activities1: Transport 
Policies and Reform Activities

• Rail transport capacity 
on Eastern Freight 
Corridor increased from 
20 (in 2011) to 22 (NTKM 
bn ton-km) by 2017

1.2 Improved 
inter-regional 
power transmission 
connectivity

• Power exchange 
between regions and 
States increased from 
46,027 Gwh in 2009 to 
60,000 Gwh by 2017

Strengthen India’s 
electricity supply 
and transmission 
system in order to 
increase availability 
and reliability of 
power for economic 
development

Electricity 
transmission 
capacity 
between 
regions and 
states is low

Generation 
stations 
operate below 
capacity (60% 
of firms rely on 
costly back-up 
generation)

At least 5,000 
circuit k ilometers 
of transmission 
capacity added by 
2015

At least 412 MW 
of hydro power 
generation capacity 
constructed by 2017

630 MW of Coal-
Fired generation 
plant rehabilitated

Ongoing financing: Coal-Fired 
Generation Rehabilitation; Vishnugad 
Pipalkoti Hydroelectric; Haryana 
Power Sector Improvement; 
Rampur Hydropower ; Power Sector 
Development IV&V; IFC investment in the 
transmission sector (Nepal-India Power 
Transmission Project)

Indicative financing: Northeast Power 
Transmission; Luhri Hydropower

Knowledge activities: Concentration 
Solar Power ; Program for Market 
Readiness; Rural Feeder Segregation; 
Private Sector Participation in 
Hydropower

1 

Knowledge activities include advisory services, technical assistance, impact evaluations, and economic and sector work .

73

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–171.3 Improved 
demand-driven 
skills for productive 
employment

5 Institutes of 
training of trainers 
(ITOT ) established 
by 2014

Develop demand 
driven, sk illed 
workforce by 
providing increased 
opportunities sk ills 
training

Sk ills mismatch 
in the job 
market.

Poorly trained 
labor force (29% 
not literate and 
another 24% 
with primary 
education).

Low female 
labor force 
participation 
(29% of total).

Increase private 
sector investment in 
lagging regions

Low private 
sector 
investment in 
Low-income 
States

• Graduates of Industrial 
Training Institutes 
employed within 1st year 
of completing training 
increased from 60% 
(Female 38%) in 2012 
to 70% (Female 50%) by 
2015

• At least 17,000 youth 
(including more than 
50% women) from the 
supported SHGs and 
CDOs are placed in 
appropriate jobs

1.4 Enhanced private 
investment in low 
income States

• Additional US$ 2.3 
billion private investment 
facilitated in LIS States 
by 2017

Ongoing financing: Vocational 
Training Improvement; Second Technical 
Engineering Education Quality ; National 
Rural Livelihoods; State Livelihood 
Projects (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Northeast)

Indicative financing: Andhra Pradesh 
Rural Inclusive Growth; IFC investments 
in competitive, employment generating 
industries

Knowledge activities: Migration 
and Remittances; Higher Education; 
Small and Medium Enterprise Capacity 
Building; IFC Farmer Training/GAP 
Program, India Sugar Program and Farm 
Forestry Project; TVET; West Bengal Sk ills 
Development

Ongoing financing: IFC investment 
to support enabling environment and 
mobilize private sector resources for 
investments and PPP projects in Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, and West 
Bengal

Indicative financing: IFC investment 
to support enabling environment and 
mobilize private sector resources for 
investments in Uttar Pradesh

Knowledge activities: IFC ’s programs 
on Health for All, Buddhist Circuit, 
Rajasthan IC
Indicative operations: Nepal-India 
Trade and Transport Facilitation Project; 
IFC South-South investments

Knowledge activities: Bangladesh-
India Inland Water Transport; TA for 
knowledge exchange across SAR 
countries on per formance management

At least 3000 
new and current 
instructors given 
entry-level or 
refresher/specialized 
instructors courses 
annually by 2015

At least 33,000 
SHGs are provided 
with job placement 
training

IFC ’s technical 
assistance and PPP 
advisory projects in 
low-income states, 
which include

- 8 IFC led technical 
advisory and/or PPP 
projects in by 2015

- 23 IFC led 
investment projects 
by 2015

Construction 
of Indo-Nepal 
transmission line 
has commenced 
in accordance with 
the tender package 
awarded by 2014

Trade information 
portal and single 
window system 
developed by 2015

Narayanghat-
mugling road 
upgraded by 2016

Integrate regional 
market in trade, 
infrastructure 
(power and 
transport), and 
investment

Below potential 
levels of regional 
trade and 
investment; 
poor 
connectivity 
between India 
and neighboring 
countries

1.5 Strengthened 
regional trade 
and infrastructure 
integration

• 150 MW of electricity 
traded between India 
and Nepal by 2017

• Border crossing time 
between India and Nepal 
reduced by 20 % by 2017 
(3-4 days in 2012)

74

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Improve long-
term planning for 
sustainable and 
inclusive urban 
development; 
strengthen 
governance 
and financial 
sustainability of 
urban local bodies 
(ULBs)

Low urban 
planning 
capacity, weak 
governance, 
and financially 
unsustainable 
ULBs, with 
limited capacity 
to raise own 
resources

Engagement Area 2: Transformation
2.1 Strengthened 
At least 20 cities 
institutional capacity 
with new/revised 
of urban government 
city development 
in targeted states
plan in targeted 
States by 2015

• At least 220 cities (ULBs) 
with new/updated 
urban management 
systems (in planning, 
financial management, 
citizen-interface, etc. ) to 
improve service delivery 
in targeted states by 2017

230 cities with new 
e-governance and/
or GIS mapping 
system in Karnataka 
State by 2016 (0 in 
2012)

Increase public 
transport; expand 
metro rail and 
bus system; and 
improve road safety

Improve access to 
water and sanitation 
services in rural and 
urban areas

Poor or non-
existent urban 
transport 
planning

Supply of public 
transport has 
not kept up with 
demand

Limited access 
to piped water 
supply services 
and sanitation 
systems in rural 
and urban areas

6 Cities developed 
urban transport 
investment plans by 
2016

7 additional electric 
EMU train (12-car 
train) added in 
targeted cities by 
2017
Additional 
18,000 water 
supply systems 
rehabilitated or 
extended across 
states by 2017

Additional 10,000 
sanitation systems 
rehabilitated or 
extended across 
states by 2017

2.2 Improved urban 
transport services

• Modal share by public
transport in targeted 
cities increased from 4 % 
in 2010 to 8% by 2017

2.3 Improved access 
to water supply and 
sanitation services

• Additional 34 million 
people provided with 
access to improved water 
sources by 2017

• Additional 12 million 
people provided with 
access to improved 
sanitation system by 
2017 (Urban: 1.2 million; 
Rural: 10.8 million)

Raise agricultural 
productivity to 4% 
per annum

Strengthen irrigated 
water resource 
management

Low agricultural 
productivity

Outdated 
agriculture 
technology and 
practices

Inefficient and 
unsustainable 
use of water 
resources 
in irrigated 
agriculture

2.4 Increased 
agricultural 
productivity in 
targeted areas

• Cereal yield for 
beneficiaries farmers 
(tons/hectares)
- Paddy increased from 
2.9 in 2012 to 3.5 by 
2017
- Wheat increased from 
2.8 in 2012 to 3.5 by 
2017

Additional 1.1 
million hectares of 
improved irrigation 
in targeted areas by 
2017

At least 1 million 
farmers adopting 
improved crop 
production 
techniques and 
practices in targeted 
areas by 2017

Ongoing financing: Capacity Building 
for Urban Development; Andhra Pradesh 
Municipal Development ; Third Tamil 
Nadu Urban Development; Karnataka 
Municipal Reform

Indicative financing: Informal 
Settlements; West Bengal Secondary 
Cities

Knowledge activities: Social 
Dimensions of Urbanization; National 
Land Records Modernization 
Implementation Support; Inclusive 
Heritage Based City Development 
Planning; IFC ’s advisory assistance to 
governments to structure PPP
Ongoing financing: Mumbai Urban 
Transport; Sustainable Urban Transport

Indicative financing: Efficient and 
Sustainable City Bus Service

Ongoing financing: Tamil Nadu 
Urban III; Andhra Pradesh Municipal 
Development; Karnataka Municipal 
Reform; Karnataka RWSS II; Punjab 
RWSS; Uttaranchal RWSS; Andhra 
Pradesh RWSS; Kerala RWSSP II; IFC ’s 
Waste to Energy Investment Project; IFC 
investment in water treating utilities

Indicative financing: Karnataka Urban 
Water Modernization; Maharashtra Rural 
Water and Sanitation III; Rural Water 
Supply in Low-income States

Knowledge activities: IFC ’s India 
E-Waste Advisory
Ongoing financing: National 
Agriculture Innovation; Maharashtra 
Agriculture Competitiveness; Assam 
Competitiveness; National Dairy 
Support; Andhra Pradesh Community 
Tank Management; Tamil Nadu Irrigated 
Agriculture; Uttar Pradesh Sodic Land 
Reclamation; Water Sector Restructuring 
(Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh); 
Odisha Community Tank Management; 
Rajasthan Water Sector ; West Bengal 
Minor Irrigation; IFC ’s investments in 
diary/oilseed/poultry sector and in 
fertilizers and pesticides production

75

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Indicative financing: Uttar Pradesh 
Water Sector Restructuring II; Northeast 
Water Resources; National Watersheds; 
Uttarkhand Watersheds II; Himachal 
Pradesh Mid-Himalayan Watersheds-AF; 
Northeast Water Resources

Knowledge activities: Enhancing 
Agriculture Productivity : Policy 
and Investment Priorities; Capacity 
Development for Integrated Water 
Resource Development; IFC India Sugar 
Program & Farmer Training/GAP

Ongoing financing: National Ganga 
River Basin; Capacity Building for 
Industrial Pollution Management; 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management; 
Biodiversity Conservation and Rural 
Livelihood Improvement; Sustainable 
Land Management

Indicative financing: Himachal 
Pradesh Watershed-AF; Karnataka 
Watershed; Sustainable Livelihoods 
and Adaptation to Climate Change; 
Sundarbans Biodiversity Conservation 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management II

Knowledge activities: Green Growth 
in Himachal Pradesh; IFC Agri-water 
efficiency program and industrial water 
reuse project

- Sugarcane increased 
from 55 in 2012 to 63 
by 2017

• Milk production 
(kg/day/animal) for 
beneficiaries farmers 
increased from 4 kg in 
2012 to 4.4 kg by 2017

At least 500,000 
farmers adopting 
improved livestock 
production 
techniques and 
practices in targeted 
areas by 2017

Improve 
management of 
natural resources 
by introducing 
regulation to limit 
water pollution, 
improving sewerage 
treatment system, 
and protecting 
biodiversity

Deteriorating 
environmental 
quality due to 
water pollution
Unsustainable 
exploitation 
of natural 
resources and 
degradation of 
biodiversity.

2.5 Improved 
environment 
protection and 
biodiversity 
conservation

• 160 million liter per 
day of untreated 
municipal and industrial 
wastewater prevented 
from entering the 
National Ganga River 
by 2017

• Additional 500,000 
hectares brought under 
enhanced biodiversity 
protected area 
management

Environmental 
Compliance 
Assistance Center 
to promote 
measures for 
voluntary industrial 
compliance 
established by 2015

Additional 200 
million liter per 
day of wastewater 
treatment capacity 
created in the 
National Ganga 
River basin by 2017

Institutional and 
methodological 
framework 
and guidelines 
for landscape 
conservation 
approaches 
developed in 
high biodiversity 
landscapes

Additional 500 
million liter of water 
saved or harvested 
as a result of IFC ’s 
engagement

76

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Reduce the intensity 
of greenhouse gas 
emissions

Lack of 
awareness about 
energy saving 
technologies 
and measures to 
reduce Ozone 
Depleting 
Substances

2.6 Reduced 
Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions through 
energy efficiency and 
renewable energy 
production

• Additional 1.5 million 
(tCO2e) GHG emissions 
reduced per year by 2016

Additional 4,000 
MW of energy 
saved via supported 
energy efficiency 
measures by 2017

Additional 3000 
Gwh of renewable 
energy capacity 
developed by 2017

80 CFC-based 
centrifugal chillers 
replaced by the 
CEEP

Ongoing financing: Coal-Fired 
Generation Rehabilitation; Vishnugad 
Pipalkoti Hydroelectric; IFC Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency PPP; 
IFC ’s Equity/Debt Investment in 
Renewables, Energy Efficiency projects in 
Manufacturing Sector, and wholesaling 
through financial institutions

Indicative financing: Himachal 
Pradesh DPL II; CTF-Energy Efficiency 
Partial Risk Sharing Facility ; CTF-Super 
Efficient Equipment Program

Knowledge activities: IFC Lighting 
Asia: India Program

Construction and 
operation of 13 solar 
and wind stations 
by 2017
Engagement Area 3: Inclusion
3.1 Improved access 
At least 10,000 
to electricity in 
circuit k ilometers 
targeted states
of transmission 
capacity added by 
2015

Universalize access 
to electricity, 
focusing on 
electrification of all 
villages

Increase household 
access to clean and 
environmentally 
sustainable energy

30% of rural 
households 
lack access to 
electricity ;

High reliance 
on traditional 
sources of 
fuel in rural 
households, 
with deleterious 
health impact

• Additional 300,000 of 
connections to Below 
Poverty Line households 
by 2017 in North Eastern 
Region

• Additional 220,000 
households with off-grid 
connections

Improve efficiency 
of health delivery 
systems by 
converging health 
programs under 
the National Rural 
Health Mission

Limited capacity 
of state-
level health 
institutions (low 
accountability, 
inadequate 
financial 
management, 
poor quality 
assurance, 
poorly trained 
health workers), 
resulting in 
inefficiency 
delivery of 
health services

3.2 Strengthened 
public and private 
health delivery 
systems

• Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
and other vulnerable 
households covered 
under Government 
Sponsored Health 
Insurance Schemes 
increased from 180 
million in 2011 to 350 
million by 2017

• Additional 9.4 million 
patients reached in 
supported private health 
facilities by 2017

Ongoing financing: Power System 
Development IV; Coal-Fired Generation 
Rehab; Rampur Hydro Power ; 
Haryana Power System Improvement; 
PowerGridV;Vishnugad Pipalkoti; IFC 
Investment in private sector generation, 
transmission and distribution; IFC 
supported direct lines with banks/
infrastructure finance companies to 
support renewable energy ;

Indicative financing: Northeast Power 
Transmission

Knowledge activities: IFC Lighting 
Asia: India Program and Rooftop Solar 
Program.
Ongoing financing: Uttar Pradesh 
Health System Strengthening; Karnataka 
Health System – AF; IFC ’s Investment in 
private health facilities; IFC ’s Jharkhand 
Hospital PPP

Indicative financing: National AIDS 
Control Support Project

At least 412 MW 
of hydro power 
generation capacity 
constructed by 2017

630 MW of Coal-
Fired generation 
plant rehabilitated

At least 40 
health facilities 
assessments 
completed and 
action plan 
developed in the 
targeted states by 
2017

At least 50 PPPs 
per formance-based 
contracts in health 
facilities in targeted 
states by 2017

Knowledge activities: Service 
Delivery and Public Spending on 
Health; Government-sponsored Health 
Insurance Schemes; IFC ’s Meghalaya 
Health for All; IFC ’s Shillong Medical; 
Karnataka RBF Hospital Care

Additional 
21 private 
health facilities 
strengthened 
through IFC 
engagements

77

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Reduce under-
nutrition among 
children aged 0-3 
from 40% (2005-06) 
to 27%

Inadequate 
systems/
institutions to 
address high 
levels of child 
malnutrition 
(40% of 
the world’s 
malnourished 
children live in 
India)

• Public sector hospitals 
that have achieved entry 
level-pre-accreditation in 
the three sates (UP, Tamil 
Nadu, and Karnataka) 
increased from 6 in 2011 
to 50 by 2017

3.3 Improved child 
nutrition delivery 
systems in targeted 
States

• 246,000 Anganwadi 
Centers conducting 
inter-personal counseling 
to improve Infant and 
Young Child Feeding 
practices

• 400,000 additional 
Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) households with 
access to community 
management nutrition 
centers

Universalize access 
to secondary 
education by 2017

Poor quality of 
education at all 
levels

3.4 Improved access 
and quality of 
education 

Improve quality at 
all Education levels 
and align programs 
to market needs

Implement direct 
cash transfer for 
major subsidies 
and welfare-
related beneficiary 
payments

Low learning 
outcomes,

Low retention 
rates and 
enrollment at 
the secondary 
level

Limited access 
to education for 
underprivileged 
children/youth

Limited 
state-level 
institutional 
capacity and 
systems to 
implement 
social protection 
programs 
(including 
beneficiary 
awareness, 
enrollment, 

• Enrolment of students 
in Secondary (Grade IX 
and X ) increased from 
28 million in 2012 to 40 
million by 2017

• Gross Graduation rate 
increased from 78% in 
2010 to 88% by 2017

• Gender Parity Index 
(GPI) in secondary 
schools increased from 
94% in 2010 to 98% by 
2017

3.5 Increased 
coverage of social 
protection programs 
in targeted States

• Coverage of program 
beneficiaries in targeted 
districts increased from 
18% in 2012 to 25% by 
2017

78

Ongoing financing: ICDS Systems 
Strengthening and Nutrition 
Improvement

Knowledge activities: Multisectoral 
Nutrition Action in Bihar ; Social 
Observatory for Rural Food & Nutrition 
Security in National Rural Livelihoods 
Mission; Community Food and Nutrition 
Initiatives in High Poverty States

Ongoing financing: RMSA Secondary 
Education; IFC Investment in education 
infrastructure

Indicative financing: Bihar Teacher 
Education and Training; SSA—Education 
for All

Knowledge activities: Teachers 
Education; Secondary Education; 
Teacher ’s Education and Professional 
Development- International Best 
Practice; IFC ’s Gujarat University PPP and 
Meghalaya College PPPs

Indicative financing: Bihar Integrated 
Social Protection Strengthening Project
Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth

Knowledge activities: Social 
Pensions; Jharkhand Social Protection; 
Chhattisgarh RSBY/PDS Evaluation

Multi-sectoral 
nutrition action 
plans developed 
and implemented in 
targeted districts in 
6 states

Inter-personal 
counseling 
guidelines and 
tools material for 
promoting positive 
IYCF behaviors 
developed and 
adopted by 8 states

10,000 additional 
community service 
delivery centers 
organized by 2017
New system 
of National 
Assessment 
of Student 
Per formance 
developed and 
implemented (for 
grade X) by 2014

Proportion of 
schools with all core 
subject specific 
teachers available 
increased from 20 
% in 2010 to 40% by 
2017

IT application 
to track benefit 
payments 
established in at 
least one state by 
2015

State disability 
and older persons 
policies developed 
for at least one state 
by 2015

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Create economic 
opportunities 
to improve rural 
livelihood of poor 
households

Improve financial 
Services

Provide access to 
bank ing services 
to 90% of Indian 
households

Strengthen 
natural disaster 
management/
resilience

benefits 
payments and 
track ing and 
accountability)
Limited 
livelihood 
opportunities 
(farm and non-
farm) for rural 
poor, especially 
women

40% of 
households do 
not avail any 
bank ing services

Organized 
financial sector 
does not reach 
out to a large 
segment of the 
population

Weak or 
non-existent 
institutions and 
mechanisms 
for enhanced 
disaster risk 
management 
and climate 
resilience, 
especially in 
agriculture and 
water-intensive 
sectors

3.6 Enhanced 
rural livelihood 
opportunities in 
targeted States

• Additional 500,000 
supported poor 
households report 
a minimum of 20% 
increase in income by 
2017

3.7 Increased access 
to financial services 
in targeted states

• Additional one million 
households with access 
to formal financial 
services by 2017.

• Additional 20 million 
loans provided to micro-, 
small-, and medium-
enterprises in targeted 
states by 2017 (including 
0.5 million to female-
owned microenterprises)

• Additional 750,000 
payment accounts 
opened by 2017

3.8 Enhanced 
disaster risk 
management system

• At least 3 states have 
installed an operational 
Early Warning 
dissemination Systems 
(EWDS)in targeted 
vulnerable communities 
by 2017

Ongoing financing: National Rural 
Livelihood Project; State Rural Livelihood 
Projects (Bihar, Odisha, Rajasthan, and 
Northeast states); Scaling-up Sustainable 
and Responsible Micro-Finance

Indicative financing: Andhra Pradesh 
Rural Inclusive Growth Andhra Pradesh: 
Rural Poverty Impact Evaluation Food 
Security in Tribal and Conflict Affected 
Areas Strengthening Implementation of 
Rural Livelihood Program
Ongoing financing: National Rural 
Livelihood Project; State Livelihood 
Projects (Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and states in the 
Northeast); IFC investments in MFIs; IFC 
equity in banks and long-term finance 
institutions; IFC ’s short-term trade 
finance and liquidity to banks. 

Indicative Financing: IFC Low-income 
Housing Finance

Knowledge activities: Rural Credit 
Cooperatives; Financial Literacy and 
Education; IFC Micro-and small and 
medium enterprise access to finance: 
Capacity Building Programs with Banks 
and NBFCs; IFC work to facilitate G2P for 
health services

Ongoing financing: National Cyclone 
Risk Mitigation I; Bihar Kosi I; Global Fund 
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery

Indicative financing: Bihar Flood 
Rehabilitation II; Tamil Nadu and 
Puducherry Disaster Risk Reduction; 
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Phase 
II & III

Knowledge activities: Bihar Kosi 
Flood and Climate Adaptation; Support 
to National Cyclone Risk Mitigation 
Program

At least 50 social 
protection service 
centers established 
by 2017
At least 50,000 
additional Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) 
have been formed, 
including poor 
women SHGs

10 additional 
number of lenders 
for low-income 
housing finance 
created in target 
States by 2017

27 MFIs supported 
through IFC ’s 
engagement

Master plan for 
Flood Management 
prepared for Kosi 
river basin by 2015

Multi-hazard risk 
and vulnerability 
assessment 
prepared for India’s 
coastal areas by 
2015

400 Cyclone shelters 
completed in 
targeted coastal 
areas by 2017

900 Remote 
Public Alert 
Communication 
System installed by 
2015

79

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 2

India’s Progress towards the 
Millennium Development Goals1

India has or is on track to achieve some of 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 

by 2015. Extreme pover ty—the propor tion of 
people living on less than $1.25 a day—has been 
halved (MDG1) to under 30 percent, and halve the 
number of people without sustainable access to 
safe drink ing water (MDG7). In addition, 96 percent 
of Indian school children—boys and girls alike—will 
complete a full course of primary education (MDG2) 
and India will likely eliminating gender disparity in 
primary and secondary education (MDG3).

At least three MDGs are off track in India. 

Although much progress has been made since 
1990, under-five and infant mor tality rates remain 
high. According to 2010 data, 63 children under 
age five out of 1,000 and 48 infants out of 1,000 live 
bir ths die. Although both rates have been halved, it 
is unlikely that India will meet the target of reducing 
them by two-thirds. Reducing the target on 
maternal mor tality (MDG5) by three -four ths is also 
likely to be missed, even though it has decreased 
from 570 out of 100,000 live bir ths in 1990 to 230 

in 2010. Although India has almost doubled the 
share of the population with access to improved 
sanitation facilities (MDG7)—from 18 percent in 
1990 to 34 percent in 2010, it is unlikely to achieve 
the target of halving it by 2015 (table 1).

From a global perspective and for most 
MDGs, India is making more progress than 
the rest of the developing world (figure 1). For 

primary education completion, India has already 
achieved 96 percent of the required target, whereas 
developing countries, as a group, have achieved 
87 percent. This is also the case for health-related 
MDGs, even though more progress is needed, and 
par ticularly relevant for maternal mor tality. Recent 
estimates indicate that although the country may 
not reduce by three -quar ters the maternal mor tality 
ratio between 1990 and 2015, it has already 
achieved 75 percent of the target, far above the 46 
percent reduction observed in developing countries 
as a whole. Increased effor ts are nonetheless 
required in terms of access to improved sanitation 
facilities, where progress is significantly lower  

Table 1. 
India’s Performance on MDGs

MDG
1 Extreme poverty
2 Primary education completion rate
3 Gender parity in primary and secondary education
4 Child mortality
5 Maternal mortality
7a Access to improved water source
7b Access to improved sanitation facilities

Performance
Achieved
On track
On track
Off track
Off track
Achieved
Off track

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

1 

Based on Global Monitoring Report 2012: Food Prices, Nutrition, and the Millennium Development Goals.

80

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Figure 1. 
India’s MDG performance in the global context

5
1
0
2

d

r

a

w

o

t

s
s

e

r

g
o
P

r

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

100%

96%

96%

92%

87%

100%

75%

59%

52%

46%

72%

62%

MDG 1a. 
Extreme 
poverty 
(% of 
population 
below $1.25 
a day in 
2005 PPP)

MDG 2a. 
Primary 
completion 
rate, total (% 
of relevant 
age group)

MDG 3a. 
Ratio of girls 
to boys in 
primary and 
secondary 
education 
(%)

MDG 4a. 
Mortality 
rate, under-5 
(per 1,000 
live births)

MDG 5a. 
Maternal 
mortality 
ratio 
(modeled 
estimate, 
per 100,000 
live births)

MDG 7c. 
Improved 
water 
source (% of 
population 
without 
access)

MDG 7c. 
Improved 
sanitation 
facilities 
(% of 
population 
without 
access)

Developing countries

India

Note: a value of 100% means that respective MDG has been reached. Values denote present progress as illustrated by most recent available data: 
Extreme poverty-Global: 2010, India: 2008; Primary completion rate-Global: 2009, India: 2008; Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary-Global: 
2009, India: 2007; Mortality rate, under 5-2010, Global: 2010, India: 2009; Maternal mortality ratio-2010; Improved water source-2010; Improved 
sanitation facilities-Global: 2008, India: 2010.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

(62 percent of the target) than the 72 percent 
achieved in the rest of the developing world.

India’s contribution to meeting global MDGs 
is significant, especially for MDGs that are 
fur thest away from meeting global targets 

(table 2). Ind ia’s contr ibut ion to lower ing the 
materna l mor ta l ity rat io (MDG5) was 33 percent 
between 2005-2010 wh i le for the mor ta l ity rate 
of ch i ldren under f ive (MDG4) it was 28 percent . 
For Improved San itat ion (MDG7) , not on ly does 
Ind ia st i l l have a way to go (cur rent ly at 62 percent 
of the target) , but progress is much s lower as 

shown by the rat io of Ind ia’s per formance re lat ive 
to g loba l per formance (83 percent) . (f igure 2) For 
many other MDGs, Ind ia was one of the leaders. 
For examp le, Ind ia’s pr imar y educat ion comp let ion 
rate improved by more than 3 t imes w ith respec t 
to a l l deve lop ing countr ies between 1990 and 
2009 . G iven Ind ia’s track record and its cont inued 
and focused attent ion to address ing the MDG 
cha l lenge, Ind ia has the potent ia l to contr ibute 
even more to g loba l targets. Without Ind ia 
mak ing fur ther and faster progress in on ch i ld and 
materna l mor ta l ity and san itat ion , g loba l MDGs 
are un l ike ly to be ach ieved. 

81

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
Table 2. 
India’s contribution to improvement in selected MDGs, 2005-2010 (%)

India
South Asia excluding India
East Asia & Pacific
Middle East & North Africa
Latin America & Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
Europe & Central Asia
Total Improvement

Access to 
Sanitation
15%
17%
52%
6%
2%
12%
-5%
100%

Access to 
Water

46%
7%
16%
4%
4%
29%
-7%
100%

Maternal 
Mortality
33%
12%
8%
2%
2%
43%
0%
100%

Infant 
Mortality
32%
13%
18%
3%
7%
25%
2%
100%

Under-5 
Mortality
28%
10%
19%
3%
4%
35%
2%
100%

Figure 2. 
Improvement in MDG indicators relative to global performance, 1990-2009

MDG 7c. Improved sanitation facilities 
(% of population without access)

0.83

MDG 7c. Improved water source 
(% of population without access)

MDG 5a. Maternal mortality ratio
(modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

MDG 4a. Mortality rate, under-5 
(per 1,000 live births)

MDG 3a. Ratio of girls to boys in primary and 
secondary education (%)

MDG 2a. Primary completion rate, total 
(% of relevant age group)

1.52

1.44

2.00

2.11

3.17

MDG 1a. Extreme poverty (% of population 
below $1.25 a day in 2005 PPP)

1.47

0.00

0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
Improvement in India / Improvement at the Global level

3.50

Note: Chart depicts the ratio of absolute regional improvement to global improvement by MDG. Improvement is measured as the difference between 
latest available value (see note figure 1) and starting value circa 1990.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

82

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Millennium Development Goals – India

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015 (estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and 
malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population) 
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary 
schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and 
empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of 
nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, 
%)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live 
births)
Births attended by sk illed health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS 
and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable 
access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil 
equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

1990

53.6
..
8.8
59.5

..
64
37
62

68
13

5

115
81
56

570

..
45

0.1
216
80

69
18
21.5
4.7
0.8
3.3

0.6
0.0
0.0
..

India
1995

2000

2010

49.4
45.3
9.1
41.1

..
74
46
..

75
14

7

100
72
72

470

34
41

0.3
216
58

75
21
..
4.9
1.0
3.5

1.2
0.0
0.0
..

..
..
..
44.4

79
71
45
76

79
17

9

86
63
55

390

43
47

0.4
216
49

81
25
22.0
5.0
1.1
3.9

3.1
0.3
0.5
..

32.7
37.2
8.6
43.5

92
96
60
81

92
18

11

63
48
74

230

53
54

0.3
185
59

92
34
23.0
5.0
1.5
5.1

2.9
61.4
7.5
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. Development Economics, Development Data Group 
(DECDG)

83

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2005

2010

100

75

50

25

0

1990

1995

2000

2010

Primary net enrollment ratio

India

South Asia

Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary education

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

84

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 3

Poverty in India

India has made significant progress in reducing 
absolute pover ty in the last two decades: it has 
already achieved MDG1 in halving the propor tion 
of people whose income is less than $1.25 a day, to 
under 30 percent. The percentage of people living 
below Government of India’s official pover ty line 
has declined from 45 percent in the early 1990s to 
30 percent in 2009-10 (table 1).1 Most notably rural 
pover ty has decreased by 16.3 percentage points. 
Given that India is predominantly rural, however, a 
huge concentration of the poor people (four out of 
every five) still live in rural areas.

The pace of poverty reduction picked up significantly 
in the latter half of the 2000s, reflecting faster 
economic growth and greater inclusiveness of 
growth during this period. The poverty rate declined 
by 1.5 percentage points a year between 2004-05 
and 2009-10, relative to 0.8 percentage points a year 
in the previous two decades. Shared prosperity – 
defined as the growth rate of the bottom 40 percent 
of the population – improved, with the gap between 
growth rates of the less well-off and average growth 
narrowing considerably between 2005 and 2010.

benefits for its poor from growth. Even with recent 
improvements, at the $2 a day poverty line, the pace 
of poverty reduction is still about 2 percentage points 
per year below what a model based on international 
cross-country regressions would predict for India.2

But pover ty remains widespread. With population 
growth, it has proved difficult to reduce the number 
of poor at a rapid pace; 400 million people still 
live in pover ty.3 India and pover ty in India remain 
predominantly rural: nearly four out of every five 
poor persons live in rural areas. Wide disparity in 
pover ty rates across the states is a key feature of 
pover ty in India. For example, pover ty reduction in 
some of the poorest—and most populous States—
has been slow. Each of the seven of the low-income 
states4 have pover ty rates that are two to three 
times higher than those of the more advanced 
States. Accelerating progress in the poorest states is 
impor tant as they are the states where fer tility rates 
are par ticularly high. H igher-income States also 
have pockets of extreme pover ty ; Karnataka’s per 
capita income, for example, varies nearly five -fold 
across districts.

However, comparisons with other fast growing 
countries such as China, Vietnam and Thailand 
suggest that India is not reaping comparable 

Given such intra-India disparities, an obvious 
but impor tant fact is that where people live is 
impor tant: location-specific features are impor tant 

Table 1. 
All-India Poverty Rates

1993-94
2004-05
2009-10

Source: Government of India, 2012.

Rural
50.1
41.8
33.8

Urban
31.8
25.7
20.9

Total
45.3
37.2
29.8

2 

1 

India revised its poverty line upwards in real terms in 2011 based on recommendations of the Tendulkar Committee. Results reported in this 
annex are based on the revised official poverty lines, or based on the World Bank ’s international ($1.25 per day and $2 per day) lines.
A large and (until recently) growing gap between mean consumption per person from the National Sample Surveys (NSS) and the private 
consumption component of the National Accounts Statistics (NAS) confound efforts to provide a definitive assessment of the responsiveness of 
poverty reduction to growth in India.
3 World Bank estimate of people living on US$1.25 or less per day.
4 
Rajasthan, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh.

85

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–1786

par ts of the overall experience of pover ty. States 
matter. India’s states are so different in their 
pover ty levels that they range from the best in the 
developing world to the worst. As shown in figure 
1, India’s poorest states have pover ty rates that are 
at the high end of the distribution of all countries, 
while the pover ty rates of Goa and H imachal 
Pradesh are considerably better – towards the low 
end of the distribution. When urban and rural rates 
are analyzed, the contrast between the low and 
high pover ty areas is even more strik ing.

India’s high growth in the last decade has not 
benefited everyone uniformly. India’s consumption 
inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient 
is 0.37. Inequality is on the rise, with widening 
disparities between urban and rural areas. Fur ther, 
income inequality does not reflect the depth and 
range of social inequities. Structural inequalities 
by gender, caste, and tribe persist, and indicators 
of pover ty and human development for these 
groups lag behind those of the general population. 
Pover ty rates are especially high among Scheduled 
Tribes (46.1 percent), and Scheduled Castes (40.8 

percent) in 2009-10. Female disadvantage in India 
continues, despite high rates of growth, and women 
die both in infancy and in motherhood, with poorer 
outcomes for women from scheduled castes and 
tribes. Economic and social outcomes for women 
are underpinned by low levels of security within 
and outside their home. Caste remains a potent 
indicator of labor market outcomes and social 
status, but positive signs of dynamism are also 
appearing within the caste hierarchy. Indicators 
that India’s educational expansion is leaving 
scheduled tribes behind, especially at the secondary 
school and higher levels, are worrying. Scheduled 
tribes have shown the least improvement in 
intergenerational mobility in education and also 
display the worst indicators of child nutrition and 
mor tality.

Lifting people out of pover ty is not enough. 
Even above the threshold for the World Bank 
Group’s indicator of shared prosperity (defined as 
consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of 
the population), a large number of people have 
consumption levels that are precariously close to 

Figure 1. 
Poverty rates in Indian States span a wide range of the distribution across all countries

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

a
a
y
a
a
a
s
n
c
a
y
s
d
a
a
a
e
p
p
i
i
e
z
u
a
a
e
n
n
r
s
n
n
n
n
e
e
a
y
k
a
a
d
b
u
a
h
b
G
e
a
a
e
a
o
R
R
g
a
o
u
g
n
C
u
u
v
o
u
h
e
p
u
a
e
c
b
p
u
a
T
d
C
o
h
c
B
e
h
o
E
g
a
e
B
n
y
S
R
T
R
R
a
L
e
A
A
h
S
n
k
a
p
c
n
y
n
a
g
E

l
l

M

r

W

e

t
s

n
a
B

r

t

i
i

l

r
l

r

J

C

c
e
z

i
i
l

i

r
t

U

l
l

l
i

m

i
i

t
s

r

t

l
i
i

r
I

,

I

a
s
t

l
,

m

i

.
.

r

D

o

m

i

i

i
l
r
i
I

c
q
o
u
a
a
a
y
a
n
e
a
b
a
e
a
s
t
n
u
a
n
a
n
a
a
e
a
e
o
d
h
a
h
o
d
e
c
a
a
a
o
o
p
a
h
a
a
a
a
c
z
o
a
n
a
z
c
a
u
n
e
a
d
a
n
a
n
h
e
g
e
n
s
y
s
s
n
a
u
d
e
a
d
e
r
n
b
g
h
n
b
c
e
u
a
g
n
a
t
e
a
t
a
h
a
T
n
o
v
a
e
n
e
a
a
q
b
e
x
P
a
u
e
n
a
h
R
s
a
s
n
e
F
a
s
a
g
g
y
a
a
h
t
T
a
d
e
d
h
B
u
a
b
e
B
n
B
A
u
n
C
p
u
t
e
u
L
b
z
u
a
u
v
h
k
n
s
a
z
a
K
a
a
p
a
g
a
A
P
a
n
p
G
a
s
a
B
G
k
n
L
c
a
B
h
a
u
e
b
a
n
e
Z
P
c
e
P
t
g
P
a
a
E
S
u
a
a
o
a
R
T
n
k
a
d
S
h
R
B
r
h
a
S
a
a
r
z
n
e
P
u
J
T
B
o
Y
a
B
c

M

r

l
i
r

r

G

m

l

i
r

a
P

r

G

E

l

l

r

t

i
i
j
l
r
f

u
o
S

t

N

i

r
i
r

m

i

m

,

.

i
l
i

i
j
i

D
N

l

i

m
m
M

i
i
r
l
i

i

u
T

r

k

G

j

w

N

m

i

i

m
W

e
a
e
T

t
s

l

G
N

i

i
,

a
P

a
u
p

w

i

m

o

-
r

t
s

H
N
w
&
D

i
l

l
i

l

U

t
t

r

i

r

M

i
r
l

i
i

M

m

n
e
C

r
t

a

l

A

i
r
f

i
i
i
l

m

M

a

r

i

i
r

o
P

e
v

t
r

y

a
R

t

e

Legend
Countries         Indian States

Bihar

Chhattisgarh

Jharkhand
Odisha

Punjab

Goa

Himachal 
Pradesh

Note: At $1.25 a day, constant 2005 PPP, US$; for countries, figure indicates poverty rates for the latest year available in POVCALNET; for Indian states data 
is from 2009/10 
Source: POVCALNET

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the pover ty line. These “vulnerable” people live 
between one and two official pover ty lines.5 In 
2009-10, half of India’s people (51 percent) lived on 
consumption levels in this vulnerability band. M inor 
shocks—illness, poor weather and poor crop yields, 
indebtedness, high inflation—can easily push them 

below the pover ty line. Although the number of 
poor has been declining, the number of vulnerable 
people has steadily risen to 600 million people. The 
end goal is to reduce extreme pover ty and reduce 
vulnerability : the number of people that are not 
poor, socially included and reasonably secure. 

5 

The official poverty line for India is set at the equivalent of US$1.17 per person per day in PPP terms. For the purposes of the India CPS, the 
vulnerable are defined as those living between one and two poverty lines. This choice is based on two independent but coincident local criteria. 
The National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector classifies all population groups in five categories, and those between one and 
two poverty lines are considered “vulnerable”. The threshold to pay personal income tax is such that a family of five, with one taxpayer, would also 
be close to two poverty lines.

87

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 4

IFC Indicative Non-Lending 
Activities

Business Line

No. of projects

Access to Finance
Sustainable Business 
Advisory
Investment Climate
Public Private Partnerships*
Total Non Lending 
Activities

31
12

3
17
63

Project Name

Project Description

Microfinance Knowledge 
Management

E-Bank ing South Asia Link 
to Global Initiatives
Belstar Investment and 
Finance Private Limited

Intellecash Micro Finance

Capacity Building of 
Utkarsh

India SME Bank ing 
Knowledge Management

Microfinance Risk 
Management India
Technical Assistance to 
FINO Phase II
Sustainable Energy Finance 
- Micro Energy Credits

Capacity Building of 
Ananya

Access to Finance
Project focusing on: (i) LIS focus to expand access to finance;  
(ii) Microfinance (MF) product diversification beyond microdebt;  
(iii) e-payments linked to bank and MFI accounts; (iv) sustainable energy finance 
linked to MF; (v) micro insurance.
Work ing towards improving access to bank ing services for low-income 
households by using innovative business models for payments services
Phase I: Work ing to determine how Hand-in-Hand (HiH), an NGO work ing with 
SHGs in S.India, can successfully promote a commercially run microfinance 
institution. 
Phase II: Provide assistance to Belstar to strengthen operations and monitoring 
systems.
Support start-up MFIs to establish and grow their operations in underserved 
areas and LIS through the Intellecash Network Program franchising model.
To support Utkarsh to develop and grow its operations through improved 
product diversification, development of sound internal systems and processes, 
and the introduction of a Social Per formance Management System.
To design an SME Bank ing program through gathering of market information, 
holding discussions with internal and external stakeholders, and conducting 
studies and workshops.
To contribute to strengthening risk management systems and practices in the 
MF sector in India by providing a framework for risk assessment.
To enhance the access to financial services of low income population through 
technology platform, by supporting FINO to scale up and become sustainable.
To provide technical assistance to Regional Rural Banks for developing a clean 
energy lending portfolio and serve the demonstration effect of successful clean 
energy interventions for low income population.
To support Ananya to expand outreach, build capacity and diversify the 
product base offered to lower income population.

Funds Managed 
by IFC ($ mn)
21
16

6
8
52

Expected End 
Date

FY13

FY13

FY13

FY13

FY13

FY13

FY14

FY14

FY14

FY14

88

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17 
Project Name

Microfinance Credit 
Reporting Phase II

Sustainable Energy Finance 
- Dia Vikas
Sustainable Finance - 
Maanaveeya
Responsible Finance 
Sectoral

SEWA Livelihood Finance

Technical Assistance to 
Swadhaar
Axis Bank Alternative 
Delivery Channels

Aadhar Responsible 
Finance
Equitas Housing 
Microfinance
Janalakshmi Financial 
Services
Health Payment

The Andhra Pradesh State 
Cooperative Bank

Ujjivan Microfinance

Equitas Microfinance

MicroInsurance - 
VimoSEWA
Responsible Finance 
Accion

Sustainable Energy Finance 
- Grassroots Trading 
Network
Housing Regional

Grameen Koota Housing 
Microfinance

Project Description

To take forward and build upon the achievements of Phase I by including 
outreach to MFIs currently not members of CIB and enabling them to integrate 
with CIBs. The project design also incorporates awareness raising of end 
borrowers as well as a study of the impact of credit bureaus on MFI borrowers’ 
behaviour and dissemination of results.
To build the capacity of MFIs to undertake sustainable finance in a way that 
helps them manage their own risks and contribute to climate mitigation.

To contribute to strengthening of the MF sector in India by promoting 
initiatives aimed at bringing greater customer centricity to the sector, and 
raising awareness among decision makers to better address the issues facing 
the sector.
To assist SEWA in launching a Livelihood Finance Business by evaluating the 
feasibility, preparing the business plan and providing handholding support.
To enhance access to finance for the urban population by supporting SFPL 
through TA jointly with Accion International.
To enhance the access to financial services for low income population in India 
(such as migrants), using alternative delivery channels. The project will use 
remittance as an entry product to increase access to other bank ing services 
using this channel. It will support Axis Bank to pilot a new agent bank ing 
channel to prove the commercial viability of this model and help them scale it 
up.
To support the partner organisation in launching new housing finance 
products, capacity building and development of sound internal systems and 
processes and introduction of a Responsible Finance framework .

To launch an automated G2P payment system in Bihar, link ing payments made 
to health workers and program participants to bank accounts.
To assist AP Coop Bank to reach an expanded customer base of farmers, to 
build an expanded product base of both credit and non-credit offerings, to 
improve its overall systems and to engage in responsible finance practices.
To support Ujjivan in launching new products and scale-up of operations, 
reducing operating costs through process improvements and incorporating 
Responsible Finance principles in operations.
To support Equitas in scaling up its operations in under-banked areas and LIS, 
and incorporating Responsible Finance principles in their operations.
To develop a new microinsurance product for Self Help Groups (SHGs) to be 
piloted among selected financial institutions.
To assist the MF sector in India to refocus on a client- centric approach by 
organizing responsible finance programs at client, institutional, and sectoral 
levels leveraging on existing industry, lender and investor
To build capacity of GTN to undertake sustainable finance in a way that helps it 
to manage risk and contribute to climate change mitigation.

To conduct market assesment, develop tools for capacity building, raise 
stakeholder awareness and pilot innovative business models in the mortgage 
and housing markets across SA.
To assist Grameen Koota in introduction of new products, capacity building to 
scale up and development of Responsible Finance Management Framework .

Expected End 
Date
FY14

FY14

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY16

FY16

FY16

FY16

89

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Project Name

Project Description

Technical Assistance to 
Collateral Registry in India

Arohan Pensions

India Rajasthan Investment 
Climate Reform

Bihar Tax Simplification 
Program
Buddhist Circuit Tourism: 
Facilitating Growth 
Corridors in UP and Bihar

Green Power for Telecom

CTI TurboTech

Agribusiness - APPL

2011 India Development 
Marketplace

Tata Water Sustainability 
Program

Cleaner Production 
Technical Advisory Services

SME Management 
Solutions India
India Farm Forestry 
Advisory Program Phase II
Lighting India

South Asia Farmer 
Training/GAP
India Sugar Advisory

India E-Waste Advisory

To increase access to credit for MSMEs in India by providing support to CERSAI 
in developing a sustainable business model and expanding its remit to include 
movables.
To support Arohan, an MFI work ing in West Bengal, Bihar and Assam to offer 
pension product to the low income segments by leveraging their brand and 
branch network .

Investment Climate
To assist the Government of Rajasthan (GoR) in increasing the level of 
private investments in the State through (i) proactive investor targetting 
and investment generation, including increased investments by IFC; and (ii) 
improving its business environment with a focus on easing the regulatory and 
non-regulatory constraints.
To increase regulatory compliance by reducing compliance costs and increased 
formalization of businesses in Bihar.
A two-phase project that aims to facilitate the upgrading of tourism services in 
the Buddhist Circuit.

Sustainable Business Advisory
To facilitate two mobile operators / telecom tower companies / energy service 
providers to implement two viable business models (pilot projects) using RE / 
hybrid to reduce GHG emissions and increase RE.
To catalyze growth in TurboTech by increasing the Company ’s manufacturing 
capabilities and address the market barrier of access to financing for early-stage 
cleantech companies.
To scale-up dairy and aquaculture in APPL’s tea estates and its surrounding 
areas and to strengthen the supply chain and market linkage for dairy, 
aquaculture and other agro-produce.
To monitor and document the evolution of the 13 winning social entrepreneur 
and to oversee the management of a grant pool and award a portion to each of 
the 13 social enterprises that want to scale or replicate their inclusive business 
models in the states of Bihar, Orissa, and Rajasthan.
To support 11 Tata facilities in developing a set of detailed water response 
strategies and build awareness within the broader community for water 
sustainability and water footprinting.
To support CP assessments with IFC pipeline and portfolio clients and 
specifically target large energy intensive companies, to reduce manufacturing 
costs and potentially lead to additional CP related investments.
To scale up the Business Edge model in India by customizing for the local 
market and building capacity of local service providers to deliver Business Edge.
To increase tangible benefits from sustainable forestry and productive land use 
to rural landowners.
To focus on addressing systemic market failures in the off-grid renewable 
energy market in India by work ing at the company/sector level with the 
objective to provide renewable energy lighting access. LI will seek to replicate 
the Lighting Africa program.
To facilitate development/application of farmer training tools and techniques 
and uptake of improved good agricultural practices (GAP).
To design, implement and scale-up pilot projects (which can be taken to scale) 
with leading sugar mills in India. These pilot projects will focus on sustainable 
sugarcane and work predominantly with small and marginal landholders.
To demonstrate a sustainable business model of integrating and formalizing 
the informal sector players in the E-waste supply chain of Attero.

90

Expected End 
Date
FY15

FY16

FY13

FY13

FY15

FY13

FY13

FY13

FY13

FY14

FY14

FY14

FY14

FY15

FY15

FY15

FY16

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Project Name

Project Description

Expected End 
Date

PPP
The PPP business line provides assistance to governments in structuring and 
implementing public-private partnerships (PPPs) to improve infrastructure and 
public services, with the benefit of private-sector expertise, management, and 
finance. We are currently advising various state government on the following 
projects across sectors:

Gujarat University PPP
Universal Health Insurance, 
Meghalaya Project 1
Shillong Medical College & 
Teaching Hospital PPP
Kerala Port, Vizhinjam
Chennai Metro
Vadodara Rooftop Solar
Orissa SWM PPP - 
Berhampur
Surat Rooftop Solar
Rajkot Rooftop Solar
Mehsana Rooftop Solar
Bhavnagar Rooftop Solar
FCI Silos
Jharkhand Diagnostics
Rajasthan Public Street 
Lighting
Bhubaneswar Public Street 
Lighting

FY13
FY13

FY13

FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13

FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY14
FY14
FY14

FY14

* For PPP, currently 15 projects but two of the projects (Jharkhand diagnostics and FCI Silos) are split into two projects each mak ing the total project 
count as 17.

91

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 5

Overview of Main Trust Funds 
Activities

Trust Funds are a diverse instrument used mainly for 
two purposes: (a) to implement global conventions 
and suppor t global par tnerships/global public 
goods, and (b) to suppor t activities in country 
programs that implement country, regional, and 
sector priorities.

•		

Global Partnership Trust Funds: Trust Funds in 
suppor t of global par tnerships/public goods with 
significant activities in India are mostly focused 
on the environment, and include the following 
programs:1

•		

•		

•		

The	Ozone	Trust	Fund,	which	assists	countries 	
in phasing out Ozone Depleting Substances 
as agreed under the Montreal Protocol for the 
Protection of the Ozone Layer, with funding 
from the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal 
Protocol;
The	Global	Environmental	Facility,	which 	
provides funding for projects that improve the 
global environment;
The	Carbon	Finance	Program,	which	uses 	
money contributed by governments and 

Table 1. 
Global Partnership Trust Funds in India, FY2009-12

Trust Fund
Ozone Trust Fund
Global Environmental Facility
Carbon Finance
IDA Grant--Tsunami
Total

* FY12 data up to April 2012.

companies in OECD countries to purchase 
project-based greenhouse gas emission 
reductions in developing countries, within 
the framework of the Kyoto Protocol ’s Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM);
IDA	grants,	which	help	low-income	countries 	
to restore or maintain their external debt 
sustainability ; while India is not eligible for IDA 
grants, one such grant was approved in the 
aftermath of the Indian Ocean Tsunami.

These Trust Funds often complement IBRD/IDA 
project funding and are normally executed by 
recipient agencies.2 Disbursements over the last CAS 
period were $41.7 million (equivalent to 0.4 percent 
of IBRD/IDA disbursements over the period) (see 
table 1).

In some respects the use of funds from global 
programs in India is different than that in other 
countries. For example, the Ozone Depletion 
Program is larger in East Asian countries, and Carbon 
Finance is significantly larger in China.3 

Disbursements (US$, mn)*
22,425,798
13,632,004
3,327,801
2,300,000
41,685,604

This note covers only trust funds administered by the World Bank . The World Bank also operates as the Trustee for other global institutions such 
as the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria (GFATM), but these are not covered here, although the GFATM has disbursed $788 million in 
India since its inception in 2003.
Both Ozone and Carbon Finance projects are often free-standing—not linked to a World Bank-supported project.
For example, over FY2010 to the first half of FY2012, the Carbon Fund disbursed $408 million, GEF $96 million, and Ozone $28 million in China.

1  

2  
3  

92

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Look ing forward, while some programs such as 
Ozone are phasing out , others are expec ted to 
play an increasingly impor tant role. Most notably, 
the Clean Technology Fund (C TF) Trust Fund 
Committee agreed in May 2012 to provide an 
initial allocation of around $263 million to India 
to fund its Climate Investment Plan . Lending 
constraints in the nex t four years call for the 
leveraging of significantly higher amounts of trust 
resources, including through global par tnerships. 
Phase II of the H imachal Pradesh Green Growth 
Development Policy Loan is expec ted to be 
financed by the C TF.

Country, Region, and Sector Trust Funds: 

Trust funds also support activities in country 
programs that help implement country, regional, 
and sector priorities. During FY2009-12, 51 such 
TF programs4 were active in India, of which the 15 
largest accounted for more than 80 percent of total 
disbursements ($44.8 million) (see table 2). In all 
394 activities were funded in India, with an average 
disbursed amount of about $100,000. More than 
two-thirds ($32.6 million out of $44.8 million) of the 

Table 2. 
Country, Region, Sector Trust Funds, FY2009-12

Program

Name

DFIDIN
INFGRW
PHRD
PPIAF
SPTF
JSDF
ESMAP
TFESSD
FTIE
CITIES
GPOBA
FS-SP
SA-DSD
GFDRR
BNPPRF
OTHER

DFID India III
AusAid Infra
PHRD
PPIAF
DFID TF II
JSDF
ESMAP
TFESSD
Education for All
Cities Alliance
GPOBA
Swedish Social Development
South Asia Decentralization
GFDRR
BNPPRF
Other TFs
Total

activities were World Bank executed. The remainder 
($12.2 million) was recipient-executed.

Some trust funds are only or primarily recipient-
executed (Policy and Human Resource 
Development (PHRD), Japan Social Development 
Fund (JSDF), Cities Alliance, the Development 
Marketplace, Institutional Development Fund (IDF), 
Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (CGAP), 
the Statistical Capacity Building Trust Fund, and 
Independent Evaluation Group’s CLEAR initiative). 
In cases, where World Bank-executed funds are 
provided alongside recipient-executed funds, the 
former suppor ts supervision and implementation 
activities of recipient agencies. Cer tain trust fund 
programs can be executed by the Bank or by 
the Recipient depending on the objective of the 
activity. This is the case for (DFID, Output-Based 
Par tnership, Public Private Infrastructure Advisory 
Facility (PPIAF), Global Facility for Disaster Reduction 
and Recovery (GFDRR), and South Asia Food and 
Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI) (see table 4). 
All Recipient-executed trust funds require approval 
by the Government of India.

Total

Cum share 
(%)

7,326,037
4,578,265
3,195,235
3,152,994
2,867,551
2,549,884
2,254,167
2,055,138
1,802,713
1,419,605
1,411,650
1,326,520
1,063,634
1,021,023
1,019,145
7,832,515
44,876,076

16
27
34
41
47
53
58
62
66
70
73
76
78
80
83
100

No. 
Activities
33
29
20
30
37
8
13
19
8
13
7
10
24
9
16
118
394

Ave. size

222,001
157,871
159,762
105,100
77,501
318,736
173,398
108,165
225,339
109,200
201,664
132,652
44,318
113,447
63,697
66,377

4  

All programs excluding the Water and Sanitation Program and global programs such as Ozone Trust Fund, GEFIA, Carbon Finance Program, 
CDCFTA, and TRF

93

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17All other trust fund programs are only World Bank-
executed (see table 4 for the 11 largest). These trust 
funds are linked to activities in the India program, 
which have been requested by the Government 
of India (as are projects under preparation or 
implementation and knowledge activities), and 
are in line with the country strategy, South Asia 
Regional (SAR) Strategy, and sectoral priorities 
that are endorsed by the Board of Executive 
Directors. For example, the SAR strategy stresses 
the impor tance of reducing malnutrition in the 

region; accordingly, a large the South Asia Food and 
Nutrition Security Initiative or SAFANSI trust fund 
has been mobilized with contributions from DFID 
and other donors to suppor t initiatives to reduce 
malnutrition.

Another way to look at trust fund programs is by the 
level at which they are managed: country, region 
(South Asia), sectoral anchors or global. Trust funds 
managed at the level of the country program (the 
second and third DFID Trust Funds, for example) 

Table 3. 
Trust Funds with recipient-executed activities, FY2009-12 (US$)

Trust Fund

PHRD
JSDF
Cities Alliance
DFID TF II
DFID TF III
GPOBA
Dev. Marketplace
IDF
CGAP-T
PPIAF
StatCap
GFDRR
SAFANSI
IEG’s CLEAR Init.

Recipient-
executed 
Disbursement
2,927,082
2,403,691
1,202,933
1,188,859
1,043,294
977,663
586,491
463,561
333,639
317,078
307,313
234,610
200,000
54,304

Bank-executed 
Disbursement

Total 
Disbursement

Share RE/Total 
Disbursement (%)

Type

268,153
146,192
216,672
1,678,691
6,282,743
433,987
0
0
44,840
2,835,916
0
786,413
23,636
0

3,195,234
2,549,884
1,419,605
2,867,551
7,326,037
1,411,650
586,491
463,561
378,479
3,152,994
307,313
1,021,023
223,636
54,304

92
94
85
41
14
69
100
100
88
10
100
23
89
100

Mostly RE
Mostly RE
Mostly RE
Both
Both
Both
Only RE
Only RE
Mostly RE
Both
Only RE
Both
Both
Only RE

Table 4. 
World Bank-executed (BE) trust funds cumulative disbursements above $500,000, FY2009-12

Name
AusAid Infrastructure
ESMAP
TFESSD
Education for All
Swedish Social Development
South Asia Decentralization
BNPPRF
Water Partnership Program
Spanish IE TF
SAWI
Gender TF

Program
INFGRW
ESMAP
TFESSD
FTIE
FS-SP
SA-DSD
BNPPRF
WPP
SIEF
SAWI
GENTF

94

BE Disbursements
4,578,265
2,254,167
2,055,138
1,802,713
1,326,520
1,063,634
1,019,145
756,951
753,097
584,387
520,827

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Table 5. 
Trust Funds by Level of Management, FY2009-12 (US$)

Level of management
Country
Region
Sector or global
Total

Disbursement
10,193,588
10,345,827
24,390,127
44,929,542

Disbursement Share (%)
23
23
54
100

disbursed about a fourth of the total; regionally-
managed trust funds, another fourth; and sector/
global ones accounted for the remainder.5

Over time, the World Bank , donors, and recipients 
have striven to manage trust funds in a more strategic 
and less fragmented way, with the 2009 Trust Fund 
Reform representing an important step forward in 
this direction. For the trust funds managed by the 
India program, the DFID-World Bank Partnership 
Trust Funds for India II and III, a tripartite structure 
in which the Government of India (Department of 
Economic Affairs), DFID, and the World Bank jointly 
endorse activities has been put in place to ensure 
greater client ownership. For trust funds managed at 
the regional or sectoral level, government approval 
is needed for all recipient-executed activities, in line 
with Government of India procedures.

Other Trust Funds: In addition to the two categories 
of TFs discussed so far, both the Water and Sanitation 
Program (WSP) and IFC manage large trust fund 
resources. WSP-managed trust funds disbursed $12.3 
million and IFC-managed trust funds disbursed $31.8 
million over FY2009-12. IFC mobilized significant 
amounts of trust fund resources for its advisory 
services, from less than $1 million in FY2008 to $9.5 
million in FY2011.

The Government of India as a Trust Fund 

Donor: An impor tant deve lopment over the 
past CAS per iod has been Ind ia’s increas ing ro le 
as a donor in var ious trust funds. Ind ia is now 
a member of ten trust funds and contr ibutes 
to s ix of them (the Afghan istan Reconstruc t ion 
Trust Fund, Afr ica Cooperat ion Bu i ld ing, Av ian 
and Human Inf luenza , GEF, GFATM , South-South 
Exper ience Exchange Fac i l ity (SSEEF) , Cu ltura l 
Her itage) and the Government of Ind ia env isages 
contr ibut ing to a few add it iona l ones. Ind ia is a 
contr ibutor and prov ider of exper ience to the 
SEE TF, and SEE TF resources w i l l cont inue to be 
mob i l ized to foster exper ience shar ing regiona l ly 
and beyond on var ious deve lopment issues 
inc lud ing decentra l izat ion and de l iver y of pub l ic 
ser v ices.

Government of India’s Concerns on Trust 

Funds: The Government of India has taken a 
strategic stance on trust funds as a whole and 
expressed a major concern about the overall 
increase of trust fund funding in World Bank 
Group activities, stating that trust fund donors’ 
contributions do not have any leveraging impact 
financially, contrary to what would happen if the 
same funds were provided as IBRD or IFC capital 
increase.

5 

Excluding WSP $12,300,658 and Global Partnerships (OTF, GEFIA, Carbon, CDCFTA, and TRF)

95

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 6

India
Country Financing Parameters

Date: March 24, 2005

The country financing parameters for India set out below have been approved by the Regional
Vice President, South Asia Region and are being posted on the Bank ’s internal website. These
parameters would be applied within the overall framework of the Bank ’s Country Assistance Strategy for
FY05-08 (see India: Country Assistance Strategy, R2004-0170/3, IDA/R-2004-0208/3, September 17,
2004). 

Parameter
Remarks/Explanation
Up to 100% Cost sharing arrangements in individual projects would be managed to stay 
within the aggregate lending envelope; the Bank ’s overall financing share 
is not expected to change significantly. The Bank ’s financing percentage 
in each project may vary from project to project, depending upon project 
type, sector etc. Some level of counterpart financing however is expected 
to continue in many projects. The Bank may selectively finance 100% of 
project costs e.g., social sector projects and projects in poor and remote 
areas. In individual projects, cost sharing arrangements would take into 
consideration the characteristics of the project and sector-specific aspects 
(e.g., based on the CAS ‘guidelines for Bank lending in key sectors’) In 
national-level projects, where the Bank ’s envisages cofinancing with other 
development partners under common arrangements, including sector-
wide approaches, the Bank ’s financing share is expected to be relatively low.
In determining Bank financing of recurrent costs in individual projects the 
Bank will take into account sustainability issues at the sector and project 
levels including sustainability of the project/ program achievements/
outcomes, and implied future budgetary outlays. Sector-specific 
considerations (e.g., based on the CAS ‘guidelines for Bank lending in key 
sectors’) would also be taken into account.
India meets the criteria for Bank ’s financing of local costs. Therefore, the 
Bank may finance local and foreign costs in any proportion as needed in 
individual projects.

No country
level limit 
on
recurrent 
cost
financing
Yes

No

Current levels of taxes and duties are reasonable. At the project level, the 
Bank would consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively 
high share of project costs.

Item
Cost sharing. Limit on the
proportion of individual project costs 
that the Bank may finance

Recurrent cost financing. Any limits 
that would apply to the overall amount 
of recurrent expenditures that the Bank 
may finance

Local cost financing. Are the 
requirements for Bank financing of 
local expenditures met, namely that: 
(i) financing requirements for the 
country ’s development program 
would exceed the public sector ’s own 
resources (e.g., from taxation and other 
revenues) and expected domestic 
borrowing; and (ii) the financing of 
foreign expenditures alone would 
not enable the Bank to assist in the 
financing of individual projects
Taxes and duties. Are there any taxes 
and duties that the Bank would not 
finance?

96

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 7

Government of India Project 
Screening Criteria1

In 2011, the Depar tment of Economic Affairs, as the 
nodal agency for posing projects to the World Bank , 
Asian Development Bank (ADB), and International 
Fund for Agricultural Development, has decided 
to institute a new set of screening principles to 
govern the selection of projects to be posed to 
these agencies. The goal of instituting this screening 
criteria is to maximize access and leverage of 
Multilateral Financial Institution/Multilateral 
Development Banks’ (MDBs) knowledge base, 
international experience and familiarity with best 
practices, mak ing the best use of limited external 
resources available. This selection criteria will form 
the main approach for accessing assistance from the 
World Bank , ADB and the IFAD.

Central to this new approach are two principles: 
1) size of external assistance will be up-to a 
maximum of US$500 million from MDBs for any 
project inclusive of any technical assistance for 
project preparation and 2). Overall por tfolio will be 
progressively re -balanced towards State Projects 
and amongst the States towards the lagging and 
the special category States.

Systemic or transformational impact

1.  Does the proposal have elements of sustainable 
systems re -engineering and or sustainable 
process re -engineering which would lead 
to improved systems, business processes or 
delivery mechanisms?
2. Does the proposal involve capacity and 
institution building that can foster better 
outcomes on a long-term sustainable basis?
3. Does the proposal have focus on service 
delivery/improvement (rather than only asset 

creation) in a sustainable manner - which other 
wise has not been the norm in the projects 
implemented in the sector - e.g. focus on levels 
of reduction of water loss, focus on number 
of hours power/water is available per day, 
reduction in waterborne disease?
4. Does the proposal bring together otherwise 
disparate attempts/ schemes to one synergetic 
platform which has not been possible hither to 
(e.g. nutrition, gender issues, livelihoods)?
5. Does the proposal seek to create additional 
choice for the citizens to access required 
service/entitlements?
6. Does the proposal involve energy efficiency 
and environmental benefits without mak ing the 
project/ outcomes expensive?
7. Are knowledge transfer, technology transfer 
and best practices transfer from international 
experience envisaged with adequate long 
term engagement for ensuring sustainability in 
Indian context?
8. Does the proposal have institutional 
improvement measures: e.g. (a) Accounting 
Reforms (moving from single entry cash 
based accounting system to double entry 
accrual system of accounting (b) R ing 
fencing of finances/activities including 
corporatisation wherever needed c) creation 
and implementation of appropriate revenue 
models e.g. tariff reforms or alternative revenue 
structuring.
9. Does the proposal address issues of real sector 
reforms e.g. Development of sectoral policies, 
development of institutional structures, setting 
up of regulatory framework/ regulators?
10. Does the proposal have elements that 
are transformational in nature - which if 

1 

Based on Government of India circular (F.No. 3/2/2010-FB.II), issued on September 1, 2011, outlining a country-led screening criteria for projects 
posed to the World Bank , ADB and IFAD. 

97

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17implemented could transform the way systems 
function or the way delivery of services are done?

Innovations in financing and leveraging

Innovations and piloting of new approaches

1. Does the proposal have innovative elements and 
new approaches that have not been tried in the 
sector and have reasonable chance of changing 
for the better the way things are done in the sector 
and have some chance of scalable replication? 
2. Does the proposal look at financial sustainability 
and O&M related issues which otherwise has 
not been the norm in the sector?

1. Does the proposal use different/ innovative 
financing products /modalities?
2. Does the proposal involve co-financing from 
other financing agencies?
3. Does the proposal catalyze private sector 
financing in different ways and especially to 
create leverage?
4. Does the proposal involve CDM and accrual 
of carbon credits as natural by product of core 
development projects which can be a way of 
financing the project? 

98

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 8

Consultations Held to Inform the 
Preparation of the CPS 

World Bank FY2011 Client Survey for India

Background. In order to develop more effective 
strategies for its work in the country, the World 
Bank in India conducted a stakeholder perception 
survey in May–June 2012 to gauge how its work 
was perceived. The survey covered a wide range 
of questions about India’s development priorities, 
perceptions about the Bank in India, the Bank ’s 
perceived strengths and weaknesses, the relevance 
and quality of its research and knowledge, the ease 
of access and usefulness of its information, and its 
future role in the country.

Process. The survey was conducted by the market 
research firm AC N ielson through mailed and online 
questionnaires, as well as face -to-face interviews. 
I t covered a fair mix of think tanks, central and 
state government bodies, development agencies, 
civil society, media, the private sector, and project 
beneficiaries. About half of the respondents worked 
professionally with the World Bank . The survey 
covered the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
and H imachal Pradesh, as well as the cities of Delhi 
and Mumbai.

Results. Most stakeholders expressed confidence 
about the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and 
felt the institution had the financing, knowledge, 
and sk ills to help India solve complex development 
challenges. Better development results could be 
achieved if the WBG increased its collaboration 
with local governments, academia, think tanks, 
and research institutes in India. Going forward, 
respondents felt the World Bank had a significant 
role to play in the country ; that value would be 

greater, however, if its exper ts improved their 
knowledge of India’s specific challenges, reduced 
the complexity of obtaining financing, and offered 
more innovative knowledge products.

Areas of focus. Stakeho lders were of the op in ion 
that rura l deve lopment , agr icu ltura l deve lopment , 
and food secur ity were the most impor tant areas 
for reduc ing pover ty (tab les A9 .1 and A9 .2) . 
Educat ion , job creat ion , and econom ic growth 
were a lso be l ieved to be cr it ica l ly impor tant . Rura l 
deve lopment , governance, and energy were seen 
to be the key dr ivers of econom ic growth , and 
stakeho lders wanted the WBG to rema in engaged 
in these areas. On the g loba l deve lopment 
agenda , respondents wanted the WBG to 
engage on issues re lated to c l imate change, 
commun icab le d iseases, internat iona l f inanc ia l 
systems, and trade. Areas for future research 
inc luded rura l and agr icu ltura l deve lopment , 
food secur ity, educat ion , pover ty reduc t ion , 
governance and water and san itat ion .

Value to clients. Financing, par ticularly investment 
lending, was considered the Bank ’s most effective 
instrument in suppor t of the development agenda 
(table A9.3). This was followed by the Bank ’s 
technical assistance and advice and its ability to 
strengthen institutions. Bank research was perceived 
to be relevant and accessible. However, there were 
some concerns about the extent of the Bank ’s 
inclusiveness and openness, the accessibility of its 
staff, and its linkages to non-Bank exper tise (table 
A9.3). Selective concerns were expressed about the 
Bank ’s effectiveness in governance, job creation, and 
natural resource management. 

99

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Table A9.1.
What would contribute most to reducing poverty?

0%

10%

Percentage of Respondents (N=269)
20%
30%
40%

50%

60%

52%

43%

38%

34%

25%

21%

19%

17%

Rural development/agricultural 
development/ food security

Education

Job creation/employment

Economic growth

Governance/anti-corruption/law and 
justice

Equality of opportunity

Health

Water and sanitation

Social protection

Transport

Other

Gender/social intrusion

Energy

Natural resource management

Urban development

Environment

Conducive environment for private 
sector development and FDI

8%

7%

6%

6%

5%

5%

5%

3%

3%

“Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do 
you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in India?” (Respondents chose from a list. Responses combined.)

100

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Table A9.2.
Where should the World Bank focus its resources? 

0%

10%

Percentage of Respondents (N=269)
20%
30%
40%

50%

60%

Rural development/agricultural 
development/ food security

52%

Education

32%

Governance/anti-corruption/law and 
justice

Water and sanitation

Poverty reduction

Transport

Health

Energy

Job creation/employment

Economic growth

Urban development

Environment

26%

25%

25%

24%

20%

17%

15%

15%

11%

9%

Conducive environment for private 
sector development and FDI

Equality of opportunity

5%

5%

“When think ing about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in India, in which sectoral areas do you 
believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in India? (Choose no more than THREE)” 
(Respondents chose from a list. Responses combined.)

101

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Table A9.3.
What is the greatest value of the Bank?

0%

10%

Percentage of Respondents (N=264)
20%
30%
40%

50%

60%

Financial resources

42%

9%

51%

Institutional strengthening

14%

19%

33%

Technical assistance

AAA, studies/reports/policy notes

13%

11%

14%

27%

11%

22%

Training/capacity building

5%

17%

22%

Policy advice

6%

8%

14%

Studies/analyses

3%

8%

11%

Mobilizing third party financial resources

3%

4%

7%

Linkage to non-Bank expertise

4%

5%

Donor coordination

2%

4%

Other

2%

Data

2%

Convening/facilitating

1%

Greatest value

Second greatest value

“When think ing about the World Bank ’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second great 
value in India?” (Respondents chose from a list.)

Notes: In the previous FY2004 country survey, more than two-thirds (68%) of all respondents indicated that providing loans to finance development 
projects was the greatest value of the Bank . 

102

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Table A9.4.
What is the Bank’s greatest weakness?

Too bureaucratic in its operational 
policies and procedures

Too influenced by developed countries

Not adequately sensitive to political/
social realities in India

World Bank processes too slow and 
complex

Imposing technocratic solutions  
without regard to political realities

Not collaborating enough with  
non-state actors

Not exploring alternative  
policy options

Not willing to honestly criticize policies 
and reform efforts in the country

Not enough public disclosure of  
its work

Not aligned with country priorities

Other

Not client focused

Staff too in accessible

Arrogant in its approach

18%

16%

15%

14%

13%

12%

12%

9%

8%

6%

5%

3%

3%

0%

5%

Percentage of Respondents (N=264)
10%
15%
20%

25%

30%

27%

27%

Not aligned with other donors’ work

The credibility of its knowledge/data

1%

“Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank ’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in India? (Choose no more than TWO)” 
(Respondents chose from a list. Responses combined.)

Notes: Respondents in the previous country survey (FY2004) indicated that the Bank ’s greatest weaknesses were imposing technocratic solutions 
without regard to political realities (24%), not considering alternative policy options (21%), and being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and 
procedures (20%).

103

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17World Bank Group CPS multistakeholder 
consultations

In the summer of 2012, the Bank team held 
multistakeholder consultations to identify priorities 
for the new CPS. Consultations were held with a 
broad range of stakeholders to tap their experience 
and knowledge and hear their ideas about how 
the Bank could help India meet its long-standing 
development agenda as well as the new challenges 
thrown up by unprecedented economic growth 
and the recent slowdown.

Process. In mid-May 2012, a draft concept note 
was prepared by the WBG, outlining initial thoughts 
on its strategy for 2013–16. This was followed by 
discussions with the M inistry of Finance and line 
ministries to assess the central government ’s views 
on India’s challenges and to identify key areas 
where the WBG assistance could have the greatest 
impact. To capture the diversity of development 
challenges facing India today and the views of 
state governments, fur ther consultations were held 
with officials in four states: Assam, Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh.

These early consultations were accompanied by 
parallel consultations with civil society organizations 
in the state capitals of Assam, Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh, as well as in Delhi and 
Mumbai. Ahead of the consultations, all par ticipants 
received a presentation in both English and H indi 
that spelled out the main thrusts of the previous 
CPS, oppor tunities and challenges both within and 
outside India, and India’s own future direction as 
ar ticulated in the approach paper to the 12th Five 
Year Plan. This was followed by a paper presenting 
the WBG’s initial thoughts on its new strategy, based 
on early deliberations.

Par ticipants were asked to express their views 
candidly on what they felt should be the 
development priorities for India (and their state), 
and whether the CPS captured those priorities. They 
were also asked what role they envisaged for the 
WBG in suppor t of those priorities, in which sectors 
that suppor t would be most effective, and what 
form the suppor t should take (finance, knowledge, 
experience sharing, and so on). After feedback from 
the Bangalore consultations, a section was added 
on the lessons learned from earlier Bank projects.

To reach a much wider audience, the details of the 
discussions were shared on the Bank ’s external 
website, with comments and suggestions invited 
from the public at large.

Results. Despite the diversity of development 
challenges raised during the consultations, 
par ticipants identified a few key areas where the 
WBG could play a catalytic role:

Agriculture

Agriculture was repeatedly identified as an 
overarching concern, given the impor tance of 
food security for the country and the fact that 
the majority of India’s rural poor depend on 
agriculture for at least a por tion of their income. 
Par ticipants strongly felt that the WBG could help 
increase agricultural productivity by suppor ting the 
development of agriculture -related infrastructure 
and services. Ideas included suppor t for low-cost 
irrigation, improved access to credit, the provision 
of adequate warehousing and storage facilities, 
bringing the benefits of research to farmers, 
upgrading technological interventions, providing 
crop insurance, developing village roads, and 
building primary-level processing and marketing 
capacity at the grass roots. The improvement of 
livestock , par ticularly for dairy farming, was also 
seen as impor tant. Par ticipants felt that the creation 
of one -stop facilities for farmers should be a priority. 
Other matters of perceived impor tance were 
the proper management of the country ’s water 
resources and strengthening agriculture’s resilience 
to climate change.

Health

Hea lth and ma lnutr it ion were a lso h igh pr ior it ies. 
Par t ic ipants po inted out that on ly a sma l l 
percentage of the popu lat ion had access to forma l 
hea lth care. Pub l ic sec tor ser v ices were beset 
w ith poor management and leak ages, and some 
80 percent of hea lth spend ing occur red in the 
pr ivate sec tor. An average fam i ly spent more on 
hea lth care than on educat ion , w ith the h igh cost 
of treatment of ten lead ing to impover ishment . 
The sec tor faced a cr it ica l shor tage of human 
resources, espec ia l ly in rura l areas, mak ing it 
necessar y to tra in loca l peop le as paramed ics. 
Some par t ic ipants suggested that a pub l ic-

104

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17pr ivate -par tnersh ip mode l in hea lth care cou ld be 
promoted, w ith targeted subs idy for the poor. The 
Wor ld Bank cou ld he lp in prov id ing techn ica l and 
manager ia l ass istance to the sec tor, a long w ith 
capac ity bu i ld ing at var ious leve ls. Bank suppor t 
cou ld a lso be expanded to inc lude the promot ion 
of prevent ive and a lternat ive med ica l systems.

Education and skills

Education was another area of concern. Par ticipants 
highlighted the poor quality of elementary 
education, which laid a weak academic foundation 
that made it difficult for students to cope at higher 
levels, with direct effects on the quality of human 
resources. Moreover, the emphasis on enrolment 
numbers created an erroneous impression of 
universal schooling. Several speakers emphasized 
the need for meaningful sk ills training for youth to 
enable them to set up microenterprises and small 
businesses, thereby slowing the migration of rural 
youth to urban areas. There was also a perceived 
need to increase the number of seats available 
in institutions providing technical and vocational 
education, and increase resources allocated to such 
institutions.

Urbanization

Discussions also focused on the challenges created 
by India’s rapid urbanization. I t was observed that 
$1 trillion would be needed for urban development 
over the next two decades to meet the needs of 
India’s rapidly urbanizing population. However, 
it was also suggested that allocations should 
go primarily to local governments, and that 
transparency in public expenditures should be 
strengthened. Some par ticipants recommended 
that the WBG suppor t the planned development 
of the rapidly growing second- and third-tier cities, 
especially by providing technological and scientific 
solutions for public transpor tation, waste disposal, 
and other urban problems. Several par ticipants 
expressed apprehension that rapid urbanization, 
especially through rural-urban migration, was 
creating pockets of urban pover ty that were likely 
to deepen unless the sk ills of rural migrants were 
developed to improve their employability. Facilities 
in rural areas also needed to be improved to halt 
migration to urban centers.

Governance

The impor tance of good governance was 
repeatedly emphasized, par ticularly the need 
to tack le corruption. I t was felt that improving 
governance should be a focus area of the Bank ’s 
new strategy. Par ticipants expressed the need for 
greater transparency and disclosure regarding 
the use of public funds and the outcomes of 
publicly funded programs. They also cited a need 
for independent monitoring at the block , district, 
and state levels. The Bank , they said, could provide 
technical assistance and exper tise in this area. To 
suppor t decentralized planning, par ticipants saw it 
as impor tant to strengthen grassroots institutions 
(Panchayati Raj institutions, or PRIs) and to build 
their capacity by sharing examples of successful 
community-driven projects, the more because the 
PRIs provided the only institutional encouragement 
to women’s political empowerment in the country. 
Convergence of government programs was also 
needed through greater interministerial and 
interdepar tmental coordination. Several speakers 
pointed out the need to develop a current database 
of critical indicators—such as population, maternal 
health, education, location of resources, and so 
on—to improve development planning at the 
grassroots and to allocate resources wisely.

Environment

Par ticipants highlighted the environmental cost of 
high growth as manifested in rampant water, air and 
soil pollution. I t was emphasized that development 
programs should factor in environmental 
sustainability to ensure holistic development in 
addition to the creation of wealth creation and 
the stimulation of economic growth. I t was also 
suggested that the Bank help the government to 
come up with a climate -change response for the 
medium and long terms.

Infrastructure

Discussions also centered on the need for 
strengthening infrastructure, par ticularly transpor t, 
communications, and power. Several par ticipants 
felt that growth in sectors such as water, energy, 
roads and rail was needed if the manufacturing 
sector was to develop to its full potential.

105

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Small business

Several par ticipants said that the informal sector 
needed to be recognized as the biggest trigger 
for growth as it generated far more employment 
than the formal sector. However, productivity in 
small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) needed 
to be improved and such enterprises integrated 
with markets across the country. Given the sector ’s 
enormous potential, it was suggested that SMEs 
(including microenterprises) should be served 
by dedicated financial institutions that provided 
exper tise together with financial suppor t. I t was 
observed that the World Bank could act as a catalyst 
and counselor for this sector ; moreover, deeper 
research on the sector ’s considerable untapped 
potential was needed.

Regional imbalances and the unique characteristics 
of some of India’s regions were also discussed. For 
instance, in the nor theast, development projects 
needed to take into account the region’s unique 
ecological characteristics, and more research was 
required to understand the richness of the resource 
base. The World Bank could play an impor tant role in 
Assam by suppor ting small farmers; strengthening 
transpor tation (including river transpor tation on 
the Brahmaputra), communications, and power ; 
and expanding microfinance and vocational 
training. In Chhattisgarh, while highlighting the 

difficulties of work ing in Maoist-dominated areas, 
par ticipants pointed to the plight of farmers and 
forest-dependent people and the need to improve 
primary health care and education, upgrade the 
delivery of government programs, and ensure the 
judicious use of the state’s natural resources.

Other areas of focus

Children, the disabled, the elderly, and agri-business 
were identified as sectors that required specific 
mention in the strategy. I t was mentioned that 
senior citizens—whose number is expected to rise 
to about 340 million by 2050 according to a United 
Nations estimate—required special focus as they 
were excluded from most development programs. 
Fur ther, in many rural areas, young people were 
migrating to urban centers, leaving their elders 
behind to fend for themselves without a suppor t 
system. In the absence of a clear agenda to address 
this issue seriously, a major problem was bound to 
appear.

CPS Formulation and Consultation Process

A more detailed version of the CPS consultation 
process, with the names of par ticipants, details of 
discussions, and other information, is available on 
the World Bank ’s India website:  
http://www.worldbank .org/en/country/india.

106

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX 9

The Indian Statistical System 

India has been a pioneer in the collection and use 
of statistics for national development and has one 
of the largest and most complex statistical systems 
in the world. The complexity derives from the size 
of the economy and the population, the great 
variety of economic activities and social conditions, 
the variability in natural endowments and 
environmental conditions and the constitutional 
structure of a federal state. While national statistics 
are the responsibility of the central government, 
state and local governments have formal 
responsibility for the collection of the basic data 
which make up the national estimates.

The Indian Statistical System (ISS) is the responsibility 
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI). The Statistics Wing of 
the Ministry – also called the National Statistical 
Office (NSO – includes the Central Statistics Office 
(CSO), responsible for the compilation of national 
statistics and statistical standards, the National 
Sample Survey Office, responsible for sample surveys 
throughout India, and the Computer Center. At 
the Center statistical work is also carried out in a 
number of ministries coordinated by the CSO. At 
the state level and below, statistical activities are 
the responsibility of state governments and most 
states have a department of Economics or Statistics, 
or its equivalent, to coordinate activities. Statistical 
activities also take place in districts and panchayats 
(local levels). To oversee and promote coordination of 
the ISS, in 2005 the Government set up a permanent 
National Statistical Commission (NSC). The NSC 
works to promote coordination, improve standards 
and to ensure that the ISS as a whole meets the 
needs of the nation to support economic, social and 
environmental development.

A strong history of statistical development: 

Significant development of the ISS and its related 
institutions took place in the first decades after 
Independence. The Indian Statistical Institute, for 
example, was responsible for the development of 
many of the statistical procedures and techniques 
that are widely used today throughout the world. 
The National Sample Survey, which is now in its 
68th round, has collected and disseminated an 
enormous amount of extremely valuable data 
about the economic activity and social conditions 
of households throughout the country. I t represents 
the pre -eminent source of data for micro-economic 
research in India and a very impor tant resource for 
historical analysis.

In many respects, the Indian statistical system 
in 2012 is sophisticated and well-resourced. For 
example, India was one of the first subscribers to 
the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard 
(SDDS) and has been in compliance with the 
standard since 19961. The most recent IMF Ar ticle IV 
staff repor t states that “Macroeconomic statistics are 
adequate for surveillance, but weaknesses remain 
in the timeliness and coverage of cer tain statistical 
series. India has an elaborate system for compiling 
economic and financial statistics and produces 
a vast quantity of data covering most sectors of 
the economy.”2 The World Bank ’s Bulletin Board 
on Statistical Capacity (BBSC )3, indicates that the 
Statistical Capacity Indicator for India is significantly 
higher than for other IDA countries and for other 
countries in the South Asia region. At the national 
level, the statistical system is able to call upon a 
cadre of highly sk illed and experienced statisticians 
and there is an extensive education and training 
system in place to replace those who leave.

1 
2  
3  

http://dsbb.imf.org/images/pdfs/AnnualReports/2010/IND_SDDS_AR2010.pdf
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr1150.pdf
http://go.worldbank .org/QVSQM1R6V0

107

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17The statistical system under pressure: Despite 

significant progress, by the end of the twentieth 
centur y, the Indian statistical system as a whole 
was under considerable pressure. As demand for 
statistics increased generally and as new concerns 
and problems led to demands for new data. To 
a large extent, however, both overall coverage 
and the quality of data also declined as financial 
resources were limited under general fiscal 
pressures and as Government policies turned away 
from central planning towards greater pr ivate 
sector involvement in national development. By 
the time of the M illennium there was widespread 
concern that the system had been increasingly 
unable to respond as economic reforms, 
deregulating pr ivate investment, and promoting 
the market economy k icked in and as more powers 
were devolved to the states. To help understand 
the problems, in 2000 the Government set up a 
National Statistical Commission (NSC ), to carr y out 
a comprehensive examination of the statistical 
system and to make recommendations on how it 
could be improved.

The 2001 NSC repor t identified a number of 
deficiencies in administrative statistics as well as 
censuses and surveys, including: a) gaps in the 
availability of needed information; b) delays in the 
publication of results; c) large and frequent revisions 
of published results; d) gross discrepancies between 
official statistics from different sources; and e) lack 
of transparency in statistical operations. At the same 
time, quality assurance processes were ineffective 
and significant sets of data especially at the state 
level were judged to be of poor quality. The repor t 
also noted the absence of effective coordination 
to promote efficient production of comparable 
statistics, inadequate technical knowledge of staff, 
inadequate numbers of statistical staff in place 
and inadequate information and communications 
technology and physical infrastructure. In addition, 
it was found that variations in the capacities of 
state Statistical Bureaus had had a major effect on 

the quality and consistency of state and national 
statistics.

The World Bank’s involvement in statistics in 

India: The World Bank has been in a dialogue with 
the Government on statistics for more than fifteen 
years. This engagement has been based on three 
arguments. First, it suppor ts a program of reform 
which the Government of India itself has identified 
as a priority. The impor tance of good statistics to 
provide the evidence base for socio-economic 
development has long been recognized in India. 
An efficient and effective national statistical system 
in India is seen as a core function of Government 
at all levels and an integral component of the 
accountability and transparency framework . 
Second, good statistics are an integral par t of 
the development results agenda and suppor t 
development effor ts at all levels and in all sectors. 
Third, an efficient and effective statistical system 
is essential not only for the proper operation of 
government at all levels but also for the World Bank 
Group’s own lending and non-lending operations in 
India.

Wor ld Bank suppor t to statistics was initiated in 
1996 , and a draft projec t was prepared in 1999 , 
but it did not proceed until after the NSC issued 
its repor t . The engagement was re -star ted in 2005 
with a number of technical studies, including an 
assessment of the requirements to strengthen 
state statistical systems. In 2010 , Statistical 
Strengthening Loan for India (a development 
policy loan for $107 million) was approved by 
the Board. I t suppor ted a program of reform and 
capacity strengthening that the Government 
had initiated in 2006 , largely in response to the 
recommendations of the 2001 NSC Repor t . In 
par ticular, the Government established a centrally 
sponsored scheme to suppor t a process of reform 
and statistical capacity building in the 35 States 
and Union Terr itor ies. Under this scheme states 
under took to invest in their statistical systems in 

108

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17line with the needs for both national and state 
level statistics, setting their own pr ior ities and 
timetable for reform . In return , the centre provided 
grants, training and technical suppor t .

What has been achieved? Although the Loan 

closed in 2011, the process of reform and capacity 
building continues. The centrally sponsored 
statistical strengthening scheme, which was set up 
under the 11th Plan will continue through the 12th 
Plan and possibly beyond. Thir ty-three out of 35 
States have signed up to par ticipate in the scheme, 
nine states have completed their strategic plans, 
and most are now implementing the reforms and 
building capacity. A monitoring system has been 
established and progress repor ts are produced 

regularly. After a slow star t, progress is now pick ing 
up and MOSPI anticipates that significant additional 
funds will be needed in the 12th Plan beyond 
the initial allocation. Building on lessons learned 
from the Statistical Strengthening Loan, the World 
Bank will explore options for fur ther engagement 
under the new CPS. An impor tant par t of the 
engagement for the Government was to gain 
access to experience and knowledge of statistical 
capacity building programs and good practice 
elsewhere. I t is clear that success requires careful 
and sustained follow up of the reform and capacity 
building process, and that all states would benefit 
from additional technical assistance and capacity 
building effor ts both to prepare strategic plans, and, 
more impor tantly, implement them.

109

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX A2

India at a glance

Poverty and Social

India

South Asia

Lower- middle-
income

2011
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
Average annual growth, 2005-11
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2005-11)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

1,241.5
1,410
1,746.5

1.4
0.2

30
31
65
47
44
92
63
116
116
116

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

1,657
1,299
2,151

1.5
1.1

..
31
65
48
33
90
62
106
107
105

2,533
1,760
4,458

1.5
1.4

..
39
66
46
24
87
71
104
106
102

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

India

Lower-middle-income group

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will be 
incomplete.

110

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Key Economic Ratios and Long-Term Trends

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1991
274.8
22.5
8.3
22.5
..
-0.4
1.7
31.6
33.4
..
..

1991-01
6.2
4.2
12.3

2001-11
7.9
6.4
15.1

Economic ratios*

Trade 

2001
492.4
25.7
12.4
24.2
..
0.7
0.9
20.2
18.0
..
..

2010
9.6
8.0
22.7

2010
1,684.3
35.8
22.8
31.7
..
-2.7
0.3
17.2
6.3
..
..

2011
1,848.0
36.6
24.6
31.1
..
-4.2
0.4
18.1
7.1
15.3
68.7

(average annual growth)

2011
6.9
5.4
15.3

2011-15
7.0
5.6
21.8

Domestic 
savings

Capital 
formation

Indebtedness 

India

Lower-middle-income group

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will be 
incomplete.

111

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Structure of the Economy

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov ’t final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov ’t final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

1991
29.4
25.4
15.2
45.2
65.9
11.6
8.3

1991-01
3.3
6.2
6.9
8.0
5.9
6.9
8.0
13.5

2001
23.0
25.2
14.7
51.8
63.4
12.4
13.2

2001-11
3.2
8.4
8.6
9.6
6.4
7.3
13.2
16.9

2010
17.7
27.1
14.5
55.1
56.5
11.9
26.9

(% of GDP)

2011
17.2
26.4
13.9
56.4
57.2
11.7
29.8

(average annual growth)

2010
7.0
7.2
7.6
9.3
7.0
7.8
11.1
15.6

2011
2.8
3.4
2.5
8.9
7.5
5.1
11.1
18.5

Growth of capital and GDP (%)

Growth of exports and imports (%)

20

15

10

5

0

-5

40

30

20

10

0

-10

06

07

08

09

10

11

06

07

08

09

10

11

GDP

GCF

Imports

Exports

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.

112

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Prices and Government Finance

Domestic prices 
(% age)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

Total exports (fob)
Tea
Iron
Manufactures
Total imports (cif )
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

1991

2001

2010

2011

13.5
13.8

18.6
-5.4
-8.6

1991
17,865
492
135
13,148
19,411
..
5,325
4,233
..
..
..

4.3
3.2

16.2
-6.9
-9.7

2001
43,827
361
230
33,370
51,413
..
14,000
9,882
..
..
..

10.4
8.5

20.2
-4.1
-7.9

2010
251,136
691
639
168,098
369,769
..
106,068
71,627
..
..
..

8.2
8.0

18.7
-4.8
-8.3

(US$ millions)

2011
309,843
853
789
207,393
499,533
..
143,291
96,763
..
..
..

Inflation (%)

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

06

07

08

09

GDP deflator

11

10

CPI

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

Exports

Imports

113

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17BALANCE of PAYMENTS

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

1991
23,288
24,879
-1,591
-3,830
4,243
-1,178
4,563
-3,385

9,220
24.5

1991
86,864
8,459
14,203
7,858
1,170
242

565
2,897
1,476
74
5

2,861
2,184
669
1,515
744
772

2001
61,843
70,093
-8,250
-4,206
15,856
3,400
8,551
-11,951

54,106
47.7

2001
99,499
7,009
19,458
11,770
1,091
570

557
363
-1,444
5,472
2,950

2,582
1,997
1,152
845
508
337

2010
382,280
464,054
-81,775
-17,308
53,140
-45,958
59,008
-13,050

396,666
45.6

2010
290,351
11,180
25,888
24,407
625
1,024

1,007
5,400
18,989
26,502
30,442

4,348
4,401
1,374
3,027
275
2,752

Current account balance to GDP (%) 

Composition of 2011 debt (US$ mill.) 

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

IDA
26,605 

IBRD
11,524 

Short-term 
78,052 

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

114

(US$ millions)

2011
450,777
576,439
-125,662
-15,987
63,494
-78,180
65,349
12,831

414,136
47.9

(US$ millions)

2011
334,331
11,524
26,605
29,177
740
1,101

..
2,631
17,958
32,190
-4,137

7,144
2,683
1,534
1,149
308
841

IMF
6,108 
Other multilateral
10,711 
Bilateral
26,870

Private
174,461

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B2

India - Selected Indicators* of 
Bank Portfolio Per formance and 
Management

As of Date January 24, 2013

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousand)
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2010

2011

2012

2013

75
3.7
9.3
11.2
10.7
11.8
27.5

81
3.9
8.6
12.0
9.9
12.4
16.9

76
3.8
7.9
12.1
10.5
13.4
13.0

77
4.2
19.5
27.2
20.8
29.8
4.3

yes
14,390  
192  

yes
12,199  
151  

yes
16,243 
214  

yes
14,318  
186  

Since FY 80
350
49,161
25.8
23.2

Last Five FYs
19
5,359
15.8
11.4

a.  As shown in the Annual Repor t on Por tfolio Per formance (except for current FY ).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank ’s country por tfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Por tfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank ’s por tfolio at the beginning of the year : Investment projects 
only.
*  All indicators are for projects active in the Por tfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes all active projects as well as 
projects which exited during the fiscal year.

115

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B3A

CAS Annex B3A - IBRD/IDA 
Program Summary : India

As of March 31, 2013

Fiscal 
Year

Project Name

2013

2014

2015

2013

INTEGRATION
Himachal Pradesh State Roads - Additional Financing b/
Kerala Transport II
National Highways Interconnectivity
Gujarat Highways II
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor II
Northeast Power Transmission I
Tamil Nadu Roads II
Implementing Per form, Achieve, Trade - CTF
AP Rural Roads
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor III
Northeast Power Transmission II
Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization
Luhri Hydro
Sub-total by engagement area 
TRANSFORMATION
Karnataka Watersheds II b/
HP Mid-Himalayan Watersheds - Additional Financing b/
Himachal Pradesh DPL Green Growth b/
Super Efficient Equipment Program for Egy Effcy - CTF
Maharashtra Rural Water and Sanitation III
Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring II
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation for Low-income States
Karnataka Urban Water Modernization
Uttarakhand Watersheds II
Partial Risk Sharing Facility in Energy Efficiency - CTF
Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Services - GEF
Facility for Low Carbon Technology Deployment - GEF
Himachal Pradesh DPL II Green Growth - CTF
Sustainable Livelihoods & Adaptation to Climate Change - 
GEF
Informal Settlements Improvement Project
Neeranchal National Watersheds
Sub-total by engagement area

2015

2014

116

IBRD  
US$ M

IDA a/ 
US$ M

GEF/MP/
CTF US$ M

TOTAL 
US$ M

 61.7 
 216.0 
 500.0 
 350.0 
 1,200.0 
 425.0 
 300.0 
 50.0 
 120.0 
 525.0 
 500.0 

 650.0 
4,897.7   

 100.0 

 190.0 

 61.7 
 216.0 
 500.0 
 350.0 
 1,200.0 
 425.0 
 300.0 
 100.0 
 120.0 
 525.0 
 500.0 
 325.0 
 650.0 
 5,272.7 

 60.0 
 37.0 
 100.0 
 50.0 
 290.0 
 300.0 
 500.0 
 190.0 
 100.0 
 25.0 
 10.1 
 10.0 
 100.0 
 8.8 

50.0    

325.0   

325.0

50.0    

 60.0 
 37.0 

 290.0 
 300.0 
 500.0 

 100.0 

 50.0 

 25.0 
 10.1 
 10.0 
 100.0 
 8.8 

 500.0 

 790.0 

 245.0 
 1,532.0 

 203.9 

 500.0 
 245.0 
 2,780.9 

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Fiscal 
Year

Project Name

IBRD  
US$ M

IDA a/ 
US$ M

GEF/MP/
CTF US$ M

TOTAL 
US$ M

2013

2014

INCLUSION
ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement b/
Karnataka Health Systems - Additional Financing b/
Bihar Panchayati Raj Institutions b/
HIV AIDS IV
Bihar Social Protection
Low-Income Housing
Tamil Nadu & Puducherri Disaster Risk Reduction 
AP Rural Inclusive Growth
Teacher Training in Bihar
SSA (Elementary Education) IIII
Bihar Flood Rehabilitation APL II
ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition APL II
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation APL II
Kerala Health Systems 
Bihar Flood Rehabilitation APL III
Sub-total by engagement area 
Total by 
FY
2013
2014
2015 c/

2015

a/ $2.73 billion IDA16 committed in FY12 
b/ approved 
c/ project preparation underway ; assumes transitional IDA17 financing

 106.0 
 70.0 
 84.0 
 255.0 
 70.0 
 100.0 
 202.5 
 150.0 
 200.0 
 400.0 
 250.0 
 344.0 
 250.0 
 40.0 
 250.0 
 3,016.5 

 106.0 
 70.0 
 84.0 
 255.0 
 70.0 
 100.0 
 202.5 
 150.0 
 200.0 
 400.0 
 250.0 
 344.0 
 250.0 
 40.0 
 250.0 
 3,061.5 

 377.7 
 2,665.0 
 2,645.0 

 2,074.50 
 1,100.0 
 1,454.0 

 50.0 
 153.9 
 50.0 

 2,502.2 
 3,918.9 
 4,149.0 

117

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B3B

India: IFC Investment  
Operations Program

2010

2011

2012

2013*

1130
806

421
401

2
4
2

14
25

4
9
31
4
3
0
0
1
0
100

15
1
83
0
1
100

0
10
6

14
55
0

9

0

0

3
2
100

36
0
58

6
100

789
789

0
15
15
7
8
31
2
7
4
0
0
8
0
0
0
2
0
100

34
9
47
0
11
100

653
468

13
11
4

35
26

9

0
2
0

0
0
100

10
4
62
0
25
100

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only
Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
Agriculture and Forestry
Chemicals
Collective Investment Vehicles
Education Services
Electric Power
Finance & Insurance
Food & Beverages
Health Care
Industrial & Consumer Products
Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
Oil, Gas and Mining
Plastics & Rubber
Primary Metals
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
Textiles, Apparel & Leather
Transportation and Warehousing
Utilities
Total
Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC 
Accounts only
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi equity
Quasi loan
Total

* Data as of Jan 17, 2013

118

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17119

Product Name

Product

Completion 
FY

Cost 
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

INTEGRATION

Recent completions (FY12-13)

Macro Brief

ESW

2012

172

G

KG

Policy Brief on Indian Power Sector

ESW

2013

12

G

PS

Orissa: Institutionalizing PSIA Capacity 

TA

2012

138

G

PS

Issues in Employment: Global & Country Perspectives

TA

2012

408

G

KG, PD

Review of Regulatory Framework: Ports & Airports

TA

2012

65

G

PS

Visiting Scholars Program

TA

2012

89

B, G

KG

Manufacturing Plan Implementation

TA

2013

45

G

PS

Underway (FY 13-14)

Bihar Growth Assessment

ESW

2013

G

KG

Financial Sector Assessment: Supplementary Studies

ESW

2013

G

KG

Experience with PPPs in Infrastructure

ESW

2013

G

KG

Policy Notes on Power

ESW

2013

G

KG, PS

India Economic Update

ESW

2013

G

KG, PD

Sk ills Development

ESW

2014

G

KG

States Report

ESW

2014

G

KG

Options Study for Growth on Eastern Dedicated Freight 
Corridor

ESW

2014

G

KG

Growth, Inclusion & Competitiveness

ESW

2014

G

KG

Mobilizing Financing for Infrastructure PPPs

ESW

2014

G

PS

Manufacturing Plan Implementation II

TA

2013

G

PS

Solar Power : Renewable Energy Market Transformation 
Initiative

TA

2014

G

PS

Transport Policies & Reform Activities

TA

2014

G

PS

Orissa Mining & Inclusive Growth

TA

2014

G

PS

Partnership for Market Readiness in Renewable Energy

TA

2014

D

PS

Financial Sector Assessment Follow-up: RBI Bank ing SPN

TA

2015

G

PS

ANNEX B4

Summary of World Bank 
Knowledge Services - India

As of January 23, 2013

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17120

Product Name

Product

Completion 
FY

Cost 
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

TRANSFORMATION

Recent completions (FY12-13)

PPP Options Study for Waste Water Management

TA

2012

73

G

KG

Urbanization Review

ESW

2012

241

G

KG

Evaluation of National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Program

ESW

2012

239

G

KG

Urban Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Building

TA

2012

92

G

PS

Strengthening Institutions for Mgmt of Land Acquisition 
and R&R

TA

2012

1178

G

PS

Facilitating PPPs for Urban Infrastructure Development

TA

2012

62

G

PS

Impact Evaluation of Rural Credit Cooperatives Project

Impact Eval

2013

350

G

KG

Underway (FY 13-14)

Social Dimensions of Urbanization

ESW

2013

G

KG

Enhancing Agricultural Productivity : Policy & Investment 
Priorities

ESW

2013

G

KG

Rural Road Development - Benefits Impact of PMGSY 
Project

ESW

2014

G

KG

National Land Records Modernization Implementation 
Support

TA

2014

G

PS

Inclusive Heritage-Based City Development Planning

TA

2014

G

PS

Food Security in Tribal & Conflict-affected Areas

TA

2014

G

PS

Cap Dev for Integrated Water Resources Development 
& Mgmt

TA

2015

G

PS

INCLUSION

Recent completions (FY12-13)

Madhya Pradesh Pilot on Integrated Child Development

Impact Eval

2012

569

G

KG

Teacher Accountability & School Outcomes

Impact Eval

2012

1011

G

KG

Health Insurance System of India

Impact Eval

2012

142

G

KG

Financial Literacy & Education

Impact Eval

2013

478

G

KG

Sundarbans Climate Change Mitigation & Disaster Risk 
Mgmt

TA

2012

1765

G

KG

Implementation Support for India Disaster Risk 
Mitigation Program

TA

2012

204

G

PS

Bihar : Immediate Relief Support & Disaster Risk 
Management

TA

2012

297

G

PS

Capacity Building in Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR)

TA

2012

286

G

PS

Consultations on Human Development

TA

2012

242

B

PD

Health Policy Notes & Client Engagement

TA

2012

628

G

KG

Growth & Inclusion Workshop

TA

2013

121

G

PD

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17121

Product Name

Product

Completion 
FY

Cost 
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Underway (FY 13-14)

Human Resources for More Effective Health Systems

ESW

2013

G

KG

Service Delivery & Public Spending in Health

ESW

2013

G

KG

Institutional Arrangements for Nutrition

ESW

2013

G

PS

Madhya Pradesh Higher Education

ESW

2014

G

KG

Andhra Pradesh: Teacher Accountability & Student 
Achievement

Impact Eval

2013

G

KG

Andhra Pradesh: Rural Poverty Impact Evaluation

Impact Eval

2014

G

KG

Karnataka Results-based Financing Hospital Care

Impact Eval

2014

G

KG

Strengthening Implementation of Rural Livelihoods 
Programs

TA

2013

G

PS

Improving Technical & Vocational Education & Training 
in West Bengal

TA

2013

G

PS

Improving Social Inclusion in India's Health Ins Scheme 
for the Poor

TA

2014

G

PS

Teacher Education & Professional Devmt -Int'l Best 
Practices

TA

2014

G

PS

National Unique Identification System

TA

2014

G

PS

Multi-sectoral Nutrition Action in Bihar

TA

2014

G

PS

Community Food & Nutrition Security Initiatives in High-
Poverty States

TA

2014

G

PS

Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery & Climate Adaptation 
Program

TA

2014

G

PS

Social Pensions for Ministry of Rural Development

TA

2014

G

PS

Foundation for Corporate Social Responsibility

TA

2014

G

PS

Higher Education

TA

2014

G

KG

Strengthening Institutional Capacity of RSBY

TA

2015

G

PS

Social Observatory for Rural Food & Nutrition Security 
in NRLM

TA

2015

G

KG, PS

ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY

Recent completions (FY12-13)

Environmental Challenges of India's Rapid Growth

ESW

2012

446

G

KG

Climate Investment Plan

TA

2012

55

G, D

PS

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Product Name

GOVERNANCE

Recent completions (FY12-13)

Product

Completion 
FY

Cost 
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Constraints to Project Preparation & Implementation

TA

2012

327

Underway (FY 13-14)

Introduction of e-tools in Mgmt of Construction Projects

ESW

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

PS

PS

PS

PS

PS

PS

PS

KG

PS

PS

PS

KG

2013

2013

2014

2014

2014

2014

2014

2014

2015

2015

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

ESW

2014

Procurement Capacity Building

Chattisgarh Capacity Building Program

Bihar Capacity Building Program

Karnataka Per formance Management

E-Governance in the Northeast

Karnataka PFM Reform Action Plan

Support for Per formance Management Initiatives

Uttar Pradesh Capacity Building

Jharkhand Capacity Building

GENDER 

Underway (FY 13-14)

Gender and Development

a. Government, Donor, Bank .
b. Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-Solving.

122

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B5

India Social Indicators

POPULATION 
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
 Measles
DPT

Latest single year

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

Same region/income 
group
South Asia

Lower-
middle-
income

784.5
2.3
24.3
4.3

964.5
2.0
26.6
3.5

1,224.6
1.4
30.1
2.6

1,633.1
1.5
30.1
2.7

2,518.7
1.6
39.4
2.9

..
..
..

290
24

31.1
8.7
40.1

..
3.2

..
..
..

..
..
..

1
18

45.3
31.8
50.1

360
57

30.8
9.1
40.1

1.2
..

..
..
..

75
90
70

72
71

37.2
25.7
41.8

1,270
152

33.4
8.6
42.4

1.4
3.1

92
92
89

92
97
90

74
72

1,176
148

1,623
140

1.3
2.5

86
89
84

90
95
88

77
76

1.7
4.0

85
87
83

87
93
83

80
79

123

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Latest single year

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

Same region/income 
group
South Asia

Lower-
middle-
income
25

65
64
67

50
69

244
175
300
57

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total
       Male
        Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by sk illed health staff (%)

..

57
57
57

91
130

261
279
..
..

51

60
59
61

72
100

236
241
470
34

44

65
64
67

48
63

253
168
230
53

33

65
64
67

52
67

239
166
290
48

Notes: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to change from ISCED76 to 
ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2012. 

124

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B6

India - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

Actual  
2008

2007

2009

2010

Estimate 
2011

2012

2013

Projected
2014

2015

8
23
20
26
31
34

8.2

9.6

9
24
24
29
30
34

8
25
20
24
34
37

100
18
28
54
70
32

100
18
29
53
66
33

100
18
27
55
68
30

1238700

1224097

1361057

1684324

100
18
28
55
69
32

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed 
investment
Government investment
Private investment
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas 
method)
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 93 prices)
Gross domestic product at 
9.8
3.9
market prices
Gross Domestic Income
9.8
5.3
7.7
10.0
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 93 prices)
Gross domestic product at 
8.2
2.4
6.7
market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
256504
Merchandise FOB
166162
Imports (GNFS)b
309119
      Merchandise FOB
257629
Resource balance
-52615
Net current transfers
41945
Current account balance
-15737
Net private foreign direct 
15893
investment

277991
182262
360181
300644
-82190
52045
-38435
17966

294964
189001
360568
308520
-65604
44799
-27914
22372

382280
250627
464054
381061
-81775
53140
-45958
9360

960

1030

1160

1280

5.7
5.3

9.6
9.7

4.8
3.3

8
22
23
27
32
34

8.0

5.7
5.6

100
17
26
56
69
30

8
22
25
30
31
33

100
17
25
58
77
27

8
19
27
34
23
26

100
16
25
59
73
30

8
22
31
37
27
29

100
15
25
60
72
30

8
22
36
41
28
30

100
15
25
60
73
29

8
21
41
46
27
29

1847982

1967881

2113579

2295980

2475905

1410

1540

1660

1770

1890

6.9

7.1

5.4

7.5
8.3

5.1

2.8

3.7

20.0
19.6

6.4

5.4

4.9

-6.3
-7.1

7.1

6.0

5.6

0.9
0.1

7.3

6.7

5.8

7.5
7.9

450777
309843
576439
499533
-125662
63494
-78180
22061

529513
369430
670761
586140
-141247
70275
-87279
20000

659244
458868
787609
693201
-128366
65674
-79974
26500

822528
580173
942151
837620
-119624
70810
-69623
40000

1012629
723648
1127393
1008240
-114764
76008
-63409
40000

125

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17126

Indicator

Actual  
2008
10303
2896
7407
-24840

Estimate 
2011
11592
2631
8961
31696

Projected
2014
19437
5656
13781
59989

2007
24724
2272
22452
67284

2009
5792
3039
2753
28118

2010
17145
5400
11746
32503

2012
7245
6631
614
49689

2013
18423
6254
12168
49936

2015
-2608
1348
-3955
61495

Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & 
ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates 
(YR93 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
..
Primary
..
Manufactures
..
Merchandise imports (CIF)
..
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
21.0
19.4
Current expenditures
21.2
23.8
Current account surplus (+) or 
-0.2
-4.4
deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%)
Price indices (YR93 =100)
Merchandise export price 
index
Merchandise import price 
index
Merchandise terms of trade 
index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% 
change)
GDP deflator (% change)

-92164

20079

-13441

-13050

12831

10345

-14885

-49802

-35479

-4.2

-5.4

-6.0

-4.9

-6.8

-7.2

-6.1

-5.2

-4.6

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

18.3
24.2
-6.0

18.9
24.4
-5.5

18.7
23.5
-4.8

18.7
23.8
-5.1

19.0
22.8
-3.7

19.2
22.4
-3.2

19.2
22.2
-3.0

4.8
..

4.0
..

3.9
..

3.8
..

3.5
..

3.6
0.1

3.8
0.1

3.9
0.1

3.9
0.1

23.3
19.3
86.2

22.5
8.9
53.6

23.1
18.2
54.9

21.4
10.0
70.3

19.6
5.8
65.2

19.6
12.9
57.9

20.0
15.9
57.3

20.0
14.1
50.2

20.0
13.7
66.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

108.5

97.8

94.7

102.0

99.1

102.5

102.2

101.8

101.8

6.4

9.0

12.4

10.4

8.2

7.4

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.8

8.7

6.0

8.5

8.0

7.4

7.0

6.5

6.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. 
“GNFS” denotes “goods and nonfactor services.”
c.  
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d.  
Includes use of IMF resources.
e.  Consolidated central government.
f.  
“LCU” denotes “local currency units.” An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Table B6.1.
India’s Demographic Transition

India Male and Female Population by Age, 2009-10

90 and above
85 to 90
80 to 84
75 to 79
70 to 74
65 to 69
60 to 64
55 to 59
50 to 54
45 to 49
40 to 44
35 to 39
30 to 34
25 to 29
20 to 24
15 to 19
10 to 14
5 to 9
Under 5

60

50

40

30

20

Millions

20

30

40

50

60

Source: NSS 66th round.

Males

Females

India Male and Female Projected Population by Age, 2030

90 and above
85 to 90
80 to 84
75 to 79
70 to 74
65 to 69
60 to 64
55 to 59
50 to 54
45 to 49
40 to 44
35 to 39
30 to 34
25 to 29
20 to 24
15 to 19
10 to 14
5 to 9
Under 5

60

50

40

30

20

Millions

20

30

40

50

60

Source: NSS 66th round & UN Population division.

Males

Females

127

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–1715 to 19

20 to 24

25 to 29

30 to 34

35 to 39

40 to 44

45 to 49

50 to 54

55 to 59

60 to 64

65 and above

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

Average savings rate by average age of the adults in the household (%)

128

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B7

India - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
2008
227043

2009
256229

2010
290351

Estimate
2011
334331

2012
370576

2013
401250

Projected
2014
431936

2015
439329

41064
7287

29587
5532

56064
5392

55916
7039

16745
39013

30673
43689

30687
53912

7392
62034

..
18.5
..
20.8

4.7
14.0

..
7187

80.2
18.8
1.7
18.8

10.0
30.7

69.3
17.2
1.3
17.4

10.0
32.7

67.9
18.1
1.4
15.6

9.3
28.7

64.4
18.6
6.8
14.8

6.8
26.1

56.4
18.6
6.1
14.0

8.0
29.5

49.0
18.5
6.1
12.9

7.9
28.1

40.7
17.4
5.8
12.2

12.2
40.0

0.2
7868

0.1
10755

0.2
11386

0.2
11654

0.2
12370

0.1
13560

0.1
15246

6
25365

7
26050

10
25888

11
26605

14
26584

18
26907

23
27076

23
27083

..
6404

5
25319

Indicator

2007
204005

83365
7307

..
16.5
..
21.8

6.8
19.5

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed ( TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service ( TDS) 
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d  
Of which present value of  
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

a. 
Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. 
“XGS” denotes exports of goods and services, including workers’ remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International Settlements.
d. 
Includes present value of guarantees.
e. 
Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments. 

129

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17ANNEX B8A

India - Operations Portfolio 
(IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As of January 24, 2013

(in US dollars)

Closed Projects: 470

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

Active Projects:

Project ID

Project Name

6,957.0
230.6
16,588.1
15,354.1
23,545.1
15,584.7
16,179.8
61.5
16,241.3

Last PSR
Supervision Rating

Fiscal 
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Cancel.

Undisb.

Development 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 
Disbursements a/

Orig.

Frm  
Rev’d

IN: IIFCL - India 
Infras Finance Co 
Ltd
IN: A. P. RWSS
IN: AP 
Community Tank 
Management Proj
IN: AP Municipal 
Development
IN: AP Road Sector 
Project
IN: AP Water 
Sector 
Improvement Proj
IN: Assam Agric 
Competitiveness
IN: Assam State 
Roads Project
IN: Bihar Kosi 
Flood Recovery 
Project
IN: Bihar PRI

U

S
S

S

S

S

S

S

MS

MS

P102771

P101650
P100789

P071250

P096021

P100954

P084792

P096018

P122096

P102627

130

MU

2010

1,195

1,172

813

MU
MS

MS

MU

S

S

S

95

300

320

451

2010
2007

2010

2010

2010

2005

2012

320

MU

2011

MS

2013

150
95

204

220

84

130
93

276

257

354

68

320

194

86

-3

77
90

62

101

-1

-9

5

11

12

53

1

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17131

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating

Fiscal 
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Cancel.

Undisb.

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 
Disbursements a/

Development 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Orig.

Frm  
Rev’d

P090764

IN: Bihar Rural 
Livelihoods 
Project
IN: Biodiver Cons 
& Rural Livelihood
IN: Biodiver 
Cons & Rural 
Livelihoods
IN: CBldg for Indus 
Poll Mgt
IN: CBldg 
for Urban 
Development
IN: Chiller Effcy-
GEF
IN: Chiller Energy 
Efficiency - MP
IN: Coal-Fired 
Generation 
Rehabilitation
IN: Coal-Fired 
Generation 
Rehabilitation
IN: Dam 
Rehabilitation & 
Improvement
IN: Eastern 
Dedicated Freight 
Corridor-I
IN: Egy Effcy at 
SMEs
IN: Haryana Power 
System Improv 
Project
IN: HP State Roads 
Project
IN: Hydrology II
IN: ICDS Syst 
Strength & Nut 
Imp Prog
IN: Integrated 
Coastal Zone 
Mgmt Project
IN: Karn Municipal 
Reform
IN: Karn Wtrshed II
IN: Karnataka 
Health Systems

S

S

2007

163

98

-58

7

P088520

S

MS

2011

15

14

1

P088598

S

MS

2011

8

7

1

P091031

S

S

2010

25

39

58

8

P099979

MS

MS

2012

60

57

3

P100584

#

MS

2009

6

5

4

P102790

MS

MS

2009

1

1

P100531

MS

MU

2009

45

45

32

P100101

MS

MU

2009

180

180

120

P089985

S

S

2010

175

175

347

95

15

P114338

S

MS

2011

975

972

127

P100530

S

MS

2010

11

11

7

P110051

S

MS

2010

330

215

202

-115

P96019

MS

MS

2007

282

132

70

P084632
P121731

MS
#

MS
#

2005
2013

105

43
102

43

43

106

P097985

S

MS

2010

222

196

57

37

P079675

S

MS

2006

216

97

97

23

P122486
P071160

S
S

S
S

2013
2007

60
212

60
98

0
15

6

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17132

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating

Fiscal 
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Cancel.

Undisb.

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 
Disbursements a/

Development 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Orig.

Frm  
Rev’d

P078832

IN: Karnataka 
Panchayats 
Strengthening
IN: KARNATAKA 
RWSS II
IN: Kerala RWSSP II
IN: Madhya 
Pradesh Water 
Sector Restruct
IN: MAHAR WSIP
IN: Maharashtra 
Agric. 
Competitiveness
IN: Microf-Scaling 
Up Sustnble & 
Resp
IN: Mid-Himalayan 
(HP) Watersheds
IN: MPDPIP-II
IN: Mumbai Urban 
Transport Project-
2A
IN: NAIP
IN: National 
Agricultural 
Innovation&SLM
IN: National 
Ganga River Basin 
Project
IN: National 
Rural Livelihoods 
Project
IN: NHAI Technical 
Assistance Project
IN: North East 
Rural Livelihoods 
Project
IN: Ntnl VBD 
Control & Polio 
Eradication
IN: ODS IV-CTC 
Sector Phaseout 
Project
IN: Orissa Rural 
Livelihoods 
Project
IN: Orissa State 
Roads
IN: PMGSY Rural 
Roads Project

MS

MS

2006

120

14

-9

P050653

S

MS

2002

302

17

96

-67

50

P121774
P073370

S
S

MS
S

2012
2005

155

151
175

1
181

394

7

11

P084790
P120836

MS
S

S
S

2005
2011

325

61
90

61
-5

-6

100

P119043

S

S

2010

200

100

167

59

P093720

S

S

2006

97

45

4

P102331
P113028

S
S

S
MS

2009
2010

100

48
375

32
116

430

P092735
P112060

S
S

MS
MS

2006
2010

200

56
4

39

16
2

7

P119085

MU

MU

2011

801

199

943

20

P104164

MS

MS

2012

1,000

959

203

P121515

MU

MU

2011

45

40

16

P102330

MS

MU

2012

130

124

3

P094360

MS

MS

2009

521

160

124

247

P085345

HS

MS

2005

53

14

3

P093478

MS

U

2009

82

61

50

P096023

MU

MU

2009

250

222

147

P124639

MS

MU

2011

500

1,000

1,341

349

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17133

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating

Fiscal 
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Cancel.

Undisb.

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 
Disbursements a/

Development 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Orig.

Frm  
Rev’d

P101653

IN: Power System 
Development 
Project IV
IN: POWERGRID V
IN: Punjab Rural 
Water Supply & 
Sanitation
IN: Punjab State 
Road Sector 
Project
IN: RAJ WSRP
IN: Rajasthan ACP
IN: Rajasthan 
Rural Livelihoods 
Project
IN: Rampur 
Hydropower 
Project
IN: Secondary 
Education 
Program
IN: SME Financing 
& Development
IN: Stren India’s 
Rural Credit Coops
IN: Sustainable 
Urban Transport 
Project
IN: Sustainable 
Urban Transport 
Project
IN: Tech Engr 
Educ Qual 
Improvement II
IN: TN Empwr & 
Pov Reduction
IN: TN Health 
Systems
IN: TN IAM WARM
IN: TN Urban III
IN: UP Health Sys 
Strengthening 
Project
IN: UP Sodic III
IN: Uttarakhand 
RWSS Project
IN: Uttarakhand 
Watershed Mgmt. 
SLEM

HS

S

2008

1,000

138

-262

137

P115566
P090592

S
MS

MS
MS

2010
2007

1,000

727
79

235
65

154

0

19

P090585

MS

MS

2007

250

105

105

2

P040610
P124614
P102329

MS
S
MS

S
S
MS

2002
2012
2011

159
109
163

26

37
107
150

5
2
4

-4

P095114

MS

MU

2008

400

82

65

-7

P118445

S

S

2012

500

497

8

P086518

S

MS

2005

520

20

-380

20

P102768

MS

MS

2007

300

300

164

163

P110371

S

MU

2010

105

87

68

P100589

S

MU

2010

20

17

P102549

S

S

2010

300

235

115

P079708

S

S

2006

274

130

-31

58

P075058

S

S

2005

229

20

53

-49

20

P090768
P083780
P100304

S
S
S

MS
MS
S

2007
2006
2012

335
300

150

237
56
137

209
57
18

1

34

152

P112033
P083187

S
S

MS
S

2009
2007

197
120

144
41

9
32

8

P112061

S

S

2010

7

1

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating

Fiscal 
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Cancel.

Undisb.

Development 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 
Disbursements a/

Orig.

Frm  
Rev’d

IN: Vishnugad 
Pipalkoti HEP
IN: Vocational 
Training
IN: WB Minor 
Irrigation Project
IN: West Bengal 
PRI
IN:Karnataka State 
Highway Improv 
Pro II
IN:Kerala Local 
Govt. & Service 
Delivery
IN:National 
Cyclone Risk 
Mitigation Proj
IN:Orissa 
Community Tank 
Management Proj
National Dairy 
Support Project

P096124

P099047

P105311

P105990

P107649

P102624

P092217

P100735

P107648

Overall 
Result

MS

MS

S

S

S

S

S

U

S

S

S

MS

MS

MS

2011

648

2007

2012

125

2010

2011

350

2011

2010

280

125

200

200

255

646

136

244

134

323

-2

107

4

-12

47

133

3

225

125

MU

MU

2009

56

56

35

65

S

S

2012

352

336

17

53

7

13,302

10,185

160

265

16,285

4,267

385

a.  

Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

134

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17135

ANNEX B8B

India: Committed and Disbursed 
Outstanding Investment Portfolio

As of December 31, 2012

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2007

ABC Coffee

5

4

0

0

0

5

4

0

0

0

2005/ 
2008/ 
2009

ADPCL

52

12

0

0

0

52

12

0

0

0

2006/ 
2009/ 
2012

AHEL

63

25

0

0

0

63

25

0

0

0

2005

AP Paper Mills

9

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

0

2005

APIDC Biotech

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2009

APPL

0

6

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2012/ 
2013

ATC India

50

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2013

ATG BV

0

10

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

2003/ 
2005/ 
2010/ 
2011

ATL

30

0

0

0

20

30

0

0

0

20

2010/ 
2012/ 
2013

AU Financiers

0

22

0

0

0

0

22

0

0

0

2010

Aadhar

0

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

2007/ 
2009

Aavishkaar

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2010/ 
2013

AavishkaarFundII

0

6

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2011

Aavishkaar MSME

0

15

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2008

Aloe 2

0

17

0

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

2008

Ambit Pragma

0

12

0

0

0

0

11

0

0

0

2012

Ambit Pragma II

0

20

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2008/ 
2012

Angel Global

0

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

(In USD Millions)

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17136

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2010/ 
2012

Applied Solar

8

6

0

0

0

5

6

0

0

0

2011

Attero Recycling

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

2006/ 
2010/ 
2011

Atul Ltd

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

0

2010

Auro Mira Energy

0

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

2008

Avigo Fund II

0

9

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2009

Avigo Fund III

0

20

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

0

2012

Axis Bank

70

0

0

0

0

70

0

0

0

0

2010/ 
2013

Azure Power

0

5

7

0

0

0

5

7

0

0

2007

BHSIL

28

0

17

0

32

28

0

17

0

32

2001/ 
2004

BILT

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2003/ 
2007

Balrampur

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

0

2011

Bandhan

0

24

0

0

0

0

24

0

0

0

2012

Banyan Tree II

0

25

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2001

Basix Ltd.

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2010

Belstar

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2005

Bharat Biotech

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

2010/ 
2012

Bhilwara Energy

0

19

0

0

0

0

19

0

0

0

2012

Bhilwara Wind

13

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

0

1985/ 
1990/ 
1991/ 
1993

Bihar Sponge

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

2001/ 
2006/ 
2007/ 
2008/ 
2010/

CCIL

6

6

0

1

2

6

3

0

0

2

2008

CGPL Ultra Mega

447

0

0

0

0

344

0

0

0

0

2003/ 
2005/ 
2012

COSMO

10

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

2013

CapAleph

0

15

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2010/ 
2011

Chola

0

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17137

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2009

Connectiva

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2010/ 
2012

Craftsman

0

13

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

0

2003/ 
2004

DQEL

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2005/ 
2006/ 
2009

DSCL

59

0

0

7

0

59

0

0

0

0

Dhunseri India

0

5

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2009

Dishman

13

0

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

0

2012

Dunar Foods

0

14

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

0

2013

Ecolibrium

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

Educomp

30

14

10

0

0

30

14

10

0

0

2007

Electrotherm

13

0

10

0

0

13

0

10

0

0

2012

Equitas

0

16

0

0

0

0

16

0

0

0

2009/ 
2010/ 
2011

Exim India

150

0

0

0

0

150

0

0

0

0

2007/ 
2010

FINO

0

1

5

0

0

0

1

5

0

0

2006/ 
2008/ 
2010/ 
2011/ 
2012

Federal Bank

0

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

2008/ 
2013

Finechem

16

13

0

0

0

16

12

0

0

0

2012

Flareum

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

Forum Synergies

0

15

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2007/ 
2008

GSPL

49

13

0

0

0

49

13

0

0

0

2011

Gamesa India

15

0

0

0

0

15

0

0

0

0

1994/ 
1999/ 
2000/ 
2001

Global Trust

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007/ 
2009/ 
2012

Granules

17

1

0

0

0

17

1

0

0

0

2013

Green Infra 20MW

8

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

2013

Green Infra 5MW

2

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17138

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2007

HDFC Bank

0

0

100

0

0

0

0

100

0

0

2009

HIKAL

13

7

0

0

0

13

4

0

0

0

2008

HNGFG

6

4

0

0

0

6

3

0

0

0

2009/ 
2011

Himadri

11

0

7

22

0

6

0

7

0

0

2010/ 
2011

Husk Power

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007

ICICI Bank

0

0

150

0

0

0

0

150

0

0

2011

ICM-INDIA

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1998/ 
2005/ 
2006/ 
2010

IDFC

79

3

0

0

0

79

3

0

0

0

2006

IHDC

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

IHDC - Ascent

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

2012

IMGC

0

5

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2008

Idea Cellular

98

0

0

0

0

98

0

0

0

0

2013

Inabensa Bharat

14

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

2006

Indecomm

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2008/ 
2013

India Infr. Fund

0

46

0

0

0

0

27

0

0

0

2009

India Agri Fund

0

19

0

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

2012/ 
2013

Infuse Capital

0

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2013

Inox Rajasthan

50

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2006/ 
2009

JK Paper

10

2

0

0

0

10

2

0

0

0

2013

JMT Auto

9

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2008/ 
2009/ 
2010/ 
2013

Jain Irrigation

55

19

40

0

65

55

18

40

0

65

2007/ 
2010

KCIL

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2005/ 
2006

KPIT

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011

Kaizen

0

10

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2010

Kalyani Gerdau

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

0

2012/ 
2013

Kalk itech

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17139

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2008

Kamani Oil

0

5

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

2005/ 
2007/ 
2010/ 
2011/ 
2012/

Kotak Mahindr...

0

0

45

17

0

0

0

45

17

0

2006

LGB

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

LGB FORGE

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

Laxmi Organic

10

9

0

0

0

10

9

0

0

0

2006/ 
2008

Lok Fund

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2011/ 
2012

Lok Capital II

0

13

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

1990/ 
1993/ 
1995

M&M

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007

MBPV

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

0

2010

MSETCL

45

0

0

0

0

45

0

0

0

0

2007

MSPL

8

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

0

2009

Macq-SBI Int F

0

149

0

0

0

0

96

0

0

0

2009

Macquarie IM

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011

MagmaFincorp

0

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

2012

Mahindra Solar 1

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2004/ 
2007

Max Healthcare

0

5

31

0

0

0

5

31

0

0

2009

Max India Ltd

0

28

0

0

0

0

28

0

0

0

2009

Midas

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2009

Modern Dairies

0

6

0

0

0

0

6

0

0

0

1996/ 
1997/ 
1999/ 
2000

Moser Baer

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2011

NCMSL

0

6

0

0

0

0

6

0

0

0

1993/ 
1996/ 
1997/ 
1998

NICCO-UCO

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

NSL Power

0

16

0

0

0

0

16

0

0

0

2012

Nereus Capital

0

20

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007

OCL

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

0

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17140

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2007/ 
2009

Ocean Spark le

11

9

0

0

0

11

9

0

0

0

2007

Ocimum

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2011/ 
2013

PTC Financial

80

0

0

0

0

50

0

0

0

0

2012

Paradeep Phosp

50

0

0

0

0

20

0

0

0

0

2006

Peepul CapFnd II

0

15

0

0

0

0

14

0

0

0

2007/ 
2010

Petronet

42

0

0

0

150

42

0

0

0

150

2011/ 
2012

Piaggio India

37

0

0

0

0

37

0

0

0

0

2009

Polycab

0

19

31

0

0

0

19

31

0

0

2004

Powerlinks

33

0

0

0

0

33

0

0

0

0

2013

Power Grid

100

0

0

0

120

100

0

0

0

120

2012

Pragati Fund

0

20

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2008

Punj Lloyd

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

0

2008

Punj Upstream

23

3

0

0

0

10

3

0

0

0

2013

RK Forgings

14

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Rabo Equity Mgt.

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1996/ 
1998/ 
2005

Rain Calcining

0

0

0

47

0

0

0

0

8

0

2013

Religare

0

0

74

0

0

0

0

74

0

0

2012/ 
2013

Rhodia Inc.

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

0

2008

Rock land

0

14

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

2011

SAFAL Jain NBFC

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

SAME DEUTZ India

13

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2009

SBI - Macq DM

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2012

SEWA

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

SPSL

9

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

0

2012

SRLL

0

25

0

0

0

0

21

0

0

0

2008

Samara Capital

0

10

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2008

Samson Maritime

18

4

0

0

0

18

4

0

0

0

1996

Sara Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2005

SeaLion

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17141

FY 
Approval

Company

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici-
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Partici- 
pant

2011/ 
2012

Shalivahana

0

5

0

14

0

0

5

0

0

0

2010/ 
2012

Snowman

5

5

0

0

0

3

5

0

0

0

2008/ 
2010

Soktas India

8

2

0

0

0

8

1

0

0

0

2007

Suguna

0

0

7

0

0

0

0

7

0

0

2010/ 
2012

Suvidhaa

0

7

0

0

0

0

7

0

0

0

2012

Tata Cleantech

0

3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011/ 
2012

Techno Wind

29

4

0

0

0

29

4

0

0

0

2012

Ujjivan

0

8

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2010/ 
2011/ 
2012

Utkarsh

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2008/ 
2010

VPF

0

15

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

2009/ 
2010

VW-India

79

0

0

0

99

79

0

0

0

99

2010

VicatSagar

75

0

0

0

73

75

0

0

0

73

2011

Vinati

10

0

5

0

0

10

0

5

0

0

2011

Visakha Terminal

8

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011

Vishwa Infra

3

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2011

Vishwa Utilities

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2011

Vivimed

13

0

8

0

0

13

0

8

0

0

2012

Vortex

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2007

WCPM

33

0

0

0

0

33

0

0

0

0

2010

WEG S.A.

22

0

0

0

0

22

0

0

0

0

2009/ 
2010

WHI India

9

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

1998

WIV

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1998/ 
2000

Walden-Mgt India

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

YES BANK LTD

0

0

75

0

0

0

0

75

0

0

2010

Zephyr India II

0

9

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2012

Zephyr India III

0

15

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

Total Portfolio

2,460

1,083

631

109

561

2,099

781

630

25

561

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17THE WORLD BANK GROUP

70 Lodi Estate
New Delhi - 110003, India
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/india
Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/WorldBankIndia

