d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 86518-MA

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (CPS)

FOR

THE KINGDOM OF MOROCCO

FOR THE PERIOD FY2014-2017

April 1, 2014

Maghreb Country Department, World Bank
Middle East and North Africa Region

International Finance Corporation
Middle East and North Africa Region

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Middle East and North Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency unit: Moroccan Dirham (MAD) as of March 1, 2014
US$1 = MAD 8.13705

MOROCCO FISCAL YEAR 

WORLD BANK GROUP FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31 

July 1 - June 30

AAA 
AFD 
AfDB 
AMC 
AMDL 
ANAPEC 

ASIMA 
BAM 
BCP 
BPO 
CEM 
CNEA 
CSP 
CPSCR 
CTF 
DTF 
DPL 
ESCP 
ESW 
EU 
FDI 
GCC 
GDP 
GEF 
GIZC 
GoM 
GPSA 
HCP 
HMIS 
ICT 
IDF 
IGF 
IGG 
IMA 
INDH 

MDG 
MDTF 

List of Abbreviations and Acronyms

Analytical and advisory activities
Agence Franqaise de Diveloppement (French Development Agency)
African Development Bank
Asset Management Company
Moroccan Agency for the Development of Logistics
Agence Nationale de Promotion de l'Emploi et des Comptences (National
employment and skills promotion agency)
Social and Integrated Agriculture
Bank Al Maghrib - Central Bank
Banque Centrale Populaire
Business Process Outsourcing
Country Economic Memorandum
National Business Environment Committee
Concentrated Solar Power
CPS Completion Report
Clean Technology Fund
Deauville MENA Transition Fund
Development Policy Lending
Economic Competitiveness Support Program
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign direct investment
Gulf Cooperation Council
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund
Integrated Management of Coastal Zones
Government of Morocco
Global Partnership for Social Accountability
Haut CommissariatAu Plan
Health Management Information System
Information and Communication Technology
Institutional Development Fund
Inspection Gindrale des Finances
Inclusive Green Growth
Moroccan Institute of Directors
Initiative Nationale de Diveloppement Humain (National Initiative for Human
Development)
Millennium Development Goals
Multidonor Trust Fund

11

MENA 
MSME 
MTEF 
NCD 
NHSFO 
NHFO-SOE 
ONEE 

ORDAR 
PACT 
PAGER 
P-ESW 
PERG 
PforR 
PICCPMV 
PJD 
PMV 
PNEI 
PNEEI 
PNRR 
PPP 
RAMED 
SEDP 
SME 
SOE 
SWM 
TA 
TFP 
UNICOP 
WSS 

Middle East and North Africa
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
Medium-term expenditure framework
Non-communicable Diseases
Non-honoring of sovereign financial obligations
Non-honoring of financial obligations of state-owned enterprises
Office National de l'Eau et de l'ElectricitW (National Office for Water and
Electricity)
Offices rigionaux de dveloppement agricole et rural
Local Government Support Program
National program promoting potable water supply to rural populations
Programmatic economic and sector work
National program for universal rural electrification
Program for Results
Integrating Climate Change in the Implementation of the PMV
Parti pour le Diveloppement et la Justice (Development and Justice Party)
Plan Maroc Vert
National Pact for Industrial Emergence
National Program of Energy Efficiency in the Industry
Programme National de Routes Rurales (National Rural Roads Program)
Public-Private Partnerships
Non-contributory Health Insurance Program
Skills and Employment DPL
Small and Medium Enterprise
State Owned Enterprise
Solid Waste Management
Technical Assistance
Total Factor Productivity
Union Nationale des Industries de la Conserve de Poisson
Water supply and sanitation

111

IBRD 

IFC 

MIGA

Vice President 

Inger Andersen 

Dimitris Tsitsiragos 

Michel Wormser

Country Director 
Simon Gray 
Country. CountryJoumana 
Representative

Mouayed Makhlouf 

Ravi Vish

Cobemn

Task Team Leader Michael Hamaide 

Serena Cavicchi 

Persephone Economou

Acknowledgement
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was prepared under the guidance of Simon Gray,
World Bank Country Director, and Joumana Cobein, IFC Principal Country Officer. The World
Bank team was led by Michael Hamaide, Task Team Leader and Senior Country Officer for
Morocco. The IFC team was led by Serena Cavicchi, Co-Task Team Leader and Strategy Officer.
MIGA participation was led by Persephone Economou.

The CPS Core Team included: Bachir Abdaym, Ibtissam Alaoui, Aurelien Antoine Claude
Boyer, Kamel Braham, Joelle Businger, Jean-Pierre Chauffour, Philippe De Meneval, Hind Kadiri,
Andrea Liverani and Fabien Seiderer.

The following WBG Morocco Country Team members and colleagues have also made important
contributions to this strategy: Teymour Abdel Aziz, Richard Abdulnour, Randa Akeel, Diego
Angel-Urdinola, Axel E. N. Baeumler, Amine Benjelloun, Zineb Benkirane, Fadwa Bennani,
Maha Bensaid, Fatiha Bouamoud, Sanaa Bouchikhi, Franqois Boulanger, Xavier Chauvot de
Beauch6ne, Dalila Bouna, Lida Bteddini, Roger Coma Cunill, Soumia Driouch, Alejandra Eguiluz,
Aziza El Aouad, Khalid El Massnaoui, Khadija Faridi, Nawal Filali, Jaafar Friaa, Catherine
Gozard, Fabrice Houdart, Gabriella Izzi, Hind Kadiri, Abdoulaye Keita, Gloria La Cava, Candice
Le Tourneur, Song Li, Daniela Marotta, Mohamed Medouar, Samia Melhem, Fanny Missfeldt-
Ringius, Sameh 1. Mobarek, Laila Moudden, Ziad Nakat, Silvia Pariente-David, Nadine Poupart,
Patricia Ravelomanantsoa, Achraf Rissafi, Paul Scott Prettitore, Khadija Sebbata, Gabriel
Sensenbrenner, Sylvia Solf, Kathleen So Ting Fong, Manaf Touati, Paolo Verme, and Vincent
Vesin.

Special thanks are extended to Ina-Marlene Ruthenberg and Jean-Luc Bernasconi, who
peer reviewed the document; to Victoria Gyllerup, for her invaluable guidance on results; to
Amanda Van Kirk, for her always constructive support and substantial contribution to the CPS
CR, to all the counterparts of the Government of Morocco, and to Minister Mohammed Louafa
and his team at the Ministry of General Affairs and Governance in particular; to the many actors of
Morocco's civil society met during the consultations, for sharing their genuine views and
expectations; and to colleagues from partner donor agencies in Morocco.

iv

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (CPS) FY14-17
FOR THE KINGDOM OF MOROCCO

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

I. 

II. 

INTRODUCTION 

............................................. 

............ 1

COUNTRY CONTEXT....................................... 

.............. 1

Political Context............................................................1

Social Context and Poverty Profile 

............................... 

....................

Economic Developments and Prospects 

................................ 

...........

Key Development Challenges 

..................................................

Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy ............................

III. 

BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

.................................. 

111.1. Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback ....................

III.1.A. Lessons from CPS Progress & Completion Report .......................

2

4

7

13

15

15

15

111.I.B. Client Feedback and Stakeholder Consultations 

................... 

.......... 17

111.2. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy ...............................

111.2.A. World Bank Group Partnership Strategy Overview 

..........................

18

18

111.2.B. Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities .. 

.......... 19

111.3. Implementing the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy .

................... 

...... 30

III.3.A. Managing the Program 

..............................................

III.3.B. Portfolio and Pipeline Management 

................................ 

.....

III.3.C. Partnerships and Donor Coordination 

......................... 

...........

IV. MANAGING RISKS ...................................................

30

33

34

34

v

CPS ANNEXES

Country Specific Annexes:

Annex 1: Morocco CPS Program Selectivity
Annex 2: Morocco CPS Results Framework (FY14-17)
Annex 3: Morocco CPS FY14-17 Completion Report
Annex 4: Morocco Detailed Macroeconomic Overview

Standard CPS Annexes:

Annex A: Morocco at Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: IBRD Program Summary - Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program
Annex B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B5: Morocco Social Indicators
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: IBRD Operations Portfolio
Annex B9: Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio

vi

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Amidst the historic and tumultuous changes that have marked the Region in
recent years, Morocco has embarked on a promising and peaceful political and social
transition toward a more open society. The transition has come in response to the demands
of Moroccans who took to the streets in early 2011 to call for change as the economy failed to
deliver on jobs and opportunities, particularly for youth, despite years of strong growth and
prudent economic management.

ii. 
In response, the King of Morocco launched a broad program of reforms and a
new Constitution was adopted in 2011. It presents a revised governance framework,
strengthening the powers of the Head of Government and of Parliament and the independence
of the judiciary. It grants greater human and social rights, providing for a more open and
decentralized system of governance. A new coalition Government formed in 2012 has sought
to implement the reforms promised under the new Constitution. As weak global growth has
dampened Morocco's economic performance and hindered job creation, the Government has
increasingly focused on managing social pressures, and this has delayed reforms. In 2014, the
coalition Government renewed its commitment to the reform program.

iii. Morocco's economic prospects are closely tied to Europe's, and any slow-down
there will undermine the macro-economic outlook through continued weak exports,
tourism, remittances or FDI. High fuel prices, deterioration in the regional context, or
renewed global financial turmoil would compound these challenges. While the Government
has launched a series of sector strategies to boost economic performance, absent a reorientation
of the economy toward the tradable sector and increased competitiveness, growth and job
creation will remain weak. Morocco will therefore need to increase its efforts to enhance
competitiveness and gain market share on global markets. These efforts will require a higher
quality of domestic 
investments and continuing to attract large flows of foreign direct
investments. It will call for increased opportunities and economic freedom for all Moroccans,
to compete, produce and participate in the economy, and a greater role for the private sector.

iv. Macroeconomic stability will depend on strengthened governance and robust
fiscal consolidation-particularly subsidy, pension, and fiscal reforms, a prudent
monetary policy, and greater flexibility in exchange rate management. While subsidy and
pension reforms are most urgent, including establishing more effective and inclusive social
protection programs, structural reforms are needed in the medium term to boost enterprise
productivity by better channeling resources to competitive industries. The 2014 Budget Law
confirmed the Government's strategy to continue reforming the subsidy system and launch the
reforms of the pension and fiscal systems this year. In addition, government intends to adopt
the Organic Budget Law to strengthen the articulation and implementation of local government
budgets. The government plans to proceed with justice reform, improve access to financing,
especially for SMEs, address constraints to land access, develop logistics services, and
reinforce technical training. Assuming these reforms take place, growth in the non-agriculture
economy could reach around 5.5 percent over the medium term, with inflation below 2 percent
and the budget deficit below 3 percent of GDP.

v. 
Against this backdrop, the World Bank Group (WBG) seeks to renew its
commitment to support Morocco 
in accelerating sustainable and inclusive growth to
create much-needed employment and to achieve the twin goals of eliminating poverty and
boosting shared prosperity. Under this four-year Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), the
WBG proposes to scale up its support for Morocco's open governance and green growth
agendas, supporting innovative multi-sector approaches to sustainable and environmentally-

Vii

sound development, for the benefit of future generations and to improve private sector-led
competitiveness and global integration. The CPS deepens the WBG's focus on improving
governance and strengthening the accountability and capacity of institutions that manage
public resources and deliver basic services, particularly at the local level. Promoting citizens'
voice and participation is integral to these efforts, as is the focus on gender and youth. The CPS
is designed to support these objectives with a broad array of financial and technical instruments
and services drawing on the comparative strengths of IBRD, IFC and MIGA.

vi. Morocco's estimated demand for IBRD financing during the CPS period of FY14-
17 may reach US$4 billion. Lending volumes 
in FY15-17 will depend on country
performance, IBRD's lending capacity, demand by other Bank borrowers and global economic
developments. This level of financing represents a notable scale up for the World Bank in
Morocco and would allow for a high case lending scenario that would support the critical
reforms and investments in the area of public administration reform, increased accountability
and decentralization, employment support, inclusive green growth, agriculture modernization
and basic services. This stepped-up engagement will respond to Morocco's need for external
financing and enable the authorities to pursue economic transformation against a backdrop of
economic difficulties in Europe that have dampened external demand; high international food
and fuel prices; and escalating social pressure pressures to create jobs and to deliver on the
promises of the new Constitution. Development Policy Loans (DPL) are expected to continue
to play an important role in IBRD lending to support reforms. At the same time, as the Bank
shifts toward a more results-centered program, providing increased 
levels of technical
assistance for reforms and building institutional capacity, the proportion of non-DPL financing,
namely investment lending and program for results lending, is expected to increase.

vii. 
IFC will focus its efforts on attracting more private capital to Morocco, and in
FY14 IFC expects to invest about US$150 million from its own account. Assuming continued
improvements in the business environment, IFC expects to invest a total of around US$350-
400 million over the FY15-17 period from its own account, as well as mobilize additional
resources from other investors. IFC will continue to boost investor confidence in Morocco by
playing a counter cyclical role and will adjust its approach to allow for flexibility in
implementing its program to reflect changes in market conditions. In line with the principles of
additionality, IFC will remain selective in its engagement in the country and continue focus on
innovative areas, inclusion and south-south/regional 
integration. Promoting South-South
investments, particularly to support the expansion of Morocco's regional players, will be a
critical aspect of IFC's strategy. IFC's stepped up engagement in Morocco will continue to
focus on increasing private sector led growth, creating jobs and expanding access to finance for
small and medium business, especially of youth and women. IFC will continue to implement a
sizeable advisory program to address constraints to private sector development which is critical
to foster a competitive private sector.

vii. 
The Bank Group's performance will be measured against its contributions to the
priorities of the Government as proposed in the CPS. Annex 2 presents a Results
Framework that tracks progress towards expected CPS outcomes in each of the three Results
Areas. The Bank will hold Performance Learning Reviews to evaluate program performance
jointly with Moroccan counterparts.

viii. The CPS identifies several risks to the program and mitigating measures:
Economic, social and external risks: Uncertain economic prospects in Europe and emerging
markets create downside 
risk 
to Morocco's trade position, economic growth, fiscal
performance and pace of financing for investments. Morocco will remain under tremendous
domestic pressure to continue generous social programs. The CPS program is designed

Viii

precisely to provide financial and technical assistance on these complex issues, including
reforms to improve the fiscal situation, to help the economy become more competitive and to
bolster broad-based support for reforms. Political risks. The implementation of the CPS and
achievement of proposed outcomes are predicated on the Government's adherence to the
ambitious reforms set out in its program. The WBG will maintain a close dialogue with the
authorities and other stakeholders and help raise awareness of reform options. Program
coordination risks: To mitigate delays in preparation and implementation of multi-sector
operations due to weak coordination, the Bank will work closely with its partners to establish
consensus and define clear roles and responsibilities, in line with the respective technical
expertise and mandate of agencies. Implementation risks are relate principally to resolving
safeguards issues around land acquisition and compensation that have delayed implementation
of some investment operations The Bank has launched a review of these and other safeguards
issues and is discussing a program for resolving them with the authorities. The Bank will also
work closely with counterparts to ensure the availability of data that is essential for key
analytical activities to proceed.

ix

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
This document presents the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for Morocco for FY14 to FY17. The WBG's approach under the new CPS
has evolved in a number of important ways since the 2010 CPS (Board presentation in January
2010) and CPS Progress Report (Board presentation in June 2012). Following the historic
political and social events in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region since early
2011, Morocco has engaged in a promising transition and reform process built on the principles
of a new Constitution providing for greater accountability, openness, and opportunity. At the
same time, weak global growth, strains on natural resources, and stubborn unemployment
levels have dampened Morocco's economic performance and highlighted the need for
important shifts in its development model.

2. 
Against this backdrop, the WBG seeks to renew its commitment to support
Morocco 
in accelerating sustainable and inclusive growth to create much-needed
employment and to eliminate poverty and boost shared prosperity. Under this CPS, the
WBG proposes to scale up its support for Morocco's open governance and green growth
agendas, supporting innovative multi-sector approaches to sustainable and environmentally
sound development for the benefit of future generations, and to improve private sector-led
competitiveness and global integration to reduce the country's vulnerability to shocks. Indeed,
a broader global integration agenda will be the paramount driver of private sector development,
job creation, and structural changes in Morocco in the coming years. The CPS deepens the
WBG's focus on improving governance and strengthening the accountability and capacity of
institutions that manage public resources and deliver basic services, particularly at the local
level. Promoting citizens' voice and participation is integral to these efforts, as is the focus on
gender and youth. The CPS is designed to support these objectives using a broad array of
financial and technical instruments and services from IBRD, IFC, and MIGA.

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT

Political Context

3. 
Morocco's political landscape has been relatively stable over the past decades. The
country is governed by a parliamentary constitutional monarchy, whereby executive power is
exercised by a multi-party government led by a Head of Government and by the King who is
the Head of State. Legislative power is vested in both the Chamber of Representatives and the
Chamber of Councilors, while the judiciary is independent from the Government.

4. 
The Arab Spring in early 2011 spurred a peaceful political transformation in
Morocco. Reflective of this call for sweeping change, Moroccans-young people in
particular-called for a revamped democratic system, improved governance, and greater
freedoms, voice, and opportunities. Although Morocco has experienced noteworthy economic
and social advances since the 1990s, high unemployment and lack of opportunity led protestors
to denounce exclusion and corruption.

5. 
The King responded by launching a comprehensive program of reforms, including
the drafting of a new Constitution adopted through a referendum in July 2011. The
Constitution presented a revised governance framework and strengthened the powers of the
Head of Government and of Parliament, and the independence of the judiciary. It granted
greater human and social rights, providing for a more open (and decentralized) system of
governance and laying out the rules for fairer and more inclusive development.

1

6. 
Breaking with the past and as required by the new Constitution, the King
designated a Head of Government from the party that won the most seats in legislative
elections held in November 2011. After years in opposition, the Justice and Development
Party (Parti de la justice et du developpement, PJD) achieved a groundbreaking victory by
winning the most seats in legislative elections. In January 2012, the King named Abdelilah
Benkirane, the head of the PJD, as Head of Government to form a new coalition government
("Benkinrane I") that would be tasked with delivering on the main reforms under the new
Constitution and to harmonize legislative texts with the new constitutional provisions.

7. 
Benkirane I was slow 
to deliver on the ambitious legislative agenda amid
significant social pressures and a weakened economic environment. As growth slowed, in
the context of the Eurozone crisis and instability in the region, the Government focused on
managing social pressures. Progress on reforms was also hampered by the differing views of
coalition members on how best to approach them. Moreover, new requirements for public
consultations have lengthened the process for finalizing and adopting new policies.

8. 
In 2014, the coalition Government renewed its commitment to pursue reforms and
implement the Constitution. Following changes in the coalition government in 2013,1 the
Benkirane II Government confirmed its commitment to push forward with reforms and
accelerate the legislative agenda set out by the new Constitution.

Social Context and Poverty Profile2

9. 
With an average economic growth rate of nearly 5 percent from 2001-2011,
Morocco reduced poverty and boosted shared prosperity. Extreme poverty has practically
been eradicated, dropping from 2 percent to 0.28 percent over the same period. 3 Relative
poverty also declined, from 15.3 percent to 6.2 percent, and population vulnerability (those
living just above the poverty line) decreased from 22.8 percent to 13.3 percent.4 Still, nearly 20
percent of the country, or 6.3 million Moroccans, live in poverty or under constant threat of
falling back into poverty. During the same period, the wellbeing of the bottom 40 percent of
the population grew both in absolute terms (the wellbeing of the poor improved) and relative
terms (the wellbeing of the poor improved relative to that of the non-poor), suggesting an
increase in shared prosperity.

** 

5

10. 
Inequality, poverty and vulnerability remain important challenges. Morocco's Gini
coefficient of 0.41 reflects stubbornly high levels of inequality. Disparities in poverty rates
across regions provide one measure of this inequality: in 2011, the poverty rate in seven of
Morocco's sixteen regions was higher than the national average, as much as 40 percent higher
in three of those regions (Figure 1). Moroccan cities, generating 75 percent of GDP, have
pockets of entrenched poverty and high rates of unemployment. Inequality hinders the potential
for economic growth to reduce poverty rates further and delays the emergence of a larger
middle class.

Notably, the withdrawal of the Istiqlal party, the second largest in the coalition,and the subsequent entry of the center-right
National Rally of Independents (NRI) party in the government coalition.
2 All poverty indicators for 2011 are HCP estimates mapping 2007 HHCS data with LFSs. Results are published by HCP in the
2013 MDGs report.
Extreme poverty refers to the population living on less than US$1 PPP/day. The drop is based on the national poverty
threshold, corresponding to the equivalent of US$2.15 PPP in 2007.
4Alternative poverty measurements confirm this decline. The Alkire-Foster multidimensional poverty rates declined from
28.5% in 2004 to 8.9% in 2011.
The wellbeing of the bottom 40% of the population grew by 3.3 percent over 2001-2007, against the growth rate of per-capita
household consumption (3.2%) over that period.

2

Figure 1. Morocco's Poverty Rates - Regional Evolutions

Gharb-Chrarda-Eleni Hssen 

Doukala-Abda 

Souss-Massa-Daraa 

Fes-Boulemane 

Marrakech-Tensift-Al Haouz 

Taza-Al Hoceima-Taounate 

Oriental 

Meknes-Tafilalet 

Tadla-Azilal 

Chaouia-aurdigha 

Tang 
ager-T&touan 
-

Refgionsdu Sud 

17 

15.&

1A3

6 9

i1S

1174

10.7

E 

1 

2.1

i 

I

.3

i 

I 

611

7.4

I 

6.3 

U 2007
U 2011

National poverty
rate in 2007

Rabat-SaL!-Zemmiour-Zaer 

5.1 

3.- 

-

~ratein 2011

National poverty

Grand-Casablanca 

2.3

0.0 

6.2 

8.9 

Percent

Source: HCP, 2007 HHCIS and 2013 MDGs Reports

11. 
Poverty rates are highest in rural areas. Ten percent of Morocco's 13.4 million rural
residents lived below the poverty line in 2011. They account for two-thirds of the poor in
Morocco and are largely employed in informal agriculture (including fisheries and forestry).
Poverty is linked to difficult geographic conditions, particularly mountainous areas, as well as
to deteriorating 
infrastructure, poor access to basic services and very limited formal
employment opportunities. The emerging effects of climate change are expected to have the
greatest impact on the poorest and most vulnerable. Participants in CPS consultations in the
Taounate province confirmed the long distances, lack of adequate transportation, and costs
encountered in reaching schools and health facilities, noting that their children leave for school
before daybreak and return after sunset, often by foot. Close to a quarter of rural households
have no direct access to a road and live at least 10 kilometers away from basic health services.
The share of births attended by skilled health personnel averages 63 percent, compared to 92
percent in urban areas. 6 In certain regions (such as the Atlantic coast and Mediterranean
mountainous 
region), households still do not have access 
to safe drinking water.
Telecommunications service coverage also poses a challenge in rural areas. These factors all
combine to lower the quality of life, productivity, and prospects of rural households.

12. 
Despite some notable progress on key human development indicators, Morocco
still lags in health and education achievements. Immunization of one-year-olds 
is nearly
universal and indicators of life expectancy and average infant and maternal mortality rates have
all improved over the past ten years.7 Nonetheless, they compare poorly to similar economies
and progress has been uneven, with rural areas being left behind. Morocco is in the midst of a
rapid demographic and epidemiological transition, seeing fewer communicable illnesses but
growing incidence of chronic disease which has important cost implications for the health
sector. Non-communicable diseases (NCD) account for 75 percent of all deaths, followed by
diabetes. The leading cause of death for young Moroccans (between the ages of 20 and 29) is

6 WDI Data

Life expectancy improved from 71.7 years in 2004 to 74.9 years in 2011 (Source: HCP); Mortality rates increased by over 15
percent from 2000 to 2012 (Source: UNDP).

3

road traffic accidents, which have increased by an alarming 35 percent during 2000-2010.
Morocco spends less on health care than do countries of similar socioeconomic development.

13. 
There has been remarkable improvement in access to education, though the MDG
of universal primary school completion is unlikely to be achieved by 2015. Net primary
school enrollment rates increased from 75 to 96 percent between 2000 and 2011, and similar
improvements were noted at the secondary level. 9 Nonetheless, educational quality and
learning outcomes continue to lag well behind those of other countries with similar or even
lower income levels and overall illiteracy rates and gender disparity in secondary and higher
education also remain high. International studies have shown that 74 percent of Moroccan
students do not reach even the lowest benchmark level of Grade 4 mathematics, compared with
the international median of 10 percent.

14. With less than half of the Moroccan population economically active, Morocco has
one of the lowest labor participation rates among emerging economies. Despite declining
by 4 percent between 2000 and 2011, unemployment has remained at around 9 percent, or one
million people. Unemployment rates are higher in urban areas (13.7 percent compared to 4
percent in rural areas), among women (at 10 percent compared to 9 for men, though with a
very low participation rate of 25 percent), youth (18 percent, although only 32 percent
participate), and highly educated individuals, according to the Haut Commissariat Au Plan
(HCP).

15. 
Access to basic infrastructure services has increased dramatically over the past 15
years, although quality and sustainability remain of concern. Nearly 98 percent of urban
households have access 
to a power network, and 98 percent of rural households have
electricity. Thousands of villages have standpipes providing potable water for 93 percent of the
population as of 2013 (compared to 61 percent in 2004). The rate of connection to sewerage is
estimated at around 76 percent in large cities. The mobile telephone penetration rate has grown
dramatically from 73 percent in 2008 to 122 percent in 2013. Despite these advances, overall
progress has been uneven and some rural and peri-urban areas, as well as small and medium-
sized cities, still lack access 
to basic infrastructure services. Moreover, the reliability,
maintenance, and financial sustainability of these services remain a persistent challenge,
particularly at the local level.

Economic Developments and Prospects"

16. 
Structurally, the Moroccan economy remains oriented toward nontradable
activities (such as construction, public works, and low value-added services) and volatile,
poorly productive agriculture. Given this orientation, Morocco has made little productivity
gains over the past two decades despite high levels of investment." 
Investment efforts-
dominated by publicly funded large infrastructure projects-have boosted the productivity of
labor, but have not triggered a growth take-off through higher total factor productivity (TFP).
Some positive effects may still occur in coming years as the TFP gains from government
expenditures on infrastructure (energy, highways, ports, airports, industrial zones) materialize.
But Morocco has yet to guarantee the productivity gains needed to support the emergence of a

Budget allocation to the health sector represented 5.1% (2009), 5.0% (2010), and 4.8% (2011) of total government budget.
9 UNESCO Institute of Statistics.
10 See Annex 3 for a more detailed macroeconomic analysis of recent developments and prospects.
Morocco has consistently invested 5 to 10 percentage points of GDP more than peer countries and its total investment as a
share of GDP has increased from 25 percent of GDP in the 1990s to 35 percent currently.

4

larger middle class. The challenge of increasing and further sharing prosperity remains
paramount.

17. 
One important explanatory factor behind Morocco's weak economic performance
can be traced to its difficulty in benefitting from the current wave of globalization.
Morocco's share of global exports has hovered around 0.15 percent since the mid-1970s, while
most competitors have seen substantial increases in their shares. The price of the national
export basket has generally been higher, than that of key competitors and this gap has widened
since the global financial crisis. High and rising export prices are symptomatic of persistent
weaknesses in the competitiveness of Moroccan enterprises on the global market. Moroccan
firms strive to improve the sophistication and quality of their export products. While existing
firms have increased their market share for existing products in existing destinations, the
renewal of the exporter base with entry and exit of firms is limited, and existing firms exhibit
little product and market innovation.

18. 
The enormous competitiveness challenge faced by Moroccan firms was highlighted
by the country's response to recent adverse external shocks. While the 2008 financial crisis
has had limited direct effects on Morocco's economy, the subsequent food and fuel price crises
and Eurozone crisis have had more serious repercussions. Morocco suffered a major
deterioration of its terms of trade, compounded by a significant increase in its food import bill
since 2008 (18 percent per year on average). Moreover, with a strong trade exposure to the
European Union (EU), Morocco has been adversely affected by the sovereign debt crises in
Spain, Italy, and Portugal, and the subsequent slowdown of economic growth in Europe more
generally. As a result, economic growth beyond the agricultural sector has decelerated to an
average of 3.5 percent since 2009, compared to 4.7 percent during 2000-2008. Growth has
been driven mostly by debt-creating domestic demand, most notably by growing public
expenditures. On the upside, the emergence of new growth drivers in higher value-added
industries (such as car manufacturing and aeronautics) and the expansion of Moroccan
companies in Western Africa are potentially creating the conditions for Morocco to become a
regional hub for investments between Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa.

19. 
In response to deteriorating fiscal trends, the Government initiated the reform of
the subsidy system and began to rein in other recurrent and capital expenditures.
Morocco's fiscal balance swung from a surplus of 0.4 percent of GDP in 2008 to the highest
deficit in two decades, at 7.3 percent of GDP, in 2012. The activation of a price indexation
mechanism helped cut subsidies by almost 2 percentage points of GDP in 2013. The
consolidation measures also included limiting the rise of the wage bill to 2 percent and cutting
capital outlays by 6.2 percent. As a result, the fiscal deficit narrowed to 6 percent of GDP1 2 in
2013, and the recourse to international markets was limited to US$750 million in 2013, as
compared to US$1.5 billion in 2012. Following an agreement signed with the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) countries in 2012, Morocco has also received US$615 million in capital grants
in 2013. Outstanding government debt continued to increase in 2013 (albeit at a slower pace
than in recent years) to reach 62.3 percent of GDP.

20. 
The pursuit of expansionary fiscal policies has fuelled current account deficits in
recent years. After widening to 9.7 percent of GDP in 2012, the current account deficit is
estimated to have improved to 8.7 percent of GDP in 2013. Europe has remained Morocco's
main trading partner by far. On the financing side, in a context of a fixed exchange rate, net

12 The budget deficit does not take account of capital grants, which are registered as source of financing. The budget deficit
including capital grants was 5.4 percent of GDP in 2013.

5

foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows grew by an impressive 23 percent in 2013. After two
years of falling foreign exchange reserves, overall financial flows more than covered the
current account deficit in 2013, leading to a consolidation of foreign reserves by US$1.3 billion
to US$18.5 billion (4.3 months of imports).

21. 
The financing of fiscal deficits tightened banking system liquidity. In 2012, Bank
Al-Maghrib partly compensated for this by relaxing its stance in a context of low inflation:
cutting its policy rate from 3.25 to 3 percent, lowering the commercial banks' reserve
requirement from 6 to 4 percent, and increasing liquidity injections. In 2013, the monetary
stance was less accommodating and money supply grew by only 2.8 percent, compared to 4.5
percent in 2012. Non-performing loans continued to increase in 2013, reaching 5.9 percent of
bank credit to the private sector. With the loan-to-deposit ratio exceeding 100 percent in
domestic banks, the scope for extending credits 
to the private sector 
is increasingly
constrained. The implementation of the Basel III accords, which comes into force in 2014, is
expected to put further pressure on credit extension, especially longer terms and to larger
borrowers.

Table 1. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators (2010-17)

GDP Growth (%) 

In-,estment (a, %" of G;DP) 

Actual 
2011 
5.0 

3)6.0 

2010 
3.6 

35.0 

2012 
2.7 
35 .3 

25.2 

29.3 

DomesticSavings(aso 

ofGDP) 

Unemploy ment Rate (%)) 
CPI Inflation (%) (period average) 
Budget Baanice ofli th G /GDP, 
5Subsidy outlaysI/GDP, % 
DelbtStocko1 thc(G/GEP,", 
External Debt Stock /GDP, %29.0 
Current Account Balance / GDP,% 
Net Official Reserves (billion US$) (including gold) 
23.3 
20.3 
Source: Government of Morocco and World Bank estimates and projections

9.1 
0.9 
-4.' 
3.6 
50. 

81. 9 
0. 
-6.9 
6.1 

-8.0 

53.7 

29.3 

-4.5 

21,1 
9.0 
1.3 

7.3I 

6.6 

601 

34.4 

-9 7 

17.2 

Est 
2013 
4.4 
33. 

19.3 
9. 
1.9 
-6.1 
4.7 

6.3 

38.4 

-8.7 

18.4 

2014 
3.0 
33 Il.2 

20.5 

..

1.7 
-4.8 
4.3 

6. 

40.5 

-7.7 

19.7 

Projections
2015 
2016 
4.6 
4.8 
321.9 
32. 
-

21.4 

1.9 
-4.1 
3.9 
61. 
40. 

-6.6 

20.0 

22.1 

2.3 
-3.4 
3.4 
601 
40.6 

-5.8 

20.8 

2017
4.9
32 
.7

23.0

2.3
31
3.2
8.
39.4

-5.0

21.6

22. 
Progress toward fiscal consolidation and improvement in external indicators
underscore that the Government's medium-term macroeconomic framework remains
broadly appropriate. Nevertheless, difficult conditions 
in 
the global and 
regional
environment entail significant downside risks. In particular, three debt sustainability analysis
tests put the medium-term public debt-to-GDP ratio in the 62-64 percent range, highlighting
the risks posed by a limited reform scenario. However, successful implementation of the
Government's revamped development strategy should ensure that this outcome is avoided (see
Table 1 for key macroeconomic projections under a strong reform scenario). In the 2014
Budget Law, the Government confirmed its intention to continue reforming the subsidy system
and to launch a reform of the pension system. In addition, it has asserted its commitment to
deepen regionalization and deconcentration and adopt the organic budget law necessary to
enhance the central and local governments' ability to deliver better and more efficient services.
To improve the investment climate further, the Government plans to proceed with justice
reform; improve access to financing, especially for small and medium enterprises (SMEs);
address constraints in access to land; develop logistics services; and reinforce technical
training. Last year, Bank Al-Maghrib announced its aim to move toward a more flexible
exchange rate mechanism over the next three years.

6

Key Development Challenges

A. Accelerating and Sustaining Economic Growth

Accelerating shared growth

23. 
One of the key challenges for Morocco is to grow its economy faster than at
historical rates in order to generate more jobs and greater wealth. Prudent economic
management produced average growth rates of around 5 percent during 2001-2011 and reduced
poverty (see above section on the poverty profile). Yet this growth rate has been insufficient to
reduce unemployment, which has held at 9-10 percent since 2006. A simultaneously declining
participation rate points to a disturbing trend of increased exclusion. It is estimated that
Morocco needs to reach annual growth rates of 6-7 percent to absorb new entrants into the
labor market and generate greater wealth for all.

24. 
To achieve stronger growth rates, Morocco will need a structural transformation
of its economy, with a focus on broadening economic opportunities. These include a more
stable macroeconomic environment, 
trade and exchange rate policies 
that support the
competitiveness of Moroccan products, an improved business environment with a financial
sector that better serves smaller and newer firms, more opportunities for private investment
across all sectors, a labor force that is better trained and more productive, and a reduction in
Morocco's reliance upon and inefficient use of natural resources (e.g. groundwater, imported
fossil fuels).

25. 
A more stable macroeconomic environment can only come with a more diversified
and resilient economy. Morocco's reliance on a few sectors (for example, agriculture,
tourism, and phosphates) and on fragile and deteriorating natural resources, which are often
exported without much local transformation and to a few markets (such as the Euro zone),
makes it particularly vulnerable to internal and external shocks. The further development of
agro-industry, along with a comprehensive program 
to modernize 
irrigation and adapt
agriculture practices and crops to a changing climate, would further protect Morocco against
such shocks. In addition, Morocco's dependence on fossil fuels and energy imports makes its
economy vulnerable to global price fluctuations, while its significant potential in renewable
energy (wind and solar) and in energy efficiency, including in transport, remain largely
untapped.

26. 
Trade and exchange rate policies must support competitiveness and integration in
global value chains. While export development plans are in place and Morocco has adopted an
ambitious agenda with regard to free trade agreements, especially vis-i-vis the EU, the
implementation of comprehensive 
investment climate reforms, increased productivity and
reduced trade and investment barriers will be required to ensure deeper integration with global
markets. In recent years Morocco has invested in robust trade reforms, notably in customs, and
in major and successful transshipment activities. Yet trade costs remain relatively high, mostly
due to supply chain inefficiencies, 
in particular among Maghreb countries. Modernizing
logistics services can better connect Morocco to global value chains. Morocco also needs to
shift progressively to a flexible exchange rate regime that would better support its export
strategies and help increase resilience to external and internal shocks.

27. 
Implementing a comprehensive global integration agenda would require greater
government efforts to coordinate and execute economic integration initiatives. Strategic
reform areas will include foreign investment policy and investment protection, services trade

7

liberalization, competition policy, and consumer protection-all areas in which Morocco has
room for improvement. This may require lifting government coordination to a higher position
in the political hierarchy and establishing administrative units within the civil service to
support the transition. Drawing best practices from successful experiences in Poland, Serbia,
Slovenia, and Turkey could help Morocco build the institutions and 
implementation
mechanisms needed to promote effective integration.

28. Morocco's financial sector could be more diversified and better serve SMEs and
new firms. Morocco has a fairly diversified financial system that grew rapidly over the past
decade. Financial system assets as a percentage of GDP have reached levels comparable to
some high-income countries. 1 3 Morocco's financial system has therefore performed well in
mobilizing savings for the formation of capital. However, finance functions pertaining to
allocating and monitoring capital inhibit growth. At this stage of Morocco's development, a
better mix between banking and capital markets might help increase diversity among investors,
improve transparency in capital decisions, and foster good corporate governance. Raising the
proportion of equity capital in the financial structure of particular SMEs, by facilitating access
to external finance, could also enhance creditworthiness. Finally, implementing G-20 financial
system reforms will naturally give capital markets a greater role in providing long-term
financing to the economy.

29. 
An environment more conducive to starting and growing businesses would boost
economic activity and provide needed opportunities for disadvantaged youth and women
entrepreneurs. Despite some business environment reforms, 
the 
legal and regulatory
environment in many respects still does not facilitate the creation or formalization of small
enterprises. The unpredictable application of rules by the bureaucracy and the courts, together
with numerous administrative instructions and circulars, create an opaque and overly complex
environment that discourages informal businesses from formalizing. As a result, informality
rates are high in Morocco, with most informal workers being in small firms that engage in low-
productivity activities.14 SMEs also commonly face barriers 
in access to land, finance,
information, and support. These challenges were brought up emphatically throughout CPS
consultations by young entrepreneurs and women who are most affected by these constraints.

30. 
Upgrading the skills of the 
labor force would 
improve productivity and
employment rates in Morocco. This issue has worsened in recent years, with 35 percent of
firms pointing to difficulties 
in identifying skilled workers as an important constraint,
compared to 20 percent in 2004.15 This lack of skills is due to inadequate education (for the
new labor force) and a lack of continued education (for the existing labor stock). During CPS
consultations, participants expressed frustration with 
the mismatch between academic
programs and employment opportunities, particularly the limited relevance of educational
curricula in today's job market.

31. 
Labor regulations and comparatively high payroll taxes discourage the emergence
of a dynamic labor force and formal employment, disproportionately affecting youth and
women. Morocco's highly restrictive fixed-term contract 
laws and heavy employment
regulations and costs constitute important obstacles to firms that seek to adjust their staffing to
cope with new demand, technologies, and economic shocks. With one of the highest minimum

13 Over 200 percent of GDP.
14 Gatti, R.; Angel-Urdinola, D.; Silva J. and Bodor, A. 2011. Striving for Better Jobs: The Challenge of Informality in the

Middle East and North Africa. Washington D.C.: World Bank

15 Doing Business for Morocco, World Bank, 2008

8

wagesl6 in the world and relatively high payroll taxes, the cost of formal labor is inflated in
Morocco. As a result, businesses prefer to remain informal to minimize labor costs and
rigidities, which negatively affects the quality ofjobs available to young people and women.

Sustainable growth forfuture generations

32. 
Stronger health and education outcomes would boost Morocco's economic growth.
11 percent of economic growth and 25 percent of total income growth in developing countries
during 2000-2011 could be traced to health improvements alone. 17 Early interventions in health
and education are key to ensuring a healthy and productive workforce for Morocco's future.
Malnutrition, in particular, impairs cognitive development in early childhood and limits
learning, performance, productivity, and earnings later in adult life. In addition, the rise of
NCDs has significant consequences for future health spending and labor productivity.

33. 
A more sustainable use of natural resources will help to ensure they continue to be
available to future generations. At issue is the overexploitation of Morocco's natural capital
base on which the economy relies heavily and which is vulnerable to climate change.
Agriculture and fisheries (accounting for nearly 20 percent of GDP) face land and water
resource constraints; aquifers are being overexploited to provide water for irrigation and, to a
lesser extent, industry; and the sustained growth of the tourism sector relies on coastal and
marine assets that are also under pressure. Morocco is also particularly vulnerable to climate
change: global warming and a decline in rainfall will negatively affect already scarce water
resources, and have serious implications for the many industries that rely upon them.'8

34. 
Actions taken by Morocco to mitigate the potential impact of natural hazards will
decrease threats to sustainable growth. Morocco is susceptible to destructive earthquakes, as
well as flooding, droughts, and rising sea levels, all of which are expected to worsen due to
climate change with potential impacts likely to be exacerbated by urbanization. Greater
Casablanca, for example, is becoming increasingly prone to flooding, coastal erosion, and
marine inundation. Rural areas are also vulnerable. A majority of Morocco's farms are small,
semi-subsistence, and largely rain-fed, hence at risk of losses in the face of recurrent droughts.

B. Addressing Social and Economic Exclusion

35. 
Reducing inequality and exclusion is a prerequisite for a stronger economy in the
long term. Great disparities still exist in access to social and economic opportunities and
services between coastal and interior regions, urban, peri-urban and rural areas, within rural
areas, and among different segments of the population. During CPS consultations, civil society
representatives from marginalized or remote regions complained about the lack of political will
to implement social and infrastructure programs that would sustainably 
improve living
conditions at the local level. These concerns were at the heart of the protest movement that led
to the 2011 constitutional reforms.

36. 
Improving the prospects of the rural poor requires sustainable farming practices,
higher incomes, and more diverse income opportunities. Farming is the main source of
income in rural areas, and for the vast majority it consists of semi-subsistence farming of low
productivity and quality on small lands. Women's work on such farms is often unrecognized or

16 Equivalent to 70% of average wages in 2011.
1 Global Health 2035: A World Converging within a Generation, The Lancet on December 3, 2013.
18 These include hydropower generation capacity, rainfed agriculture yields, and water for irrigation, fisheries, and tourism.

9

unpaid. Small farmers face significant constraints, including land titling issues and land
fragmentation, limited farmer organization, unpredictable rainfall, marginal land, and limited
access to markets. Highlighting the dualist nature and inequality of the agriculture sector, fewer
than one percent of farmers have very profitable, commercial, and export-oriented farms,
representing 14 percent of cultivated land. Increased value added from irrigation water and
crops produced, 
improved agriculture value chain management and commercialization
practices, reform of extension services, and promotion of local transformation through agro-
industry would ensure that better sector performance translates into higher incomes for all.
Promoting aquaculture and ecotourism activities would provide alternative income sources in
marginal and mountainous rural areas while reducing pressure on natural resources.

37. 
Integrated, participatory development approaches are needed to improve rural
access to social and infrastructure services. Experience demonstrates that truly integrated
and participatory rural development approaches are critical to improving living conditions and
creating economic opportunities in rural areas. Achieving better service levels in a given area
calls for concerted and coordinated multi-sector approaches centered on harmonized planning.
The challenge for Government is to bridge sector divides and support the local level (e.g.
communes) to find innovative ways of providing services in rural areas.

38. With half of Morocco's population living 
in cities, improving urban service
delivery is a key priority for the Government. Urban and peri-urban centers face uneven
access to city services such as solid waste management, public transportation, water, sanitation,
and sewerage infrastructure, highlighting the need for structured and integrated programs to
upgrade or expand services in response to the needs of growing urban populations. To that
effect, the technical and financial capacity of municipalities needs to be enhanced, and public
funds need to be allocated for key services that are not currently being delivered, including
through performance-based partnerships with public or private service providers. In addition,
ICT and e-government services can help play a key role in promoting more effective,
transparent and equitable delivery of services.

39. 
Local governments, the primary citizen interface for a majority of basic services,
will require significant strengthening. Limited access to information and space for voice
limits opportunities 
to enhance public and private service provision. Local government
capacity and community organization need to be strengthened and combined with local
participatory governance and community-driven development approaches to decide on and
deliver solutions that ensure quality service to all citizens. In parallel, central and local
government resources need to be allocated according to local priorities.

40. 
Creating opportunities for young people who are disproportionately excluded
from the economy and have limited voice is an important challenge. More than half of
young people are inactive, neither in school nor employed. While unemployment rates are
higher for more educated youth, a vast majority of unemployed young people have not
completed middle school or are illiterate.1 9 A staggering 82 percent of girls drop out of school
and are not in the labor force due to family reasons or discouragement. Most employed young
people work in the informal sector with few, if any, benefits and under precarious conditions.
Government employment policies have focused primarily on supporting university graduates -
an approach that has had only limited impact on youth employment. A diagnostic on 11
countries 20 highlighted the issue of employability (the mismatch between the available

19 63 percent and 30 percent, respectively.
20 McKinsey & Company. 2011. "Education for Employment for Youth in the Arab Region," (March).

10

workforce and available jobs) and its links to the lack of information sharing between the
education sector and the job market, the lack of data on placement rates per education type, and
the poor quality of job intermediation. Additional efforts need to be made to partner with the
private sector and to work with youth groups, schools, and other local organizations to develop
programs that more effectively keep young people active, particularly by better informing and
equipping them for the future.

41. 
Shortcomings 
in the implementation of the legal framework undermine the
economic, social, and political status of women. Social norms exclude women socially and
economically, leading to social phenomena such as harassment and domestic violence, for
which there is no comprehensive legislation. In addition to gaps in the legal framework,
women are affected by limited application of existing legislation, caused by weak institutional
capacity and selective enforcement by public officials influenced by social norms. In particular,
some social norms restrict women's ability to exercise newly acquired rights, further limiting
their economic, social, and political participation. Women's access to top management
positions is limited both in the professional and political arena.

42. 
Efficient subsidy and targeted safety net programs are needed to better support
disadvantaged and excluded Moroccans. The current social protection system is not
effective in fighting poverty, as it favors primarily the wealthiest households and supply chain
networks. Data from 2012 show that the richest 25 percent of Morocco's households benefit
from 46.7 percent of all butane subsidies and around 40 percent of all liquid fuel subsidies. 2 1
At the same time, social assistance programs remain limited in scope, fragmented, and poorly
targeted, while the social insurance system has limited coverage and displays ad hoc financing
mechanisms and redistributive arrangements that increase the cost of formal employment and
make the system financially unsustainable and inequitable. The challenge for the Government
is to raise awareness about the advantages of reforming these programs in order to expand their
coverage, improve their targeting, and promote program integration while assisting the sector
stakeholders who are most affected. In particular, the Government needs to reach consensus on
how best to sequence and apply subsidy and safety net reforms.

C. Strengthening Governance and Institutions for Better Public Interventions

43. 
Improving public sector governance and the capacity of institutions and service
providers is critical to ensuring effective and inclusive public interventions. Access to
basic public services is central to sustained poverty reduction and to the promotion of shared
prosperity. Indeed, the poorest segments of the population are particularly dependent, and
therefore vulnerable, to any discretion or quality deficiencies in public service provision. Lack
of access to these basic services has a direct effect on citizens' living conditions and
purchasing power. To remedy this, 
the Constitution has mandated the government to
implement reforms to make institutions more accountable and transparent in the delivery of
public services at the local level, including through decentralization and fiscal transfers.

44. 
At the central level, a key priority is improving public sector governance,
including strengthening accountability and transparency in the management of public
resources. The budget is considered opaque, insufficiently strategic, highly fragmented, and
difficult 
to monitor and evaluate. Similarly, the process for fiscal 
transfers 
is highly

21 Wealth being determined by consumption quintile, World Bank estimates, Verme, Araar and Gadiry-Barry, 2012.

11

prescriptive and rigid with the result that spending is not as effective as it could be. 2 2 To
address these challenges, the organic budget law is being revised to introduce performance-
based budgeting. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) represent two-thirds of public investment and
half of public expenditures and play an important role in delivering services and implementing
public policy. As such, the Government has embarked on a program to modernize the
governance of SOEs to promote more efficient service delivery.

45. Morocco's health sector 
illustrates some of the governance challenges that
undermine access to services and their quality. The system faces a critical shortage of
health personnel, who are often poorly trained, do not report to work, and are not equitably
distributed, particularly to health facilities in rural areas. There is also no system for regulating
or evaluating the quality of health care providers and no program for career management.
Many health care facilities are poorly operated, lack legitimacy and are not accountable to
patients. Drug policies and controls are weak (prices of drugs are inconsistent and leakages
occur). At the institutional level, different actors have overlapping functions, or one institution
may do more than it is mandated to do.

46. Morocco's procurement system also needs to be modernized. It would benefit from
greater transparency, accountability, and efficiency to align with international good practices
and to effectively reduce the risk of corruption.2 3 The revision of the procurement decree at the
end of 2013, harmonizing the application of public procurement across all government entities,
is a welcome first step.

47. 
The new Constitution introduced the principle of open governance by granting
citizens the right to information, to public consultation, and to petition the Government
and Parliament. The Government has launched a number of initiatives in this regard, which
strengthen voice and public participation but that need to be translated into dedicated policies
applied across the public sector. These reforms, including a new access to information law,
take time to implement and will require education and communication campaigns to raise
awareness and change behaviors. To facilitate this process, the Government is seeking to
further develop e-government solutions, as illustrated by the Watiqa 24 platform.

48. 
At the local level, governance reforms should aim to improve access to and quality
of service delivery, by listening to users and making service providers more accountable.
What matters most to citizens is receiving services whose cost, timeliness, and reliability is
acceptable. Many of these services are provided primarily at the decentralized level, either by
municipalities or other decentralized government entities. To guarantee that such services are
efficiently delivered and relevant to the user, infrastructure bottlenecks need to be addressed,
tariff issues (for example, in water, sanitation, and electricity) resolved, and greater voice in
service delivery discussions allowed at the local level. Public services need to be modernized
and more accessible to citizens. Strengthening the private sector's role in infrastructure assets
and service delivery, through public-private partnerships (PPPs) and greater competition,
would also help ensure proper, cost-efficient, and sustainable management of good-quality
service delivery.

22 Increased spending on priority sectors such as education and justice have not witnessed improved performance, according to
public expenditure reviews undertaken by the WBG in the health, education, and justice sectors.
23 Procurement system assessment of the Use of Country System (UCS) pilot program in 2010-2011.
24 Watiqa is a new one-stop online service enabling citizens to request various administrative documents (for example, birth
certificates) and receive them via registered mail.

12

Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy

49. 

The Government's strategic priorities mirror in great part the principles, changes,
and actions prescribed by the new Constitution. This was detailed in the Head of
Government's January 2012 speech, which laid out the Government's 2012-2016 program. The
latter reflects constitutional priorities such as inclusion, reinforcement of good governance
principles, human rights, and protection of individual freedoms, as well as institutional
responsibility and accountability, sustainable development, and the move toward a more
decentralized system of governance.

50. 
The Government's program is structured around five mutually-reinforcing
pillars: (I) deepening national identity, preserving social cohesion and diversity, and openness;
(II) consolidating the rule of law, strengthening good governance, democratic participation and
advancement of regionalization and decentralization, in the context of accountability and true
citizenship; 
(III) pursuing strong, competitive, multi-sector, diversified, wealth- and
employment-generating, and equitable economic growth; (IV) promoting social programs
guaranteeing equitable access to basic services and strengthening solidarity and equal
opportunities across citizens, generations, and regions; and (V) Consolidation of the country's
regional and international credibility and promotion of public services aimed at Moroccans
living abroad. Based on the WBG's comparative advantages and aim of ensuring selective
support to those areas of the Government program that will most effectively address the key
development challenges identified, the CPS program seeks most directly to support three of
these pillars (II, III and IV) (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Morocco's Challenges, Government Program and CPS focus

Development 
Challenges

Government Program

Pillar 1: Deepening national identity,
preserving social cohesion and diversity

Accelerating &

sustainingecnomitc 

Addrssig 
sciagan

Addrssig 
soialandare 
econmic 
exclusion 

C

Pillar II: Consolidation of the rule of Law

Pillar IllPusuit of a strong, competitive,
muti-sector, diversified, and weafth and

employment generating economy 

Pillar III: Pursuit of an economic policy0
guaranteeing that the benefits of growth
shared
Pillar IV: Promotion of social programs
guaranteeing equitable access to basic
services and strengthening solidarity and
equal opportunities across citizens,
generations, and regions

Pillar V: Consolidation of Morocco's

regional and international credibility, as

well as support to Moroccans abroad

13

51. 
Under Pillar II, the Government is pursuing governance reforms focused on the
delivery of public services, access to information and public consultation, tax reform,
budget reform, advanced regionalization (that is, decentralization), and a better-
functioning justice sector. A common goal of these governance reforms is to improve the
effectiveness of public policies and the delivery of public services to all citizens. This is being
pursued through an integrated, holistic program of governance reforms using mutually
reinforcing reform levers across the public sector, covering the central administration, SOEs,
and local governments. Over the last decade, Morocco has invested heavily to improve local
service delivery. Several national sector plans have directed large amounts of funding to
infrastructure for local services in the form of financial incentives for investment and
professionalizing services (mostly through PPPs), in particular in sanitation (Programme
National d'Assainissement), solid waste management (Programme National des Dchets
Menagers), urban transport, urban upgrading (Mise i Niveau urbaine), and rural electrification.
Although programs to universalize access to services have been fairly successful, about two
million people in low-income peri-urban areas still do not have water or sanitation services. In
parallel, the new constitutional rights on access to information and public participation aim to
create a more open and inclusive government to foster voice and accountability. Public
financial management and public sector reforms aim to strengthen public institutions and
accountability in the use of public resources in order to improve the delivery and efficiency of
public services. Decentralization reforms focus on strengthening local governance and bringing
the most relevant and efficient services to citizens, based on the principle of subsidiarity that
decisions should be taken as close as possible to the citizens.

52. 
Under this pillar, the Government also seeks to improve economic and financial
governance. Strengthening the Competition Council, improving governance in SOEs, putting
in place more transparent and performance-based budgeting, reforming public procurement,
rebalancing the pension system through parametric reforms, and implementing fiscal transfers
to local governments are key efforts in this regard.

53. 
Under Pillar III, the Government seeks to improve economic productivity. To this
end, Morocco continues 
to 
implement key 
Box 1. Government's 2012-2016 Program -
sector-specific strategies consisting mainly of 
Selected Targets
tax incentives 
to sectors with high growth
potential, 
combined 
with 
dedicated 
infrastructure 
investments, simplification of 
administrative procedures, and broader access 
to 
financing. Several strategies have been 
adopted 
covering 
the main 
sectors 
that 
Morocco wishes to develop, such as agriculture 
(through the Plan Maroc Vert), ICT (through 
Plan Maroc Numeric), and tourism (Plan Azur 
and Vision 2020). An ambitious 
industrial 
strategy was launched in 2005 and continues to 
be implemented under the "National Pact of 

As part of its program, the Government set out
to achieve the following targets by 2016:
* Growth rate of 5.5 percent
* Inflation rate of 2 percent
* Reduction of unemployment rate to 8 percent
improved sustainability of public finances by
reducing the budget deficit to 3 percent
. Strengthened competitiveness of the economy
. Improved investment climate
9 Encouraged exports
9 Development of long-term savings
9 Renewable energy reaches 42 percent of
installed capacity (by 2020)
Energy efficiency leading to 12 percent in
energy savings (by 2020)

Industrial Emergence 2009-2015 
(PNEI)," 
signed in February 2009 between key ministries 
and representatives of the private sector and the 
Professional Banking Association. It covers ten 
pillars: offshoring, automobiles, aeronautics, electronics, textile and leather, agro-industry,

.

. Greater support to SMEs

SME competitiveness, investment climate, training, and industrial zones.

14

54. 
Sustainable management of natural resources is also a key component of Pillar III.
The Government has made the green growth agenda a top priority. The Framework Law on
Environment and Sustainable Development, approved in January 2013, defines the rights and
obligations of the state and citizens for the protection and preservation of the environment and
sustainable development; establishes 
the "Police de 
l'Environnement" to strengthen
environmental control and inspection; introduces a green tax (the "fiscalit verte"); and
promotes waste reduction, reuse, and recycling with a view to achieving more productive and
resilient use of environmental assets. The Government is currently preparing a national strategy
for the sustainable management of natural resources.

55. 
Pillar IV is focused on improving social indicators and economic opportunities.
Through continued support to employment creation programs and the introduction of new
programs to insert the unemployed into business and associations, the Government aims to
reduce the employment rate to 8 percent by 2016. Other priorities include improving
Morocco's weakest health indicators, such as infant and maternal mortality; addressing the
growing challenge of NCDs; improving service quality across the health sector; and reducing
the financial burden on households and protecting them from impoverishment due to out-of-
pocket health expenditures. A particular emphasis on promoting women's social and economic
opportunities, including through participation, is also stressed under this Pillar. More generally,
human development remains a priority for the Government, supported heavily through the
National Initiative for Human Development (INDH). More than ever, the importance of
fulfilling the goals of the Education Charter, and in particular promoting better governance and
quality in the education sector, has been recognized as one of the Government's top priorities.
56. 
Social solidarity, equity, and inclusion are all emphasized under this pillar, with a
special focus on poor and vulnerable households. The Government seeks to move from
channeling support to the population through universal energy and food subsidies to more
efficient, targeted safety nets. In September 2013, the Government embarked on an important
reform to progressively phase out all fuel subsidies except butane, which is used predominately
by the poor. The Government is considering how best to move forward with a broad parallel
reform of the more cost-effective and better-targeted social assistance program. Broadening the
array of citizens that can benefit from the pension system is also an important feature of the
program Finally, continued expansion of basic infrastructure services such as water, sanitation,
electricity, roads, and ICT, including mobile phone and Internet services, to remote and
underserved areas remains a government priority.

III. BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Lessons Learned from the Previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback

A. Lessons from the CPS Progress and Completion Reports

57. 
The FY10-13 CPS concentrated on 
three strategic pillars: 
(i) growth,
competitiveness and employment; (ii) service delivery to citizens; and (iii) sustainable
development 
in a changing climate, supported by the two crosscutting beams of
governance and territoriality. A CPS Progress Report was prepared in 2012 to assess
implementation progress and make mid-course adjustments, 
in particular to bring new
emphasis to the themes of inclusion, governance, accountability, voice, and opportunity.

58. 
The WBG's performance in designing and implementing the CPS program was
rated good in the CPS Completion Report (CPSCR). The evaluation highlighted the
relevance of the strategy's highly flexible design as social, political, and economic

15

transformation took hold in Morocco and the broader MENA region over the course of the CPS
period. The CPS made use of a unique mix of instruments to support implementation of the
Government's ambitious reform agenda, backed up by a well-designed results matrix that
closely linked expected CPS outcomes to the outcomes of planned interventions and struck a
practical balance between flexibility and specificity. WBG implementation of the CPS program
was characterized by largely satisfactory project outcomes, disbursements above the regional
average despite significantly expanded lending commitments, increased IFC investment in key
sectors, a strong program of analytical and advisory activities, and close and effective
partnerships with the Government, development partners, foreign investors, regional players,
and nongovemment stakeholders in the country.

59. 
The CPSCR concludes that good progress was made toward achieving most CPS
proposed outcomes. The CPSCR rates program performance as moderately satisfactory, with
notable achievements in private and financial sector reform, access to education, addressing
vulnerability and social exclusion, agriculture 
sector management, and solid waste
management (SWM). Substantial progress was made toward most other expected outcomes,
though some targets on water management, energy and health sector reforms, and climate
change adaptation were not achieved. In general, successful CPS interventions enjoyed high-
level government ownership and 
integration with government programs; participatory
approaches; effective technical assistance (TA); and well-specified, operationally integrated,
and regularly monitored outcome indicators. In a few areas (such as the competitiveness
program), momentum was slowed by the additional challenges associated with interagency
coordination and under the auspices of new multi-sector DPLs, by low government staffing, or
as a result of imperfectly specified targets.

60. 
Lessons from the CPSCR have informed the design of the FY14-17 CPS. WBG
engagement in strategic areas such as competitiveness, governance, green growth, social
protection, and service delivery remains relevant and has been scaled up in pursuit of
promoting shared prosperity and eliminating poverty. The integration of gender and youth
across CPS pillars and activities is maintained and further deepened through discrete new
interventions. This CPS retains the previous strategy's flexible model, which successfully
allowed the WBG to adjust its program as needed to respond to emerging priorities. Although
significant sector advancements were made through single-sector DPLs under the previous
CPS, the CPSCR pointed out the importance of supporting more ambitious second-generation
reforms with cross-sectoral dimensions while continuing to focus on service provision,
strengthening coordination to achieve tangible results, and enhancing citizen participation. This
approach responds to the Government's request for more multi-sector programs to help tackle
more complex, multidimensional problems. Building on the previous CPS focus on a wide
reform agenda, under this CPS, the WBG will bring more focus to implementation support,
with a more balanced portfolio of instruments (relying less heavily on DPLs). Given the
positive experience with Morocco's first Program for Results (PforR) operation, approved for
the INDH2 in 2012, together with the Government's interest in managing for results, the WBG
will mobilize this new instrument to achieve a more balanced, results-focused program, in
conjunction with continued DPL and investment lending support where appropriate. In terms
of investment lending, the CPSCR confirmed that many operations encountered challenges
with implementation readiness, which delayed the pace of procurement and disbursement,
particularly in the first year of implementation. This issue has proved particularly acute with
grant-financed operations. Overall, the CPSCR concludes that the FY1O-13 CPS was generally
implemented as planned and reached a majority of the intended results.

16

B. Client Feedback and Stakeholder Consultations

61. 
The WBG carried out comprehensive and inclusive in-country consultations in
2013 through formal conferences and bilateral meetings with the Government, civil
society, private sector, academia, and development partners, at both the central and
regional level. A wide variety of development stakeholders were invited to provide feedback,
comments, and recommendations around key themes of WBG involvement in Morocco. They
were asked to offer their views on the new partnership framework with regard to Morocco's
development priorities. A dedicated web space was created to keep stakeholders informed
about the CPS process and invite further comments.

62. 
Civil society recommendations have been critical to the WBG's dialogue with the
Moroccan Government and have helped to frame the orientation of the CPS. Civil society
representatives have provided valuable feedback based on their experience on the ground and
their knowledge of major bottlenecks in key sectors, and have made constructive proposals to
enhance the WBG's support to the Government. The following are key recommendations made
by civil society.

63. Morocco's civil society constitutes a vibrant and growing development stakeholder
whose field presence and experience are invaluable. Its capacity and expertise should be
strengthened to more effectively deliver on the ground. One of the most common demands
made by civil society organizations during CPS consultations was the chance to be involved in
Morocco's development programs from inception to implementation, including in the decision-
making process. They requested 
that 
their role be better recognized and 
taken 
into
consideration in development policies and reforms at the local and national level.

64. 
Governance is at the heart of Morocco's development challenges. In virtually all
consultations held, civil society stakeholders pointed to weak governance mechanisms as a key
cause of public service failures to deliver on promised results, despite the involvement in some
cases of substantial financial resources. Stakeholders advocated for urgent collective action to
upgrade governance norms and guidelines in all public facilities and services, mirroring a
strong demand among street protesters in 2011: combating corruption, privilege, and rent
seeking.

65. 
In particular, there was a request for increased transparency and participation at
all levels of decision making. Be it at a central or local, sectoral or administrative level,
Morocco's governance system will gain in efficiency and performance if managed through the
prism of transparency, participation, and accountability, according to stakeholders. This is seen
as the thrust of the new Constitution.

66. 
The performance of public services, and social programs in particular, falls well
below people's expectations, especially in lagging regions and some urban and peri-urban
areas. Training, education, and capacity building for civil society, young people, rural women,
and local authorities are needed to equip citizens with adequate knowledge and competences to
become effective actors in an open society.2 5 Stakeholders called on the WBG to support
efforts to provide more economic opportunities, combat corruption and nepotism, and promote
entrepreneurship and private sector development.

25 An open society is understood as a flexible and tolerant society that is based on the rule of law and justice, individual
responsibility, accountability, transparency, freedom of information and participation, and that promotes fairness in political,
legal and economic systems, as well as equal opportunities for all.

17

Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy

A. World Bank Group Partnership Strategy Overview

67. 
The WBG, through its renewed partnership with Morocco, seeks to selectively
deepen 
its support for a more open society and sustainable economic and social
opportunities for all Moroccans. The CPS builds on the strategic areas of cooperation under
the 2010 CPS, as well as selective themes introduced in the 2012 CPS Progress Report in
response to the 2011 Constitution. This support includes promoting a more competitive
economy, creating employment, improving service delivery to citizens, greening growth, and
increasing the focus on voice and accountability, particularly in local governance, by bringing
citizens into decision-making processes. Within these themes, the WBG team focused on three
areas of strategic engagement with the aim of achieving, through tailored packages of services,
14 selective outcomes directly linked to the WBG goals (Annex 1).

68. 
The new CPS will increase the focus on competitive growth to create much-needed
jobs, while ensuring that growth is sustainable, inclusive, and responsive to the WBG's
twin objectives of boosting shared prosperity and eradicating extreme poverty. The WBG
will scale up its support for Morocco's green growth agenda, supporting innovative multisector
approaches to sustainable and environmentally sound development, for the benefit of future
generations and to reduce the country's vulnerability to shocks. The strategy also brings a new
focus to improving governance and service delivery, with increased support for more efficient,
transparent, and inclusive governance arrangements across all levels of government (central to
local), as well as in state-owned and private enterprises responsible for ensuring equitable
access and quality of services. Promoting citizens' voice and participation is integral to these
efforts, as is the focus on gender and youth.

69. 
The CPS retains a flexible approach while increasing the focus on multisector
operations to better respond to Morocco's development challenges. While the CPS
program has been designed to achieve specific objectives and outcomes, the program is
indicative and there is some flexibility to address any unforeseen or newly emerging priorities
that may arise in Morocco. In particular, the detailed program of support and the coverage of
milestones will give greater focus to the first two years of the CPS period, namely FY14-15. A
CPS Progress Report will define the milestones for the remaining period, namely FY16-17,
allowing for mid-term adaptation based on the latest conditions. The focus on transversal and
multisector operations will reduce what has at times been a fragmented and narrow sector
approach. This is expected to enable the WBG to support Morocco's more ambitious reforms.
A detailed Results Framework is presented in Annex 2.

70. 
On this basis, three strategic results areas are proposed as an organizing
framework for the new CPS program (Figure 3):

* Result Area 1: Promoting Competitive and Inclusive Growth
* Result Area 2: Building a Green and Resilient Future
* Result Area 3: Strengthening Governance and Institutions for Improved Service
Delivery to All Citizens

71. 
Because of their sensitivity and recognized importance to Morocco's development,
the CPS proposes to maintain or raise the visibility of three crosscutting themes
throughout its program: (i) gender, (ii) youth, and (iii) voice and participation.

18

Figure 3. Morocco CPS FY14-17: Strategic Results Areas and CPS Outcome Areas

Supported Areas of Government Program

*Consolidation of the rule of Law (Pillar II)
* Strengthening of good governance, democratic participation, and advanced regionalization and
decentralization (Pillar II)
* Pursuit of a strong, competitive, multi-sector, diversified, and wealth and employment
generating economy(Pillar Ill]
* Pursuit of an economic policy guaranteeing that the benefits of growth are shared (Pillar III)
Promotion of social programs guaranteeing equitable accessto basic services and strengthening
solidarity and equal opportunities across citizens, generations, and regions (Pillar IV)

WBG's Support

ResultsArea2 

Building a Green & 
Resilient Future 

of soil, coastal and water resources 
StrategicOutcomez2-2.Increaserenewabe 
energygenerationand enhance energy 

ResultsArea3

Strengthening Governance&
Institutions for Improved Service

StrategicOutcome 3.1. Suppoit moreopencand
inclusive governanceensuing effective rights
for ctitien toaccessinfornation and petition
government

e 
FStrategicOutcome 3.2. Enablemoretransparent
Strategic Outcome 2.3. Better integrateaccountable 
managementof public
mechanismsto preventand mitigateaainst 
resources through buet and procement

reforms

manageand assesthe delivery of keyservices,

3.3. improve capacyto 

n,

Oucomeco.4. 
aaeragefte b
j!r(Oto 
-. Epn ce5t mi

serves(water, sanitation, electiity,transport,

telecommuaicationi, health, eduction)

IncreasetheproduRoutcome 

t 

i 

Promoting Competitive & 
Inclusive Growth 

St,cteEic_Ouome 1.1.Enhantethe 
enviionment with a more supportive 
institutionalframiewouk for buinesentry,ade 
facilitation and SME development 
trategioutcome1..Improveaccessto 
finance, with a particular focus on low income 

households, micro, small and youngfirms, and 

youth women 

Strategic utcome. 
andvalue-addedoftheagri-foodsector 
StReZ 
Better 
socio-economic potential of integrated rural 
develogment_and_tourism 

StrategicOutcome l.5. Improvethereliability of 

electricity supply

Strategic Outcome 1.6. Better match suis
developed through highereducationor
vocational training with the needs of the job
market
Strategic Outcome 1.7. Improve access to and
effectiveness of social protection programs,
espe,cilly for youth

B. Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities

Results Area 1: Promoting Competitive and Inclusive Growth

72. 

Under this Results Area, the WBG will support the Government of Morocco in its
efforts to achieve a more competitive economy in which the benefits of growth are shared

by all. The WBG will support policies and interventions 
that promote investment 
in
competitive sectors as one channel for accelerating Morocco's growth potential to further
reduce poverty; and strengthen the business environment and financial sector to encourage and
accompany entrepreneurs and emerging businesses, 
facilitate 
the participation of all
Moroccans, including the rural poor, women and young people, in the economy, and ensure a
greater role for the private sector. (See Annex 1 which discusses the proposed pLqgram.
xpected outcomes and impact on WBG Goals).

Strategic Outcome oti Enhance the business environment with a more supportive
institution aframework for business entry, trade facilitation and SME development

Link to twin goals: This outcome will boost economic activity to help create jobs and is
linked to the goal of boosting shared prosperity.

73. 

Business environment. Efforts to improve the business environment were initiated
under the Economic Competitiveness Support Program (ECSP) DPL series and associated

19

technical and advisory assistance, and will be pursued under a second ECSP operation (FY15).
The ECSP series will be complemented by dedicated assistance, several parallel studies, and
additional TA. For instance, a new Country Economic Memorandum (FY14/15) will examine
opportunities to promote a more open society and thus reignite Morocco's economic dynamism
to set it on a higher and more inclusive growth path. Joint Bank-IFC TA will continue to be
dedicated 
to 
institutional 
strengthening of 
the Competition Council (Conseil de 
la
Concurrence), increasing 
the 
transparency with which 
the 
Investment Commission
(Commission des Investissements) grants 
incentives, and strengthening public-private
coordination in designing investment climate reforms through the public-private National
Business Environment Committee (ComWit National de l'Environnement des Affaires, CNEA).

74. 
Trade facilitation. A study on trade and integration with the EU will further inform the
understanding of, and future support to, the competitiveness agenda. Morocco's first-ever
reimbursable TA initiative is exploring how the establishment of a new Moroccan Investment
Agency could help provide adequate tools for supporting public and private investments in
strategic projects in productive and transformative sectors such as agribusiness. TA on ICT-
enabled business process outsourcing (BPO) will help the country cement its status as a
destination for foreign investment in areas such as call centers and software development. The
WBG will provide TA to the transport sector, potentially through the Deauville MENA
Transition Fund (DTF), to focus on logistics, public-private partnerships in transport, an
assessment of transit along the trans-Maghreb corridor, the competitiveness of the national
railway, and the trucking industry. Additional TA in logistics will support the newly created
Moroccan Agency for the Development of Logistics (AMDL), urban logistics, customs
reforms, and collaboration with other international financial institutions. In addition, IFC will
continue to support a public-private initiative in collaboration with AMDL and the private
sector to improve youth employability and the sector's overall competitiveness.

75. 
Entrepreneurship and SME development. The World Bank and IFC will pursue an
integrated approach to facilitate entrepreneurship and SME development. The MENA MSME
Technical Assistance Facility, a joint World Bank-IFC led project, will continue to provide TA
to governments, regulators, financial institutions, and micro, small, and medium enterprises
(MSMEs) in Morocco. Additional support for microenterprises, microfinance institutions, and
their enabling environment will be provided under a Microfinance Development Project
(FY14), financed by the DTF. A new procurement framework enabling greater participation of
SMEs in public contracts and systematic publication of awards is also receiving TA through an
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant. IFC will complement the Bank's support to SMEs
by investing in financial intermediaries, SME funds, and microfinance institutions. IFC will
continue to implement a sizeable advisory program in MSME finance, business environment,
skills development and corporate governance program, which 
is critical to strengthen
companies' ability to attract investment and promote economic development.

Strategic Outcome 1.2. Improve access to finance, with a particular focus on low income
households, micro, small and young firms, and youth and women

Link 
to 
twin goals: This outcome will help create more opportunities for young
entrepreneurs and boost shared prosperity.

76. Micro and SME finance. These priorities will be supported through several WBG
instruments: (i) the programmatic DPL series (FY14-16) 
in support of capital market
development and SME access to finance; (ii) the Microfinance Development Project, which
will promote access to finance among low-income households, MSMEs, and women; (iii) an

20

IFC microfinance investment and advisory program that will continue to support the three main
microfinance institutions, enhancing their resilience and diversifying their product offerings to
improve their ability to manage risks and to scale up their outreach, particularly to women and
youth, in a sustainable manner; (iv) the ongoing MSME Development Project, which provides
partial credit guarantees 
to SMEs and 
is nearly fully disbursed after 18 months of
implementation due to high uptake of the credit guarantee for very small enterprises,
confirming needs in this area and opening up the possibility of a follow-on operation; (v)
training to 
improve the financial 
literacy of women and youth and for microfinance
institutions, supported through a regional TA program on enhancing microfinance for women
and youth; and (vi) Bank TA and lending to provide innovative entrepreneurs with capital and
support adapted to the risk profile of early-stage ventures. As one of the priority areas of its
engagement in Morocco, IFC will continue 
to support SMEs by investing in financial
intermediaries, private equity funds targeting high-growth SMEs, and through microfinance
institutions that provide access to finance mostly to women and young entrepreneurs

77. 
Capital market development. The programmatic DPL series mentioned above will
support capital market development by promoting more sophisticated financing tools that
optimize domestic and foreign investment allocations in productive and innovative sectors.

Strategic Outcome 1.3 Increase the productivity and value-added of the agri-food sector

Link to twin goals: This outcome will increase revenues for farmers, thereby boosting
prosperity and reducing poverty in rural areas.

78. 
The Bank will continue to support the Plan Maroc Vert (PMV), which seeks to double
the agriculture sector's value-added and supports activities to integrate commercial and small
farmers into domestic and international markets. The Bank will continue to support the PMV
components that aim to enhance farmers' 
income through better techniques, skills, and
knowledge support, and IFC will continue to promote private agribusiness investments to
maximize outreach to farmers and help increase and diversify rural incomes. In line with the
PMV DPL series, the Bank will further support the expansion of drip irrigation and associated
improvements in the value chain and farmers' organizations through additional lending. 2 6 In
the outer years of the CPS, new lending, possibly though PforR operations, and programmatic
economic and sector work (ESW) is envisaged to support further agriculture modernization
(including restructuring of the Department of Agriculture's decentralized services at the
regional level, establishment of regional irrigation utilities to improve service to farmers,
establishment of agro-industrial areas and 
trade and commercialization platforms, and
sustainable approaches to improve the livelihoods of small famers27 ). Focus on productive
adaptation of Morocco's agriculture sector to climate change will also continue under the
ongoing GEF-funded Social and Integrated Agriculture (ASIMA), Integrating Climate Change
in the Implementation of the PMV (PICCPMV) and Integrated Management of Coastal Zones
(GIZC) projects, as well as the new Inclusive Green Growth (IGG) DPL series

26 Additional financing to the Modernization of Irrigated Agriculture in the Oum Er Rbia River Basin project (FY15).
27 Pillar 2 of the PMV program.

21

Strategic Outcome 1.4. Better leverage the socioeconomic potential of integrated rural
development and tourism

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help create new economic opportunities in rural areas
thereby boosting shared prosperity.

79. 
Integrated Rural Development. Building on its past support to the implementation of
the Rural Development Strategy, as well as from Integrated Rural Development projects
financed by the IFAD and EU, the Bank will support rural development in targeted regions of
Morocco, through a new PforR operation aiming to (i) promote local economic opportunities in
agriculture and off-farm sectors, especially for women; (ii) ensure an integrated approach,
coordinated at the provincial level, in order to decentralize decisions on resource allocation
closer to the population to further the process of de-concentration and decentralization; (iii)
strengthen the capacity of the "communes rurales" by reinforcing their role 
in local
development; and (iv) further the process of transfer of responsibilities to local development
associations and producer organizations. The Bank will also support efforts to diversify
economic activities through integrated rural development programs that promote linkages
between investment in agriculture and nonagriculture sectors in rural areas through the ongoing
GEF-funded GIZC project.

80. 
Tourism. A Tourism Development 
lending project 
is working to 
leverage the
socioeconomic potential of Morocco's 31 medinas and 
its rural and natural assets by
supporting the Ministry of Tourism's M'dinti and Qariati programs, which aim to diversify the
sector and create additional revenues and job opportunities through new investment and
management models on the empowerment of regions, cities, and local communities.

Strategic Outcome 1.5. Improve the reliability of electricity supply

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help ensure businesses can operate without
interruption, as part of a more competitive economy needed to create employment and boost
shared prosperity.

81. 
To ensure the electricity supply needed to meet the growing demand associated with a
stronger and more competitive economy, while increasing Morocco's energy security by
reducing its exposure to the volatile prices and subsidy burden associated with imported fossil
fuels, the WBG will support ONEE's efforts to strengthen its power transmission grid through
the ongoing ONEE Support Project, as well as Morocco's strategic development of renewable
energy capacity (see Results Area 3), regional 
integration efforts, and potential IFC
investments in the energy sector. MIGA will see to support eligible foreign investors in
renewable energy through traditional political risk insurance and new products (see para 116).

Strategic Outcome 1.6. Better match skills developed through higher education or vocational
training with the needs of the job market

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help create employment for young people and is linked
to the goal of shared prosperity

82. 
Skills training. The Skills and Employment DPL (SEDP) series, launched in FY12 and
whose second operation 
is planned for FY14, supports the Government's program of
improving skills, productivity, and quality of employment. The CPS will support efforts to
enhance the quality and relevance of higher education and vocational training through
assistance in implementing the reforms initiated under the SEDP series, as well as TA to the

22

establishment of the "Agence d'valuation universitaire" and the participation of Moroccan
universities in the CMI University Regional Network to support governance reforms. The
WBG plans to support the implementation of the new vocational training strategy that is under
preparation, aiming to develop a training system that better responds to labor market needs and
offering additional opportunities, especially to disadvantaged youth and women, through TA
and possibly lending. The Bank will support the Government in gaining tools to monitor jobs
and skills offerings 
through a National Labor Observatory, and the IFC will support
improvements in employment-based education offerings at a sectoral level. Through the E4E
Initiative for Arab Youth, IFC will work with the AMDL and the Ministry of Tourism to put in
place sector-specific labor observatories that will complement the National Labor Observatory.
Furthermore, IFC will work with the Ministry of Tourism to refine the sector's existing
qualification 
framework 
and 
design 
a 
training 
program 
to 
improve 
the
management/administration of education providers in the sector. The E4E Initiative also
focuses on providing high quality training to youth, in order to fill their skill gap and prepare
them better for the job market, as well as enhancing their career opportunities.

83. Micro-entrepreneurship. Through a DTF TA operation (FY14), the Bank will
continue to help disadvantaged youth receive micro-entrepreneurship development services
and to assist in strengthening the institutional capacity of national and local stakeholders,
including civil society organizations that work with young people. The Bank will provide
technical support to the Government in preparing and implementing an Integrated National
Youth Strategy and establishing a Consultative Council for Youth, which aims to strengthen
youth participation in policy decisions that affect them directly.

84. 
Revenue-generating activities. The Bank's flagship PforR operation supporting the
second phase of the National Human Development Initiative (INDH2) works through local
governments and community-driven development to promote services and income-generating
activities in poor areas, including for young people and women, while increasing local
communities' participation in decision making. Similarly, the IGG DPL series will promote
investments aimed at diversifying revenues and job opportunities in rural areas.

Strategic Outcome 1.7. Improve access to and effectiveness of social protection programs,
especially for youth

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help ensure that social protection reaches the most
vulnerable, to reduce poverty.

85. 
Active Labor Market Programs. The Bank will continue to support active labor
market programs for unemployed youth. Through policy dialogue and lending, the Bank plans
to support the reform agenda of the national employment and skills promotion agency
(ANAPEC), based on a four-pillar policy framework: (i) developing results-based PPPs; (ii)
improving the effectiveness of labor intermediation; (iii) developing results-based monitoring
and evaluation frameworks; and (iv) promoting entrepreneurship/self-employment, on-the-job
training, and life skills training among job seekers. Lending in outer years of the CPS period
could include an operation focused on youth employment opportunities. To offer opportunities
for less formal learning and lower barriers to labor market entry, including geographic
boundaries, time flexibility, and home-based work, the Bank will continue to support ICT
solutions and innovative ideas such as ICT-enabled micro-work (such as employing people
with limited opportunities for sustainable employment as principal workers in BPO centers,
and shifting simple outsourcing work from cities to poor rural areas for cost reduction).

23

86. 
Employment regulations. To prepare the ground for a more favorable regulatory
framework for employment creation in the formal sector (notably for youth and women), the
Bank will engage with the Government to identify reform options in the areas of labor
regulation, labor taxation, and wage-setting mechanisms (including minimum wage policy).

87. 

Social protection programs and policies. The Bank will continue to provide analytical
support on subsidies and the social protection system through a Social Protection ESW and
TA, pension TA, and poverty ESW. The Social Protection TA envisions developing the
Government's technical capacity to improve efficiency in the delivery of social safety nets by:
(i) finding alternatives to develop a national methodology to target poor households, and (ii)
proposing options to develop a unified registry of beneficiaries of social assistance programs.
Analytical work and TA on subsidies and social protection systems will continue to inform
policies to improve the targeting of beneficiaries of social safety nets and will inform the
preparation of a possible Social Protection P4R (FY16/17). Likewise, analytical work and TA
on youth inclusion will inform the design of a possible Youth and Employment Support
operation (FY16/17). The INDH2 project remains a critical pillar of the social protection
system being supported by the Bank and is expected to show good results during the CPS
period. Analytical work on gender will inform the policy dialogue on promoting the inclusion
of women, as well as the integration of gender considerations in development policy and
programs.

Results Area 2: Buildin! a Green and Resilient Future

88. 
Under this Results Area, the WBG will support Morocco's efforts to: (i) increase
the efficiency and sustainability of natural resource use, and (ii) mitigate the economy's
vulnerability to natural hazards. Poor and vulnerable groups are known to be more impacted
by common goods problems and environmental externalities. Measures aimed at improving the
sustainability of natural assets and environmental stewardship are key to ensuring equity and
shared prosperity, including from an inter-generational perspective. The WBG will support
policies and measures that enhance the management of natural assets to sustain the growth of
key sectors, including through strengthened management of soil, coastal, and water resources;
more rational production and utilization of energy; increased use of renewable energy and
resource efficiency; and more integrated and effective mechanisms to prevent and mitigate
against natural disasters and the effects of climate change.

Strategic Outcome 2.1. Strengthen management of soil, coastal, and water resources

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help ensure that natural resources are used in a
sustainable manner and is linked to both reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

89. 
Land and coastal management. Consistent with the Government's objective of
encouraging growth that is less costly for the environment, the Bank will continue to promote
industrial depollution, better soil management, integrated coastal management, and enhanced
and adapted agriculture techniques and knowledge through the ongoing GEF-financed Social
ASIMA, GIZC, PICCPMV projects, as well as through the IGG DPL series.

90. Water resources. The Bank will continue to promote wastewater treatment and reuse.
Additionally, in the context of both ongoing and new lending support to the water sector, the
Bank will support nonrevenue water reduction, desalination, and access to improved sanitation.

24

91. 
Climate change. In line with Morocco's green growth agenda, the Bank will continue
to support the analysis of climate change impacts through TA and programmatic ESW, as well
as TA on mining sector reform.

Strategic Outcome 2.2. Increase renewable energy generation and enhance energy efficiency

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help ensure that scarce resources are invested more
sustainably in the energy sector and is linked to both reducing poverty and boosting shared
prosperity.

92. 
Renewable energy. In the context of Morocco's intent to reduce its dependence on
fossil fuels, development of the country's vast renewable energy resource potential remains a
top priority for the Government. Morocco's new energy strategy targets a renewable energy
capacity of 42 percent by 2020. To maintain the momentum behind Morocco's Solar Plan, and
building upon the success of the first phase of the 500W Ouarzazate concentrated solar plant
(Noor I) project, together with the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), and many other donors, the
WBG intends to support the Moroccan Agency for Solar Energy's strategy for developing the
remaining 350 MW of the solar complex through the Noor II & III project (FY15). On top of
its own financing, the WBG will help mobilize additional concessional financing (notably
through CTF funding for Concentrated Solar Power), and IFC will seek to increase private
sector participation in the implementation of future phases of the Solar Plan. A Partnership for
Market Readiness Grant (FY15) will support the establishment of national systems to measure
and manage greenhouse gas emissions in different sectors. The Bank also intends to support
the Government in pursuing regional collaboration opportunities with Maghreb and EU
countries. The country's ambitious move to greater renewable energy use requires further
reinforcement of the power system to enable 
it to absorb large amounts of renewable
generation while meeting growing demand. In that context, the Bank proposes to assist ONEE,
as operator of the power system, in coping with potential grid instability from integrating wind
and solar power at a large scale without corresponding investments through a Clean and
Efficient Energy lending project (FY15) aiming at optimizing the dispatch.

93. 
Energy efficiency. The Government has set an ambitious target of 12 percent energy
efficiency savings by 2020. Rapid growth in electricity demand has strained the operation of
existing power generation and transmission assets, leading to damaging network congestion.
To alleviate the concentration of peak coincidence of electric loads, and thus to avoid the costly
investment and heavy carbon footprint associated with additional generation, the WBG
proposes to support policy measures and investments that encourage reductions in electricity
consumption during times of peak electricity demand. This support would be provided through
the Clean and Efficient Energy project. The IGG DPL series will continue to support
institutional reforms in the energy sector through the creation of an energy regulator and
revision of the legislative framework for renewable energy. During FY14-16, IFC's advisory
services will focus on resource efficiency, namely on the implementation of projects with a
number of agribusiness companies and provision of a sector-tailored guidance manual to scale
up the adoption of cleaner production technologies through relevant aggregators (such as
industrial associations). IFC also intends to implement resource efficiency projects with a
number of companies in various sectors in the industrial zone in Casablanca. Finally, IFC will
identify technologies with high resource efficiency potential per industrial sector and design
business model(s) for wider uptake in the market.

25

Strategic Outcome 2.3. Better integrate mechanisms to prevent and mitigate against natural
disasters

Link to twin goals: This outcome will help mitigate the impact of natural disasters -- which
disproportionately affect the poor -- and is linked to the goal of reducing poverty.

94. 
The Bank plans to support the Government's efforts to consolidate, modernize, and
expand existing risk prevention and mitigation initiatives into an integrated risk management
strategy and program, through an Integrated Risk Management Support PforR (FY15). The
new project would build on many years of Bank-led analytical work and technical assistance,
with support from key donors, including the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation.
TA on climate change adaptation in rural roads is also being prepared.

Results Area 3: Stren!thenin! Governance and Institutions for Improved Service
Delivery to All Citizens

95. 
Under this Results Area, the WBG will support activities to: (i) strengthen public
sector governance and institutional capacity, and (ii) improve access to basic and quality
services for all citizens. The WBG will support policies and interventions that promote a more
open and inclusive governance framework, more transparent and accountable management of
public resources, and more effective and equitable delivery of basic and quality services to all
Moroccans across the public sector. Access to basic public services is central to sustained
poverty reduction and to promoting shared prosperity as the poorest segments of the population
are particularly dependent on these services for their social and economic well-being.

Strategic Outcome 3.1. Support more open and inclusive governance ensuring effective
rights for citizens to access information and to petition government

Link to twin goals: This outcome is linked to both boosting shared prosperity and reducing
poverty.

96. Morocco's new constitution has strengthened the principles of open governance and
introduced new citizen rights, such as the right to information (article 27) and the right to
petition and to propose legislative motions (articles 14 and 15) 
in order to foster more
participatory democracy. These rights now need to be translated into specific policies and
implemented. The Government has undertaken reforms to increase fiscal transparency and
public access to information, including through the publication of draft laws and regulations
prior to consideration for adoption. To improve voice and citizen engagement, the Government
has launched a national dialogue for the implementation of the constitutional provisions on
citizen participation. The Bank is directly supporting these policies, including a draft law on
public petitions, a public consultations policy, and the law on access to information, through a
Transparency and Accountability (Hakama) programmatic DPL series, launched in FY14, and
associated TA. The Bank is supporting demand for social accountability through a multi-
stakeholder working group on e-participation and through the Global Partnership for Social
Accountability (GPSA), which Morocco joined in 2013. Design and implementation of the
new budget reform and citizen engagement policies will be supported by a New Governance
Framework Implementation Support TA (FY14), financed by a DTF. INDH2 will contribute to
this objective 
through 
its emphasis on inclusive 
local development, notably 
through
community participation of women and youth and enhanced social accountability mechanisms
targeting program beneficiaries.

26

97. 
To ensure better and wider governance of service delivery, and of its accountability
framework 
in particular, citizens and their representatives need more opportunities 
to
participate in the planning, organization, management, and control of service provision,
making 
the decision-making process more 
transparent. Combined with 
the ongoing
decentralization process, greater participation allows citizens to play a real role in public
policy. Entry points include enhancing access to water supply and sanitation, including in rural
areas (through the FY14 Second Rural Water Supply project) and improving the quality of
public transportation services (through the FY15 Urban Transport PforR operation).

Strategic Outcome 3.2. Enable more transparent and accountable management of public
resources through budget and procurement reforms

Link to twin goals: This outcome of improving effectiveness of public spending is linked to
reducing poverty.

98. 
To help the Government carry a more strategic budget policy, increase the allocative
and operational efficiency of public spending, and improve fiscal transparency, accountability,
and the focus on performance, the WBG will support reforms such as the introduction of
programmatic, multiannual, and performance-based budgeting; a new legal framework for
PPPs aimed at leveraging private investments, expertise, and competition; and a modernized
public procurement framework that strengthens the management of public resources through
unified regulation, introduction of grievance mechanisms, increase use of e-procurement, and
institutional and capacity building. In addition, the WBG will support the move toward a more
strategic and less systematic ex-ante control system (financial control) together with increased
reliance on ex-post controls (internal and external audits). Likewise, the WBG will seek to help
improve the efficiency of public investments and the effectiveness of public services by
strengthening the governance of SOEs and agencies, and the implementation of the new code
for SOE governance in priority sectors. Some of the reforms supported will contribute to
Strategic Outcome 3.3. by improving the capacity and management of public services. This
support will be provided through a Transparency and Accountability DPL series ("Hakama")
(FY14) in close coordination with the EU and the African Development Bank (AfDB), a DTF-
funded New Governance Framework TA (FY14), and an IDF-funded TA. A Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment will be undertaken jointly with the EU
and AfDB to update the analytical underpinnings of the large public financial management
reform program and to assess progress to date.

99. 
Through the above-mentioned governance program, the Bank will assist in modernizing
the management of local finances and intergovernmental fiscal relations. This entails a revision
of the system for financial transfers to local governments, with a view to strengthening the
legal framework, making the rules more transparent, and enhancing the impact of transfers, in
line with the Government's regionalization strategy. In parallel, financial management
information systems will be strengthened by extending the integrated expenditure management
system to municipalities.

27

Strategic Outcome 3.3. Improve capacity to plan, manage, and assess the delivery of key
services, especially at the local level

Link to twin goals: This outcome of improving public service delivery is linked to both
reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

100. 
Sector-specific services. Strengthening the capacity of municipalities and improving
their services is critical to delivering good-quality services to all citizens. Despite recent
achievements, additional efforts are needed to enhance governance, particularly on the demand
side, in sectors such as transport and SWM by improving accountability, transparency, and
access to information, and by providing citizens and civil society with new and effective
opportunities for engagement and voice while reducing disparities in the quality of and access
to services. To achieve these goals, the WBG will continue its support to the SWM sector
through a Fourth Municipal Solid Waste Management DPL (FY15) aimed at extending access
to and improving the quality of SWM services, as well as support to the urban transport sector
through a PforR operation (FY15) to improve coordination, quality, and access in urban
transportation with the aim of creating more sustainable and livable cities, connecting people to
opportunities, and reducing congestion and emissions from personal cars and taxis. The
ongoing Judicial Performance Enhancement for Service to Citizens Project will contribute to
this objective by strengthening the institutional capacities of the Ministry of Justice and
Liberties and improving the transparency and effectiveness of its services to citizens and
businesses.

101. Local government capacity. In addition to sector-specific reforms, there is a need to
strengthen the overall institutional and technical capacity of local governments. The Local
Government Support Program (Programme d'Appui aux Collectivits Territoriales, PACT)
(FY14), financed by the DTF, aims to leverage the economies of scale inherent in municipal
cooperation by establishing: (i) support centers to provide TA to local governments in
preparing and managing public service projects; and (ii) municipal groupings allowing
municipalities to build capacity to better invest in, manage, and operate the services they have
been mandated to provide to their constituents, whether directly or by contracting private
operators. The Bank will scale up its support to the Government's effort to strengthen local
government service delivery capacity through potential PforR financing (FY16) while
continuing 
to strengthen 
local governments' 
role 
in 
including communities 
through
participatory planning and avenues for voice and accountability through its ongoing support to
the INDH program. MIGA is looking to support a foreign investment into an integrated utility
service provider at the municipal level.

102. Education. The Bank will sustain the support provided to the education Emergency
Plan and the associated wave of reforms being defined by the Government through wide
consultations, together with other development partners. Going forward, TA and lending
support will have a stronger focus on improving the quality, equity, and governance of
education, particularly through supporting the acquisition of basic skills in early grades and
more effective 
teacher policies; consolidating and improving the efficiency of subsidy
programs targeting rural and disadvantaged areas; and improving the governance of the
education system by building the capacity of the regional academies and providing support to
school-based management mechanisms.

103. Health. To support the Government's program for expanding equitable access to
primary health services and improving the quality and distribution of health human resources
to needed regions, and to address governance issues and gaps in the health management

28

information system (HMIS), the Bank proposes a Health Sector PforR (FY15), underpinned by
a recent health public expenditure tracking survey and public expenditure review. The HMIS,
also supported though a MENA Multidonor Trust Fund (MDTF) grant, will strengthen health
sector officials' capacity to plan and provide health care access to more people across the
country, and 
improve service efficiency by making health 
information available 
to
policymakers and the public in a transparent manner. To further support health sector reforms,
the Bank is considering another complementary lending operation and additional TA in the
outer years.

104. E-government. In order to improve service delivery by reducing the redundancy in
Morocco's development effort and increase the efficiency of overall government service
delivery, 
the Bank will consider assisting the e-government agenda by ensuring that
government services, datasets, and infrastructure are shared and mutually utilized, based on
coherently defined interoperability.

Strategic Outcome 3.4. Expand access 
to basic services (water, sanitation, electricity,
transport, telecommunications, health, education)

Link to twin goals: This outcome of expanded access to services is linked to both reducing
poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

105. 
In order to reduce the outstanding access gap still observed in some areas for some
basic services, efforts still need to be made to extend services such as roads, water supply and
sanitation, electricity, telecommunications (mobile phones, internet, broadband networks
infrastructure), health, and education to underserved areas, particularly in rural and peri-urban
areas. Increasing the rural population's access to all-weather roads through the successful
National Rural Roads program (ongoing and future lending); assisting the efforts of ONEE,
local governments, and municipal service providers in expanding access to water supply and
sanitation services in underserved urban, peri-urban, and rural areas; strengthening access to
reliable power supply in underserved areas, particularly in remote areas and lagging regions,
through the development of renewable energy solutions; improving access to primary health
care services through the Health Sector PforR and TA in support of national consultations that
were initiated with the Second National Health Conference, preparation of a universal health
coverage strategy, and development of a National Health Charter; and enabling basic
telecommunications in remote areas will all constitute a focus of Bank support over the CPS
period.

106. To promote further rural deployment of infrastructure, the Bank envisages TA to
formulate policies and regulations as well as supporting PPPs to catalyze further private
investment, in particular in agro-industry and in trade and commercialization platforms for
farmers.

Crosscuttin! Themes: Gender, Youth, and Voice and Participation

107. The WBG's program will adopt a gender-sensitive approach that takes into
account the role of women and provides them with equal opportunities. Morocco's new
Constitution introduces the principle of gender equality and emphasizes the need to involve
women in the development process. Nevertheless, key indicators show that progress still needs
to be made to strengthen their status and give them equal access to opportunities. In this
respect, the CPS program seeks to promote more emphatically and concretely the gender
agenda throughout WBG-supported activities, including the INDH2 operation. To help track

29

progress in this area, gender-disaggregated indicators will be used in such key areas as
entrepreneurship, revenue-generating activities, skills training, active labor market programs
and access to basic services. A comprehensive Country Gender Assessment (FY14) is expected
to expand the Bank's understanding of challenges faced by women in Morocco and yield
concrete recommendations on how best to support opportunities and services for women. IFC
will complement the WBG's engagement in this area through a strategic and selective
approach, especially through access to finance instrument, looking for opportunities in its
investment and advisory services to improve job creation and empowerment of women and
youth entrepreneurs.

108. No one can deny the challenges faced today by Morocco's young people, one of the
largest and most vulnerable segments of the population. While acknowledged to have the
potential of being a rich and powerful engine of growth, this group is too often left out of
economic opportunities and of the decision-making process around matters that affect it most.
As a complement to the Bank's support for a new coherent and integrated government strategy,
as well as ongoing support to youth representation and participation under the INDH2, youth
challenges will be addressed through sector-specific interventions (such as the education,
employment, or entrepreneurship agendas) with the common goal of seeking to provide young
people with the social and economic opportunities they need to succeed and become productive
contributors to Morocco's future.

109. 
Increased voice and participation are seen as prerequisites for a more inclusive
development process and as a lever for improving the delivery of key public services. The
new Constitution fosters good governance and citizen engagement through enhanced access to
information, participation, and responsibility across all sectors and institutions. While large-
scale initiatives have already been launched in this area, especially around the law on access to
information and policies on public consultation, much still needs to be done to develop the
operational instruments and support the implementation of these new policies across the public
sector in order to inform and shape citizens' voice and establish an adapted space for citizen
participation. This requires support to both the public sector and civil society organizations,
notably through the GPSA.

Implementing the FY14-1 7 Country Partnership Strategy

A. Managing the Program

110. Country demand for the CPS period FY14-FY17 is estimated at up to US$4 billion
(Table 2). The indicative financing program for FY14 is US$1,185 million and is reasonably
firm. Lending volumes in FY15-17 will depend on country performance, IBRD's lending
capacity, demand by other Bank borrowers, and global economic developments. This level of
financing represents a notable increase over the total amount of financing granted during the
previous CPS, which amounted to just under US$2.5 billion. This larger lending envelope
would allow the Bank to pursue a high-case lending scenario to support critical reforms and
investments in public administration reform, accountability and decentralization, employment
support, inclusive green growth, and rural services. This stepped-up engagement would
respond to Morocco's financing demands and enable the authorities to pursue economic
transformation against a backdrop of economic difficulties in Europe, which have dampened
external demand; high international food and fuel prices; and social pressure to create jobs and
deliver on the promises of the new Constitution.

30

111. A greater focus on results and implementation will require a more balanced mix of
instruments. Development policy operations (DPLs), which accounted for 60 percent of total
lending during the last CPS period, have had a proven record of combining policy advice and
support with flexible financing. They are expected to continue to play an important role in
IBRD lending support to Morocco. At the same time, given the Government's shift toward a
more results-centered program and the greater emphasis sought on supporting reform
implementation and institutional capacity building in particular, the share of non-DPL
financing, namely investment lending and PforR lending, is expected to increase to nearly half
of IBRD financing over the CPS period. In particular, greater use of the PforR instrument,
successfully introduced in Morocco in support of the second phase of INDH and particularly
appreciated for its focus on tangible results on the ground, the intensive and continued capacity
building support 
it offers 
throughout 
implementation, and 
its 
flexible disbursement
arrangements, will be considered where most relevant. The timing and composition of IBRD
financing is expected to be managed flexibly, allowing for financing across instruments and
areas of engagement in response to evolving global conditions and country priorities within the
overall envelope.

FY14 

Project Name 

Table 2. Projected IBRD Financing Program FY14-FY17

FY15 

FY16-FY17 (indicative)*

US$m Project Name 

USSm Project Name 

Development Policy Financi q

LUS$m

Accountabitty and Transparency 1 
Inclusive Green Growth 1 
Capital Markets & SME Finance 1 

200 Economic Competitiveness 2 
300 Solid Waste 4 
300 

Skils & Employment 2 

SubToral 

100 
900 

120 
Inclusive Green Growth 2
130 Accountability &Transparency 2 & 3
Gender
Capital Markets & SME Finance 2

Su&Total

Sub-Total 

250 

Program fir Result Financl I

Urban Transport 
Health Sector Modernization 
Integrated Risk Management 

200 
Energy Efficiency
100 Agriculture Modernization
75 
Support to ORDAR Creation
Support to Periurban WSS Service Extension

INDH 3

Local Government Institutional Capacity
Social Protection Reform
Judiciary Reform Implementation
Rural Development Program
lEducation Support

Su&Total 

ONEE support AF 
Rural Roads I AF 
Rural Water Supply 

Sub-Total 

375 

knvestment Project financLnj i

40 
95 

Noor CSP 2-3 
Clean & Efficient Energy 
150 OER "rigation AF 
Early stage entrepreneurship 
Non-Revenue Water 

150 
Youth & Employment Support
125 Rural Road 3
180 Water & Sanitation
50 
Tourism Development
100 

ICTDevelopment

Sub-Total 
TOTAL 

285 

Sub-Total 
TOTAL 

605 
1,230 

Su&Total

Sub-Total
TOTAL

operations proposed for FY16-17 are indicative only, as the program Wit be confirmed at the time of CPS Progress Report

Total Estimated Lending Envelop 4,000

112. AAA will remain a key ingredient of the Bank's strategic support. To optimize the
Bank's knowledge and leverage greater impact on the ground, and in continuation of past
practice, the Bank will selectively use analytical and advisory services, and particularly
programmatic ESW, as an integral part of the implementation of the CPS program, continuing
to inform and support the policy dialogue on reforms and the overall lending and grant
portfolio. Discussions around the planned Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) should

31

help to seek a more integrated view of where Morocco stands on key economic issues. Support
to Morocco's green growth agenda and analysis of the impacts of climate change will continue
through programmatic ESW. Building on past knowledge work,28 a new programmatic ESW
will help to assess and review management models for service delivery, tariff and efficiency
improvements in the water and sanitation sector, and decentralization and integration of the
impacts of climate change in sector policies. Where appropriate, strategic partnerships with
Moroccan counterparts (such as the fruitful ongoing collaboration with HCP on poverty work
and on the ongoing Country Gender Assessment, the envisaged partnership with the Social and
Economic Council of Morocco on the CEM) will be sought. Opportunities to build on
emerging lessons from the country's first fee-based TA will be assessed in due time. The Bank
will continue to be flexible and responsive to other counterpart demands by providing just-in-
time AAA when appropriate.

113. Where opportunities arise, promotion of South-South exchanges will continue.
Given Morocco's own successful, and at 
times pioneering, experience 
in some key
development areas (such as climate change adaptation, integrated natural catastrophe risk
management, reliance on civil society for youth programs, use of the PforR instrument in
support of ambitious national human development programs, and pioneering solar energy
generation models), the WBG will continue to encourage Morocco's sharing of good practices
and successful experiences with other Bank client countries. Promoting South-South
investments will remain an integral part of IFC's strategy in Morocco. Supported by IFC's
program, the expansion of Morocco's banking sector to Sub-Saharan Africa helped partially
offset the impact of the slowdown of the Eurozone. IFC will continue to support Moroccan
regional players and further mobilize resources to increase investments, deepen regional
integration, and expand South-South opportunities, especially into Sub-Saharan Africa.

114. The continued but selective use of grants, trust funds, and partnerships will allow
for complementary and targeted interventions where most relevant. Where feasible, DTF
funding will be sought for larger-scale TA activities that aim to accompany critical reforms or
programs of a truly transformational nature and that require particularly intensive technical
support (such as support to the national governance framework, to local government capacity
building, to the introduction of underserved youth to micro-entrepreneurship, or to the
development of microfinance). GEF funding will be leveraged strategically to complement
operations supporting pilot or innovative initiatives in the area of sustainable development.
Similarly, support to sensitive reforms and groundbreaking analytical work in the social sectors
(such as social protection, subsidy reforms, and health) will continue to rely in part on grant
facilities such as the Japan Social Development Fund and MENA MDTF.

115. 
IFC will continue to increase its support to Morocco with a view to restoring
investor confidence through countercyclical investment support to existing clients and
new firms. The focus will be on financial markets, with equity investments likely representing
the majority of new investments as a means to help the economy through the crisis. IFC will
explore investments in agribusiness, education, aeronautics, renewables, and mining. Through
its advisory services program, IFC will help improve the Moroccan business environment, with
a focus on PPPs in the infrastructure sector. At the same time, IFC will assist businesses in
improving their corporate governance and internal controls, which are vital to attracting
investors.

28 2008-2010 Water PESW

32

116. MIGA 
is open to continuing its support for sustainable projects with high
development 
impact in sectors aligned with the broader WBG strategy. MIGA has
continued to expand its product line by introducing two new products: non-honoring of
sovereign financial obligations (NHSFO) in 2010 and non-honoring of financial obligations of
state-owned enterprises (NHFO-SOE) in 2013. Foreign investments in Morocco, including
projects in the infrastructure and energy sectors, may be eligible for support through these
products. MIGA will strive to ensure that eligible investments avail themselves of these new
products to support foreign investments. MIGA's client base has expanded and now includes
equity investors, lenders and capital market investors. MIGA will reach out to such potential
clients, including through business development missions. Notwithstanding the new products,
MIGA will continue to support investors interested in Morocco through traditional political
risk 
insurance, 
including 
through 
its Small 
Investment Program. Supporting foreign
investments into Morocco is in line with MIGA's MENA Initiative, according to which MIGA
has mobilized up to US$1 billion in capacity for new guarantees for cross-border investments
into the MENA region. Working together with IFC, MIGA will continue to support Morocco's
efforts to attract foreign private investors, including South-based and regional investors,
through the provision of guarantees for noncommercial risk. MIGA also stands ready to
support Moroccan investors and banks seeking to expand their operations in developing
economies.

B. Portfolio and Pipeline Management

117. Morocco's lending portfolio, totaling US$1.2 billion as of January 2014, consists of
one PforR operation with a commitment of US$300 million, and 9 investment operations,
with commitments totaling $945 million and an undisbursed balance of US$556 million.
While this undisbursed balance may appear high, it should be noted that close to 40 percent of it
is driven by an atypical project, the US$200 million Noor I CSP project, whose financing
profile will, by design, only lead to disbursements toward the end of the project's life (FY16).
The remaining balance is explained by a combination of new operations, some of them
involving new partners, and a few investment operations faced with challenging land acquisition
administrative procedures. Though still falling short of expectations, overall disbursement
improved somewhat over the past two years, with a FY13 disbursement ratio reaching 12.1
percent.

118. 
IFC scaled up its engagement in Morocco during the last CPS period. Since
January 2011, IFC has invested a total of US$590 million, including mobilization through its
subsidiary, IFC Asset Management Company (AMC), as well as cross-border investments.
IFC's investment portfolio has grown and has reached almost US$ 396 million in 16 companies
(end-February 2014). IFC had a record year in FY13 with annual commitments increasing to
about US$272 million (including mobilization). This increase was driven by a large equity
investment of US$204 million 
in Banque Centrale Populaire (BCP) 
to support 
the
Government's reforms of the banking sector through BCP's increased lending to SMEs and
expansion into Sub-Saharan Africa. Furthermore, IFC committed over US$300 million of
investments in South-South projects during the past three years. In FY13, IFC also made an
equity investment of US$7 million in the education sector. 
In FY14 thus far, IFC has
committed a total of US$ 133 million in social housing, agribusiness, funds, and MSME
support. In addition, IFC has been scaling up its advisory work in the areas of microfinance,
SME banking, corporate governance, investment climate, energy efficiency, public-private
partnerships in infrastructure and skills development for the youth as part of the regional E4E
Initiative for the Arab Youth.

33

119. Over the course of the last CPS, the Bank successfully introduced the new PforR
instrument to Morocco in the context of its support to the second phase of the INDH
program. In addition 
to focusing on results, strengthening 
institutional capacity and
governance, and optimizing coordination among partners, the new instrument responded to the
Government's request for greater use of country systems. It is anticipated that several areas of
support under the new CPS will benefit from this instrument.

120. Key stakeholders will be involved more proactively and better prepared to
implement new lending operations and grant-funded activities. The recent past has seen
recurring slow disbursements in some investment lending activities and a majority of grant-
funded operations. Following the recommendations of a June 2013 country fiduciary forum in
Rabat, a more proactive and integrated approach to portfolio management has been initiated, in
close collaboration with Moroccan counterparts. It ensures that all stakeholders with direct
involvement in implementation are brought on board and together much earlier during project
preparation, so that key steps such as proper budgeting, setup of payment mechanisms and
clarification of roles can be secured before effectiveness. In addition, a more systematic
application of the existing but still little-known "green circuit" procedures2 9 for activities funded
under donor grants, which allow for lighter and more ex-post financial controls in the
Government's management of funds, is being sought. Another positive development for the
auditing of Bank-financed projects is the agreement obtained to progressively migrate auditing
responsibilities from the Inspection Generale des Finances to the Cour des Comptes, which is
also mandated to carry out such functions and whose independence has been strengthened by
the new Constitution.

C. Partnerships and Donor Coordination

121. Articulation of donor strategies for support to the Moroccan Government is often
in sync, sharing similar areas of focus and strategic objectives. Alignment of donor
programs with government priorities will continue to be strong. This is especially true around
ongoing or new budget support operations (such as Hakama, IGG, SEDP2), but it also applies
to ongoing and envisaged results-based lending programs (including INDH, health, agriculture,
and urban transport) as well as investment lending operations, where possible (for example, the
Noor I CSP project and support to the national rural roads program). In addition to seeking
joint synergies (such as with the EU when supporting health and governance reforms, with the
Agence Frangaise de Developpement (AFD) on the employment agenda, or with AfDB and the
EU on a new Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment), the Bank will step
up its engagement in key areas where other donors withdraw due to their own strategic
realignment (as with the AFD in the health sector). Close and effective donor coordination will
continue through regular thematic meetings held locally at the technical level, through the more
strategic exchanges with in-country representations or visiting officials from headquarters, or
through numerous interactions sought around joint operations, from the exploratory phase of
preparation phase through implementation.

IV. MANAGING RISKS

122. Economic, social, and external risks. A fragile global environment, characterized by
an uncertain economic recovery in Europe and volatile economic conditions in many emerging
markets, create downside risks to Morocco's trade position, economic growth, and fiscal
performance, as well as to the pace of financing the country's investments. Adhering to sound

29 Decree N 2-07-1235 of 5 Kaada 1429 (November 4, 2008).

34

macroeconomic management-including reining in spending-and accelerating reforms to
boost Morocco's competitiveness and revenues will help reduce its vulnerability to external
shocks and mitigate the risk of a narrowing fiscal space with limited policy options. The
Bank's program is designed to support the authorities in undertaking reforms critical to
strengthening the country's trade position and competitiveness, and to increase the fiscal space
through reforms and fast-disbursing resources. Morocco will remain under tremendous
domestic pressure to maintain generous social programs and will need to raise awareness and
communicate widely regarding the objectives of wage, subsidy, and social safety net reforms to
bolster broad-based support. CPS outcomes which would be most at risk are associated with
improving the business environment, social protection programs and strengthening governance.
The WBG is supporting these efforts through the DPL and TA activities discussed in the CPS
document. The program's flexible design will allow for adjustments to Bank support in line
with the pace of reforms, as needed. Should the environment for the private sector deteriorates
significantly, IFC will stand ready to provide selective and high impact countercyclical support
to help existing and new clients continue their business operations and maintain their
workforces.

123. Political risks. Implementation of the CPS and the achievement of proposed outcomes,
particularly under Results Areas 1 and 3, are predicated on the coalition government's
adherence to the ambitious reforms set out in its program and mandated by the new
Constitution. Any reduction in the depth and scope of those reforms would directly affect the
CPS program, especially the delivery of the envisaged DPL operations and the proposed scale
up in lending support. The WBG will maintain a close dialogue with the authorities and other
stakeholders and continue to provide TA aimed at improving the knowledge base and
understanding of policy options for the reform program, in particular for sensitive or complex
reforms supported by the CPS program, such as subsidies, social protection, decentralization,
competitiveness, transparency, and employment promotion.

124. Program coordination risks. Given the shift toward more transversal and multi-sector
programs supported by the WBG under the CPS, there is a risk of weak coordination among
the many government actors supporting implementation, which could in turn lead to delays in
preparation and implementation of such operations. To manage such risk, the Bank will work
closely with its partners to establish consensus and define clear roles and responsibilities in line
with each agency's mandate and technical expertise. This will be particularly critical for the
delivery of the envisaged PforR operations, which involve multiple stakeholders and are
particularly critical to achieving outcomes across all three Results Areas.

125. 
Implementation risks. Land acquisition and compensation issues played a role in
delaying preparation and implementation of investment operations under the previous CPS.
Given the continued reliance on investment projects, especially to achieve the outcomes under
Results Area 3, and the opportunity for lending scale up under the CPS, the Bank has launched
a review of these and other safeguards issues and is discussing a program for resolving them
with the authorities. Success of some of the analytical work supported by the CPS (for
example, the planned Country Gender Assessment) relies heavily on official data. The Bank
will pursue close collaboration with relevant government counterparts to ensure that such data
can be made available where possible and to reduce the risk of weakening the credibility and
impact of such work.

35

Annex 1 : Summary MOROCCO CPS Selectivity, WBG Development Solutions and Impact on WBG Goals

Theme 1: Promoting Competitive and Inclusive Growth 

The WBG will support the Government of Morocco in its efforts to achieve a more

competitive economy in which the benefits of growth are shared by all.

Poet 

Sh.rs

Structural economic transformation, including trade and exchange rate 

1. Enhance the 
policies to support competitiveness and integration in global value chains. 
business environment 
Business environment more conducive to supporting micro, small and 
with a more supportive medium enterprises (MSMEs); regulation and payroll taxes favorable to 
institutional
framework for 
businesswetry, rade 
facilittiossentandtr 

Programmatic and multi-sector knowledge and convening services
supporting implementation of reform and modernizations initiatives.
IBRD funding to increase economic competitiveness; IFC investment

Low 

High

High 

High

____

im 

ets 

development 

implementation of policy reforms related to investment climate; change of on trade and integration, ICTs', value chain improvements in
pooeadnmclbrfreadceto 
ffra 
mlyet 
nfnnilmres 
elsco n SE ud.W nweg
regulatory framework to reduce dominant positions and unfair competition 
agriculture. IFC's advisory services to support investment climate 
in sectors such as ICT; heavy administrative burden and lack of 
reforms and corporate governance project
transparency; public agencies' coordination to reduce the gap between the
laws and their application
Capital markets are not sufficiently developed, which impedes the 
comotenss 
labo fca 
creatio fomakmarket 
ftefnaca etr 
iesf 
fo 
akn ocptl 
p 
y acout 
te 
tninves 
cimal 
a 
ng 

2. Improve access to 
finance, with a 
particular focus on low 
income households, 
micro, small and 
young firms, and youth SMEs lack access to finance and need support to grow, formalize and 
and women 
become sustainable and create better employment opportunities 

BG programmatic and integrated approach to facilitate capital 
development, entrereeneurship and SME development,
inpttvns 
.cluding 
through corporate governance. Additional support for
microenterprises, microfinance institutions, and improve the enabling Average High
environment, including with a new procurement framework enabling 
greater participation and transparency. FC's investment services
directly in financial intermediaries, private equity funds targeting
high-growth SMEs, and through microfinance institutions to provide
access to finance mostly to women and youth.
3. Increase the 
Clearer legal framework for water resource, including governance and non- Bank and IFC financing to support improvements in financial sector
productivity and value- conventional water resources; irrigation modernization, 
through IBRD financing and IFC investments in financial markets, 
added of the agri-food More efficient and modernized agriculture sector. Agriculture's higher 
banks, insurance, SME funds and microfinance. Bank and IFC work 
sector 
value added, including local processing of products. 
on youth and women micro-entrepreneurship.
Integrated rural development: diversify economic opportunities to improve Programmatic and multi-sector knowledge and convening services
incomes in rural areas, promoting decentralization and transfer of 
supporting implementation of reform and modernizations initiatives.
responsibilities to local development associations and producer 
IBRD funding to increase green growth and modernize water and

4. Better leverage the 
socio-economic 

ge High
Hihig

High 

High

to 

potential of integrated 

organizations to empower them 

rural development and Diversification of the tourism sector to create additional revenues and job 
of tourism 
opportunities through new investment and management models on the 
empowerment of regions, cities, and local communities. 
Ensure electricity supply meets the growing demand for a more 
copensu 
e ecctouy 
ectsonofexposureo 
the m 
competitive economy. Reduction of exposure to the volatile prices and 
subsidy burden associated with imported fossil fuels. 

5. Improve reliability 
5.Imroe elabliy 
of electricity supply. 

energy sectors. fiFC investment in agribusiness and education. GEF 

High 

contribution to knowledge (agriculture and coastal management). IFC
Advisory on irrigation PPP projects and E4E for logistics and tourism.
Collaboration with DPs.
WBG support ONEE's efforts to strengthen its power transmission
grid and strategic development of renewable energy capacity, regional High 
inerto.fot,adpoeta 
F 
netet 
inighenegyseghr
integration efforts, and potential IFC investments m the energy sector.

6. Better match skills 
developed through 
higher education or 
vocational training 
with the needs of the 
job market 

Low skilled/lack of proper skills of labor force; labor regulations and
payroll taxes do not promote a dynamic labor force and the creation of 
Programmatic and multi-sector knowledge and convening services
formal employment; limited voice and economic opportunities for young 
supporting implementation of reform and modernization initiatives for
people and women; insufficient economic growth rate to reduce 
skills and employment, education, gender, and inclusive green growth. High 
unemployment; limited diversification of job opportunities, particularly in Bank and IFC work supporting employment creation through trainings
rural areas; women and youth still marginalized from the economic and 
and skills enhancement activities. Collaboration with DPs.
decision making process; poor quality of IGA and weak capacities of the

MIGA to engage with foreign investors in renewable energy.

poor to implement them

36

High

High

High

7. Improve access to 
and effectiveness of 
social protection 
programs, especially 

for youth 

Strong disparities in accessing to social and economic opportunities and 
services; pronounced urban-rural disparities; lack of efficient and well- 
targeted subsidy program for a more effective impact and support to 
disadvantaged and excluded population. 

Theme 2: Building a Green and Resilient Future 

Programmatic and multi-sector knowledge and convening services
supporting labor market programs, revisions of employment 
regulations, and social protection program and policies (including
through and results-based instruments, and Bank's knowledge work

on cash transfers, poverty and gender assessment).

The WBG will support Morocco's efforts to (i) increase the
efficiency and sustainability of natural resource use, and (ii)
mitigate the economy's vulnerability to natural hazards

High 

High

1. Strengthen 
management of soil, 
coastal and water 
resources 

Unsustainable use of natural resources, including coastal water
management (salinization of aquifers, water supply issues, loss of
biodiversity, and ecologically sensitive areas, particularly in the northeast 
Programmatic and multi-sector knowledge and convening services 
coast with erosion and sea level rise). Poor and vulnerable households are 
supporting inclusive green growth, rural and regional water supply
more affected by these challenges and mitigating them has a greater impact systems, and modernization of irrigation and desalinization systems.
on prospects for the poor 
GEF support to social and integrated agriculture, integrated coastal
Land degradation contributes to small farmers' poverty, marginalization, 
zone management, and integrating Climate Change practices. IFC 
and overall environmental degradation. 
Advisory on Water PPP projects.

High 

High

High 

Low

High 

Low

2. Increase renewable 
energy generation and 
enhance energy 
efficiency 

Inefficient use of water for irrigation leads to wasted resources 
High dependence on fossil fuel at high cost to scarce public resources that
could otherwise be invested in programs and services for the poor; 
difficulties to absorb large amount of renewable generation while meeting 
increasing energy demand; lack of development of a sustainable renewable 
energy capacity; energy insecurity, lack of access for to all Moroccan 
households and businesses due to competitive prices.
Lack of clear strategies/actions to mitigate natural hazards and their impact
mitiatin mehansmson: highly populated urban areas (including in hazard prone areas), the
mitigation ua 
economy and agriculture. A fragmented approach to risk management has 
dgistnturs 
been less effective than a comprehensive integrated approach would be. 

l 

3. Better integrate 

prevention and 

disasters

Programmatic knowledge, technical assistance and convening services
to improve green growth through clean energy (solar and wind) and 
energy efficiency management. IFC Advisory on resource
efficiency/clean techs.

Average 

High

Programmatic knowledge, technical assistance and conveng services

to develop an integrated risk management approach in line with 
adaptation to climate change, and with mitigation strategies.

High 

Average

Theme 3: Strengthening Governance and Institutions for Improved Service Delivery to All 
Citizens 

The WBG will support activities to (i) strengthen public sector
governance and institutional capacity, and (ii) improve access
to basic and quality services for all citizens.

1. A Support a more 
Government faces challenges in delivering the governance and institutional
open and inclusive 
reforms promised under the new constitution. These reforms would
governance framework 
improve delivery of social, economic and infrastructure services on which Combination of financial and programmatic knowledge initiatives. 
through effective rights the poor and vulnerable rely the most. 
Financing to support overall and sector-specific improvements in
for citizens to access 
Lack of transparency and participation in the formulation of public policies accountability and transparency through projects and other activities.
information and 
has led to policies and actions that do not always adequately respond to 
petition government 
issues they seek to resolve
2. Enable a more 
Urgent need to improve public sector governance, including increasing
transparent and 
accountability and transparency public resource management to deliver
accountable
management of public 
better public services to citizens, in particular the poorest and most 
ranes 
e Throuhic 
underserved; need to enhance fiscal transparency and efficiency for 

IBRD) financing for accountability and transparency operations. 
Knowledge support including with work with DPs.

Average 

Average

Average Average

High 

Low

budget and 
budge 
andcommunities.
procurement reform

spending to have greatest impact for citizens, in particular poor and rural

37

Municipalities with low capacity to deliver services and economies of scale
are not leveraged to address urban growth challenges; improved 
Combination of financial, programmatic, and knowledge services to
governance and effectiveness of public service delivery at national and 
support accountability, transparency, and justice initiatives both at
local level. Institutional arrangements for inter-municipal cooperation to be 
local and central level - and encompassing sectors (health, education, 
adopted in metropolitan areas; inertia in trying new service delivery models transport, water, etc).
to serve inter-municipal challenges. Inefficient & nontransparent public

High 

High

administration processes.

3. Improve capacity to 
plan, manage and 
assess key service 
delivery, especially at 
local level. 

4. Expand access to 

basic services (water, 

Rural areas have less access to services, affecting in particular poorest 

communities 

Programmatic and multi-sector knowledge and convening services
accessibility to services, water and waste management, and transport -

supporting implementation of projects aiming to support education,

High 

Low

sanitation, transport, Disparities in access to lower secondary education; high repetition and 

telecommunications, 
health, education). 

dropouts; and low quality of education 
-- and governance aspects
dropouts;_and_low_quality_of_education_--_and_governance_aspects

Note: The above assessment identifies whether WBG interventions have a high, average or low expected impact on income poverty or on the access to any of the basic
needs that are reflected in the multi-dimensional poverty assessment. A high value represents areas where the initial expected direct impact could be on both the income
side and the access to basic needs. In other words, this refers to strategic areas on which WBG interventions could have a direct impact on "extreme poverty", defined as
population with monetary income below the 'minimum welfare' line and with at least three deprivations. An average value reflects areas where the initial impact could
be either on the income side or on the access to basic needs. Finally, a low value refers to areas that may not necessarily have an expected direct impact on the income or
the basic needs sides (i.e. a direct impact on the extreme poor).

Shared prosperity focuses on income growth of the bottom 40 % of the population; 'average' or 'low' indicates the WBG's impact on economic growth in general. 'High'
indicates impact on specific target groups within the bottom 40%.

38

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 
2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)

Annex 2: Morocco CPS Results Framework (FY14-17)

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

Result Area 1: Promoting Competitive and Inclusive Growth
1.1 Enhance the business environment with a more supportive institutional framework for business entry, trade facilitation and SME Development

Business Environment 
Key administrative business procedures 
Key 
simplified and standardized by CNEA 
(number) 
Baseline: 20 
TreIndicative 

R 

lar: poEconomic 

Trade Facilitation 

Regular production amFC 

performance and monitoring indicators 
from PORTNET, including e.g. indicators 
of transit time 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes

Business Environment 
e The public-private National Commission for Business Economic Competitiveness (DPF)
Environment (CNEA) adopts annual reform programs 
and publishes them with an evaluation of reform 
impacts

MSME Development (IPF)
1FC Investments in Financial Markets, Real Sector and SME
Funds

On-going Financing

New Financing
Competitiveness 2(DPF)

Entrepreneurship FundaPF)

applicable administrative forms to businesses and 
citizens has been formally established
f Key authorities concerned (tax, OMPIC, trade 
register, CNSS) use the common business identifier 

ofpteAgency(TA) " IF caacit 
buldin ofMorocanInsttut ofCountry 

Directors training 100 persons 

Trade Facilitation 
Ei 
mValue 
exchange is operational and used by the key public 
authorities and private trade operators involved in 
import and export operations 

Indicative AAATATFthers
First Study for the establishment of the Moroccan Investment

Economic Memorandum (ESW)
Trade and Integration-EU (ESW)
Trade and Integration - Phase Er (ESW)
Morocco Trade and Competitiveness (ESW)

Chain and Trade Improvement in Agriculture (ESW)
Advisory services to support Investment Climate reforms

IFC Maghreb Corporate Governance project
Broadband and eGov policy advice(TA)
CT -enabled BPO(TA)

Entrepreneurship and SME Development 
MSMEs receiving capacity building 
support through the corporate governance 
support tool (number) (IFC) 

Entrepreneurship and SME Development
* The regulatory framework applicable to individual
entrepreneurs has been simplified and adapted to their
specific needs

Baseline: 0 
Target: 20 

A corporate diagnostic tool for SMEs developed to
enable SMEs to identify and implement corporate

E 

governance practices.

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

1.2 Improve access to finance with a particular focus on low income households, micro, small and young firms, and youth and women

Micro and SME Finance 
Micro and SME Finance 
Volume of outstanding MSME portfolio of * The Caisse Centrale de Garantie (CCG) launches a 
Participating Financial Institutions 
public-private fund dedicated to start-ups by 2016 
Baseline: 78,644 MAD million (2012) 
* 6 CCG outlets in the regions by 2016 (baseline: 2 in 

Target: +20% (2017) 

2013) 

Microloans outstanding (number) (IFC) 

Baseline: 221,400 (127,286 to 

women)(2012) 

* Creation of a centralized collateral registry by 2016 
* 3 Alternative Microfinance Products developed and 

piloted by 2016 

* 6,000 targeted beneficiaries receiving financial 

Target:272,772 (156,820 to women) (2018) 

literacy training by 2016 

On-going Financing
Financial Sector (DPF)
MSME Development (IPF)
IFC investments in Banks, Insurance, SME Funds and

Microfinance

Microfinance Development (7F)

Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship(TF)
Indicative New Financing

Financial Sector 2(DPF)

IFC Investments in Financial Markets

Indicative AAAITAITF10thers

Enhancing Microftnancefor Women and Youth (TA)

On-going Financing
Inclusive Green Growth(DPF)
Modernization of Irrigation in cER (IPF)
FC Investment in Agribusiness and Education
Social & Integrated Agriculture(GEF) Integrated Coastal Zone
Mgt (GEF)

New small or young firms reached by CCG 
Baseline: 1572 (June 2010- June 2013) 
Target: 3000 (June 2013 -June 2016) 

* Rules and procedures of Morocco's Capital Market

Agency (AMMC) are adopted to implement Law 42-

Capital Market Development 
13 and creating independent capital market supervisor
Finance professionals required to register 
by 2016
under Law 42-13 certified by AMMC in e Securities lending contracts regulated and recorded in
trading, compliance, asset management, 
central depositary by 2016
AMMC complies with IOSCO Principles 6 and 7 on
and* 
adefina:ncial 
ifanalyis (2013 
the perimeter of regulation and maintaining financial
Baseline: no certification (2013) 
stability

1.3 Increase the productivity and value-added of the agri-food sector
New agribusinesses created based on 
* Participating farmers using drip irrigation (in targeted 
partnership projects with farmers in large 
area Doukkala-Haouz-Tadla) increases from 1 % in 

2013 to 50% by 2016 

* Feasibility studies of establishing seaweed and 
shellfish farms undertaken by 2016 

scale irrigation (number) 

Baseline: 0 (2013) 
Target: 20 (2016) 

Doukkala-Haouz-Tadla (ha) 
Baseline: 4,873 (2013) 
Target: 8,966 (2016) 

* IC's support to a leading industrial poultry producer 

eand its expansion plan including feedmill, chicken and Modernization of Irrigation in ER AF (IPF)
turkey rearing, and hatchery capacity. 
* 3 "Agropolis" and agricultural products trade 
platforms created by 2017 
e Enhanced incentive framework for agro-business 

Agriculture Modernization (Pforl?)
Support to ORDAR Creation (PforR)

Indicative New Financing

Indicative AAAITAITF10thers
IFC Advisory on irrigation PPPprojects
Value Chain and Trade Improvement in Agriculture (ESW)

investment by 2017 

40

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)
Farmers reached by IFC investments 
Baseline: 0 (2013) 

Target: 3,000 (2017) 

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

* Laws creating the ORDARs adopted and regional
irrigation utilities for improved service delivery to
farmers established in 5 regions by 2017

1.4 Better leverage the socio-economic potential of integrated rural development and of tourism

Integrated Rural Development 
Integrated Rural Development Programs 
IntegatedSocial 
implemented in selected regions 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3 

Jnteizrated Rural Development 
e National Committee on Impact Studies validates the 
Directive specific to the aquaculture sector 
e Six local development plans incorporating coastal 

zone management in the Eastern Mediterranean Coast

TuimTourism 
Ecotourism Sector Jobs created over the 
Ecoturim 
Scto Jos ceatd oer he 

period 2013-2017, gender disaggregated 

(number) 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1,100 

T 

mTourism 

Tors
. At least two Local Development Entities tasked with 

managing rural tourism investments (Qariati program) 
established by 2016 

* Small co-lodges piloted in villages along the Eastern
Mediterranean Coast by 2016

On-going Financing
Inclusive Green Growth(DPF)
& Integrated Agriculture (GEF)
Integrated Coastal Zone Mgt (GEF)
Integrating CC in the PMV (GEF)

Development(IPF)

Integrated Rural Development (PforR)

Indicative AAAITAITFlOthers
Tourism Development(TA)
JFC E4E advisory in Logistics and Tourism

1.5 Improve reliability of electricity supply
Electric transmission losses South of 

Chichaoua (%) 

Baeie 1 
21)2016 

eOn-going 
NInclusive 

Target: 8.50 % (2015) 
programs,o-odgnclilstivenGrllage 
Reduction of unserved energy (MWh) 
Baseline: 832.7 (2007) 

* Double circui transmission line constructed be 

n 

Chichaoua and Agadir by 2016
e Tariff study completed by 2016

Financing
Green Growth(DPF)
ONEE (IPF)

Indicative AA 
nWater and Energy Nexus - Thirsty Energy (TA, KP)
Glonwthe(aster

iTAcTF urthers

Target: 400 (2015) 

1_______________1_______

1.6 Better match skills developed through higher education or vocational training with the needs of the job market

Skills train ink 
Internal efficiency of vocational training 
covered by a programmatic 

Skills train in 
10 University programs evaluated by the new 
evaluation agency on their adequacy for the job 

( 

contract (%) (broken down by gender) 

Baseline: 75% (2010) 
Target: >90% from 2013 onwards 

market 

*TarfSkills& 

e The National Qualifications Framework has been
operationalized by the Ministry of National Education 

On-going Financing

Skills& Employment (DPF)

IncE4Eiv aorn Lroti adTui

Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship(TF)

Indicative New Financing

Employment 2(PforR)

41

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)
Youth are trained on management skills 
and reach jobs or career advancement 

opportunities. 
Baseline: 0 

Target: 1500 youth trained (30% women) 

and Vocational Training by 2016 
e On-the Job Training Law, providing for the 
governance and financing of on-the job training has

INDH3(PforR)
Gender(DPF)
YouhpndrmpoynntSupies.PF

been drafted by 2016 

Indicative AAAITAITF10thers

* A National Labor Observatory to monitor and analyze Programmatic Employment(TA)
the labor market has been established by 2016 
* IFC investment to support an established quality 
private educational institute 'Institut des Hautes 
Etudes de Management' to provide more technically 
oriented education at an affordable cost to 1000 
students
e The capacity of a 3-4 training providers has been built by
2015 with IFC in-house Business Edge solutions and they
will offer certified high quality training to 1000 youth and
entrepreneurs until end of FYm7.

ICT-Enabled Micro-work(TA)
Support to the Vocational TrainingStartegy (TA)
Support to the University Evaluation Agency (TA)
IFC Investments in Education
E4E in Logistics and Tourism
E4E Training programs

Micro-entreIreneurshp 
Youth micro-entrepreneurs who receive 
post-creation follow-up support for at least 
12 months (number), of which female (%) 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1800 (40% women) 

Revenue generating activities 
Income-generating activities (IGAs) 
implemented by cooperatives, associations 
or companies which are viable two years 
after benefiting from INDH financing (%) 
Baseline: 25% (2012) 
Target: 40% (2015) 

Micro-enr eprenieurshcip
* 4500 youth aspiring to be entrepreneurs who
successfully complete entrepreneurship training by
2017
* Impact evaluation of pilot program to strengthen
micro-entrepreneurship carried out by 2017
Law drafted establishing a legal, fiscal and social
status for self-entrepreneurship that minimizes the
costs, simplifies the administrative procedures and
provides social insurance coverage by 2016
Revenue zeneratink activities
e INDH financed IGAs implemented by cooperatives,
associations, and private firms up from 18% in 2012
to 35% in 2015
* 50% of income generating activities in the rural
targeted areas implemented by women
* CLDH and CPDH (INDH local governance
committees) include 20% women and 15% youth
from 2012 onwards

E 

42

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

1.7. Improve access to and effectiveness of social protection programs, especially for youth

Active Labor Market Prozrams 
New enrolments with ANAPEC per year, 
by gender (number) 

Baseline: 130,000 (2011) 

Target: 160,000 (60% male, 40% female) 

(2016) 

Social Protection Programs/Policies 
Total subsidy envelope to diesel, gasoline 

and industrial fuel (in % of GDP) 
Baseline: 3% (2012) 

Target: <2.5% (2017) 

A single registry including beneficiaries of 
the two largest social assistance programs 
(RAMED and TAYSIR) is built 
Baseline: No - (Social Assistance 
programs have their own information 
system) 
Target: Yes 

On-going Financing

_NDH2tpf6rR)

Inclusive Green Growth (DPF)
Indicative New Financing
INDH3(PforR)

Social Protection Reform (PforR)

Youth and Employment Support (IPF)
Indicative AAAITAITF10thers
Subsidy Reform and Cash Transfer Program (TA)
Morocco Poverty(ESW)

Morocco Gender Assessment(ESW)

Active Labor Market Programs 
* The National Employment and Skills Promotion 
Agency (ANAPEC) strengthens its capacity to 

develop results-based Public Private Partnerships 

(PPPs) to promote entrepreneurship/self-employment. 

* All ALMP programs evaluated (impact or process 
evaluations) 

Employment regulations 
Reform options prepared in the areas of labor 

regulation, labor taxation, and wage setting 
mechanisms (including minimum wage policy). 

Social Protection ProtramslPolicies
* Reform of inefficient universal subsidy system,
including introducing automatic price adjustment for
diesel, gasoline and fuel
e Proposing options to develop a unified registry of
beneficiaries of social of social assistance programs
* Identifying possible options for a pro-poor INDH
targeting
( AAdministrative 
offices (Ministry of Interior) at the
local level are equipped with ICT tools necessary to
register social assistance beneficiaries in all localities
* RAMED's targeting method (formula and
implementation) is assessed and adjusted periodically.

Results Area 2: Building a Green and Resilient Future

2.1. Strengthen management of soil, coastal and water resources

Land and coastal zone management 
Land area where sustainable land 
management practices were adopted as a 
result of Bank program (ha) 
Baseline: 0 (2013) 
Tre:500 (2017) 

Target: 

Land and coastal zone management 
Two regional coastal zone management plans 
(Schemas Regionaux d'Amenegement du Littoral) 
approved by 2017 
Completion of a hydrological study of biodiversity 
ecosystem interest sites by 2016 

*RAMED'stargetingdOum 

On-going Financing
Inclusive Green Growth(DPF)
Regional Potable Water Supply Systems(IPo)
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation(iPF)
ER Irrigation Modernization (JPF)
Social & Integrated Agriculture(GEF)
Integrated Coastal Zone Mgt(GEF)
Integrating CC in the PMV(GEF)
Er Rbia Sanitation

43

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)
Marine areas brought under biodiversity
protectionIndicative 
protetion(ha)Rural 
Baseline: 0 (2013) 
Target: 20 (2017) 

Water resources 
Reduction pollution (as measured by tons 
of BOD abated yearly) 

Baseline : 0 (2013) 
Target: 1,830 (2017) 

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

Water resources 

eImpacts of climate change on water resources 

assessed in 3 additional river basins by 2016 (up from

New Financing
Water Supply 2(IPF)

Rural Water Supply 3UPF)
OER Irrigation Modernization AF(PF)
Desalination and NR W reduction (IPF)

one in 2013) 

e Aquifers (nappes) in which groundwater abstraction is 
regulated by an aquifer agreement among 'large' 
water consumer (Baseline:1(2013), Target: 3 (2017) Non-Revenue Water Assessment (ESW)
e Revised Water Law adopted by CG 

IFC Advisory on Water PPP projects

Water/Energy Distribution Restructuring(ESW)
Support to Artisanal Mining(TA)

Impacts of CC in WRM (TA)

Climate Change
Small farmers in the selected Plan Maroc 
Climate Change
Vert Pillar II projects integrating at least 
e Development of the capacities of public and private
one climate change adaptation (%)institutions 
for integrating climate change adaptations
Baseline : 0 (2011) 
in projects directed to small farmers in five target

Target: 35% (2015) 

regions by 2015

2.2 Increase renewable energy generation and enhance energy efficiency

Renewable Energy 

Installed solar energy capacity 
Baseline: 20 MW (2013) 
Target: (i) 180 MW installed; (ii) 375 MW 
under development (having achieved 
financial close) (2017) 

Renewable Ener 

* Commissioning of the Noor I Concentrated Solar 
Power plant by 2015 
e Reinforcement of the power system to enable it to 
absorb large amount of renewable generation while 
meeting the increasing demand 
e Revision of the legislative framework for renewables 
o allow for renewable energy generation connected to

the medium voltage grid 

New buildings (hospitals, residential, 
tertiary) integrating legal BE requirements 

e New decree on energy efficiency in the building 
sector implemented

Baseline : 0% (2013)
Target: 50% (2017)

44

On-going Financing

Noor I Concentrated Solar Power (IPF)
Inclusive Green Growth (DPF)

Indicative New Financing
Noor l III Concentrated Solar Power Project (IPF)
Clean and Efficient Energy Project(PforR)
Energy Efficiency (PforR)
IFC Investments in Wind and Solar Energy

Indicative AAA/TA/TF/Others
Partnership for Market Readiness (CF)
Water/Energy Distribution Restructuring(ESW)
uppoClean 
Energy (Phase 2)(TA)
IFC Advisory on resource efficiency/clean techs

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

2.3. Better integrate prevention and mitigation mechanisms against natural disasters

TBD at the CPS progress report stage 
based on the scope of the Integrated Risk 
Management Project 

* Select number of risk mitigation projects launched -
both in terms of risk mitigation and risk insurance 
* Reform of institutional risk management practices 
launched 
* A more integrated risk management system 
established 

Indicative New Financing
Integrated Risk Management Project (PforR)

Indicative AAA/TA/TF/Others
Integrating CC in the PMV(GEF)
Climate Change Adaptation & Mitigation Strategy(ESW)
Climate Change Adaptation in the road Sector(TA)

Results Area 3: Strengthening Governance and Institutions for Improved Service Delivery to All Citizens
3.1. Support a more open and inclusive governance framework through effective rights for citizen to access information and petition government

* Draft law on Access to information and accompanying On-going Financing
regulation prepared in line with art 27 of the 

Accountability and Transparency (DPF)

Open Budget Index (OBI) from the 
Intemational Budget Partnership (IBP) 
Baseline: OBI Score 38 (2012) 

Target: OBI Score 42 (2015) 

Open Government partnership's OGP score 
on access to information 
Baseline: OGP 2 out of 4 (2012) 

Target: OGP 4 out of 4 (2015) 

constitution and intemational good practice 
* Draft organic law on public petition in line with the 

new constitutional right and the recommendations of 
the National Dialogue and intemational good practice 
* Social accountability tools such as Citizens' Report 
Cards (CRCs) introduced in at least three large cities 

by 2016 

RNrHl(WatrS 

y

Urban Transport Project(PforR)

IGG DPL 2 (DPF)
Indicative New Financing
Accountability and Transparency Series (DPF)
Agriculture Modernization (P4R)
INDH3(PforR)

Indicative AAATA/TF10thers
Support New Governance Framework(TF)

Women within local govemance bodies 

(CLDH &CPDH) ()accountability 

Baselinec: 20% 
Target*: 22% 

* Strengthening participatory monitoring and evaluation 
in INDH targeted areas, through the use of social 
tools
* Number of birth certificates provided electronically
using "Watiqa" is 2850 by 2015.

3.2. Enable a more transparent and accountable management of public resources through budget and procurement reforms

PEFA indicators related to budget 
transparency, policy based budgeting and 
external scrutiny 
Baseline: 2009 PEFA assessment: 
Indicator n'6 scored B; nO 12: C, 
n'26: D, and n027: B 
Target: Increase by one notch PEFA 
scores (indicators 6, 12,26 and 27) (2015) 

* New organic budget law and its implementing 
regulation, including the new programmatic budget 
classification and performance indicators (Oincluding 
gender) by 2016 
* The National Public Contracts Committee, including 
non-State actors is established with a stronger mandate 
on oversight, complaints handling and training by 
2015 
* 80% of municipalities have real time information on
budget execution through the roll out of an integrated

On-going Financing

Accountability and Transparency (DPF)

Indicative New Financing
Accountability and Transparency 2 (DPF)

INDH3(PforR)

Indicative AAAITAITF10thers

Support New Governance Framework(TF)
PEFA diagnostic (with EU and ADB) (ES W)

45

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)

Procuring entities subject to the new 
procurement rules (number) 
Baseline: 1,571 (2012)
Target: 3,345 (2015)

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

expenditure management information system (GID)
by 2015

3.3. Improve capacity to plan, manage and assess key service delivery, especially at local level

Cities with over 300,000 inhabitants with 
long term multimodal urban transport 
longONEE 
master plan 
Baseline: 5 cities (Casablanca, Tangiers, 
Tetouan, Marrakesh, and Rabat) (2013) 

Target: 8 cities (2017) 

At least three cities over 500,000 inhabitants have 
established local governments-owned holding 
companies ("Socijt s de Patrimoine") with urban 
transport planning and management authority for the 
urban transport sector, 

Three conurbation associations created and/or 

Local Government Support Program 
(PACT) s operational with at least two 
support centers established 

Baseline : No (2013) 

Target: Yes (2017) 

expanded (geographically or in sector terms) with 
clear/sustainable legal, financial, governance, and 
staffing arrangements 
A national program has been set up to support the 

contractualization (between State and LGs) of the 

improvement of municipal management and strategic 

urban development 

Water and Electricity infrastructure investment 

planning and policies are harmonized 

* Establishment of a third party conciliation mechanism

thegticn 

On-going Financing
Inclusive Green Growth(DPF)

AF(IPF)

Modernization of Irrigation in OER (IPF)
Social &Integrated Agriculture(GEF)
Integrated Coastal Zone Mgt (GEF)

1FC Investment in Agribusiness and Education

Solid Waste Sector (DPLIV)

Indicative New Financing
Tourism Development (IPF)
Modernization of Irrigation in OER (IPF)
Urban Transport (PforR)
Indicative AAAITAITFlOther,
Tourism Development(TA)
Water & Energy Nexus- Thirsty Energy (TA, Kp)
FCutAdvisory n 
ouris

3.4. Expand access to basic services
National rural road accessibility index 
Baseline: 77 % (2013) 
Target: 80% (2015) 

People in rural areas provided with access 

to Improved Water Sources (number) 

Baseline: 171,000 (2013) 

Target: 465,000  335,000 (2017) 

for delegated municipal services by 2016 (solid waste
DPL)

* 15,560 kms of rural roads rehabilitated or upgraded 
under Second National Rural Roads Program by 2015 

(up from 13,171 km in 2013) 
* Program establishing sustainable management models 

for water and sanitation services in small towns and 

rural areas in place 

* 90% of water supply and wastewater facilities built 
have functioning and sustainable management 

structures 

* 10 waste water treatment plants constructed in the 

Oum Er Rbia Basin by 2017 

46

On-going Financing
Rural Roads 
(IPF)
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (IPF)
Regional Potable Water Supply SystemsPF)
Ois Er Rbia Sanitation PF)
INDwt (PforR
Support t'o Periurban WSS Service Extension
Indicative New Financing
Rural Roads 
(IPF)
Urban Transport Proect (PforR)
Clean and Efficient Ener n Project(PcF)
Rural Water Supply (IPF)

otAF 

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (with 

2014 baselines and FYI 7-end targets)
People in urban areas provided with access 
to Improved Sanitation (number) 

Baseline: 0(2013) 

Target: 65,000 (2017) 

CPS Milestones 

Indicative WBG Program

Water and Sanitation (IPF)
Health (PforR)
Non-Revenue Water(IPF)

Indicative AAA/TA/TF/Others
Promoting Accessibility of PLM(PHRD)
Education Support(TA)
Morocco Systems Approach for Better Education Results
Workforce Development(TA)
improving the governance ofprovision ofsocial services(ESW)
Public Expenditure Review: Health and Education(ESW)
Climate Change Adaptation in the road Sector(TA)

47

Annex 2 : Country Partnership Strategy FY10-13 Completion Report

I. INTRODUCTION

126. 

This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) evaluates 
the
Country Partnership Strategy prepared jointly by the World Bank and International
Finance Corporation (IFC) for the Kingdom of Morocco for FY2010-2013. Based on a
review of the operational support, technical assistance, and knowledge and coordination
services provided by the World Bank Group (WBG), this CPSCR: (i) assesses the extent to
which expected CPS outcomes, as updated in the May 2012 CPS Progress Report (CPSPR),
were achieved; (ii) evaluates the WBG's performance in designing and implementing the CPS
program; and (iii) draws lessons for the preparation of the forthcoming CPS for FY2014-2017.

127. 
The main objective of the CPSfor FY2010-2013, which was presented to the World
Bank's Board of Directors in January 2010, was to support the government in the
implementation of its reform program. In doing so, the WBG's intention was to focus on the
"how to" of implementation by facilitating institutional reform and coordination, to support
reform implementation in areas requiring interagency coordination and capacity building
through lending programs built on a strong foundation of analytical work, and to help increase
the results orientation of country programs. The strategy focused on three thematic pillars of
relevance to both the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and
IFC: (i) growth, competitiveness, and employment; (ii) service delivery to citizens; and (iii)
sustainable development in a changing climate. In addition, all CPS activities were to address
two crosscutting beams: governance and territoriality. 3 0

128. 
This evaluation of the performance of the CPS program, and of the WBG's design
and implementation of the strategy, points to positive results overall. The country team has
rated program performance Moderately Satisfactory, highlighting notable achievements in
private and financial sector reform, access to education, addressing vulnerability and social
exclusion, agriculture sector management, implementation of conditional cash transfers, and
solid waste management. Substantial progress was made toward most other expected
outcomes, though some targets in water management, energy sector reform, and climate
change adaptation were not achieved. WBG performance is rated Good, reflecting the highly
flexible design of the CPS and its responsiveness to the significant social, political, and
economic changes that took hold in Morocco during the CPS period. Implementation of the
CPS program was characterized by largely satisfactory project outcomes, disbursements above
the regional average despite expanded lending commitments, increased IFC investment in key
sectors, a strong program of analytical and advisory work, and close and effective
partnerships. This evaluation is based on the results matrix as updated in the CPSPR, and
ratings are based on the latest guidelines on assessing country partnership strategies.
Highlights of the program assessment are discussed below, and details are provided in the
summary assessment matrix (Annex 2A).

31

30 In Morocco, territoriality is understood to refer broadly to deconcentration, decentralization, regionalization, and spatially
aware development.
31 World Bank. 2013. "Guidance to Staff on the Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report." Operations Policy and
Country Services (OPCS) Department (November); and "Assessing Country Partnership Strategies: A Shared Approach."
OPCS and Independent Evaluation Group.

II. CHANGES IN COUNTRY CONTEXT AND PROGRESS TOWARD LONGER-
TERM NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS

2.1 Social and Political Environment

129. 
Following the Arab awakening, Morocco's social and political context has shifted
considerably since the preparation of the FY2010-2013 CPS. Morocco's experience with this
social movement has been relatively peaceful and constructive compared to other countries in
the region. Street protests conducted during 2011 and early 2012 centered around the need for
political change, including the establishment of a more democratic constitution enshrining the
principles of popular sovereignty, an independent judiciary, and separation of powers.
Protesters called for greater social equality, better social welfare services, improved media
freedom and independence, and better, more transparent governance. Despite many of the
same popular grievances expressed in other countries affected by this movement, Morocco's
experience underlines 
its political distinctiveness 
in 
the region. Successive national
governments have overseen an impressive political, economic, and social transformation, with
a marked acceleration of reforms in recent years. Though these gains did not provide
immunity to popular dissatisfaction or remaining development challenges, the country's
experience has shown that Moroccans seem more inclined to seek evolution within the system
rather than seeking change outside of it.

130. 
In March 2011, King Mohammed VI responded to popular calls for reform with a
broad package of political, institutional, and social reforms that gathered widespread
popular support through a constitutional referendum held in July 2011. The new
constitution reinforces the principles of good governance, human rights, and protection of
individual freedoms, including extending the previous guarantee of political equality between
women and men to civil and social arenas as well. In addition, the new constitution
strengthens the separation of powers, judicial independence, and checks and balances, and lays
the basis for regionalization as a decentralized system of government. Transparent elections
held in November 2011 brought the Justice and Development Party (PJD) to power in a
convincing victory. The King named the head of the PJD, Abdelilah Benkirane, as Head of
Government in January 2012.

2.2 Recent Economic Developments

131. Morocco's economy performed relatively well during the CPS period, despite the
environment of regional upheaval and global economic slowdown. Annual growth averaged
3.8 percent during 2010-2012 and registered 4.4 percent in 2013, during which a 21 percent
jump in agricultural production offset slower growth in other sectors. Growth of non-
agriculture GDP declined from an average of 4.9 percent during the period 2000-2008 to 3.4
percent per year, on average, since 2009. The main drivers of growth have been domestic
demand and fiscal spending. After declining steadily from 62 percent of GDP in 2005 to 50.3
percent in 2010, government debt has grown to 61.9 percent of GDP in 2013, where it was
contained by substantial capital grants. The Government has made a significant effort to
control inflation mainly through subsidies on food and fuel products, with growth in the
consumer price index limited to one percent in the last few years, though increasing slightly to
1.9 percent in 2013. Gross investment as a share of GDP has increased from 25 percent in the
1990s to 35 percent currently, and net foreign direct investment inflows more than doubled

over the CPS period, increasing from US$ 1.5 billion in 2009 to US$ 3.4 billion in 2013.

49

132. 
Fiscal sustainability has been tested by increased government spending to alleviate
popular grievances and counteract the economic effects of the financial crisis in Europe.
Subsidies on food and fuel, at 6.6 percent of GDP in 2012, exceeded capital expenditures for
the first time. In 2012, the budget deficit widened to 7.6 percent of GDP, well above the
Budget Law's target of 5.5 percent. In 2013, owing to lower world fuel prices and the start of
a fuel price indexation system, the subsidy bill declined to 4.8 percent of GDP and the fiscal
deficit narrowed to just below 6 percent of GDP.

133. Morocco's terms of trade deteriorated significantly over the CPS period, faced with
high prices for food and fuel and diminished demand in European markets. The country's
food import bill rose significantly 
in 2012 
in response 
to severe drought conditions
domestically at a time of soaring international prices for food, especially wheat. With no
domestic oil production, Morocco's spending on fuel imports was similarly affected by high
oil prices, which averaged US$ 110 per barrel in 2011-2012. At the same time, demand for
Moroccan products declined in the European Union-the country's principal trading partner,
largely as a result of sovereign debt crises in Spain, Italy, and elsewhere, and the broader
economic slowdown that followed.

134. 
Given these external challenges, Morocco will have to rely on its own forces to
foster the structural transformation necessary to eradicate poverty, grow the middle class,
and meet citizens' high expectations. Though Morocco's production structure has gradually
shifted toward services (whose share in GDP has increased from 51.8 percent in the 1990s to
55.8 percent in the 2000s), continued weak performance in manufacturing and agriculture has
prevented the country from taking full advantage of opportunities for better market access.
With further structural changes, Morocco could expand its export potential-and the growth
and employment benefits that would follow.

2.3 Poverty and Human Development

135. 
Economic growth in Morocco has been pro-poor, but vulnerability and inequality
remain important challenges. Absolute poverty has decreased sharply in the space of a
decade, from 15.3 percent in 2001 to 6.2 percent in 2011. Average per-capita income doubled
during the same period to US$ 3,100 in 2011. Despite the country's improved poverty profile,
13.3 percent of Moroccans live just above the poverty line and thus continue to face the threat
of falling into poverty. Rural areas are subject to higher poverty rates (15 percent in 2011),
largely as a result of difficult geography, deteriorating infrastructure, poor access to basic
services, and limited opportunities for formal employment. Income inequality has remained
high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.41.32

136. 
Unemployment is an enduring challenge, particularly in urban areas and among
young people. Overall unemployment has remained steady at about nine percent since 2011,
after dropping from about 13 percent in 2000. Unemployment is 13.7 percent in urban areas,
as compared to four percent in rural areas. Youth unemployment is high at 18 percent overall
and 35 percent in urban areas. The unemployment rate among women is ten percent, as
compared to nine percent for men.

32 The Gini coefficient measures the dispersion of wealth, with 0 indicating perfect equality and I indicating maximum
inequality.

50

137. 

Despite good progress on poverty reduction and social indicators such as access to
education, Morocco lags behind comparator countries on human development outcomes,
especially for women. Morocco ranks 
1 3 0 th of 187 countries on the United Nations
Development Programme's 2013 Human Development Index. 3 3 Life expectancy increased
from 71.7 years in 2004 to 74.9 years in 2011. Infant mortality rates declined from 36.1 per
1,000 live births in 2004 to 26.8 in 2012, and the maternal mortality ratio dropped from 170

per 100,000 live births in 2000 to 100 in 2011. Yet health indicators continue to lag behind

similar economies (Table 1). Similarly, despite a remarkable expansion in access to schooling,
with net primary school enrollment rates growing from 52.4 percent in 1990/91 
to 93.5
percent in 2006/07 to 96.6 percent in 2011/12, literacy remains low at about 67 percent, and
gender disparities and gaps in educational quality and efficiency remain.

Country 

Algeria 
Egypt 
Jordan 
Kuwait 
Lebanon 
Morocco 
Oman 
Saudi Arabia 
Tunisia 

Table 1: Key Social Indicators - Morocco in Comparison

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years) 
2011 
70.8 
70.7 
73.6 
74.3 
79.6 
74.9 
76.3 
75.3 
74.8 

Infant Mortality Rate Maternal Mortality Ratio
(per 1,000 live births) 
(per 100,000 live births)
2012 
2010
17.2 
97
17.9 
66
16.4 
63
9.5 
14
8.0 
25
26.8 
100
10.0 
32
7.4 
24
13.8 
56

Sources: Haut Commissariat an Plan for Morocco life expectancy data; World Development Indicators.

III. PROGRAM PERFORMANCE

138. 
The strategic themes of the CPS and the majority of its envisioned activities were
implemented broadly as expected, though the country team made effective use of the
strategy's flexible approach to make mid-course adjustments and additions in response to
changing country circumstances and priorities. The CPS was built around 19 program areas
that were recognized at the time of CPS preparation as being at different stages of
development. Of these program areas, 14 were considered sufficiently well advanced to be
included in the CPS results matrix, and it was expected that the program would be adjusted
based on client needs as well as any progress made in fleshing out the program areas that were
still under development at the start of the CPS period. By the time the mid-term CPSPR was
prepared, Morocco had experienced significant social and political changes, including the
adoption of the new constitution and election of a new coalition government. The CPS
program was adjusted to reflect a greater focus on governance and accountability, social and
economic inclusion, and voice and participation.

139. 
A revised results matrix was presented in the CPSPR, reflecting both the pace of
implementation progress and shifts in emphasis in both the Government's and the WBG's
programs. The health sector activities envisaged in the CPS did not evolve as planned,
following the Ministry of Health's decision not to engage the WBG in support of the health
agenda. Program Area 1.3 on the health sector was therefore dropped from the results matrix
and will not be evaluated by this CPSCR, save for an exploration of lessons learned from this
experience. By contrast, as the WBG's engagement in the area of trade and competitiveness

3 The Human Development Index measures a country's average achievement along three dimensions: life expectancy,
educational attainment, and income.

51

had evolved into a key element of the country program, the CPSPR included a new results
area to capture implementation progress and outcomes. Expected results in public sector
management, skills and employment, and social protection were fine-tuned to align more
closely with government priorities and with the actual delivery of the WBG program. In other
areas, indicators were added or revised to strengthen gender disaggregation and ensure
effective measurement of progress toward expected outcomes. These changes were indicated
clearly in the text of the revised results matrix appended to the CPSPR.

140. 
Overall performance of the CPS program is rated Moderately Satisfactory, as
expected program outcomes were mostly achieved (Annex 1). There were notable results in
private and financial sector reform, access to education, addressing vulnerability and social
exclusion, agriculture sector management, implementation of conditional cash transfers, and
solid waste management. Substantial progress was made toward most other expected
outcomes, though some targets on water management, energy sector reform, and climate
change adaptation were not achieved. In general, successful CPS interventions enjoyed high-
level government ownership and 
integration with government programs; participatory
approaches; effective technical assistance; and well-specified, operationally integrated, and
regularly monitored outcome indicators. In a few areas, momentum was slowed by the
additional challenges associated with interagency coordination under the auspices of new
multisectoral development policy loans (DPLs), by low government staffing, or as a result of
imperfectly specified targets.

3.1 Pillar One: Growth, Competitiveness, and Employment

141. 
Performance on the first strategic pillar is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Good
progress on private sector reform took shape in significant improvements to Morocco's Doing
Business indicators over the course of the CPS period. The country's ranking for overall ease
of doing business rose from 12 4 th of 181 economies in 2009 to 8 7 th of 189 economies in 2013.
Importantly, Morocco eliminated 
the minimum capital requirement for limited liability
companies and slightly exceeded targets on strengthening investor protection. The financial
sector reform agenda advanced considerably over the CPS period supported by a joint Bank-
IFC package of lending, TA and advisory services, exceeding targets on strengthening credit
infrastructure for small businesses, improving liquidity, and putting in place the legal
framework needed to establish independent supervisory authorities on insurance and pension
funds and on capital markets. Performance on expanding household access to finance was
mixed, exceeding 
targets on increasing the number of deposit accounts relative to the
population and initially meeting targets on reducing the share of nonperforming loans in
microfinance institutions before this indicator slipped again in 2012. Moderate progress was
achieved on the multisectoral agendas related to skills and employment and trade and
competitiveness, which the WBG supported through DPLs and technical assistance. Delays
related to changes in the Government's organizational structure and limited human resource
capacity were among the constraints.

3.2 Pillar Two: Service Delivery to Citizens

142. 
Performance on the second strategic pillar is rated Moderately Satisfactory. All
expected outcomes were at least partially achieved, and there was exceptional progress in a
few key areas. The education sector saw impressive gains in primary school enrollment
rates-both overall and for girls specifically-reflecting improvements in student retention.
Under the Government's National Initiative for Human Development (known by its French
acronym, INDH), targets on the use, accountability, and inclusiveness of basic infrastructure

52

services were exceeded as a result of strong political support and successful mobilization to
reach over five million beneficiaries. In the social protection arena, the Tayssir pilot program
of conditional cash transfers in education reached nearly double the targeted number of
beneficiaries and has been scaled up to the national level. An impact evaluation showed that
the program played a role in reducing dropout rates and improving students' math test results.
The RAMED program of non-contributory insurance for poor and vulnerable segments of the
population was scaled up to the national level, and its targeting systems were improved. Other
areas showed moderate progress toward expected outcomes. There was some progress in
introducing key public sector management 
tools such as medium-term expenditure
frameworks (MTEF) at the sector and subsector level and e-government platforms. In the
education sector, expanded school enrollment at the primary level was not matched at the
lower secondary tier, largely as a result of low enrollment in rural areas and overly ambitious
targets. Expected results in reducing repetition rates and increasing the efficiency of human
resource allocations were not achieved. In the transport sector, rural access to all-weather
roads improved significantly, and preparation of a strategy for the maintenance of unclassified
rural roads has advanced, though at a slower pace than expected. In the agriculture sector,
targets on irrigation water management and public sector support to smallholders were
achieved, and there was good progress in integrating smallholders into domestic markets.

3.3 Pillar Three: Sustainable Development in a Changing Climate

143. 
Performance on the third strategic pillar is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Good
progress was recorded in the water management sector, with improvement in off-farm
irrigation networks and extension of subsidized household access to piped sanitation supported
though WBG investment projects. Targets on urban sewerage and wastewater treatment
coverage were not met, however. There was some progress on institutional reforms in the
energy sector, though price reform targets were not met owing to historically high oil prices
during the CPS period. CPS targets in the solid waste management sector were all achieved,
including the establishment of legislative decrees and improvements in financial sustainability
and cost effectiveness through a successful series of DPLs in the sector. Good progress was
recorded on climate change adaptation. An adaptation action plan was adopted for the
agriculture sector, and pilot initiatives on adaptation in the sector were launched as planned as
part of the PMV DPL series and supporting GEF activities. There was some movement on
developing a national climate change strategy, but the establishment of climate early warning
systems has been delayed.

3.4 Cross-Cutting Beams

144. 
Through the CPSPR, the WBG indicated its intention to realign its governance
agenda to support the development and implementation of Morocco's new constitution and
the subsequent changes 
to 
the country's overall governance structure. Governance
continued to be mainstreamed in all WBG operations, supported by institutional development
activities under DPLs on competitiveness and sustainable access to finance. The first INDH
program was designed around 
the principles of 
transparency, accountability, and
inclusiveness, and its expected outcomes amended in the CPSPR to reflect this enhanced
governance focus. The Public Administration Reform DPL IV focused on strengthening
budget management, human resource management, and e-government, and there has been
good progress on procurement reforms. These initiatives were supported by extensive
analytical and advisory work, including programmatic economic and sector work (P-ESW) on
public administration reform, a Country Governance and Anticorruption assessment, a Use of
Country Systems Initiative Pilot, and a Bank Governance Review. The country team is

53

continuing to deepen its governance focus, preparing an Accountability and Transparency
DPL and a New Governance Framework Implementation Support Project for implementation
beginning in FY2014.

145. 
The CPS supported governance improvements at the sector level. The Solid Waste
DPL3 has helped strengthen demand-driven governance improvements by supporting the
progressive rollout of Citizen Report Cards on the quality and adequacy of municipal solid
waste services, following a successful pilot in T6mara. In the agriculture sector, the first DPL
in support of the Plan Maroc Vert worked to improve the legal and institutional framework
and enhance the governance and public financial management of agricultural investment
support. The Education DPL helped strengthen sector public expenditure management, and as
part of the Urban Transport DPL agencies involved in sector governance were established and
strengthened.

146. 
The WBG has implemented a program of targeted assistance to the justice sector,
building on the new Government's strong focus in this area. The ongoing Judicial
Performance Enhancement Project aims to strengthen the Government's capacity to deliver
efficient, timely, and transparent justice services to citizens and businesses by piloting a
participatory reform process involving judges, court staff, and the public in selected courts,
and strengthening central capacity to support and monitor the court system. The project has
been somewhat slow to roll out, but there have been some consultations with judges and
administrative staff and several planned activities will be launched in the near future. This
program has been accompanied by justice sector technical assistance in FY20 11 and a Justice
Public Expenditure Review in FY2013.

147. 
The CPS aimed to support the Government's objective of fostering spatially
inclusive development and increasing 
the role, performance, accountability, and
empowerment of local governments. These goals were 
tackled largely 
through sector
programs, with good results in expanding access to critical services in rural areas. The Second
Rural Roads Project has made significant progress in increasing the share of Moroccans who
have access to an all-weather road (from 54 percent in 2005 to 77 percent in 2013) and is on
track to meet the target of 80 percent by the end of 2015. The Improved Access to Water and
Sanitation Services Project supported an innovative, large-scale, and successful pilot in poor
peri-urban neighborhoods of three cities to demonstrate output-based aid mechanisms for the
promotion of water and sanitation service connections in chronically underserved areas. The
ongoing Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project is making progress 
in expanding
sustainable access to potable water supply in rural areas. Several sector interventions focused
on strengthening local government. These activities were supported by technical assistance on
regional development for disadvantaged areas and on governance and territoriality. The New
Governance Framework 
Implementation Support Project 
aims 
to 
support 
fiscal
decentralization by assisting in the revision of the fiscal transfer and equalization system for
local governments and providing training to regional and other local authorities.

3.5 Gender, Inclusion, and Voice

148. 
The CPSPR committed to strengthening the focus on gender, inclusion, and voice
during the remainder of CPS implementation. The WBG has focused on using knowledge as
a platform for dialogue and advocacy by disseminating data from analytical and advisory work
to inform reforms, nourish public debate, and ensure more effective targeting. Work on gender
and inclusion has been informed by a report on promoting youth opportunities, a TA program
in employment, a social protection strategy note, and statistical work on poverty. A Gender
Assessment is underway, with delivery expected in FY2014. In addition, the WBG has

54

continued to work with stakeholder and citizen groups to implement the ongoing portfolio
with an emphasis on gender mainstreaming where possible, and enhancing outreach and
communication. The CPSPR 
introduced 
several new, gender-disaggregated outcome
indicators intended to better assess the effect of CPS programs on women and girls in
education and in the area of vulnerability and social exclusion. Progress toward these targets
was good under the INDH program and on primary education, but less successful on girls'
enrollment and repetition rates in lower secondary school.

149. 
Approved 
in FY2012, the flagship Program for Results (PforR) operation on
targeting women, 
tackling vulnerability, and strengthening inclusion-the National
Initiative for Human Development 2-has so far been successful in expanding educational
support and opportunities for local governance among women. This program aims to address
economic and social inclusion through a participatory and community-driven approach that
promotes voice in development and reaches out to marginalized groups such as women and
young people. Its monitoring and evaluation component features gender-disaggregated
information and wide application of social accountability tools. In addition to the INDH2, the
MSME Project (FY2012) aims to improve access to finance among women-owned micro,
small, and medium enterprises, and the WBG has prepared a project on Strengthening Micro-
Entrepreneurship for Disadvantaged Youth (FY2014) to strengthen youth inclusion through
self-employment.

150. 
IFC's investment and advisory services have focused on empowering women
entrepreneurs, especially 
in underserved regions. IFC has partnered with microfinance
institutions that have a strong gender focus, helping to increase their outreach and thus
increase access to finance among women micro-entrepreneurs.

Table 2: Achieving the CPS Objectives - Overview
Program Areas 
Performance Rating
PiHar I 
MS
1.1 Biness Environment 
Achueved

12 Financial Sector Refonn 

13 SkiM1 and Emplovment 
I 4 Trade and Competitiveness 

Pillar II 

21 Public Sector Management 
22 Quaity and Access in Education 
23 Health Sector Reforfm 
24 Vulnerability and Social Exclusion 
2.5 Transport 
26 Agricultural Sector Reform 
27 Social Protection Reform 

Pillar M 

3.1 Water Management 
32 Low Carbon Energy Policy and Energy 
3-3 Solid Waste Management 
3 A Climate Change Adaptation 

Achieved

Mostly Achieved
Partially Achieved

MS

Partially Achieved
Mostly Achieved
Dropped
Achieved
Partially Acieved
Achieved
Achiev ed

S

Mostly Achieved
Pzrtially Acieved
Achieved
Mostly Achieved

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

151. 
Overall WBG performance is rated Good. The strategy's flexible design allowed the
WBG to respond quickly to adjust the CPS program as social, political, and economic
transformation took hold in Morocco and the broader Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
region. The CPS used a unique mix of instruments to support implementation of the
Government's ambitious reform agenda, backed up by a well-designed results matrix, in that it
closely linked expected CPS outcomes to the outcomes of planned interventions and struck a

55

practical balance between flexibility and specificity. WBG implementation of the CPS
program was characterized by largely satisfactory project outcomes, disbursements above the
regional average despite expanded lending commitments, increased IFC investment in key
sectors, a strong program of analytical and advisory activities, and close and effective
partnerships with the government, development partners, and nongovernment stakeholders in
the country.

4.1 Design and Relevance

152. 
The flexible design of the CPS proved highly relevant, allowing the WBG to make
seamless program adjustments in response to changes in government and in the social,
political, and economic environment more broadly. Based on the lessons learned in
implementing the previous Country Assistance Strategy, the CPS for FY2010-2013 was
intentionally designed as a flexible, evolving program. It encompassed a 24-month business
plan of firmly developed activities whose expected outcomes were defined 
in 
the
accompanying results matrix, embedded within a longer-term strategic framework that
included several potential activities still under development. The later stages of the CPS
program were to be laid out more concretely at mid-term, through the preparation of the
CPSPR and a fully updated results matrix. This nimble design proved to be an asset, as the
CPS program and expected results were easily adjusted following changes in the country's
constitution and government and in response to the economic challenges posed by the
domestic drought and the financial crisis in Europe. The flexibility of the CPS also proved to
be an effective risk mitigation measure, as both risks highlighted in the original CPS-
systemic and exogenous risks related to the global economic crisis, as well as the role of
political economy factors in successful implementation of the government program-came
into play during CPS implementation.

153. While the original strategy's three strategic pillars remained relevant, the CPS
program was revised at mid-term to align with the priorities of the new government and to
adhere to the MENA region's commitment to "do things differently" following the Arab
awakening. The program was adapted to focus more on strengthening governance and
accountability, ensuring greater social and economic inclusion, and increasing voice and
participation. The CPSPR proposed two fundamental directions for the WBG program going
forward. First, it aimed to support more ambitious reforms, including an enhanced focus on
sectoral governance, communication, and participation 
in ongoing program areas, and
stepped-up engagement on economic competitiveness in support of growth and job creation,
governance, social protection and subsidy reform, and strengthening inclusion and voice,
particularly for young people and women. Second, the CPSPR introduced multisector
approaches to lay the basis for consolidation in the next CPS, allowing stronger alignment
with the Government's priority of addressing complex cross-sectoral issues. This adjustment
took shape in a move from single-sector development policy lending to more intricate cross-
cutting programs in areas such as skills and employment, competitiveness, and green growth.
These shifts in the CPS program design were appropriate and effective in advancing the
WBG's contribution to achieving Morocco's country development goals, and in setting the
stage for continued support under the forthcoming CPS, though it is important to note that the
increased focus on multisectoral approaches introduces new challenges in coordination and
implementation.

154. 
The CPS program employed a unique mix of instruments to support implementation
of the Government's ambitious reform agenda. The use of DPLs has become a defining
aspect of the WBG's program in Morocco, reflecting the Government's preference for this

56

instrument's flexibility and ability to tackle the structural challenges posed by sectorwide
reforms. In parallel, the WBG implemented sectoral investment lending programs in key
sectors such as water and sanitation, rural roads, irrigation modernization, agriculture, and
judicial reform. Beginning in FY2012, the WBG successfully introduced the new and
innovative PforR instrument in the context of a second program in support of the INDH. The
PforR format responds closely to the government's request for greater use of country systems
and stronger focus on results.3 4

155. 
As part of the flexible CPS approach, IFC's program adapted to market conditions
in a difficult environment for private investment. In response to sweeping changes in the
regional context and in the domestic political environment, IFC stepped in to restore investor
confidence by increasing its engagement in Morocco. The global crisis had a dampening effect
on IFC's investment pipeline, however, especially in infrastructure and the real sector. Some
projects were delayed or passed on to public financing, and some potential investment areas,
such as direct agribusiness investments, did not materialize due to a lack of suitable
opportunities.

156. 
The CPS program was underpinned by a well-designed results framework, which
succeeded in striking a balance between flexibility and specificity. The CPS results matrix,
and its updated version in the CPSPR, provided a clear link between country development
goals and expected CPS outcomes, targets, milestones, and proposed programs. The realism of
CPS objectives was broadly on target, though some sectors saw advanced progress by the time
of the CPSPR in FY2012 while targets in a few areas (such as school completion and energy
sector reform) proved to be overly ambitious. Monitoring and evaluation of CPS outcomes
and targets was, in most sectors, relatively well integrated into supervision and results
monitoring at the program level.

4.2 Implementation

157. 
Lending commitments slightly exceeded the anticipated envelope. The CPS proposed
an annual IBRD 
lending envelope of US$ 600 million. Over the course of CPS
implementation, IBRD commitments to Morocco averaged about US$ 630 million per year
and reached record levels in FY20 10 at US$ 729.5 million, after which they amounted to US$
480.3 million in FY2011, US$ 716 million in FY2012, and US$ 593 million in FY2013. The
WBG delivered eleven DPLs, seven investment projects, and one PforR project during the
four-year CPS cycle. Pursuing several DPLs at once allowed the Bank to provide deeper
support to a broader range of reforms than would have been the case had several sectors been
bundled into multisectoral DPLs. At the close of the CPS period, the IBRD investment
portfolio consisted of eleven operations for a total of US$ 1.3 billion in commitments, with an
undisbursed balance of US$ 922.5 million. The relatively high level of undisbursed funds is
explained by a combination of new operations, some of which involve new partners; a few
investment operations 
that face challenging administrative procedures related 
to 
land
acquisition; and atypical projects such as 
the US$ 200 million Ouarzazate (Noor I)
Concentrated Solar Power Project, whose design implies that disbursements are only expected
toward the end of the project (FY2016).

34 This new instrument, introduced in January 2012, supports government programs and links the disbursement of funds
directly to the delivery of defined results with a special focus on strengthening institutions.

57

158. 
Performance of the IBRD portfolio has been broadly satisfactory, with all projects
rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory. There have been some delays in launching new
projects due to lengthy procurement processes and a focus on capacity building at the start of
project implementation, particularly for decentralized entities that are responsible for project
implementation. The disbursement ratio averaged 15.6 percent over 
the CPS period,
outperforming the regional average of 13.6 percent.

Table 3: Morocco IBRD Portfolio Highlights

Number of projects 
Number of problem projects 
Number of projects at risk 
Net commitment amount 
Commitments at risk, % 
Proactivity, % 
Disbursement ratio 

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.

FY2010 
12 
2 
2 
1,161.1 
15.0 
100 
21.72 

FY2011 
11 
2 
2 
1,344.5 
13.0 
0 
14.09 

FY2012 
11 
0 
0 
1,305.3 
0.0 
100
18.23 

FY2013
11
1
1
1,305.3
3.3

12.14

159. 
As evidenced by the substantial program shifts introduced at the time of the CPSPR,
implementation of the CPS has been responsive 
to changing country circumstances,
emerging needs, and client requests. As discussed above, the intentionally flexible design of
the CPS allowed for mid-course adjustments to strengthen the WBG program in the light of
game-changing regional and domestic developments. As envisioned, the WBG responded to
these shifts by rebalancing the sectoral and thematic emphasis of the CPS program to better
match government plans and needs, and by expanding the use of multisectoral (e.g. support to
skills and employment, social protection, competitiveness) and results-based (e.g. PforR
support to INDH2) 
instruments as CPS 
implementation evolved. The country team's
responsiveness extended to the implementation of individual initiatives as well.

160. 
The WBG continues 
to mobilize significant trust funds to complement 
its
engagement in Morocco. The inclusion of trust funds in the WBG country budget has been
particularly successful, helping to ensure smooth implementation.

161. 
A strong program of analytical and advisory activities (AAA) has helped to broaden
and deepen the knowledge base in critical areas, informing the design and implementation
of sector reform programs and the preparation of DPLs and investment programs across the
CPS portfolio. Twinning reform implementation with technical assistance, capacity building,
and policy dialogue has been a key aspect of the WBG's partnership with Morocco. The WBG
approach has been to carry out strong AAA that underpins dialogue and advocacy in many
sectors, and then build up engagement to DPL or investment financing once sectoral reform
programs are well designed, fully costed, and set to be evaluated on the basis of relevant
objectives and indicators. The WBG's AAA program in Morocco has served as a vehicle for
effective advocacy on critical issues such as youth exclusion, social protection reform, poverty
analysis, governance, competitiveness, labor market dynamics, and innovative service delivery
approaches such as conditional cash transfers.

162. 
IFC scaled up its engagement in Morocco during the CPS period. Since January
2011, IFC committed a total of US$ 477 million in investments, including mobilization of
investments through its subsidiary, IFC Asset Management Company (AMC), as well as
cross-border investments. IFC's investment program has grown from a committed portfolio of
only around US$ 6 million in FY2006 to US$ 272 million in FY2013. A 75 percent increase
in IFC's investment portfolio between FY2012 and FY2013 was driven by IFC's large equity

58

investment of US$ 204 million in Banque Centrale Populaire to support its lending to a
greater number of small businesses and expansion into Sub-Saharan Africa. IFC also made an
equity investment of US$ 7 million (within a total project size of US$ 21 million) in the
education sector in connection with the regional Education for Employment Initiative in the
Arab World (e4e). This expansion has allowed IFC to have significant development impact,
including supporting the creation of around 12,000 jobs and helping generate $1.3 billion of
volume in MSME loans.

163. 
IFC's investment activities have been complemented by a strong advisory services
program for investment climate, microfinance, and public private partnerships (PPPs) in
infrastructure. IFC supported two flagship PPP projects showcasing Morocco's regional
leadership on climate change and water: (i) a PPP advisory project to help assess the
feasibility of and structure 
the Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power Project; and (ii)
assistance to the Ministry of Agriculture in structuring and implementing Morocco's first PPP
for desalination and integrated irrigation in the Chtouka region, one of Morocco's largest
agricultural areas. IFC also provided capacity building to the Ministry of Finance to help with
the design and implementation of PPP projects in health and education.

164. 
The CPS commitment to greater collaboration and harmonization yielded dividends
in the form of successful World Bank-IFC integration, strong donor coordination, and a
growing partnership with nongovernment stakeholders. As foreseen in the jointly prepared,
well-integrated results framework, collaboration between the World Bank and IFC was strong
over the course of CPS implementation. Examples include support to MSMEs through IBRD
lending and a joint TA facility, and joint advisory and TA work on targeted measures to
improve the business climate. Coordination among Morocco's development partners has
continued to be effective, with close alignment between donor programs and government
priorities, especially around budget support operations. Donor partnerships have been
particularly strong in education, public administration reform, financial sector reform, rural
roads, and support for the government's INDH. Finally, consultation with nongovernment
stakeholders, outreach to beneficiaries, and dissemination of knowledge evolved into central
themes over the course of CPS implementation. This increased emphasis on civil society
partnerships reflected 
the WBG's broader effort to take a more inclusive approach to
development in response to the profound changes in the MENA region. In Morocco, these
efforts involved further strengthening transparency about WBG programs and broadening
relationships to provide a wider range of stakeholders with opportunities to provide input into
program and give feedback on implementation results.

V. LESSONS RELEVANT TO THE NEXT COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

165. 
Implementation of the CPS confirmed the importance of flexible program design.
The strategy's two-level approach included a 24-month business plan of firmly developed
activities and a longer-term framework of potential intervention areas. This approach allowed
the WBG 
to adapt 
to country circumstances and client demand, including as a new
Government took office and developed its own reform plans and as a new constitution was
adopted midway into the program.

166. Morocco's response 
to 
the challenges emerging from 
the Arab awakening
highlights the importance of understanding the political economy environment. Although
confronted by 
Morocco 
faced many of the 
same challenges 
its neighbors-high
unemployment and poor job quality, inequality, exclusionary practices that benefited elites,
and a public service delivery system that partially failed to deliver good-quality results-its

59

responses were more effective as a result of the Government's willingness to work in a
participatory and inclusive manner.3 5 There is a broad understanding in Morocco that to
achieve real social transformation requires two comprehensive sets of reforms: fostering
equitable growth and jobs, and strengthening service delivery and governance. The CPS aimed
to strengthen its focus in these areas following the CPSPR, and will continue to seek
opportunities to do so in the next CPS.

167. High-level government ownership-together with consistent and constructive
dialogue-are helpful in generating interest and building momentum for reform. Under the
CPS, reforms with regular high-level attention were able to move forward more easily. This
included 
the investment climate work 
through 
the national commission on business
environment, IFC's advisory work with the central bank on credit access, and agriculture
sector reforms under the government's high-profile Plan Maroc Vert and the National Plan for
Irrigation Water Conservation in Morocco. High-level dialogue on broad macro sustainability
issues raised awareness of the importance of controlling the wage bill, allowing reform
progress even after this objective was dropped from the CPS and in the absence of a dedicated
program in this area. Where reform commitment was not backed up by appropriate resources,
as in the case of insufficient staffing to implement trade and competitiveness reforms, progress
was slow. Even where there has been clear government ownership, as on business
environment reforms, 
their 
impact has been weaker 
than anticipated given 
that 
the
bureaucracy has been slow to adapt to new practices. This suggests the importance of pairing
high-level dialogue with practical change management approaches targeted to working-level
staff.

168. While capitalizing on client ownership and reform momentum, attention to
appropriate sequencing remains important. Some reforms envisaged under the CPS stalled
because smaller reform steps that enjoyed significant interest and backing were taken before
overarching frameworks were in place. In the area of public sector management, for example,
multiannual performance budgeting objectives did not yield intended results because sector
medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEFs) were developed before the global MTEF. In
the solid waste sector, policy reforms adopted under the first two DPLs may have advanced
more quickly than the administrative procedures required to implement them.

169. 
Participatory approaches are essential to ensure broader stakeholder ownership of
reform. In light of Morocco's new constitutional mandate to conduct more systematic public
consultations and foster citizen participation, the CPSPR highlighted the need to strengthen
the WBG's support for greater outreach, 
inclusion, and accountability. Participatory
approaches were successful in ushering forward reform through the INDH, on agriculture, on
water and sanitation, and in implementing the Clean Development Mechanism in the solid
waste sector. It will be important to build on these successful experiences in the forthcoming
CPS.

170. 
The single-sector DPLs on which the CPS program relied were effective in moving
forward on a broad program of first-generation reforms amid weaknesses 
in cross-
ministerial coordination, but Morocco's development needs-and the Government's reform
interests-now center around more complex second-generation reforms that involve more
cross-sectoral challenges. Several of the Government's priority reforms, in areas such as trade
and competitiveness, employment generation, and climate change adaptation and green

3s The new constitution specifically states that the government is obliged to work in a more participatory and inclusive way.

60

growth, can only be achieved through across-the-board efforts encompassing a wide variety of
actors. In response to this need, the WBG program has begun to move toward the design of
operations that support the Government in mobilizing multiple institutions and actors and
ensuring better coordination and communication. This shift implies a risk that implementation
progress will stall in the face of continued challenges in cross-agency collaboration. However,
recent experience demonstrates that carefully designed multisectoral operations, backed by
support for institutional coordination mechanisms, could improve the chances of reform
success and, indeed, have a greater impact on complex cross-sectoral reforms than a "silo"
approach centered on individual sectors. For example, the experience of the CNEA shows that
interministerial coordination mechanisms can help build reform momentum 
if given
appropriately high-level support. In the water sector, improved coordination and better
governance were key factors 
in resolving the disconnect between water mobilization
investments and irrigation infrastructure (each the responsibility of a different agency) on the
one hand, and underutilization of already mobilized water resources.

171. 
The strong AAA approach adopted under the CPS was a key factor in developing
and maintaining strong country engagement, and this will need to continue and deepen as
more ambitious reforms are undertaken. It will be important to ensure, however, that the
WBG has the required knowledge and expertise to accompany the Government and can add
real value to the process. Well-targeted technical assistance can help foster institutional and
technical capacity building, an area that is expected to receive greater emphasis as the WBG
moves to implement activities with a stronger focus on implementation and results, as well as
initiatives that aim to strengthen governance, accountability, and voice. In parallel, as echoed
by regular counterpart requests, there 
is a need 
to step up technical assistance and
implementation support for reforms. This is particularly important as the program continues to
shift toward multisectoral reform programs. The WBG program needs 
to step up
implementation support going forward.

172. 
Thoughtful design of monitoring and evaluation frameworks was a factor in the
successful implementation of CPS programs. The INDH program benefited from a thorough
approach to monitoring and evaluation design, which was emphasized not only as a
mechanism for tracking and improving INDH performance and for measuring achievements
against targets, but also as a key element in two-way communication with beneficiaries.
Achievements in the transport sector were facilitated by the use of an indicator on rural access
to all-weather roads, which was well defined, measurable, and well understood and
internalized by all stakeholders. On business environment reforms, the WBG followed the
Government's lead in concentrating on improving performance against the high-profile Doing
Business indicators, which resulted in significant progress in key areas of this survey. Good
results 
in advisory projects 
led by IFC showed 
the importance of involving project
stakeholders in developing monitoring and evaluation frameworks to ensure the same vision
of success. In other areas, such as public sector management reforms, the country team felt
that ownership of reforms could be strengthened through enhanced consultation of users and
stakeholders, notably in the definition of performance objectives and indicators.

61

Annex 2A: Morocco CPS Completion Report Summary Assessment Matrix

Pillar 1: GROWTH, COMPETITIVENESS AND EMPLOYMENT

1.1 BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT:

Government Objectives: Improve the business environment, especially for SMEs, via a comprehensive investment climate reform strategy supported by an effective reform implementation and
coordination

Key Issues Targeted : (1) Uneven quality of the business law/regulatory framework and its enforcement, leading to an unlevel playing field that reduces entry of new SMEs and diversification and
(2) Weak and uninstitutionalized process of PSD reform identification, preparation, implementation and coordination.
Progress Overview: Among other achievements, Morocco improved its Doing Business indicators the most in 2011 compared to other global economies, climbing 21 places to 94 out of 183
economies on overall ease of doing business; with continued progress, Morocco is now ranked 87 of 189 economies. This improvement reflects progress on CPS outcomes such as eliminating the
minimum capital requirement for limited liability companies and strengthening investor protections. Progress in reducing the time and cost of registering a business has been slower than planned,
but is expected to gain momentum through the establishment of e-registration in 2014.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and evaluation summary 

Streamlined regulatory environment 
and a more equitable enforcement of 
rules, particularly for new entrants & 
SMEs. 

Achieved 

* Indicator: Minimum capital 
requirement for a limited liability 
company (as % of GNI per capita) 
Baseline: 2009: 11.8% 
Target: 2013: less than 1%. 

* Indicator: Administrative steps to 
create a business/cost associated as 
% of GNI per capita 
Baseline: 2009: 6 steps/16% 
Target: 2013: 3 steps/8%. 

Minimum capital requirement for a limited liability 
company is 0% of GNI. The amendment to the 
Limited Liability Company law was included in the 
annual reform program of the public-private National 
Commitee for Business Environment, chaired by the 
Head of Government and prepared by the Ministry of 
Industry and Commerce (MCINET) which is the 
authority in charge of overseeing commercial law. 

5 administrative steps required to create a business, 
at an average cost of 9.5% of income per capita. 
Morocco reduced the costs and number of 
administrative steps through setting up a common 
process at the local Regional Investment Committee 
one-stop shops. The planned e-registration process 
has not progressed due to a lack of agreement on 
processes. It is planned to be fully operational in 
2014 under the leadership of the tax administration 
and close involvement of the NCBE.

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

Lending 
Competitiveness DPL (Approved 
FY13; Closed FY14; S); 
Competitiveness DPL2 now 
underway 

AAA 
e IDF for national commission on 
business environment (CNEA) 
(Closed FY14; MU due to late 
delivery) 
e Bank TA to the NCBE (CNEA) 
(between 2010-2012) 
e ICT Strategy Implementation 

IFC 
9 TA to support regulatory reforms 
of the business environment 
e Alternative Dispute Resolution 
advisory (ADRII) aimed at 
encouraging the use of commercial 
mediation to streamline conflict 
settlement processes (Delivered 

Lessons Learned

Business environment simplification is a key demand
from the private sector. Moroccan authorities have been
able to streamline regulatory processes and
administrative procedures in certain areas, but with a
relatively moderate impact.
The Competitiveness DPL and TA assistance to the
CNEA aimed at generating an ambitious approach to
this issue. Following the TA, the Ministry in charge of
Administrative Simplification has contmcted out a
private firm with the mission of establishing a
streamlined mechanism for simplifying procedures
through a certification process for administrative forms.
In parallel, several legal and regulatory reforms have
been undertaken by concerned ministries.
However, even though there is a clear progress and
willingness of authorities to continue moving on that
front, the concrete impact of these efforts remains
relatively weak, as the bureaucracy is slow to adapt its
practices to the new business environment.
*In terms of project implementation, advisory projects
led by IFC showed the importance of building synergies
among different project partners for greater impact, as
well as the importance of having project stakeholders

SIndicator: 0 of firms which claim 
The baseline was established in the 2009 Investment 
that the rule s/regulations are applied Climate Assessment (ICA), to be measured again in 
in an unpredictable and inconsistent 
2013 ICA. The repeat ICA was not conducted due to 
way. 
a lack of government interest. The ongoing regional 
Baseline: 2009: 60%o 
ICA may have findings in late 2014. It is important 
Target: 2013: 4000 
to note, however, that Morocco jumped from 12 7 th to 
8 7 th in the Doing Business rankings between DB201 1 
and D1320 14, pointing to a better business 
environment overall, 

* Indicator: Average of the Doing 
Business indices of extent of 
director's liability, ease of 
shareholders' suit; and strength of 
minority investor protection. 
Baseline: 2009: 3 
Target: 2013: 4.5 

More effective reform coordination 
and implementation in the business 
environment area. 

* Indicator: Effectiveness indicators 
of investment climate reform 
commissions 
Baseline: 2009: average score 
among 4 existing reform 
commissions: 1.7 
Target: 2013: 2.5 for CNEA 

* Indicator (as of CPSPR): Increase in 
Doing Business Ranking. 
Baseline: 124 in 2009 

Average index on strength of investor protection 
increased to 4.7 in 2013, as reported in Doing 
Business 2014. Morocco adopted: (a) an
implementing decree to its corporations law,
prepared by MCINET, which improved minority
shareholder protection; and (b) an amendment to the
law on judicial procedures before commercial courts,
prepared by the Ministry of Justice, which facilitated
shareholder suits.
Achieved 

* Dropped This indicator was dropped at the CPSPR 
stage and replaced with the new indicator below. 

* Overall ranking in the Doing Business survey 
increased from 124 of 181 economies in 2008 
(DB2009)to 94 of 183 economies in 2011 
(DB2012) to 87 of 189 economies in 2013 

(DB2014). 

June 2013) 
* Quality of Public Service Delivery 
(IFC AS) to improve the quality of 
the regulatory environment 
(Underway as of March 2013) 
* Corporate governance advisory and 
capacity building to enhance 
corporate governance standards of 
private SMEs (Launched in FY13; 
to be completed FY16)
9E4E logistic s/tourism labor
observatories (Underway; to be
completed FY16)

involved in developing monitoring and evaluation
frameworks to ensure the same vision of success.
* On corporate governance, market-level activities have
been successful in the long term in convincing firms to
implement better practices. However, working on
regulatory reforms by assisting regulators (central bank,
market authority, stock exchange) to promulgate
corporate governance directives would speed up the
reform process.

* The CNEA was established in 2010 by the Moroccan
authorities with World Bank assistance. The purpose of
the CNEA was to remedy the coordination failures that
were identified during previous diagnostics, notably the
ICA.
* In many ways, the CNEA has proved successful in
generating interest and momentum on investment
climate reforms. It is now routinely chaired by the Head
of Government and has established its legitimacy as the
main tool to identify and monitor investment climate
reforms.
* The CNEA now needs to be more ambitious and tackle
more aggressively the systemic constraints that are not
measured by the Doing Business report. Coordination
with the private sector needs to be enhanced to ensure

that reforms have an actual impact on business

transactions and private sector development.

63

1.2 FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM -

Government Objectives: (1) Improve further access to finance for households; (2) Strengthen access to finance for SMEs; (3) Promote financial stability; and (4) Foster capital
market development to improve access to finance, competition, and risk management.

Key Issues Targeted : (1) More than half of the population does not have access to banking or postal accounts and MFI weaknesses could affect over 1.2 million customers; (2)
SMEs remain underserved; (3) New risks generated by the development of the financial system (e.g. real estate, interest rate, etc.); and (4) Limited development of long term market
instruments.
Progress Overview: Nearly all targets met. Establishment of authorities on capital markets and insurance and pension funds has advanced significantly through the passage of key
laws, and nomination of the heads of these authorities is expected soon.

Learned

o 
n 
khp
strong agenda in the area of financial inclusion and
has worked over the past decade with the WBG and
MFIs to design a program for extending access to
finance among households. These efforts are paying
off, demonstrating the importance of tailoring WBG
interventions to areas with strong ownership, in this
case by the central bank.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

A restructured financial sector 
allowing for sustainable expansion 
of access to finance by 
households. 

Mostly Achieved 

* Indicator: Increase in number of Number of total deposit accounts relative to the 
total deposit accounts relative to population increased to 50% in December 2010, 
the population. 
54% in December 2011, 57% in December 
Baseline: 43% (banks and the 
2012, and 58% in June 2013. The banks have 
post office) in December 2008. 
continued to roll out low-income banking
services under the central bank's financial 
inclusion strategy, endorsed by the Alliance for 
Financial Inclusion (AFI). 

" Reduction in the NPL ratio of 
MFIs 
Baseline: 9% in June 2009. 

The NPL ratio of MFIs decreased to 6.2% in 
December 2010 and 4.3% in December 2012, 
then rose to 9.6% in December 2012. Key 
factors in the initial achievement of this target 
included more effective supervision, merger of 
microfinance institutions (MFIs), and pausing to 
clean up the loan portfolio.

n ru 
aLessons 
Instruments/Status

LT 
e Sustainable Access to Finance 
DPL 1 (Approved FY10, 
Closed FY12, S) 
9 Financial Sector DPL 2 (FY1 3) 
dropped 
e MSME Development Project 
(Investment loan, approved 
FY12; S)

AAA
e Technical assistance, funded by
MNA Transition Fund
* Bank Governance Review
(2009)
* Strengthening Crisis
Preparedness and Processes
(FIRST) (2010)
e Review of framework for
mobile payments (2012)

IFC
* Access to Finance advisory

64

IFC established strong credibility during the first
project with BAM (2006-2009), which positioned
IFC as the preferred advisor to BAM in the area of
credit reporting. Continuous follow-up and
provision of high-level advice following the
conclusion ofthe first project helped maintain a
strong relationship between both institutions in
credit reporting, ensured that Morocco is moving in
the right direction in this area, and may potentially
result in a second project in the next period.
BAM's strong awareness of and buy-in regarding
the importance of credit reporting and capacity
helped it to partner with IFC in awareness and
capacity-building activities designed for countries in
the MENA and Africa regions, which has positioned
Morocco as one of the knowledge centers in the
region on credit reporting.

Established credit infrastructure 
more conducive to SME finance 

Achieved 

* Indicator: Increase in the 
number of monthly 
consultations to the credit 
bureau. 
Baseline: 2,000 consultations in 
November 2009 

The number of monthly consultations to the 
credit bureau reached 12,500 in January 2010, 

79,9 in December 01,9017 

in 2 

,n 

baseline is because the credit bureau had just 
been set up when the baseline was calculated. 

Better identification of risks in the Mostly achieved 
financial system through the 
introduction of fuilly independent 
supervisors. 

Indicator: Establishment of new A law creating the insurance and pension find 
T 
insurance supervisor 
authority was voted by both chambers of 
Baseline: none 
Parliament in 2013. 

Indicator: Establishment of new 
capital market supervisor 
Baseline: none

The law creating the capital market authority 
was promulgated in 2013. 

The law for nominating the heads of both
authorities was adopted by government in
February 2014, paving the way for
operationalization of these entities in the near
feture.

aimed at improvement of 
financial infrastructure with the 
creation of a credit bureau and 
ongoing support to BAM (Bank 
Al-Maghrib, central bank) for 
implementation. 
Capacity building for 
microfinance. Support provided 
to the 3 main MFIs to scale up 
their outreach, now serving 
about 800,000 micro- 
entrepreneurs. 
*Investment 
in local banks, 
insurance companies, SME 
funds, and MFIs focused on 
women and MSMEs. IFC own 
account investments in financial 
markets reached US 290
million in January 2014.
to banking sector and
improved financial
infrastructure
Morocco Secured Lending
Project to establish legal
infrastructure for secured
transactions to expand access to
c 
finance for Moroccan SMEs
(Started 2013)

*Support 

65

Improved liquidity of the 
benchmark yield curve, creation of 
new instruments (e.g. covered
bonds.

Achieved 

* Indicator: Reduction in the 
Number of lines of Treasury bills: 63 (Dec.
number of lines of Treasury 
2013). Key enabling factors included
bills 
implementation of the FIRST TA and issuance
Baseline: 170 lines in June 2009 of a strategy adapted to macro conditions.

* Success in this area demonstrates the importance of
close consultations with industry.

1.3 SKILLS AND EMPLOYMENT -

Government Objectives: (1) Improve access to and quality of higher education (and vocational education and training [VET]) system; (2) Improve labor market information
systems; (3) Extend active labor market programs; (4) Set-up an unemployment insurance scheme.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Inadequacy of higher education (and VET) supply to demand; (2) Knowledge of labor market dynamics is insufficient to inform policies and program; (3)
Labor market rigidity and lack of income protection mechanisms hamper labor mobility and productivity.
Progress Overview: Moderate progress recorded, although data collection has been challenging. CPS outcomes in this sector were amended in the CPSPR to reflect the Skills and
Employment DPL.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Partially achieved 

Matching skills developed within 
the vocational training and higher 
education systems to the needs of 
the labor market ("flow") 

* Indicator: Rate of internal 
efficien cofvocatona byain 
programs covered by a
programmatic contract 
Baseline: 75% (2009/10) 
Target: >90% (20 12/13) 

Bank Group ProgramLesnLard

n 
ruaLessons 
Instruments/Status

Learned

Lending 
9 First Skills and Employment 
DPL (Approved FY12; Closed 
FY13; 5) 

The Second Skills and Employment DPL has been
delayed by several months due political changes in
Morocco and the subsequent government reshuffle,
which has heavily affected the departments

Rate of internal efficiency of vocational training 
programs covered by a programmatic contract: 

9 Second Skills and Employment 
DPL under preparation, to be 
delivered in FY1 4 subject to 

involved. The limited capacity in the relevant
sectors has been another factor.
*The employment TA has helped strengthen capacity

no aggregated data were available at the time of 
publication. However, 2013 data related to 
specific sectors show high levels of both internal AAA 
ate 
Programmatic Employment TA, 
and exteal efficiency oftraining programswhich aims to strengthen 
covered by a programmatic contract: (i) 100 
government capacity to: (i) 
percent of the 400 trainees of the aeronautics 
design the 2012-2106 

completion of prior actions, 

in several areas: (i) strategic vision; (ii) establishing
a Labor Market Observatory; (iii) improving the
design of Active Labor Market Programs; and (iv)
facilitating the dialogue for the preparation of an on-
the-job training law, etc. All related prior actions are
now nearing completion.
DPLs can be a challenging instrument in low-

66

capacity sectors.
When a series of two DPLs is approved, it is
important for the Bank to continue its commitment
in supporting the reforms of the second DPL and to
take into account the political environment in
gauging the processing time.

employment promotion 
strategy; (ii) strengthen the 
labor market information 
system; and (iii) prepare the 
Vocational Training Law 
(ongoing; most of the outputs 
planned at the concept stage
have been delivered or are
nearing completion).
Growth, Employment and
Poverty PESW (Underway; to
be completed FY14).

center (GIMAS) completed the program and 
were employed; and (ii) 95 percent of the 3,425 
trainees in the Renault center were employed. 

* Indicator: University graduation University graduation rate in open-enrollment 
rate in open-enrollment faculties 
faculties: 64% in 2012: data for 2013 requested 
Baseline: 64% (2009/10) 
but not obtained by the time of publication. 
Target: 69%o (2012/13) 

Improving the effectiveness of 
intermediation services, including 
active labor market programs 
("stock")

36

*Indicator: Number of new 
enrolments with ANAPEC, 
including proportion of non- 
graduates 
, per year, by gender 
Baseline: 130,000, including 1%o 
of non-graduates (2011)
Target: 150,000, including 
(13
of non-graduates (2013)
Improving ob quality 

Indicator: Number of firms, 
formerly operating in the 
informal sector, registered 
annually for professional tax 
Baseline: n.a. (2010)
Target: 14,000 (2012)b- 

cumulative 

Achieved 

Number of new enrolments with ANAPEC:
158,770 in 2012 (60%o men, 40%o women),
including 10( of non-graduates! 150,559 in
2013 (61% men, 39%o women), including 15%o of
non-graduates.

Achieved

The number of firms formerly operating in the
informal sector, registered annually for
professional tax, has increased steadily following
fiscal measures implemented in January 2011.

2011: 6,449 firms
2012: 12,410 firms
2013: 19,400 firms

36 Non-graduates are those who have not completed high school (baccalaureat), or do not have a vocational training diploma.

67

1.4 TRADE AND COMPETITIVENESS - Added to the CPS Results Matrix at CPSPR -

Government Objectives: (1) Modernizing the legal and institutional framework of foreign trade; (2) Streamlining trade logistics at the ports of entry; (3) Strengthening the
institutional framework for the competition policy

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Enhancement of transparency and predictability on the regulatory framework applicable to safety and hygiene standards for local producers and importers;
(2) Reduction of administrative burden (time and costs) and increased transparency for importers and exporters; and (3) Reduction of dominant positions and unfair competition.

Progress Overview: This new results area was added through the CPSPR to reflect the focus of the Bank's Competitiveness DPL. All planned actions have been initiated, but
targets have only been partially achieved, due either to a lack of resources or to overambitious indicators.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Modernizing the legal and 
institutional framework of foreign 
trade 

Partially achieved 

* Number of controls on imported 
products 
Baseline: 71,000 (2011) 
Target (2013): over 100,000 
Streamlining trade logistics at thein 
Stealiin rae ogsic a te 
ports of entry 
* Reduce the total time (dischargeof 
Reduce th total tme (discarge 
7 dys (Dec.2013). 

Partially achieved 

76,000 controls on imported products (2012), 
including 343 rejections. Data for 2013 will be 
available in March 2014. 
8,300 control operations on the local market, 

94 cases bein brought to litigation.

outlet) for containers 
Baseline: 2010 average 
Target (2013): Reduce by 25% 
by 2013 

Strengthening the institutional 
framework for the competition 
policy 
* Number of cases of self-referral, 
investigation and sanctions 
impoed 
b 
theNatinalhuman 
imposed by the National 
Competition Council.
Baseline: 0
Target: 4 official investigations

Portnet is used only to unload containers and is 
not yet a single entry point for all controls 

(stopover only). 

Partially achieved 

2 official investigations in 2013. Incomplete 
progress can be explained by a lack of sufficient
resources, as there are only 6 operational
staff+ 3 operational staff in 2 years.

by end 201376,000controlsonimportedproducts(2

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status
Lending 
Economic Competitiveness 
Support Program DPL 
(Approved FY13; Closed
FY14; S)
9 Competitiveness DPL2 now
underway

Lessons Learned

It is suggested that this indicator be amended to
reflect the number of rejected products and the
number of prosecutions.

AAePortnet 
e TAon trade capacity building 

eTA on AnalyticalSuprtohe 
Government of Morocco in the 
Analysis of Constraints to 
Competitiveness and
C 
CmeiieesPlcDsgn 
(FY 12) 
AAA on data and statistics, 
including simulation of 
industrial and trade policies (To 
be completed FY14) 

deployment took longer than expected. The
delay can be explained by delays in implementation
the Guichet Unique du Commerce Extrieur
(n-opspfrfrigtad,wchstob
(e-sop 
sh 
for f 
oreign 
trade, wiitb
dvped b the Mnt of orinT

In addition, the partners involved do not have the
same degree of IT maturity, underestimating the
impact on information systems interconnection.
* The average processing time is one year due to
insufficient resources.
" A manual of procedures for investigations would
facilitate the work of investigators.

68

Pillar 2: SERVICE DELIVERY TO CITIZENS

2.1 PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT -

Government Objectives: (1) Increase transparency, accountability and performance measurement of the budget; (2) Progress in implementing key components of HR reform; (3)
Consolidate and control civil service payroll evolution; (4) Simplification of PA procedures and greater availability of on line services.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Insufficient visibility of policies in their medium-term budgetary implications which would allow for budgetary allocation decisions in a multiyear
framework; (2) Need to improve HR management to enhance civil service performance including in deconcentrated entities; (3) Strengthen payroll management to foster control of
overall public wage bill and promote macroeconomic stability; and (4) Inefficient and nontransparent procedures undermine quality and reliability ofPA processes.
Progress Overview: Moderate progress recorded based mainly on PARL IV DPL actions. Some good progress on reducing the wage bill was achieved in 2010 but was then reversed
due to Arab Spring pressures up to 2012. As the medium-term sustainability of public finance was at risk, the government worked to better control expenditures in 2013, including the
wage bill, with encouraging results. The First Transparency and Accountability DPL series was signed in December 2013. It supports key policy reforms to enhance transparency and
accountability in the management of public resources and foster a more open mode of governance through access to information and public participation. A parallel technical
assistance project, funded by the Transition Fund, was approved in October 2013 to support the implementation of reforms related to performance budgeting, citizen participation, and
fiscal decentralization.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Multiannual budgetary planning 
integrated with the process of 
preparation of the Budget Law. 

* Indicator: Number of additional 
ministries that routinely do a 
Medium-Term Expenditure 
Framework (MTEF). 
Baseline: 12 ministries, in 
October~ ~ 

~ 

Partially achieved 

~ 

~ 

In progress. More than 16 ministries have 
developed over 19 sector or subsector MTEFs. 
Most ministries are familiar with this tool, but it 
is not yet fully operational, in the absence of a 
global MTEF and multi annual budget ceilings. 
h 
e 
rai 
ugtlw 
hc 
a 
n 
approved by the Council of Ministers in January 
2014 and is awaiting parliamentary approval, 
intends to address this shortcoming by 
introducing a multi annual budget perspective 
and a programmatic approach. In the meantime, 
the 2014 budget law launched the preparation of 
programmatic budgets for 4 ministries on the 
basis of performance objectives and indicators. 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status
Lending 
* PAR 
IV (Approved FY10; 
Closed FY11; 5) 
e Accountability and 
Transparency DPL underway 
(Approved FY14) 

AAA 
e Pension Reform TA 
B09 
-Government TA 
Compensation Reform TA 
dropped 
Public Administration Reform 
TA 
Country Governance and 
Corruption 
P-ESW 
Public Expenditure Review 

ti- 

Lessons Learned

The multiannual performance budgeting did not yield
the intended results in the absence of a central
medium-term budget framework and a clear legal
framework. Sector MTEFs were developed without a
global MTEF or initial globalization of
appropriations at budget item level before genuine
budget program and heads were defined. The benefits
from testing the performance approach were
therefore limited. This is being addressed through the
new organic budget law.
There is a need for stronger coordination with a
number of connected reforms, including payroll and
human resources management as well as the
deconcentration charter. Similarly, synergies between
these central reforms and sector strategies seem to
have been underutilized.
The long and incremental preparation phase and its
extended pilot testing have led to reform fatigue in
line ministries. A shorter implementation phase (2 to
3 years) with a participatory platform approach may
be more effective in fully mobilizing the

69

Achieved 

The pending HRM policy adopted 
by the government. This concerns 
the decree on Harmonization of 
Civil Service Status of "Editors- 
Rdacteurs" and "Technicians." 

* Indicator: Decree adopted by the 
government. 
Baseline: Preparatory background 
work has started. 

The number of different civil servant statutes 
was reduced through the adoption of three 
decrees at the beginning of 2011, merging 22 
statutes into 3. 

The wage bill is in line with the 
government medium term target of 
10 percent of GDP. 

Dropped 

Indicator: Share of Wage Bill in 
GDP. 
Baseline: 10. 3 %n in 2009. 

n 

This outcome was dropped due to the 
Government's response to the Arab awakening, 
including wage increases for civil servants. The 
focus of the Bank's program shifted away from 
support for a traditional administrative reform 
agenda toward the improvement of transparency,

accountability, and public service delivery.

70

administration for reform implementation, as in the
Latin American experience with public sector
reforms.
Lessons learned from the steering of the preparatory
and experimental phase confirm the need to
strengthen and formalize the steering of the reform
on three levels: (i) a specific, temporary, and
adequately fumnded coordination unit within the
Ministry of Finance and dedicated temporary units,
which are directly attached to sector ministries and
have both budget and operational expertise; (ii)
senior-level thematic inter-ministerial committees for
consolidating and broadening the working groups
created to revise the organic budget law; and (iii) a
political interministerial committee that would meet
regularly to steer the reform, arbitrate and to monitor
its implementation.
Ownership of reforms could be strengthened through:
(i) enhanced consultation of users and stakeholders,
notably in the definition of performance objectives
and indicators; (ii) creating a reform community
(through an Internet/Intranet website and topical
seminars) aimed at networking experts and
disseminating knowledge and experience; (iii)
intensifying and institutionalizing information and
training (ENA, management training organizations,
etc.).
* Although no Bank program is addressing the wage
bill issue explicitly, dialogue with the government on
the consolidation of public finance to ensure
macroeconomic sustainability over the medium term
raises awareness of the government on the need to
control the wage bill. The government is felly
committed to rationalizing management of the wage
bill, which it succeeded to achieve in 2013 despite
i 
o a

Nevertheless, after an increase to 11.6% of GDP
in 2012, the wage bill was reduced to around
11% of GDP in 2013.

E-government is introduced to 
simplify PA procedures including 
for service delivery. 

Partially achieved 

* Indicator: Number of Government Over 9 Government Priority projects fully 
Priority projects (15 listed) fully 
implemented; e-Consulat, Integrated 
implemented. 
management of public expenditure, Online VAT 
Baseline: None in 2009. 
claims, Paying Corporate Tax, Paying Income 

tax, Setting up and electronic certificationestablished.
tax,Seting p ad elctrnic 
ertficaionFurthermore, 
authority, Employee online social claims, 
Customs declarations, 

Other applications are on their way to being
implemented: Online bidding for public tenders,
enterprise creation, Common identifier and
inter-operability among administrations.

The Bank has focused its support on two key e-
government initiatives. (1) A collaborative Internet
platform called Watiqa, enabling citizens to order
their birth certificates online and to receive them
through registered mail; the geographic and
functional scope of this platform is being extended.
(2) The adoption of e-procurement and reverse
auctions, for which the legal basis has been

a multi-stakeholder working group has
been established with participation from the civil
society and academe to develop an e-participation
platform concretizing the new constitutional right for
participatory democracy.

71

2.2 QUALITY AND ACCESS IN EDUCATION -

Government Objectives: (1) Achieve universal compulsory basic education by 2015; (2) Improve system performance (teaching, management and stewardship); (3) Mobilize and
utilize resources effectively.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Large number of school-aged remains excluded from the system, with high repetition and dropout rates; (2) Weak external efficiency and quality of the
education system; and (3) Weak institutional performance in teaching, management and stewardship.

Progress Overview: Good progress toward most outcomes, particularly in the area of access to primary education. Slower progress in expanding access to lower secondary education
reflects low enrollment in rural areas as well as overly ambitious indicators. Targets on quality and management capacity were mostly achieved. The thrust of the Bank's support to
education evolved during the CPS period, focusing more on quality than on access. Gender-disaggregated indicators were introduced in the CPSPR.

Lessons Learned

Budget support provided jointly with other
development partners has been instrumental in
helping the Ministry of National Education
(MEN) achieve most of its targets in terms of
improved access to education.
Targets regarding lower secondary education
were overly ambitious given wide disparity in
enrollments between urban and rural areas.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Increased net enrollment rates for 
primary and lower secondary 
education. 

Mostly achieved with 2 targets fully achieved 
and 2 targets partially achieved 

* Indicator: primary education net 
enrollment rate. 
Baseline: 90.5% (2008/09). 
Targets: 91.9% (2009/10), 93.2% 
(2010/11), 94.6% (2011/12). 

Primary education net enrollment rate targets 
exceeded: 93.9% (2009/10), 96.4% (2010/11), 
96.6% (2011/12). Good progress as a result of 
improved student retention as reflected in lower 
dropout rates (from 4.6% to 2.8%). 

* Indicator: lower secondary net 
enrollment rate. 
Baseline: 42.7% (2008/09). 
Targets: 51.5% (2009/10), 62.0% 
(2010/11), 74.7% (2011/12). 

Lower secondary education net enrollment rate 
improved but fell short of targets: 48.0%
(2009/10), 51.0% (2010/11), 53.9% (2011/12). 
Partial progress reflects overly ambitious 
targets, as well as low enrollment in rural areas 
(31%in 2011/12). 
(31% 

Additional gender indicators added 
at CPSPR: 

a 

Indicator: female primary 
education net enrollment rate 
Baseline: 89.1% (2008/09). 
Targets: 92.5% (2010/11), 94.2% 
(2011/12). 

Female primary education net enrollment rate 
targets exceeded: 92.7% (2009/10), 95.4% 
(2010/11), 96% (2011/12). Good progress due
largely to improved female net enrollment in
rural areas (from 93% to 97%).

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

Lending 
e Education DPL (Approved FY10; 
Closed FY11; MS) 
e Education DPL2 (Approved FY1 3; S) 
e Skills and Employment DPL 
(Approved FY12; Closed FY13; S) 
Second Public Administration Reform 
DPL (Approved FY06, Closed FY07; 
S)
e Accountability and Transparency DPL
underway (Approved FY14)

AAA
* Impact evaluation of conditional cash
transfer program in rural primary
schools (Data collected, draft report
completed, final report underway)

e Education PER (Draft completed)
PETS-QSDF (PETS TOR developed)

IFC
PPP in Education

72

Improving internal efficiency and quality of
education requires a better understanding of
factors related to both demand and supply
this area is currently

insufficient.

* Indicator: female lower secondary 
net enrollment rate 
Baseline: 42.4% (2008/09) 
Targets: 61.8%o (2010/11), 74.6%0.
(2011/12). 

Female lower secondary net enrollment rate
improved but fell short of targets: 47.3%
(2009/10), 50.2% (2010/11), 52.9% (2011/12).
Partial progress reflects overly ambitious
targets, as well as low enrollment in rural areas
(24% in 2011/12).

Reduced repetition rates for primary Partially achieved 
and lower secondary education. 

*key 
Baseline: 12.3%o (2008/09). 

Targets: 9.100 (2009/10), 6.7% 

(2010/11), 5.0%o (2011/12). 

Primary education repetition rate improved butin 
fell short of targets: 12.0% (2009/10), 9.3% 
(2010/11), 8.2% (2011/12). Repetition rates are
still high, particularly for boys (9.8% in
2011/12). One possible explanation is that it is
taking time to put in place the planned student
monitoring and support mechanism (education
non formelle).

* Indicator: lower secondary 
repetition rate. 
Baseline: 15.2% (2008/09). 
Targets: 13.0% (2009/10), 11.1% 
(2010/11), 9.5% (2011/12). 

Lower secondary education repetition rate
remained stable: 16.1% (2009/10), 16.3%
(2010/11), 16.0% (2011/12). Repetition rates
are still high, particularly for boys (19.4% in
2011/12). Same factors as above.

Additional gender indicators added
at CPSPR:
* Indicator: Primary female 
repetition rate 
Baseline: 10% (2008/09). 
Targets: 5.9 % (2010/11), 4 .5 % 
(2011/12).

* Indicator: lower secondary female 
repetition rate 
Baseline: 11.5% (2008/09) 
Targets: 8.9% (2010/11), 7.9% 
(2011/12).

Primary female repetition rate improved
significantly, but still fell short of targets: 9 .8 %
(2009/10), 7.3% (2010/11), 6.4% (2011/12).
Same factors as above.

Lower secondary female repetition rate
remained stable: 12.1% (2009/10), 12.3%

(2010/11), 11.6% (2011/12). Same factors as
above.

73

* DPLs are not appropriate for supporting the
government in addressing issues (such as
quality and internal efficiency) that require
closer collaboration with the client.

Improved education quality with a 
focus on restructuring teachers' 
training and learning evaluation. 

Mostly achieved 

* Indicator: Establishment of 
national learning assessment 
system. 
Baseline: Not yet established 

(2008/09).

National Learning Assessment System (PNEA)
established. One learning outcomes survey
conducted; second planned survey postponed
due to teacher strikes. New upper secondary

education strategy at early stages of
preparation, awaiting ongoing consultations on
overall education sector strategy.

Target: New upper secondary 
education strategy is developed 
and implemented by 2012; 
National learning assessment
system has been established and at
least one learning outcomes survey
has been carried out (with analysis
and dissemination) by 2012.
Improved management capacity and Mostly achieved
increased accountability of results at
all levels, within the context of
decentralization.

* Indicator: Proportion of lower 
secondary teachers working the 
full complement of hours assigned. 
Baseline: 37.5% (2008/09). 
Targets: 40.5% (2007/08), 53.8% 

Proportion of lower secondary teachers
working the full complement of hours assigned
improved, but fell short of targets: 40.2%
(2010/11), 59.8% (2011/12).
Despite measures adopted by MEN for

(2009/10), 43.00 

in the schools sector (covering teacher
redeployment, mobility, and retention), which
improved efficiency in administrative
processing, their effect on efficiency in
managing HR particularly on teacher
deployment has been limited.

74

2.3 HEALTH SECTOR REFORM -

Government Objectives: (1) Reduce the burden of major health conditions; (2) Reduce inequity in access to services affecting poor and rural populations; (3) Improve financing and
efficiency of the sector; and (4) Improve governance of the sector.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Dual burden of non-communicable diseases and poor maternal and child health outcomes; (2) Public financing of health services remains inadequate,
resulting, among other things, in high out-of-pocket expenditures; and (3) Limited access to affordable and quality pharmaceutical products (quantity scarce in public sector, prices
high in the private sector).
Progress Overview: The Bank's Health DPL preparation was cancelled because no agreement was reached on the adequacy of the measures to be supported, the instrument, or sector
needs. Technical assistance was carried out.

2.4 VULNERABILITY AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION -

Government Objectives: (1) Reduce rural poverty, urban social exclusion and vulnerability; (2) Empower poor and vulnerable groups for their own development.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) High level of rural poverty, social exclusion and vulnerability; (2) Insufficient access to/use of basic infrastructure, social services and economic
opportunities, by poor and vulnerable groups; (3) Lack of convergence of poverty alleviation policies and implementation mechanism across government agencies; and (4) Centrally-
driven approach dealing with poverty and social exclusion, with little room for participation and empowerment of the stakeholders.
Progress Overview: Advanced progress recorded based on the successful completion of INDH-1, in which many outcomes surpassed their targets. The CPS outcomes in this program
area were amended at the time of the CPSPR in response to changes made in INDH-1 project development objectives, at the government's request, to better capture the outcomes of
inclusiveness, accountability and transparency, and to measure the impact on the target population. Recognizing the value added provided by the Bank, the client requested Bank
technical and financial support for the p ogram's second phase, launched in June 2011. The Bank is supporting the INDH-2 through the first PforR operation in Morocco (2012-2015).

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

Lessons Learned

Use of services and infrastructure 

Achieved 

* Indicator: Number of persons (men, Number of persons (men, women, and youth) 
women and youth) reporting 
reporting increased use of basic infrastructure 
increased use of basic infrastructure 
and socioeconomic services created by INDH, 
and socioeconomic services created 
broken down by program 
by INDH 
(rural/urban/vulnerable/crosscutting), at 
project's end in June 2011: 
Baseline 
Target (June 
Rural: 78% men, 71% women, 61% youth 
(Dec. 2006): 
2011): 
Men 0% 
Men 70% 
Urban: 73% men, 72% women, 56% youth 
Women 0% Women 50% 
Crosscutting: 74% men, 67% women, and 58% 
Youth 0% 
Youth 30% 
youth. This indicator was not tracked for the 

vulnerability component, which focused instead 

Lendiniz 

9INDH Project (SWAP, 2007-20 10) 

completed (Approved FY07; Closed 
FY12; MS) 
9 INDH 2 PforR Operation, 2011-2015 
(Approved FY12; S) 
* JSDF Grant S2.85m Promoting 
Accessibility for Persons with 
Limited Mobility (Approved FY12; 
S) 

Design of and support to the participatory
process was critical. Particular Bank
contributions included supporting the
preparation or revision of the operational
manuals that guided the program as a whole.
Strong focus on procedures helped ensure
fiduciary soundness and appropriate
safeguards, including elaboration of financial
and procurement manuals, an environmental
management plan and a resettlement plan,
inclusion of environmental screening in
subproject selection, and designation of a

safeguards focal person at the INDH

75

on budget priorities and NGO participation in 
decision making and project management. 
These achievements were the result of high 
mobilization, strong political support, and the 
implementation of over 22,000 subprojects for 
5.2 million beneficiaries. This key project 
development indicator was monitored and 
followed up on regularly.

Transparency 

Achieved 

*Indicator: 00 of CLDH, CPDH and 
CRDH's decisions published, 
relating to the projects 
approved/rejected and annual 
physical and financial reports 
Baseline: 000 in Dec. 2006 
Target: 950c in June 2011 

10000 of CLDH, CPDH, and CRDH's 
decisions published, relating to the projects
approved/rejected and annual physical and
financial reports at project's end in June 2011.
This was a key intermediate indicator in the
project, monitored closely during
implementation.

Accountability & ownership 

Achieved

AAA 
* PESW 
* Breaking Barriers to Youth Inclusion 
* Governance of Service Delivery to 
Citizens
* Poverty PESW (Underway; to be
s Ecto 
completed FY14).

IFC
*Ongoing IFC support to microfinance
sco ivsmn 
n dioy

coordination unit at the central level.
Targeting mechanisms for urban
neighborhoods could have been refined to
ensure more objectivity in selection.

*(Targetinemechanismdforsurba

* Indicator: % of projects 
implemented by communities, 
CPDHofCLandPDH 
NGO, Communes 
Baseline 
Target(June 
(Dec. 2006): 
2011): 

Rural 000 

Rural 60 

Urban 0n 
Crosscutting 

000 

Urban 70% 
Cross-

cuing 7 0

Inclusiveness 

*Indicator: 00 of women in CLDH, 

Baseline 
(Dec. 
2006): 
CLDH O 

Target 
(June 
2011): 
CLDH140  

CPDH 0% 
CPDH 140%
CRDH 0% CrH 70%

90 

rural, 72% urban, and 790 of

cross-cutting projects implemented by
anRCRH'
communities, NGOs, and communes at the
project's end in June 2011. Lessons of
experience from community-driven

development projects elsewhere were

introduced in the INDH design.

Achieved
1 70% of women in CLDH, 170 o in CPDH, and
s110 
in CRDH. The key enabling factors for
this achievement were the implementation of
awareness-raising and capacity development
activities and the inclusion of specific
indicators to assess progress overtime.

76

) 

*The significant difference between the target
and the result achieved regarding the girls'
success rates points to the possibility that
either the baseline or the target value were
underestimated. This will be assessed during
the upcoming mid-term review of the project.

* Indicator: % of youth in CLDH, 
CPDH and CRDH. 
Baseline: 0% in December 2006
Target: 7% in June 2011

12% of youth in CLDH, CPDH, and CRDH.
Success factors as described above.

** 
Srese in the 
i80.4% 
who reside in the educational 
dormitories (Dgr--Tlib-Dar Taliba), 
graduating to the next grade. 
Baseline: 45%
Target: 50% by end-2012 

* Increase in the % of women and 
youth (18 -35 years old) in local
youh (8 
-35 ear ol) 
i loal 
governance bodies: CLDH & CPDH. 
Baseline: 17% women and 12%
youth at end-201 1. 
Targets: 20% women, 15% youth by 
end-2012

Increase in % of 
implementing 
agencies receiving capacity building. 
Target: 50% (20,15%yothb
Baseline: 20% of above agencies 
receive capacity building (2011) 

Achieved 

ADDITIONAL INDICATORS ADDED AT THE CPSPR
Lending 
INDH 2 (Approved FY2; 

of girls who reside in the educational 
dormitories (Dar Taliba) graduated to the next 

gan 

eeeing 

at 

in 

girls also benefitted from educational support
during their stay in the dormitories.

20.1% of women and 16.4% of youth (18-35
years old) in local governance bodies--CLDH
and CPDH-i 2012. This was achieved thanks

to the lessons learned in implementing INDH-
.

t 
A capacity building program was implemented,
lGA 
including training of over 800 NGOs. The final
and exact number will be validated in 2014, but
preliminary estimates foresee that 50-60% of
Tunde.IGA 
agencies received capacity building

77

2.5 TRANSPORT - P

Government Objectives: (1) Rural Roads: Improve access of rural dwellers to basic infrastructure and social services with all weather roads; (2) Urban Transport: develop the
institutional framework, improve efficiency of services and infrastructure, and ensure the environmental and social sustainability.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Rural Roads Accessibility: only 54% of the rural population has access to roads that can be used all times; (2) Responsibility over maintenance of the
3,000km of unclassified roads is unclear; (3) Inefficient provision of transport services and infrastructure due also to weak institutional capacity.
Progress Overview: Advanced progress recorded. Access among the rural population to an all-weather road improved significantly from 54 percent in 2005 to 77 percent in 2013.
Preparation of a strategy for the maintenance of unclassified rural roads has advanced, albeit at a slower pace than expected. Indicators and milestones for the Urban Transport PforR
will be specified at the time of preparation and will be captured by the next CPS. The JSDF grant supporting accessibility of people with reduced mobility expects to achieve results
only by end-2013, which is beyond the timeframe of the current CPS; results of this activity will therefore be captured in the next CPS.

Lessons Learned

One key success factor of the Second National
Program of Rural Roads was its monitoring
and evaluation system, which was built upon
the indicator of the rural population's access to
an all-weather road. All stakeholders
understood and internalized this well-defined
and measurable indicator, which is more
relevant than the length of improved roads.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Increased accessibility of rural 
population to all-weather roads - from 
65% (2009) to 80% (2012). 

Partially achieved 

Indicator: Percentage of rural 
population that have access to all 
weather-roads. 
Baseline: 65% (2009) 
Target: 80% (2012). 

Percentage of rural population that has access 
to all-weather roads: 75% (December 2012), 
77% (June 2013). In 2005, the government 
launched the Second National Program of 
Rural Roads to increase this percentage from 
54% in 2005 to 80% in 2015 through the 
improvement of 15,600 km of rural roads. In 
2007 the government decided to bring the 
program's completion date forward to 2012, 
but this proved infeasible due to a lack of 
financing. The program is ongoing, with 
completion expected in 2015 as originally 
planned.

Sustainable maintenance of 
unclassified roads. 

Partially achieved 

Indicator: Action plan for 
sustainability of unclassified rural 
roads in place. 
Baseline: No plan prepared 
Target: Plan implemented by 2012. 

Sustainability of unclassified rural roads has 
advanced, albeit at a slower pace than expected 
since institutional stakes are complex. Ani
interministerial committee was formed in 
201 Ito devise a strategy for the maintenance of

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

Lending 
* Rural Roads Project (Approved 
FY04; Closed FY11; S) 
* Second Rural Roads Project and 
Additional Financing (Approved 
FY06; AF FY10; Second AF under 
preparation; S) 
9 Urban Transport DPL 1 (Approved 
FY11; Closed FY12; MS)
9 Urban Transport DPL 2 (FY13)
replaced by Urban Transport PforR
(FY15)
FYCo4;sCoderd Faciitaionan
9 JSDF Grant ($2.85m) Promoting
Accessibility for Persons with
Limited Mobility (in supervision
phase)

AAA
9 TA to reinforce the Port Authority
(ANP)
inrau 
sctourae trady frct 
conatre stdfoMahe

and

* Transport and Energy Efficient AAA

78

these roads, including institutional, financial, 
and organizational arrangements. The 
committee proposed three strategic options in
October 2013, and the decision is expected in
2014. The committee would then develop the
selected option in details with a view to
beginning implementation in 2015.
Efficient planning and management of Partially achieved 
the urban transport sector. 

IFC
* PPP in transport

* Indicator 1: Number of cities over 
500,000 inhabitants which have 
established an urban transport 
planning and management authority 
Baseline: 1 city (Casablanca) 
Target: 4 cities by 2013 

* Indicator 2: Number of cities over 
500,000 inhabitants which have 
adopted a long term multimodal 
urban transport master plan 
Baseline: 1 city (Casablanca) 
Target: 6 cities by 2013. 

Financial support allocated to urban 
transport projects with high economic
returns

* Indiao: tralovernmen 

re 

1 city (Casablanca) has established a fully 
functioning urban transport planning authority 
(AODU) with oversight and advisory 
responsibilities. 1 mid-sized city (Agadir) is 
working to set up a similar institution. The 
Ministry of Interior's current strategy is to have 
local government-owned holding companies
(Socit 
de Patrimoine) assume the role of
urban transport planning and management
authorities. Over the medium term, it is planned
that STRS (Socimo de Tramway de Rabat-Sal 
will act as the de facto urban transport authority
for Greater Rabat. The Urban Transport Project
(PforR) will support this strategy under the next
CPS.

5 cities (Tangers, Casablanca, Rabat, T6touan,
Marrakech) have adopted a long term
multimode urban transport master plan (PDU).
2 other mid-sized cities (Agadir and Oujda)
have made significant progress on their PDUs
following initial delays due to local
procurement issues.

Partially achieved

urban infrastructure investments are
relevant for this indicator:
ourity1) 
Tramway in Rabat, estimated to cost 3.8bn

79

Local issues related to procurement, financing,
governance, and coordination may contribute
to delaying the implementation of initiatives
by both cities and local governments. It is
critically important, therefore, to include in the
program strong incentives for cities to achieve
results, coupled with institutional
strengthening and complementary
investments.

toTwo 
boat 

investment funding in cities over 
500,000 inhabitants. 
Baseline: To be established through 
the first UT DPL. 
Target: 20% in 2013. 

DH. The central government's share of the
funding is 1.7bn DH (45%), channeled through
a company responsible for land planning
(AAVB); this is the entity that will be investing
in the tramway as well as in other infrastructure
projects.
2) Tramway in Casablanca, estimated to cost
6bn DH. Central government funding is 4bn
DH (66%).

Government Objectives: Increased competitiveness and diversification of the agricultural sector to sustain stronger agricultural growth and employment.

2.6 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR REFORM -

(IVED

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Low quality domestic marketing infrastructure (wholesale markets and slaughterhouses) that inhibits price formation; (2) Inefficient management of water
resources in irrigation sector; and (3) Under-performing public sector support and services.
Progress Overview: Significant progress has been recorded, due mainly to the successful implementation and completion of the DPL series in support of the Plan Maroc Vert
(Morocco Agricultural Policy).

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Improved integration of smallholders Mostly achieved 
into domestic markets. 

* Indicator: Million tons domestically 
produced fresh fruit and vegetable 
sold in national wholesale markets, 
Baseline: 2.2 million tons 
Target: 4 million tons. 

Improved integration of smallholders into 
domestic markets: 3.25 million tons of 
domestically produced fresh fruit and 
vegetables sold in wholesale markets, 
Imprvnt miniteraio deparmentoes nt

The convention between local government and 
tmodernized; 
impemetin 
frit nd egeabl whlesle 
metiliberalizing 
market pilot projects that introduce new 
management models has been signed for 
Berkane. 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

Lending 
9 Oum Er Rbia Irrigation Project 
(Approved FY1 0; MS) 
e PMV DPL 1 (Approved FY11; 
Closed FY12; S) 
9 PMV DPL 2 (Approved FY1 3; S) 

Modernization of irrigation project is 
progressing well, with 20,000 ha to be 
the first sectors to be 
completed by the end of 2014. 

Policy dialog continues on financial 
sustainability. PMV DPL-2 tariff 
measure replaced by more structural 
support for sector reform to turn 

Lessons Learned

The Ministry of Agriculture and Maritime
Fisheries (MAPM) has demonstrated
sufficient capacity to design and implement
agreed reforms. However, this capacity
continues to be challenged in the case of
reforms entailing interministerial coordination,
as in the case of improving the efficiency of
domestic markets.
9 Reducing domestic market distortions through
increased investment and improved
management of marketing infrastructure and
distribution systems for fruit and
vegetables will require more time because the
process of change involves many actors, both
in the central government and in the
municipalities, that have traditionally played a
large role in regulating marketing at the local

80

ORMVAs from an administration status 
into a utility called Regional Irrigation 
Companies, as part of a broader reform 
to consolidate all of MAPM's 
deconcentrated services at the regional 
level into one called ORDAR (Regional 
Office for Agricultural and Rural 
Development). 16 laws were prepared
and are being reviewed by the 
government, 

AAA 
9 WBG and FAO technical assistance 
* WBG TA on PPP models for 
ORMVAs 

Improved irrigation water 
management. 

Achieved 

* Indicator 1: area equipped with drip 
irrigation systems. 
Baseline: 2008: 165,000 ha; 
Target: 2013: 360,000 ha. 

* Indicator 2: 00 O&M cost recovery 
in 5 ORMVAs 
Baseline: 2007: 76%. 
Target: 88% 
Target for this indicator changed from 
7 to 5 ORMVAs and from 100% to 
88% to align with indicators ofPlan 
Maroc Vert DPL2 

Drip irrigation water management: 365,000 ha 
equipped by the end of 2013. Achievement of 
this target was enabled by the MAPM's strong 
engagement in implementing the Plan Maroc 
Vert, and within it the National Irrigation 
Modernization Program (PNEEI), combined 
with subsidies made available to farmers 
through the FDA fund. 

%0 0&M cost recovery in the 5 ORMVAs: 
Despite the government's recall of tariff 
reforms, collection rates have improved to 900 
in5 ORMVAs. In addition, 76% correspond to 
the sustainable cost, which goes beyond O&M 
and includes a portion of renewal. Although 
ORMVA-specific, the ballpark breakdown for 
all ORMVAs is 80 O&M /20 
renewal. As 
a result, the O&M cost recovery is over 900 
for 5 ORMVAs. 

level. Two additional conventions for
wholesale markets are underway, one in
Mekn s and one in Rabat.
* The government has made a strong push to
support PMV, PNEEI, and FDA subsidies
. Modernization of large-scale irrigation takes
time, as it requires the development of new

irrigation 
stcture.
farmers to take control of their farming
strategy and learn how to best use drip
irrigation.
* The participatory approach embedded in the
project structure was a key to success, and has
been replicated by other donors funding
PNEEI (AfD13 and EIB).
* Partnership with FAO embedded in the
Modernization of Irrigation project is
recognized by all parties as good practice.
* New modes of engagement need further
support in the form of technical assistance to
manage technology; development of adapted
extension services to deliver on intensification
ambition; and encouraging the creation of new
value chain to incentivize farmers to switch to
higher-value crops.
e MAPM led a strong push to increase the
collection ratio in ORMVAs that were
performing less well; through improved
service, this generated improvement in Gharb
ORMVA.
O Farmers have no problem paying more for
water, as long as the water generates added
value beyond this cost. The key to water
efficiency is to combine the added value of
agriculture and the added value per cubic
meter of irrigation water.

81

Improved public sector support and 
services to smallholders. 

Achieved 

* Indicator: # of Pillar II projects 
implemented in 2013. 
Baseline: 50 Pillar II projects (2009) 
Target: 290 Pillar II projects (2013) 

340 projects implemented as of the end of 
FY13. These projects involve 530,000 
beneficiaries, 660,000 ha, and represent a total 
amount of MAD 12 billion (US$1.4 billion) in 
investment. Provincial technical committees 
have been established for the pre-selection of 
Pillar II projects. The main contributing factors 
to the achievement of this outcome are the 
lessons learned since the launch of the Plan 
Maroc Vert in 2008 and the priority given by 
the government to this program. Pillar II 
projects are financed mainly by public 
resources. 

* ADA, the agency responsible for
implementing and monitoring the PMV, is
highly dynamic. They are able to combine
these Pillar II approaches with the value chain
diversification they are also promoting.
* Strengthening good governance and public
financial management is important to sector
outcomes.
* Pillar II of PMV demonstrates the
government's push to confront problems of
falling productivity and low incomes of small
farmers.
* There is important domestic pressure to
address challenges in small-scale farming in
an effort to increase its contribution to the rest
of the economy.

82

2.7 SOCIAL PROTECTION REFORM-

Government Objectives: (1) System reform to consolidate SP: (i) Design and implement a more equitable, efficient and coherent package of social protection programs; (ii) As part
of the above, reform the oil and food subsidies programs.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Main safety net remains the general subsidies provided by the Caisse de Compensation which in the medium to long term may become unsustainable. In
addition, the poor receive only about 10 percent of the allocated amounts (2007). Lack of coherent social protection strategy to inform reform options; (2) Current SP system is
fragmented. The various targeting methods generate inequities. Efficiency and impact of most programs are unknown; (3) Less than 25% of the labor force has access to pensions,
health insurance, and other social security benefits.
Progress Overview: The most promising social protection programs envisioned in the CPS-RAMED (a non-contributory insurance scheme for poor and vulnerable segments of the
population) and Tayssir (a conditional cash transfer program) were rolled out. The govermnent introduced measures to decrease fuel subsidies.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

A more coherent, equitable, and 
sustainable supply of social 
protection programs available to poor 
and vulnerable groups. 

Achieved 

Number of beneficiaries of Tayssir 
program. 

Baseline: 80,000 students 
(2008/09) 
Target: 400,000 (2012/2013) 

Number of beneficiaries of Tayssir program 
has reached 757,000 (2012/2013). The pilot 
was scaled up and an impact evaluation showed 
an effect in reducing dropout rates (by 4 points 
on average, 5 points for girls) and in improving 
students' math test results, 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

AAA 
* ESW/TA on Social Protection and 
Targeting Strategy (Delivered May 
2012). 
* TA on social security extension 
dropped 
9 ESW/TA on the political economy 
of removing food and fuel 
subsidies (Delivered early 2011). 
* TA for food and fuel subsidy 
reform dropped 
* Programmatic ESW/TA for Social 
Protection and Subsidy Reform 
(Ongoing; roadmap toward the 
establishment of an unconditional 
cash transfer program delivered to 
Ministry of General Affairs and 
Governance (MAGG) in October 
2012; models to perform incidence 
analysis of the impacts of food and 
fuel subside reform scenarios on 
macro variables (e.g. inflation, 
budget, poverty) delivered early 
2012). 

Lessons Learned

*Despite 

In June 2012, the government introduced a one-
off increase in the price for unleaded gasoline and
diesel fuel by 20 percent and 16 percent,
respectively-the sharpest single increase in fuel
prices in several years. In August 2013, the Prime
Minister approved an Order introducing
automatic price adjustments based on
international price fluctuations for three
subsidized petroleum products (diesel, gasoline,
and industrial fuel).
the lack of political consensus regarding
social protection and subsidy reforms in Morocco
and the lack of a high-level government champion
supporting a comprehensive medium-term reform
of subsidies, high-level officials in the
government acknowledge that the Bank's
technical assistance on subsidy reform in recent
years has shaped the government's decision-
making process. At the technical level, the
government acknowledges that future social
protection reforms (and notably the development
of a system of household compensation) will need
to be in place if other subsidized products
(notably butane) are indexedliberalized, as they
have higher incidence on the consumption

83

patterns of poor, vulnerable, and middle class
households. In this context, the Bank needs to
continue to identify and assess policy options to
further reform subsidies and social protection and
discuss them with the main stakeholders despite
uncertainties. Doing so is expected to inform the
political process and promote consensus building.
* In addition to technical issues, the establishment
of national registries/identification systems
confronts political economy challenges. The Bank
may be able to overcome these political economy
challenges by using its convening power at the
national level.

More efficient and effective social 
protection operational systems, 
including targeting, and M&E. 

Achieved 

In 2012, the government decided to scale up 
the pilot RAMED nationally and improved the 
targeting system processes. However,
RAMED's targeting system is not yet used by
other social protection programs.
Dropped due to change in Bank engagement

* The RAMED targeting system has 
been implemented nationally and 
can be used by other social 
assistance programs. 

Expansion and diversification of 
social security coverage.

* Number of non-salaried workers
registered with National Social
Security Fund
Baseline: n.a. (2011)
Target: 200,000 (2013)

84

Pillar 3: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN A CHANGING CLIMATE

3.1 WATER MANAGEMENT -

Government Objectives: (1)Promote water demand management; (2) Improve water resources quality protection; (3) Adaptation to climate change impacts on water resources (see
CC matrix); (4) Improve water supply and sanitation (WSS) service coverage and efficiency; and (5) Pursue institutional reforms of the water sector.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Sub-optimal use of irrigation water, overexploitation of aquifers and weak enforcement of water abstraction regulation; (2) Inadequate sewerage, lack of
wastewater treatment, environmental degradation and weak enforcement of water quality regulation; (3) Water resources management institutions not well prepared; (4) Inadequate
access to WSS service in poor peri-urban and rural areas, need for enhanced cost recovery and investment capacity in WSS utility service and inefficient sector organization and
operator regulation; and (5) Weak inter-ministerial coordination.

Progress Overview: Moderate progress recorded, with significant progress on modernization of irrigation practices, preparation of an action plan on climate change adaptation, and
improved coordination. Targets on increased coverage of urban sewerage and wastewater treatment were not met, however. The results matrix in this area was fully revised during the
CPSPR to better reflect the Bank's program and align with the objectives of the three water/sanitation/irrigation investment projects approved by Board in June 2010 (after the CPS).

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Modernization of irrigation practices 
in agriculture and better control of 
groundwater abstraction. 

Achieved 

Indicator: area equipped with drip 
irrigation systems. 
Baseline: 2008: 800 ha. 
Target: 2013: 15,000 ha. 

Target exceeded, as area equipped with drip 
irrigation systems nationwide reached 365,000 
ha in 2013. 

Under the Modernization of Irrigation Project, 
works for off-farm drip irrigation networks to 
equip 7,700 ha are expected to be completed, 
allowing a switch to drip irrigation service 
provision, by December 2014. Works launched 
or being launched for the equipment in 
modernized irrigation of 60,000 ha in large- 
scale irrigation perimeter, 21,000 under the
ongoing Bank project to be completed between 
ongingBak 
pojct o e cmpete btwen 
end-2014 and 2016. Procurement of on-farm 
equipment is ongoing, with delivery expected 

to take place in 2014. 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

Lending 
* Oum er Rbia (OER) Irrigation 
Project (Approved FY10; MS) 
*PMV DPL (Approved FY11; 
Closed FY12; S) 
* PMV DPL2 (Approved FY13; S) 
9 Improved Access to Water and 
Sanitation Services Project (OBA 
scale-up) (Approved FY07; Closed 
FY12; 5) 
* OER Sanitation Project (Approved 
FY10; MU) 
* PHRD grant to the OER basin 
agency 
* Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 

Lessons Learned

* The government has made a strong push to
promote and fund drip irrigation through the
PNEEI and FDA.
9 The areas equipped consist of private farmers
equipping themselves.
9 Equipment with drip irrigation systems depends
on the development of new infrastructure to
deliver water under pressure to farmers in the
large-scale irrigation perimeter. The Bank is
pioneering such development with the first
support to PNEEI for the modernization of 20,000
ha. Through the PMV DPL series and irrigation
modernization projects, the WB is working on the
entire value chain to ensure agriculture
intensification while preserving its sustainability.

Project (Approved FY06; 
) 
* Regional Potable Water Supply 
Systems Project (Approved FY10; 
MS) 
1 Oo 

Investment planning needs to be carefully
mastered to ensure timely delivery of all
infrastructure aspects and minimize delays.
9 Accompanying measures to demonstrate the

potential in drip irrigation, and to help farmers

85

AAA 
* ESW on CC impacts on water 
resources management 

Increased urban sewerage and 
wastewater treatment coverage (in 
project areas) 

Not achieved 

* Indicator 1: Number of households 
with access to piped sanitation 

Baseline: 2008: 10,000 hhd. 

The OBA Pilots for service extension to poor 
peri-urban areas subsidized access of 9,036 
households to piped sanitation by the end of 
2011. 

Target 2013: 40,000 hhd. 

* Indicator 2: Wastewater treatment 
capacity installed 
Baseline: Zero in 2008. 
Target: 200,000 eq inhabitants. 

Better knowledge of CC impacts on 
water resources. 

As of end-2013, no wastewater treatment 
capacity has been installed and no additional 
household connections to water supply and 
sanitation were established. The OER 
Sanitation Project is facing implementation 
delays, but the project is nevertheless 
proceeding at an accelerated pace and results
are expected by the end of 2014.
Achieved 

* Indicator: Action Plan for 
Study on the preparation of the CC Adaptation 
adaptation to CC in the OER basin Action Plan was delivered in April 2013 (in 
prepared 
French). The action plan was included in a 
Baseline: Zero. 
Bank ESW finalized in June 2013 (in Eglish). 
Target: One action plan. 

86

determine their farming strategy and organize
themselves in associations to equip themselves
take time, but this time needs to be taken as it is
key to sustainability and drawing the benefits of
the investments.
* Delays in wastewater collection and treatment
projects are to be expected due to the NIMBY
(Not In My Back Yard) syndrome. Voice and
participation improvements since 2011 translated
into more and stronger opposition.
* The OER Sanitation Project, although
implemented by ONEE, responds to communes'
requests for such investments. The post-2011
period saw an increase in local politics translating
into delays in obtaining commitments of
communes. Some communes decided to drop out
of the project and are being replaced by
communes that show a clear demand.
* The Government of Morocco has not yet
implemented the National Program for Water and
Sanitation extension to low-income peri-urban
areas. Although some progress took place, it is
not in Bank support and is therefore not recorded.

* Understanding CC impacts on water resources is
key to informing public policies and major
investments in the sector, such as interbasin
transfers and desalination for water supply, as
available freshwater resources get more scarce,
despite >90% mobilization of surface water.
* Impacts of CC are significant in the OER basin
and demonstrate that water availability stated in
current plans and strategies (PDAIRE, Plan
National de l'Eau) is overoptimistic.
* Further to the study, the OER River Basin
Agency is working to accompany a voluntary
reduction of groundwater abstraction in the OER
river basin, to protect this strategic resource.

Increased access to and efficiency of Mostly achieved 
WSS services (in project areas). 
Iniao:%access to water 
service in rural and pen-urban 
areas covered by project. 
Baseline: 2009: 0%. 
Target: 70%. 

The OB 
iosfrsrieetninto 
porconnections 
peni-urban areas subsidized access to piped 
water supply for 10,504 households by the end 
of 2011, which corresponds to 52,500 people, 
which represent over 80% of the target 
population. The target was therefore exceeded
in peri-urban areas. Though targets for rural 
access to water service in rural areas were not 
fullyinfrastructure 
funlydet project 
res 
onongrank- 
fuinded projects contributed to an overall
increase in the coverage of water service in
rural areas from 610% in 2005 to 930% in 2013. 
In the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Project areas, 183,000 gained access, which 
represents 49.l1% of the target population. The 
overall population in project provinces with
access to safe and reliable water supply
increased by about 9%.
Achieved 

Better coordination between 
ministries involved in the water 
sector. 

* Indicator: Number of integrated 
water mobilization-irrigation 
investment plans prepared 
Baseline: 2009: 0. 
Target 2013: 3 (2011, 2012 and 

2013). 

This prior condition to PMV DPL 2 was met. 
Adequate funding for the irrigation perimeters 
located downstream from dams under 
construction has been allocated in the budget 
law in each of the last four years (2010-2013). 

It is particularly relevant to consider 2010, 

_______________ 

87

* This study should he carried out in other river
basins in Morocco. The Bank was asked to carry
out similar impact assessments, with due
adaptations, in water-wealthy river basins.
* This study is the result of funding from WPP and
PsRD. There is a need for Bank fsnding to be
allocated to other CC impact studies on water
resources as part of Bank sector dialog.
* Demand for improved water supply service, either
through standpipes (rural areas) or through house
(peni-urban areas), is very high.
9Kycnrbtr/nbln 
atr 
o
fcusonclent aces (A prequisite subid
paym 
ent 
acsocia mneentste to 
cary
out 
an 
camanan 
awaness 
ri

among beneficiary populations.
* The limitations are linked in part to lengthy
projects needed to provide service
to remote areas and associated technical obstacles

* In pen-urban areas, the limitation is the end ofthe
grant funding and the fact that the government
has not yet implemented the national service
extension program, although requested in the new
CPS.

* Improved coordination and better governance
contributed to put a halt to the disconnect
between water mobilization investments
(responsibility of MEMEE) and irrigation
infrastructure (responsibility of MAPM), and
underutilization of already mobilized water
resources. In 2010, the gap between the potential
area irrigable by reservoirs and the actual area
irrigated by these reservoirs reached 108,000 ha.

The investment needed to fill this gap is estimated

given the utility of improving budget 
programming as early as possible. 
Achievement of this target required 
coordination between MAPM and MEF. 

at MAD 15 billion.
* MAPM elaborated a program to close the
irrigation infrastructure gap. This program is
included in the multiyear agreement on the
financing of the PMV (2009-2015) signed
between MEF and MAPM.
* This integrated planning approach allows MEF to
allocate financial resources for investments in
water mobilization consistently with investments
in irrigation infrastructure development.
* Water scarcity in Morocco calls for more such
integrated approaches in the coming years,
ideally. Such coordination, embedded in the
Water Law (10-95) should be implemented
systematically and involve all stakeholders.

3.2 LOW CARBON ENERGY POLICY AND ENERGY SECTOR RESTRUCTURING -

Government Objectives: Enhance energy security and ensure availability of energy to all households and businesses at competitive prices, while protecting the environment and
mitigating climate change.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) High import dependency and strong reliance on fossil fuels, resulting in a high carbon content of the energy mix; (2) Budgetary burden of price support
schemes; (3) Finding the financial resources required by large investment needs of fast growing energy demand, especially to finance highly capital intensive low carbon technologies;
and (4) Avoiding a negative effect on the balance of trade because of the switch to more complex low carbon technologies.
Progress Overview: Good progress at the level of the program. It should be noted that the indicators measuring the CPS outcome are dominated by effects that are outside of the
control of the measures that were adopted. The results matrix has been updated. Since the CPSPR, the Noor I (previously Ouarzazate Phase 1) project has become effective and
construction has begun. The Ain Beni Mathar ISCC is fully operational and the project closed with satisfactory outcomes. The ONEE Support Project is making good progress and
Additional Financing to tackle cost overruns has been approved. The Bank's program will continue to explore ways of being more innovative on issues such as pricing reforms and
energy efficiency. To this end, dedicated triggers have been inserted in a Green Growth DPL. Dedicated TA for energy efficiency is also underway.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Reduction of energy intensity and 
increased penetration of renewable, 
to transition the Moroccan energy 
system to a low carbon path. 

Achieved 

* Indicator: Energy intensity. 

Energy intensity declined somewhat over the 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status
Lending 
* ONEE Support Project (Approved 
FY08; S; additional financing for 
transmission investment, company 
restructuring in FY14) 

Lessons Learned

* In the case of the last CPS, a large number of
energy instruments were being used, but the
indicators measuring the CPS outcome are
dominated by effects that are outside of the
control of the measures that were adopted. Thus

88

Baseline (2007): 0.275 toe/$000 
GDP 
Note: Baseline rebased to use IEA 
statistics: energy intensity was 
0.275 toe per $000 GDP (GDP in 
constant 2000$). 

* Indicator: Share of renewable in 
TPES. 
Baseline (2007): 2.2% share of 
renewable in TPES. 
Note: Baseline rebased to use 
Ministry of Energy, Mines, Water 
& Environment statistics 
Implementation of price reform, to 
reduce the budgetary burden of price 
subsidies and ensure the financial 
viability of the energy operators. 

time period with a level of 0.26 toe/$000 GDP 
in 2009 and 0.22 toe$000 GDP in 2011. 

Share of renewable in TPES increased to 6.70 
in 2010, but was at a reduced level, and 

reached 4.7% in 2012, as the share of 

renewable energy is highly sensitive to 
hydropower conditions. 

Not achieved 

* Indicator: Share of explicit energy 
subsidies in GDP. 
Baseline: 3.5% in 2008. 

Share of energy subsidies in GDP increased to 
5% in 2011 and 5.8%37 in 2012 due to high 
world oil prices, 

* Indicator: Profitability of ONE as 
measured by EBITDA. 
Baseline: 21%o in 2007. 

* Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar 
PowerIBRD + CF (Approved 
FY12; Effective FY13; under 
construction; 5) 
* Am Beni Mathar integrated solar 
combined cycle power plant project 
successfully completed (GEF 
funds) (FY13) 

AAA 
* PSW on energy market reform and 
clean energy 
* TA on low carbon planning for 
power sector
* ESMAP Energy Supply Strategy 
* Maghreb Vulnerability Assessment 
(power sector) 
* PESW on Maghreb Energy Market 
(regional market integration, Euro- 
Med market in support of CSP) 
* Maghreb Fossil Fuels (CCS) (final 
report to be delivered in 2014) 
* MENA local manufacturing study 

the effectiveness of the instruments cannot be
effectively captured. Going forward CPS
outcomes should be more closely aligned with the
underlying instruments that are being used.
The share of renewable energy in TPES is better
measured by excluding hydropower, as
hydropower is subject to significant annual
fluctuations. To understand the progress that is
being made on new and renewable energy sources

is could be useful to choose an indicators that

simply states the MW installed, even if such an
indicator does not well capture the GWh
produced.

(3) The same point as under (1) applies here.
While the recent Green Growth DPL contained a
trigger for subsidies, the effects of this trigger
have not yet trickled down. A precise analysis of
subsidy flows will be essential going forward if
similar triggers are to be retained in the next CPS.
(4) ONEE's profitability has also not improved
over the reporting period mainly due to high
international energy prices. A more permanent

Profitability of ONE has varied over the
reporting period, with an EBITDA of 17% in 
and w or 
o 
lre 
F 
2009, 25a 
in 2010, 1o in 2011, and 7% in 
rotdy o 
or.occo strat 
Quarter 1 of 2012. In April 2012 the merger 
admalocmnf 
with the water company ONEP took place and 
delishmen ofd4)
the EBITDA for the joint company ONEE for 
(eiee 
04
Quarter 2 and 3 in 2012 was 7 
. Variations in 
ofgei 
Ta 
on 
the EBIDTA across years are affected byonarcdioes(ngn)
international energy prices and the level of
precipitation (availability of hydropower).

inu

)u 
n 

to onEE' finae 
oing orard 
togbe fnanure 
lendin o 
ould
sec

need

37' 48 billion MMAD of energy subsidies (Source: MEF) for a 828 billion MMAD GDP (source: HCP Planning Department)

89

* (5) The volume of FDE operations has been
continuously high, with fluctuations which are
typical for lumpy energy sector investments. As
such, it seems to be an effective tool for
supporting activities of energy sector reform.
* (6) While the concept is interesting, best practice
no longer suggests that ESCOs are an effective
instrument in and of itself to bring about
reductions in levels of energy intensity. This
aside, the CPS did not contain any specific
measures dedicated to the setting up of ESCOs,
and therefore a lack of progress of this indicator is
not surprising.
* (7) Development of a manufacturing base needs a
dedicated set of policies that are best supported
by technical assistance. The CIC was designed
with the help of the Bank's assistance and is
expected to go forward as part of the Noor II &
III CSP project.

Establishment of institutions and 
financial mechanisms to successfully 
implement energy sector reform 
(FDE, ESCOs, etc.). 

Partially achieved 

* Indicator: Volume of operations of Volume of operations of FDE 3 8.
FDE. 
2009: 167.5 MDH, 2010:160.9 MDH 
Baseline: Zero 2008. 
2011: 349.4 MDH, 2012: 76 MDH 

* Indicator: Volume of EE operations Volume of EE operations through ESCOs: 
through ESCOs. 
negligible 
Baseline: Zero in 2008. 

Development of a local 
manufacturing capability for 
renewable technologies and energy 
efficient equipment - a green 
stimulus package - therefore 
contributing to job creation. 

* Indicator: Share of renewable PG 
equipment produced locally and 
exports of renewable equipment. 
Baseline: Zero. 

Partially achieved 

Share of renewable PG equipment produced
locally and exports of renewable equipment:
small but growing. Aside from a slight increase
of locally manufactured parts due to an
increase in construction of renewable energy
projects (especially the Ouarzazate 1 (now
Noor 1) project, a Climate Innovation Center
(CIC) has been designed to take the agenda
further.

38 Source: MEF : data collected for the Climate Change PER, 2011.

90

3.3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT -

Government Objectives: (1)Provide legal and institutional basis for effective establishment of integrated municipal solid waste systems ; (2) Enhance the sustainability of the
municipal solid waste sector through the introduction of financial mechanisms and incentives ; and (3) Upgrade and operationalize the existing EIA system and improve the
environmental and social performances of the solid waste sector.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Lack of policy planning and coordination in the sector, and ineffective implementation of the national solid waste law; (2) Ad-hoc, limited and inefficient
allocation of financial resources to the sector and modest cost effectiveness of the services; and (3) Poor waste disposal practices with huge environmental and social negative impacts.
Progress Overview: All targets achieved, mainly due to the successful completion of the DPL-2 for the Solid Waste Sector. The legislative framework for the municipal solid waste
sector is nearly complete. The financial sustainability of the solid waste management sector and the cost effectiveness of municipal solid waster services have improved. Disposal
practices met targets. A Solid Waste Carbon Fund program has been appraised by the Bank and the related Emission Reduction Purchasing Agreement (ERPA) signed in 2013.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Achieved 

Effective inter-ministerial 
coordination of the National Solid 
Waste Program (PNDM) and 
strengthened regulatory framework 
through the enactment of executive 
regulations for SWM planning, 
norms and standards. 

Indicator: Issue of decrees on 
SWM norms and standards, and 
regional planning. 
Baseline: 2008: None. 

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status
Lending 
* Solid Waste DPLI (Approved 
FY09; Closed FY10; 
) 
* Solid Waste DPL2 (Approved 
FY11; Closed FY12; S) 
* Solid Waste DPL3 (Approved 
FY13; Closed FY14; S) 
S Solid Waste Carbon Finance 
program appraised and related 
ERPA signed 

With the enactment of its first Solid Waste Law 
in 2006, Morocco benefits from a solid 
framework of legislation to address the 
challenges of the sector through integrated 
An ICR for the first programmatic 
solid waste management. Morocco has now 
series (DPL 1 and 2) has been 
almost completed the required legislation in the delivered and published 
municipal solid waste sector, building on the 
enactment of its first solid waste law 28.00. It 
has published decrees related to: (a) waste 
classification, (b) administrative procedures 
and technical specifications for sanitary 
landfills (Official Gazette dated January 7,
2010), and (c) procedures for the elaboration of
provincial and prefectural MSW master plans

AAA 
* PPIAF/PSP Stdy 
* PSIA I (FY09) 
* PSIA 11 (FY13)

(Official_Gazette_dated July 22, 20 10).(

Lessons Learned

Continued coordination among ministries,
national entities, and municipalities is needed for
sustained successful results. One of the major
impacts of the first three DPLs was to mainstream
coordinated planning to support the MSW reform
program. This was a major milestone in the way
the government conducts business, not only in the
solid waste sector but in other reform areas. The
Bank was able to act as a catalyst for a new
modus operandi for interministerial collaboration
and accompany the government in a new spirit of
openness, in which the ministries were looking
for partnerships but were not yet working together
on cross-sectoral issues. The new interministerial
committee will continue to play this coordinating
role, including the introduction of eco-taxes and
the oversight of the development of the recycling
value chains.

91

Better financial sustainability of 
SWM sector Allocation of financial 
resources are consistent with the 
sector policies and programs. 

Achieved 

Indicator: Percentage of financial 
resources allocated to 
municipalities based on transparent 
eligibility criteria 
Baseline: 2008: 0% 

Improved cost effectiveness of 
private sector involvement in 
providing MSW services; and 
additional sources of revenues 
generated through Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM). 

* Indicator: Average cost of MSWM 
services provided by private 
operators. 
Baseline: 2008: 441 DH/ton. 

80% of financial resources are allocated to 
municipalities based on published and 
transparent eligibility criteria 

The average cost of MSW services provided by 
private operators was reduced to about 380 
DH/ton in 2012. 

Additional sources of revenues 
generated through Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM). 

Achieved 

* Indicator: Number of CDM 
projects developed in solid waste 
sector. 
Baseline: 2008: Zero projects. 

A Solid Waste Carbon Fund program has been 
appraised by the Bank and the related Emission 
Reduction Purchasing Agreement (ERPA)
signed in 2013. The program targets 16

92

* Policy reforms adopted under the first two DPLs
may have advanced more quickly than the
administrative procedures required to implement
them. This was due in particular to the allocation
of financial support from the center to the
municipalities for solid waste investments and the
implementation of model contracts for private
service providers. Therefore, special attention
should be paid in the future to the implementation
capacity of the relevant agencies for investment
appraisals, financing, and contracting
mechanisms.
* While private sector participation in the MSW
sector increased substantially (collection services
are provided by private operation to more than
75% of the urban population), the capacity
building and standard specifications supported by
the DPL series have shown their limitations in
terms of improving cost-effectiveness; more
needs to be done in terms of market development.
For now, the major cities have the funds
necessary to contract out services, based on
revenues from the municipal service tax, but as
coverage rates and service standards continue to
increase, new sources of funds targeted at MSW
should be developed, including the eco-tax. The
second programmatic series supports a number of
actions intended to improve budget management,
reduce LG arrears toward private sector service
providers, and set in place conciliation
mechanisms.
* External factors-including the complex and long
CDM registration process, as well as the volatility
of the carbon market-affected the outcome of
this program and its delivery timing. Flexibility in
the design and early involvement of key players
(private operators and local governments) are key.

landfills and is expected to cover a total volume
of waste of approximately 3.38 million tons per
year, representing more than 50% of municipal
solid waste collected in urban areas. Emission
reductions are estimated at an average of
838,000 tCO2e per year, amounting to 7.5
million tCO2e over nine years (2012-2020).
The signed ERPA will enable the Bank as
trustee of CPF to purchase 2 million tCO2e.
Achieved 

32% of collected waste was being disposed of 
in sanitary landfill at the end of 2011. The 
construction of new landfills in Casablanca and 
Marrakech will help reach 60% by the end of 
2014.. 

Disposal practices comply with 
international social and 
environmental standards. 

* Indicator: Percentage of collected 
waste is being disposed of in 
sanitary landfill. 
Baseline: 2008: 10% 
Target (2011): 30% of collected 
municipal wastes are disposed of 
in sanitary landfills.

* The institutions at regional and local level remain
below capacity compared to what is needed to
take the program into the next phase, including
development and implementation of regional
sanitary landfills. DPL3&4 will place emphasis
on the overall coherence of reforms in the sector
with regionalization of support and oversight
structures, coupled with targeted project
management support (AMO) to local
governments in the context of the PNDM.

93

3.4 CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION -

Government Objectives: Improve resilience to climate variability and change through the integration of adaptation actions across and within sectors.

Key Issues Targeted: (1) Limited interagency coordination and policy coherence on CC adaptation; (2) Limited ability to design climate-resilient sector policies; and (3) Few
experiences on the ground of viable adaptation options
Progress Overview: The planned Climate Change DPL was replaced by the Inclusive Green Growth DPL series, whose first operation was approved in December 2013, after the
close of the CPS period.

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Improved inter-agency coordination Mostly achieved 
on climate change adaptation by 
mainstreaming climate adaptation in 
the national development planning 
process. 

" Indicator: development of a 
national climate change strategy 
Baseline: Zero 

Indicator: at least one adaptation 
action plan adopted in at least one 
of the key vulnerable sectors 
(agriculture, urban; transport or 
others) 
Baseline: Zero 

Partial progress in developing a national 
climate change strategy. The 2 nd National 
Communication to UNFCCC was completed 
and submitted; preparation of the 3 rd 
communication is underway. 
A White Paper on Climate Change has been 
finalized, and the National Sustainable 
Development Strategy, which is to be launched
in Spring 2014, has a heavy emphasis on
climate.
Integration of an article on CC policy in
Framework Law of Environment is currently
seeking parliamentary approval.

In agriculture, an action plan has been put in
place by the Agence pour le Developpement
Agricole (ADA) for prioritizing the public
financing of projects directed to small farmers
(Pillar 11 Projects under the Plan Maroc Vert)
that include climate change adaptation
measures, which are partially implemented as

of the GEF project "Integrating Climate

Bank Group Program 
Instruments/Status

AAA 
ESW on CC issues in: WRM, 
agriculture, transport, coastal cities 
adaptation, climate migration and 
displacement (Delivered June 
2012) 
9 GEF - Capacity building for 
Adaptation in WRM and 
Agriculture (In progress) 
* Adaptation Climate Change
Coastal Cities of North Africa
Risk Management AAA (Delivered
2011)

Lessons Learned

A key lesson is the importance of working
through existing sector strategies to let emerge
climate related concems affecting existing goals,
in order to catalyze government wide support to
joined up climate action. The future CPS
integrates will need to take this lesson into
account in the preparation of the second Inclusive
Green Growth DPL and the Integrated Risk
Management PforR.

* 

*part 

94

Change in the Implementation of the Plan
Maroc Vert."

Adaptation pilots initiated in selected Achieved
areas.

* Indicator: adaption pilots 
launched in at least 2 regions in 
the context of Plan Maroc Vert; 
Baseline: Zero 

9 pilots on the implementation of adaptation
measures in agriculture had been launched by
the end of 2013, 5 of them as part of the GEF
project "Integrating Climate Change in the
Implementation of the Plan Maroc Vert." These
5 projects span 5 regions: Chaouia - Ouardigha
(involved in 3 projects); Rabat - Sal6 -
Zemmour - Zar (2 projects), the regions
targeted by the GEF project; as well as Gharb
(1 project); Tadla (1 project); and Doukkala (2
projects).

Development of tools and 
mechanisms to increase resilience
and alertness.

Not achieved

* Indicator: Establishment of climate Climate early warning system still being
early warning systems (e.g. 
designed.
forecasting of spring cereal harvest
based on winter precipitation data)
Baseline: Zero

95

Annex 2B: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries, FY1O-FY13

CPS Plans 

Sustainable Access to Finance DPL 
Education Sector DPL 

Public Administration Reform DPLIV 

Rural Roads Additional Financing 
Urban and Rural Water 
Oum Er Rbia Irrigated Agriculture 
Oum Er Rbia Sanitation 

Subtotal 

Urban Transport Sector DPL 
Support to Plan Maroc Vert DPL 

Solid Waste Sector DPL2 

National Initiative for Human 

IBRD 

Status

US$m 
100 Delivered (amount increased) 
60 Delivered 

100 Delivered 

80 Delivered (amount increased) 
150 Delivered (amount increased) 
70 Delivered 
40 Delivered (amount increased) 

600 

136.7 Delivered 
205 Delivered 

138.6 Delivered 

300 Deferred to FY12

FY11 Development II

Energy Sector DPL 
Energy Development Fund 
Health Sector DPL 

Subtotal 
Subtotal FY10-11 

Dropped
Dropped
Dropped

780.3 
1,380.3 

Progress Report Plans 

Status

Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power 

200 Delivered 

FY12

First Skills and Employment DPL 

100 Delivered 

Judicial Performance Enhancement 

16 Delivered 

National Initiative for Human 
Development II (PforR)
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 

300 Delivered 

100 Delivered 

(MSME) Development
Subtotal 

716 

Economic Competitiveness Support 

160 Delivered

DPL1

Accountability and Transparency DPL 
Urban Transport Sector DPL2 
Second Competitiveness DPL 

150 Approved FY14
100 
Planned for FY15 as PforR
80 
Planned for FY15

FY13 

Plan Maroc Vert DPL2 
Solid Waste Sector DPL3 
Education Sector DPL2 
Inclusive Green Growth DPL 

Road Asset Management 

Subtotal 
Subtotal FY12-13 

203 Delivered 
130 Delivered 
100 Delivered 
100 Approved FY14

1,023 Dropped

2,046 
2,762 

CPS Plans 

Status

IBRD

US$m
200
60

100

81.5
175
70
43

729.5

136.7
205

138.6

480.3
1,209.8

200

100

16

300

100

716

203
130
100

593
1,309

Annex 2C: Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries, FY1O-FY13

Economic and Sector Work 

Technical Assistance

CPS Plans 
Transport and Climate Change 

Status 
CPS Plans 
Status
Delivered Rural Land Market Development Dropped

(PCN)

Agricultural Sector Review 
Delivered Urban Development Strategy 
Adaptation to Climate Change in Delivered ESMAP: Energy Supply 
Agriculture 
Strategy
Country Governance and 
Delivered Morocco Nutrition Strategy 

Delivered
Delivered

Dropped

FY10 Anticorruption (CGAC)

Public Administration Reform 

Delivered Regional Development for 

Delivered

PESW 

Poverty Assessment PESW 

Social Protection Strategy 
Poverty PESW 
Promoting Youth Opportunities 
and Participation
Clean Energy 
Use of Country Systems 

FY11I 

Initiative Pilot 

Disadvantaged Areas

Dropped Morocco Environment and 
Water
Morocco Housing Finance 

Morocco Railways TA 

Delivered 
Justice Reform TA 
Dropped National eGov Strategy 
Delivered Transport in Ports and Railways 

Delivered 
Delivered 

Justice Sector TA 
Institutionalizing a Reform 

Process for Business
Environment

Poverty PESW TA 
Pension Reform 
E-Security TA 

Trade Capacity Building 

Governance and Territoriality 
Bank Governance Review 
Delivered Analytical Support to the 
Country Environmental Analysis Dropped Government of Morocco in the

Poverty PESW 

Delivered Analysis of Constraints to
Competitiveness and

FY12 

Competitiveness Policy Design
Justice Survey 
Sustainable Transport and 

Logistics

Financial Literacy Survey 

Reform Process for Improving 

the Business Environment
E-Government and Broadband 

TA

Dropped

Dropped

Dropped

Dropped
Dropped
Delivered

Delivered
Dropped

Dropped
Delivered
Delivered

Delivered

Delivered
Delivered

Dropped
Dropped

Dropped

Delivered

Delivered

Education Public Expenditure 

Dropped 

Compensation Reform TA 

Dropped

Tracking Survey

FY13 

Assessment of Climate Change 
Impacts on Water Resources 

Delivered E-Government and Broadband 
Policy Advice

Delivered

Management

Justice Public Expenditure 
Review

Delivered Health Sector Support TA 

Delivered

97

Annex 3 : Detailed Macroeconomic Overview

Economic Developments

173. 
Structurally, the Moroccan economy remains largely dependent on a volatile and
poorly productive agricultural sector. The sector is the first employer in the economy,
absorbing almost 40 percent of the labor force. Although on a declining trend, the share of
agricultural and fisheries activities has remained significant over the last decade (an average
15.6 percent of GDP at factor costs). The reliance of agriculture on erratic weather conditions
also explains the volatile nature of growth. The decline in the primary sector's share of GDP
benefitted services sector, and notably the relatively low value-added services. As a result,
Morocco could not guarantee the productivity gains that would have allowed the emergence
of a larger middle class. The challenge of increasing and further sharing prosperity remains.

174. One key stylized aspect of Morocco's weak economic performance can be traced
in its difficulty to benefit from the current wave of globalization. Morocco's share of
global exports has been stagnant around 0.15 percent since mid-70s, while most competitors
saw substantial increases in their shares. The price of the national export basket has generally
been higher than that of key competitors and the gap has widened since the global financial
crisis. High and rising export prices are symptomatic of persistent weaknesses 
in the
competitiveness of Moroccan enterprises on the global market.

175. While the 2008 financial crisis had a limited impact on Morocco's economy, the
food and fuel price crisis had an important effect, which was magnified by reduced
demand from European markets. With the price of oil averaging US$110 per barrel in
2011-2012, Morocco suffered a major deterioration of its terms of trade. This deterioration
was compounded by a significant increase in its food import bill in 2012 because of a severe
domestic drought at a time of soaring international food prices, especially of wheat.
Moreover, with a strong trade exposure to the EU, Morocco has been adversely affected by
developments in the Eurozone, in particular sovereign debt crises in Spain and Italy, among
other countries, and the subsequent slowdown in economic growth. The banking/sovereign
crises in Europe and related recessionary tendencies reduced demand for Moroccan exports
and tourism, while remittances declined. As a result, growth of non-agriculture GDP
decelerated to an average of 3.5 percent since 2009 compared to 4.7 percent over 2000-2008.
Growth has mostly been driven by debt-creating domestic demand and fiscal spending.

176. The private sector in Morocco was compelled to find new growth drivers. Thanks
to solid economic fundamentals, a smooth political transition, and a relatively good track
record of conducting reforms as well as the capacity of finding new sectors of growth, helped
the Moroccan private sector weather the effects of the crises. While both traditional domestic-
and export-driven sectors 39 slowed down, the Moroccan private sector reacted by shifting its
focus to new high value industries (i.e. car manufacturing, aeronautics, etc.) and the
expansion of Moroccan companies in Sub-Saharan Africa, creating the basis for Morocco to
become a regional hub for investments.

177. External shocks however, highlighted the weak competitiveness of Moroccan
enterprises. Morocco has made virtually no productivity gains over the past two decades,

39 Exporters of traditional products (particularly phosphates and textiles) have continued to struggle, while the newer
branches of Morocco's manufacturing sector (especially the automotive and aerospace industries) have grown.

98

despite high levels of investment: (i) Morocco has consistently invested (public and private) 5
to 10 percentage points of GDP more than peer countries; (ii) investment as a share of GDP
has increased from 25 percent in the 1990s to 35 percent currently. Investment has been
insufficiently productive, even though its high level has helped dampen the volatility of
growth. Quite simply, investment has merely boosted the productivity of labor (a gain of 3
percent per year since 1999), but has not yet triggered a growth take-off through higher Total
Factor Productivity (TFP). Some impact might still occur 
in that government capital
expenditures (about 5 percent of GDP in average) focus on infrastructure (energy, highways,
ports, airports, industrial zones), for which TFP gains take longer to materialize.

178. 
Investments in the infrastructure sector have remained dominantly led by the
public sector, with limited clarity on the efficiency of the Moroccan investment and
capital allocation model. Public investment increased dramatically from about US$6.3 bln
to US$16.5 bln between 2005 and 2013, with a large share carried out by state owned
enterprises (65 percent in 2013). These investments were focused on large infrastructure
projects, including the extension of the Tangier Med port, the construction of new highways,
the extension of phosphate production facilities (Office Chrifien des Phosphates, OCP), and
increasing electricity production by ONEE. Lack of private sector involvement in these
investments is also due to the absence of a legal framework for public-private partnerships
and restrictive regulations in some sectors, including medium voltage energy, healthcare, and
intercity transport. In 2014, a number of laws (including on PPP and energy) that could have
a positive impact on private sector involvement in the infrastructure sector, both in terms of
local as well as foreign investors, are expected to be ratified.

179. The authorities put a great deal of emphasis on controlling inflation. Subsidies on
food and fuel products have helped cap inflation, notwithstanding recently higher import
prices. The consumer price index evolution has been low over the last few years (at 1 percent
in average), but edged up to 1.3 percent in 2012 and 1.9 percent in 2013, with food prices
contributing the most (+2.2 and +2.4 percent respectively). Increases in administered prices
for fuel and their direct impact on transportation (up 3.2 percent) have had limited indirect
effects on inflation so far. However, the fixed exchange rate combined with subsidies on
imported food and fuel products have increased pressures on international reserves. BAM's
expansionary stance has helped to mitigate private sector crowding out. However, poor fiscal
fundamentals have begun to feed through to higher interest rates, with yields on the key 5-
year bond gaining 100 basis points since mid-2012.

180. 
Increased government spending on subsidies, higher civil service wages and
pensions helped counteract weak demand from Europe, but is jeopardizing fiscal
sustainability. In 2012, for the first time, subsidies were higher than capital expenditures and
the pension fund for the civil and military services entered a phase of rapid decumulation
(payout). The fiscal outcome for the year was worse than expected with the deficit widening
to 7.3 percent of GDP, compared to 5.5 percent in the Budget Law, despite good tax
collection and hikes in subsidized fuel prices (up 19.6 percent for gasoline, 14 for diesel, 13.4
for industrial fuel). Subsidies (on fuel and food) and the wage and pension bill (up 12.4 and
8.7 percent, respectively) exceeded half of total expenditures.

99

Table 1. Annual subsidies in central government budget, in percent of GDP

Commodities 
2007 
Food 
0.8 
Fuels 
1.7 
Total Subsidies 
2.5 
Source: Ministry of Economy and Finance

2008 
1.1 
3.5 
4.6 

2009 
0.7 
1.1 
1.7 

2010 
0.7 
2.9 
3.6 

2011 
0.9 
5.2 
6.1 

2012 
0.8 
5.8 
6.6 

Est.
2013
0.8
3.9
4.7

181. 
In a difficult but decisive move, Government initiated reforms of the subsidy
system in 2013 to help reverse the deteriorating fiscal trend. The fiscal deficit narrowed
to 6 percent of GDP 40 in 2013 as a result of the activation of a price indexation mechanism
that cut subsidies by almost 2 percentage point of GDP. The budget also benefitted from
lower world fuel prices. The government's decision to rein in recurrent expenditures and
capital outlays also explains the consolidation of public finance. The rise of the wage bill was
contained to 2 percent in 2013- thanks to the absence of any exceptional promotions or wage
increases- while capital outlays were cut by 6.2 percent.

182. Government debt increased significantly in 2012 to reach 60.1 percent of GDP,
but was contained to 62.3 percent of GDP in 2013 in part thanks to substantial capital
grants. The deficit in 2013 was mostly financed domestically, though Morocco also tapped
international markets (BBB- rating). The Treasury issued 4.7 percent of GDP in domestic
bonds and raised US$750 million through international bonds in May 2013. It also benefited
from the equivalent of one billion dollars in capital grant, mainly from the Gulf countries.
Although less than a quarter of debt is denominated in foreign exchange, Morocco's
government debt increased by 15 percentage points of GDP in just five years of which 6.4
points in 2012 alone.

183. 
Substantial capital grants, mainly from the GCC, were critical in financing the
current account deficit and consolidating foreign reserves in 2013. Fiscal expansion and
weak exports and remittances fuelled the current account deficit in 2012 and to a lesser extent
in 2013. After widening to 9.7 % of GDP in 2012, the current account deficit is estimated to
have improved to 8.7 percent of GDP in 2013 with both imports (CIF) and exports (FOB)
declining by 2 % and 0.8 %, respectively. Europe has remained by far Morocco's main
trading partner (absorbing 60 % of its exports and providing 80 % of the remittances
received) with a strong concentration on only two markets: France and Spain accounting for a
third of total exports and half of total remittances. On the financing side, in a context of fixed
exchange rate, net FDI inflows grew by an impressive 23 % in 2013. Thanks to the capital
grants and the issuance of Eurobonds, overall financial flows more than covered the current
account deficit, leading to a consolidation of foreign reserves by US$1.3 billion to US$18.5

billion (4.3 months of imports) end 2013.

184. Current account deficits have 
tightened banking system 
liquidity. BAM
compensated by relaxing its stance in a context of low inflation: cutting its policy rate from
3.25 to 3 percent in March 2012, lowering reserve requirement from 6 to 4 percent in
September 2012, and increasing liquidity injections. However, money supply grew by only
2.8 percent in 2013, compared to 4.5 percent in 2012. Bank credit to the economy grew 3.5
percent (4.6 percent in 2012), mostly driven by mortgage credit (6.3 percent) on the back of
housing programs and credit for business equipment (1.9 percent). Consumption credit

40 The budget deficit does not take account of capital grants, which is registered as source of financing. The
budget deficit including capital grants was 5.4 percent of GDP in 2013.

100

slowed down to 2.1 percent in 2013, while working capital loans declined by 6 percent. Non-
performing loans have been increasing in 2013 and represented 5.9 percent of bank credit to
the private sector in December 2013. With the loan-to-deposit ratio above 100% in domestic
banks, deposit growth is insufficient 
to support 
loans growth to 
the private sector.
Implementation of the Basel III accords starting 2014 is expected to put further pressure on
credit extension, especially longer terms and to larger borrowers.

Economic Prospects

185. The Government's medium-term macroeconomic 
framework 
is broadly
appropriate, although both the global and regional contexts exacerbate downside risks.
Recessionary tendencies in Europe would undermine the macro-economic outlook through
continued weak exports, tourism, remittances or FDI. High fuel prices, deterioration in the
regional context, or renewed global financial turmoil would compound these challenges.
Under these conditions, it would become difficult to sustainably finance pre-crisis growth
levels if internal demand remains the key driver of growth. Absent a significant reorientation
of the economy toward the tradable sector and increased competitiveness, growth, private
sector job creation will remain weak.

186. Morocco's macroeconomic prospects are essentially 
linked to the country's
capacity to generate productivity gains. Morocco would therefore benefit from increased
efforts to enhance competitiveness and gain market shares on global markets. Along with the
sector strategies already under implementation, these efforts would involve improving the
quality of domestic investments and continuing to attract large flows of FDIs. This would call
for more opportunities and economic freedom for all Moroccans, to compete, produce and
participate in the economy, including with a greater role for the private sector. Moreover,
macroeconomic 
stability depends on 
strengthened governance 
and 
robust 
fiscal
consolidation-particularly subsidy, pension, and fiscal reforms, a prudent monetary policy,
and greater flexibility in exchange rate management. While subsidy and pension reforms are
most urgent, including establishing more effective and inclusive social protection programs,
proceeding with structural reforms is needed in the medium term to boost enterprise
productivity through better channeling resources to competitive industries.

187. 
Besides the measures discussed above, the Government confirmed in the 2014
Budget Law its strategy to continue reforming the subsidy system and launch the
reforms of the pension and fiscal systems this year. In addition, it intends to deepen
regionalization and de-concentration and adopt the Budget Organic Law to enhance central
and local governments' budget design and implementation for better public service delivery
and efficiency. To improve further the investment climate, the government planned to
proceed with the justice reform, improve access to financing, especially for the SMEs,
address access to land constraints, develop logistics services, and reinforce technical training.
The Central Bank also announced last year its objective to progressively put in place a more
flexible exchange rate mechanism over the next 3 years. Assuming these reforms take place,
growth in the non-agriculture economy would reach around 5.5 percent over the medium
term, with inflation below 2.5 percent and the budget deficit below 3 percent of GDP. Main
macroeconomic indicators under a strong reform scenario are found in Table 2.

101

Table 2. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators (2010-17)

Act. 
Est. 
Proj.
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated
5.0 
3.2 
5.9 
5.4 

2010 

2016 

2017

Real economy 
GDP (nominal--local currency) 

4.3 

7.0 

7.3 

7.3

Real GDP 
Per Capita GDP 

3.6 
2.5 

5.0 
3.8 

2.7 
1.6 

4.4 
3.3 

3.0 
1.9 

4.6 
3.5 

4.8 
3.8 

4.9
3.9

Contributions:
Consumption 
Investment 
Net exports 
Imports 
Exports 
Unemployment rate (ILO definition) 
GDP deflator 

1.1 
-0.8 
3.4 
3.6 
16.6 
9.1 
0.6 

5.0 
1.4 
-1.5 
5.0 
2.1 
8.9 
0.1 

3.6 
-0.9 
0.0 
2.0 
2.7 
9.0 
0.5 

3.1 
-0.3 
1.6 
-0.4 
1.5 
9.2 
1.5 

1.7 
1.0 
0.2 
4.1 
6.3 
... 

3.0 
1.2 
0.4 
4.0 
6.6 
... 
2.3 

3.1 
1.4 
0.3 
4.6 
7.1 
... 
2.3 

2.9
1.6
0.4
4.7
7.3
...
2.3

2.4 

CPI (pa) 

0.9 

0.9 

1.3 

1.9 

1.7 

1.8 

2.3 

2.3

Fiscal Accounts 

Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated

Expenditures 

29.9 

33.1 

35.0 

31.9 

31.5 

30.8 

30.0 

29.8

Revenues 
Central Govemment Budget Balance 
Central Govemment Debt 
Selected Monetary Accounts
Base Money 
Credit to non-govemment 
Interest (key policy interest rate) 
Balance of payments
Current Account Balance 
Imports 

25.2 
-4.7 
50.3 

26.2 
-6.9 
53.7 

27.6 
-7.3 
60.1 

25.8 
-6.1 
62.3 

26.6 
-4.8 
62.9 

26.7 
-4.1 
61.8 

26.7 
-3.4 
60.1 

26.7
-3.1
58.2

4.2 
11.0 
3.25 

6.4 
10.4 
3.25 

4.5 
5.1 
3.00 

2.8 
3.1 
3.00 

... 
... 
... 

... 
... 
... 

... 
... 
... 

...
...
...

-4.5 
44.3 

-8.0 
49.9 

-9.7 
51.5 

-8.7 
48.1 

-7.6 
46.6 

-6.6 
46.1 

-5.8 
45.8 

-5.0
45.5

Exports 

33.4 

35.8 

36.0 

33.6 

33.8 

34.6 

35.2 

35.9

Foreign Direct Investment, net 
Net reserves in US$, bln (eop) 
In months of next year's imports 
As % of short-term extemal debt 

1.1 
23.3 
5.6 
0.9 

2.4 
20.3 
4.9 
0.5 

2.8 
17.2 
4.2 
0.4 

3.3 
18.4 
4.4 
0.5 

3.2 
... 
... 
... 

3.1 
... 
... 
... 

3.2 
... 
... 
... 

3.3
...
...
...

Extemal Debt 

29.0 

29.3 

34.4 

36.5 

38.6 

38.8 

38.7 

38.4

Terms of Trade, change in % 
Exchange rate (average) 
Other memo items

-3.4 
8.42 

4.1 
8.09 

-13.1 
8.63 

0.8 
8.48 

0.7 
... 

1.7 
... 

0.1 
... 

0.1
...

GDP, nominal MAD, bln 
GDP, nominal US$, bln 

764.0 
90.8 

802.6 
99.2 

828.2 
96.0 

877.3 
103.4 

924.9 
... 

989.9 
... 

1,062.1 
... 

1,139.7
...

188. External debt sustainability remains within reach provided reforms take hold.
The current account deficit would progressively narrow from 9.7 percent of GDP in 2012 to
around 5 percent in 2017 benefiting from better export potentials and a recovery of tourism
and remittances. External debt is expected to peak at close to 40.8 percent of GDP in 2015
before declining thereafter. Foreign reserves would remain at a little more than four months
of imports, assuming foreign 
investors retain confidence and GCC financial support
materializes timely as it has been the case so far.4 1 Over the last two years, FDIs inflows has
seen double digit growth (22 percent on average, in US dollars) and is expected to continue at
the same pace over the next few years.

189. Assuming the process of reforming the subsidy and pension systems continues as
planned by the Government and the wage bill cost of civil servants is better controlled
through restrained hiring and wage policies as confirmed in the Budget Law 2014, the
fiscal framework would remain sustainable over the medium term. Stress tests suggested
sustainability over the medium term, although debt in three tests stayed between 62-64
percent of GDP, highlighting the risks posed by a limited reform scenario. Even under the

41 The Government signed in February 2013 a grant for US$1.25 billion over a five-year period with the Kuwait
Development Fund (KDF). KDF made a first installment of US$500 million in November 2013. In 2013, the Government
also received US$675 million from the Saudi Development Fund under a US$ 1.25 billion grant agreement. Qatar pledged
its share of US$1.25 billion in January 2014 and activated the first and second installment of a total of US$500 in March
2014. All these grants are part of a cooperation agreement with GCC governments for US$5 billion.

102

more optimistic scenarios, the debt ratio to GDP would remain above the range generally
judged appropriate for mid-size emerging markets.4 2

42 See IMF World Economic Outlook, Fall 2013: "based on past fiscal performance, the sustainable public debt level for a
typical emerging market may only be about 25 percent of GDP, (...) emerging markets as a group have failed to respond
in a manner consistent with ensuring fiscal sustainability once public debt exceeds 50 percent of GDP."

103

CPS Annex A - Morocco at Glance

Morocco at a glance 

11122/13

M. East 
& North 
Africa 

Lower
middle
income 

Key Development Indicators 

Morocco 

Age distribution, 2011

P12012) 

Male 

Female

Population, mid-year (millions) 
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
Urban population (%of total population) 

32.5 
447 
1.4 
58 

337 
8,775 
1.7 
59 

2,533 
20,842
1.6
39 

7579

4549

30-34

GNI(Atlas method, US$ billions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI per capita (PPP, international $) 

96.8 
2,980 
4,880 

1,279 
3,866 
8,052 

4,488
1,772 
3,837 

15-19

0-4

10 

5 

5 

10

GDP growth (%) 
GDP per capita growth (%) 

2.7 
1.3 

4.2 
2.4 

5.5 
3.9

percent of total populatio

(most recent estimate, 2005-2012)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %) 
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5) 

3 
14Under-5 
75 
29 
3 

3 

30.2

mortality rate (per 1,000)

72 
26 
6 

66
46 
24

90

70
60

Adult literacy, male (%of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacy, female (%of ages 15 and older) 
Gross primary enrollment, male (%of age group) 
Gross primary enrollment, female (%of age group) 

69 
44 
118 
111 

84 
68 
108 
101 

80 
62 
116 
112 

so
40
30
20

10

Access to an improved water source (%of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population) 

97 
51 

89 
88 

87 
47

1990 

1995 

2000 

2011

Morm 

DMddle East & NhAfca

Net Aid Flows 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2012 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid 
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
France 
European Union Institutions 
Japan 

1,161 

1,241 

434 

993 

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

135 
12 
4 

217 
29 
111 

155 
117 
103 

254 
223
121 

15

lo

Aid (%of GNI) 
Aid per capita (US$) 

5.7 
60 

4.4 
51 

1.2 
15 

1.1
31 

o

-5

Long-Term Economic Trends 

-l0

95 

05

Consumerprices (annual %change) 
GDP implicit deflator(annual%change) 

9.4 
15.2 

7.0 
7.8 

1.9 
-0.6 

1.3
0.4 

-

GDP 

-

GDP ct

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$) 
Terms of trade index (2000= 100) 

3.9 
83 

8.2 
94 

10.6 
100 

8.6
101

1980-90 1990-2000 2000-12
(average annual growth %)
2.2 
1.7 
5.1 
2.9 

Population,mid-year(millions) 
GDP (US$ millions) 

19.4 
21,079 

24.2 
28.7 
28,839 
37,022 
(%ofGDP)
19.3 
30.4 
18.9 
50.3 

32.5 
95,982 

1.0
4.7

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

18.4 
29.8 
15.9 
51.1 

14.9 
29.1 
17.5 
56.0 

14.6 
29.6 
15.2 
55.8 

6.8 
2.4 
3.3 
1.5 

0.3 
3.0 
2.6 
1.7 

5.5
3.6
2.8
4.9

Householdfinalconsumptionexpenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capitalformation 

61.8 
18.0 
28.5 

60.0 
16.8 
28.7 

61.4 
18.4 
25.5 

59.7 
19.2 
35.3 

5.0 
5.2 
2.3 

2.8 
2.3 
3.4 

4.7
4.2
7.3

Exports of goods and services 
Importsofgoodsandservices 
Gross savings 

19.9 
28.2 
22.1 

25.7 
31.2 
28.3 

28.0 
33.4 
24.3 

36.2 
50.4 
25.3

6.2 
3.5 

5.5 
4.4 

5.4
7.0

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
'a.Aid data are for 201.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

104

Morocco at Glance (Continued)

Morocco

Balance of Payments and Trade 

2000 

2012

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2011

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob) 
Total merchandise imports (cif) 
Net trade in goods and services 

7,411 
21,400
11,531 44,783 
-2,085 
-14,654 

Voice and accountablity
Poltial stabilty and

absenceofviolence

Current account balance 
as a %of GDP 

-475 
-1.3 

-9,555
-10.0 

Regulatory quality

Personal transfers and 
compensation of employees (receipts) 

Ruleoflaw
Control of corruption

2,161 

7,256 

Reserves, including gold 

5,138 

16,648 

0.0 

250 

50.0 

750 

100.

Central Government Finance 

02000 

Chighr s 

pce nti 

rank (0-100)

(/oofGDP)

Current revenue (including grants) 

23.6 

26.3 

Source: Woddwide Govemance Indicators (www.goinicator.or)

Taxrevenue 
Current expenditure 

217 
23.4 

24.1
28.7

Technology and Infrastructure 

2000 

2011

Overall surplus/deficit 

-4.8 

-7.5

Paved roads (%of total) 
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people) 
High technologyexports
(%of manufactured exports) 

56.4 

70.4

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
Individual 
Corporate 

.. 

.. 
.. 

13 

124

11.3 

7.7

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, M DRI) 

20,674 
2,610 
-

29,514 
3,232 
-

Agricultural land (%of land area) 
Forest area (%of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area) 

69 
12.7 
1.5 

67
12.7
15

Total debt (%of GDP) 
Total debt service (%of exports) 

55.8 
24.3 

30.8 
9.1 

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters) 
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

985 

899

Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 
Portfolio equity(net inflows) 

470 
30 

3,387 
110

C02 emissions per capita (mt) 

1.2 

15

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ perkg ofoil equivalent) 

8.3 

8.3

Composition of total external debt, 2012

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

356 

517

Short4erm, 

ID 

, 

2723

World Bank Group portfolio 

2000 

2011

Pnvate, 6,960 

(US$ millions)

Other muli-
lateral, 8,399 

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Interest payments 

2,837 
138 
307 
190 

2,866
711
208
60

Bilateral, 7,5 

US$ trillions 

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Total debt service 

27 
0 
2 

12
0
1

Private Sector Development 

2000 

2012 

Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to start a business (%of GNI per capita) 
Time required to register property(days) 

-
-
-

12 
15.7 
75 

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 
of which IFC own account 
Disbursements for FC own account 
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account 

29 
29 
1 

122
122
5

Ranked as a major constraint to business 
(%of managers surveyed who agreed) 
' Access to/cost of financing 
' Tax rates 

2000 

2011 

7 

6

.. 
.. 

84.4
62.6 

M IGA
Gross exposure 
Newguarantees 

-
-

-
-

Stock market capitalization (%of GDP) 
Bank capital to asset ratio (%) 

29.4 
9.8 

60.6 
8.1

Note: Figures in italics are for years otherthan those specified. 
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.

1122/13

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

105

Millennium Development Goals 

Morocco

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, 41-2 years) 

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 
Poverty headcount ratio at$1.25 a day (PPP, %of population) 
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (%of population) 
Share of income or consumption to the poo rest qunitile (%) 
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5) 

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primaryschool enrollment (net, %) 
Primary completion rate (%of relevant age group) 
Secondaryschool enrollment (gross, %) 
Youth literacy rate (%of people ages 15-24) 

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education(0) 
Womenemployed inthenonagricultural sector (%of nonagricultural employment) 
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 

Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized,%) 

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortalityratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 livebirths) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%of total) 
Contraceptive prevalence (%of women ages 15-49) 

1990 
2.5 
V.1 
6.6 
9.0 

58 
52 
37 
55 

67 

.. 

85 
66 

80 

332 
31 
42 

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (%of population ages 15-49) 
0.1 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per10,000 people) 
10 
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms) 
76 

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (%of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population) 
Forest area (%of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area) 
CO2emissions (metric tons percapita) 
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

75 
58 
6.8 
1.2 
1.0 
9.7 

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people) 
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people) 
Internet users (per 100 people) 

Households with a computer(%) 

1.6 
0.0 
0.0 

.. 

Morocco

1995 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

72 
48 
38 
62 

72 

1 

57 

88 

228 
34 
50 

0.1 
113 
73 

.. 
.. 

12.7 
15 
1.1 
8.2 

4.2 
0.1 
0.0 

.. 

2000 
6.3 
15.3 
6.3 

.. 

2011
2.5
6.2
6.6
3.1

79 
57 
38 
67 

80 
20 
1 

47 
40 

93 

228 
48 

.. 

0.1 
95 
86 

80 
68 
12.7 
1.5 
12 
8.3 

4.9 
8.1 
0.7 

.. 

97
89
67
85

7
18
V

31
29

94

IQ
74

67

0.2
85
86

96
51
12.7
15
15
8.3

11.0
113.3
51.0

39.0

Education indicators (%) 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

10D 

75 

50-

12 

1 

50 

25

05 

2-25- 

20D0 

2005 

2010

Pr 

ry n 

t endme 

tra t

Raticodgirstobysinpnma.y&.nonday 

140

10D

80-

40-
20-

1w0 

1995 2000 2011 

2000 

20D5 

2010

OMor 

OMddleE-t &N hAfr-a 

OFed+mobilesubscribe 

9I ne 

s

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. 

1122/13

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

106

CPS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of March 20, 2014

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2011 

12 
2.3 
16.7 
13.0 
16.7 
13.0 
14.1 

No 
1,588 
70 

2012 

2013 

2014

12 
2.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
18.1 

14 
2.7 
7.1 
3.3 
7.1 
3.3 
12.1 

16
3.0
6.3
2.3
6.3
2.3
13.4

No 
No 
1,587 2,048 
62 
81 

No
1,600
65

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

Last Five FYs

133 
8,592.0 

24.8 
24.3 

8
813.1

0.0
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

107

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

2014

Accountability and transparency 
Inclusive Green Growth 1 
Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance 
Rural Water Supply II 
Second Rural Roads 2 - addt'l financing 
Second Skills and Employment DPL 
ONEE Support AF 

Subtotal 

Noor II and Ill Concentrated Solar Power 
Clean and Efficient Energy 
Health Sector Support 
Integrated Risk Management 
Second Competitiveness DPL 
Solid Waste Sector DPL4 
Urban Transport Sector 
Early Stage Entrepreneurship 
Non-Revenue Water 
OER Irrigation AF 

2015 

2016-2017 
(Indicative) 

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary

As of March 20, 2014

Strategic 
Rewards b 
(HIMIL)

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

US$(M) 

200.0
300.0
300.0
150.0
95.0
100.0
40.0
1,185.0

150.0
125.0
100.0
75.0
120.0
130.0
200.0
50.0
100.0
180.0

Subtotal 

1,230.0

Inclusive Green Growth DPL2
Support to ORDAR Creation
Judiciary Reform Implementation
Rural Development Program
Financial Sector DPL2
Rural Roads Ill
Accountability and Transparency DPL2 & 3
Education Support
Tourism Development
Agriculture Modernization
Local Government Modernization
INDH3
Peri-Urban Water Supply and Sewerage
ICT Development
Gender DPL
Energy Efficiency
Social Protection Reform
Youth and Employment Support
Water and Sanitation
Subtotal 

TOTAL 

108

1,585.0

4,000.0

CAS Annex B3 - IFC Program Summary

IFC Investment Operations Program

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 (*)

Commitments (US$m)
Gross 
IFC Own Account (OA) 
Net** 
IFC Own Account + Mobilization 

10.5 
10.5 

18.5 
18.5 

106.4 
199.1 
156.4 271.7 

133.2
133.2

OA Commitments by Sector (%)

Agriculture and Forestry 

Oil, Gas and Mining 

Construction and Real Estate 
Finance & Insurance 
Collective Investment Vehicles 
Education Services 

Total 

OA Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)

Guarantee 
Loan 
Quasi-Equity (inc. Loan Type) 

Straight Equity (inc. Fund) 
Total 

(*) As of March 12, 2014

0% 

21% 

0% 
0% 
79% 
0% 

0% 

16% 

0% 
84% 
0% 
0% 

0% 

3% 

0% 
97% 
0% 
0% 

0% 

0% 

0% 
90% 
3% 
7% 

18%

0%

41%
26%
15%
0%

100% 

100% 

100% 100% 

100%

0% 
0% 
0% 

36% 
14% 
34% 

26% 
0% 
0% 

24% 
0% 
0% 

100% 
100% 

16% 
100% 

74% 
76% 
100% 100% 

11%
15%
19%

55%
100%

109

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services

As of March 20, 2014

Product 

Completion FY Cost (US$000)

FY13 
FY13 
FY13 
FY13 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 

FY14-15 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY14 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 
FY15 

262
76
73
136
609
304
462
46
245
45

150
500
500
400
130
210
90
300
200
50
500
50
150
50
365
110
400
350

Recent completions
Justice Public Expenditure Review 
Climate Change Impact on Water Resource Mgmt 
Health Sector Support 
eGov and Broadband Policy Advice 
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy 
Trade and Integration 
Governance of Service Delivery 
Community-Based Disaster Risk Management 
Integrated Risk Management and Strategy 
Systems Approach for Better Education Results 

Underway
Gender Assessment 
PER Health and Education 
Poverty PESW 
Employment TA 
Broadband and eGov Policy Advice 
Support to Improve SOE governance in MENA Region 
Trade Facilitation and Logistics in MENA Region 
Gender Learning and Operational Initiative in MENA Region-TF 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Trade and Competitiveness 
Subsidy Reform and Cash Transfer Program 
Support to Artisanal Mining 
Climate Change Adaptation in Road Sector TA 
Tourism Development 
GAC in Moroccan Health Management Information System TF 
Public Employment and Governance in MENA 
Water and Energy Nexus - Thirsty Energy Initiative TF 
Promoting Social Entrepreneurship TF 

Planned
Non-Revenue Water Assessment ESW
Water/Energy Distribution Restructuring ESW
PEFA Diagnostic ESW
ICT-Enabled Micro-Work TA
Employment TA
Poverty ESW
Clean Energy TA Phase 2

110

CPS Annex B5

Morocco Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per moman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2005=100) 
INCOM EICONSUM PTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles 

DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2006-12 

21.8 
2.3 
44.9 
4.7 

26.0 
17.3 
32.6 

670 
54 

39.2 
6.7 
46.3 

.. 

5.9 

61 
73 
48 

.. 
.. 
.. 

45 
51 

.. 

59 
58 
60 

83 
115 

264 
207 

.. 

24 

26.4 
1.8 
51.9 
3.6 

13.1 
7.6 
18.0 

1,280 
91 

39.2 
6.6 
46.4 

1.0 
5.6 

72 
81 
63 

75 
94 
58 

88 
86 
9 

68 
66 
70 

57 
76 

234 
184 
228 
34 

32.5 
1.1 
57.7 
2.2 

6.2
3.5
10.0

2,960 
123

40.8
6.6
48.1

1.4 
6.0 

97 
97 
95 

97 
100 
92 

94 

.. 

3 

75 
74 
76 

29 
31 

.. 
.. 

112 
74 

M. East 
& North 
Africa 

339.6 
1.7 
59.5 
2.8 

Lower-
middle-
income

2,507.0
1.5
38.9
2.9

3,453 

1,879

3.0 
4.7 

93 
95 
90 

89 
95 
82 

91 
91 
6 

71 
69 
73 

21 
26 

176 
111 
81 

.. 

1.5
4.2

87
88
86

87
93
84

79
73
24

66
64
68

46
61

239
166
260
57

CAS Annex BS. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system. 
1122/13
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

111

CPS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
2008 

Estimte 
2011 

Projected
2013 
2014 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

2007 

2009 

2010 

2012 

2015

100 
14 
27 
59 

100 
15 
30 
55 

100 
16 
29 
55 

100 
15 
30 
55 

100 
15 
30 
54 

100 
15 
30 
56 

100 
17 
29 
54 

100 
16 
29 
55 

100
16
29
55

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

77 
31 
4 
28 

75 
33 
5 
28 

75 
31 
6 
25 

75 
31 
6 
25 

77 
31 
6 
25 

79 
31 
6 
26 

80 
30 
5 
25 

79 
30 
5 
25 

78
30
5
25

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (ONFS) 

36 
45 

37 
51 

29 
40 

33 
43 

36 
49 

36 
50 

34 
47 

35 
47 

35
46

Gross domestic savings 
Gross nationalsavingsc 

23 
32 

25 
33 

25 
30 

25 
31 

23 
28 

21 
25 

20 
25 

21 
26 

22
27

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

75223 

88879 

90554 

90770 

99212 

95982 

103803 

108992 

115361

2340 

2600 

2870 

2960 

2990 

2960 

3140 

3180 

3360

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 98 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
2.7 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.0 

5.6 
4.4 

4.8 
7.9 

3.6 
1.8 

5.0 
4.3 

2.7 
2.0 

4.5 
4.3 

3.0 
3.1 

4.6
5.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 98 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
1.8 
4.6 
Total consumption 
3.0 
4.8 
Private consumption 
2.8 
5.0 

3.7 
5.1 
3.5 

2.4 
0.3 
1.0 

3.6 
5.4 
6.0 

1.3 
3.0 
2.1 

3.4 
4.0 
4.5 

2.0 
1.5 
1.9 

3.6
3.1
3.2

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

27268 
15129 
34610 
29206 
-7342 
7661 
-70 

33430 
20095 
46267 
39573 
-12837 
8727 
-4637 

26182 
13973 
37026 
30189 
-10844 
7360 
-4930 

30308 
17771 
40192 
32744 
-9884 
7290 
-4078 

35529 
21631 
49480 
40908 
-13951 
8010 
-7986 

34877 
21400 
49531 
41394 
-14654 
7474 
-9555 

35159 
21274 
48846 
40680 
-13687 
7684 
-8632 

37739 
22521 
50893 
42362 
-13154 
8065 
-7981 

40827
24123
53172
44230
-12345
8462
-7033

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-termloans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

2183 
370 
820 
-450 
-416 
-2067 

2002 
1445 
1758 
-312 
-291 
1481 

1476 
2321 
1902 
419 
937 
196 

985 
2559 
1161 
1398 
1739 
-1206 

2389 
1684 
1672 
12 
1280 
2632 

2474 
2742 
85 
2658 
872 
3467 

2598 
4541 
3833 
708 
1296 
198 

3500 
3863 
3165 
697 
1336 
-718 

3500
2898
3155
-257
1324
-689

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% ofGDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR98 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 

-9.8 

-14.4 

-12.0 

-10.9 

-14.1 

-15.3 

-13.2 

-12.1 

-10.7

3.5 

-4.3 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

1.3 

14.1 

0.8 

5.1 

5.9

Primary 
Manufactures 

5.1 
0.9 

-9.4 
1.3 

-3.3 
3.5 

-1.1 
23.0 

3.6 
-2.3 

6.7 
2.9 

7.6
3.3

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

11.8 

6.5 

.. 

.. 

8.2 

1.5 

0.5 

4.1 

5.0

(Continued)

112

CPS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators (Continued)

Indicator 

2007 

Actual 
2008 

2009 

2010 

Fs tintLte 
2011 

2012 

Projected
2013 
2014 

2015

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

27.4 
24.1 
3.2 
4.6 
0.6 

29.7 
25.5 
4.2 
5.5 
1.6 

25.8 
23.1 
2.7 
6.3 
1.7 

Monetary indicators

M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2(%) 
Private sector credit growth / 

total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR98 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms oftrade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) 

Real interest rates

Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

114.6 
17.5 
74.6 

116.1 
13.3 
80.6 

116.9 
7.0 
92.8 

153.9 
130.3 
118.1 
87.0 

2.5 
3.9 

211.0 
161.3 
130.8 
80.3 

3.7 
5.9 

.. 
.. 
.. 

82.8 

1.0 
1.5 

25.4 
23.8 
1.6 
6.2 
2.1 

116.7 
4.2 
108.2 

164.4 
138.6 
118.6 
87.0 

25.9 
26.9 
-0.9 
6.2 
0.9 

26.3 
28.7 
-2.4 
5.9 
1.8 

25.9 
26.3 
-0.4 
5.3 
3.9 

118.3 
6.4 
66.5 

119.8 
4.5 
68.5 

119.0 
6.4 
59.6 

197.6 
160.0 
123.5 
85.8 

171.4 
159.7 
107.4 
94.4 

169.0 
156.0 
108.3 
90.4 

26.2 
25.7 
0.5 
5.3 
3.7 

119.6 
6.0 
66.2 

170.2 
156.1 
109.0 
90.4 

26.1
25.0
1.1
5.3
2.6

119.8
7.1
72.5

172.2
155.2
110.9
90.4

1.0 
0.6 

0.9 
0.1 

1.3 
0.4 

1.6 
2.4 

1.7 
2.4 

1.4
2.3

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

113

CPS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
2008 

Estimated 
2011 

Projected
2014 

lIndicator 

2007 

2009 

2010 

2012 

2013 

2015

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

20679 

20957 

24631 

26299 

29049 

29518 

37726 

41609 

44307

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

651 

1102 

1842 

2564 

2025 

469 

4691 

3883 

2698

Total debt service (TDS) 

4023 

4205 

3413 

3306 

3234 

3232 

3440 

3656 

3914

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb 

59.2 
27.5 
11.5 
29.2 

50.7 
23.6 
10.2 
34.3 

73.9 
27.2 
10.2 
32.6 

69.9 
29.0 
8.8 
33.2 

66.7 
29.3 
7.4 
32.3 

70.2 
30.8 
7.7 
33.1 

87.2 
36.3 
7.9 
32.2 

90.0 
38.2 
7.9 
32.1 

89.1

TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

38.4
7.9
32.5

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

16.5 
34.2 

15.8 
39.0 

18.9 
49.8 

12.1 
43.7 

12.1 
51.7 

10.6 
52.7 

10.4 
50.1 

10.9 
47.6 

11.5
44.8

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 

1.1 
2578 

0.9 
2540 

1.0 
2543 

0.7 
2468 

0.6 
2866 

0.7 
2723 

0.7 
4313 

0.8 
5145 

0.8
6046

Of which present value of

guarantees (US$m)

Share oflBRDportfolio(%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

2 
17 

2 
16 

2 
14 

2 
13 

3 
12 

3 
10 

4 
9 

5 
8 

6
6

IFC (US$m)

Loans

Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use oflMF credits and net short-

termcapital.

b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers'remittances.

c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.

d. Includes present value of guarantees.

e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types ofboth loan and equity instruments.

114

Closed 
Projects

158

'

IBRD/IDA* 
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

1,131.05
16.97
3,000.88
3,146.56
4,131.94
3,163.53
708.57
0.00
708.57

Active Projects 

CAS Annex B8 - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As of March 20, 2014

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements

Project ID 

Project Name 

Development 
Objectives 

Implementation 
Progress

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

P129774 
P130903 
P121271 
P117081 
P127956 
P125799 
P093719 
P129326 
P116201 
P104265 
P122028 
P098459 
P100397 
P094007 
P086877 
P120541 

GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture 
Accountability and Transparency DPL 
GEF Integrated Coastal Zone Mgt 
GEF Integrating CC in the PMV 
Inclusive Green Growth DPL 
Judicial Performance Enhancement 
Modern. of Irrig. Agric.in OER Basin 
MSME Development 
National Initiative for Human Dev Il 
ONE Support Project 
Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power 
Oum Er Rbia Sanitation 
Regional Potable Water Supply Systems 
Rural Roads II 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Second Education DPL 

TOTAL 

S 
# 
S 
S 
# 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
MU 
MS 
S 
S 
S 

MS 
# 
MS 
MS 
# 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 
S 
MS 
MU 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 

2013 
2014 
2013 
2011 
2014 
2012 
2010 
2012 
2012 
2008 
2012 
2010 
2010 
2006 
2006 
2013 

6.44 

5.18 
4.35 

200.00

300.00
15.80 
70.00 
50.00 
300.00 
190.50 
200.00 
43.00 
175.00 
141.52 
60.00 
100.00

6.44 

4.98 
3.23 

15.57
42.39 
0.29 
170.58
60.34 
199.50
41.92 
161.24 

16.73 

0.45

1.50
1.47

21.48
(40.46)

42.87

21.90 
144.04 
(90.65) 
10.82 

18.75
71.25
(15.51)
5.91

1,845.82 

15.97 

723.22 

(629.20) 

80.40

MIS 

Region(s):Middle East and North Africa
Country(s): Morocco

CPS Annex B9

International Finance Corporation 

Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio

Amounts in US Dollar Millions

Accounting Date as of: 02/28/2014 

COMMITTED 

OUTSTANDING

2010 
'2007 
2014 
'2008 
2013 
2008 
'2013 
2008 
'2014 
200612012 
'2013 
201012011/2012 
2000 
2000 
'014 
200812012 
19881199011993 
'2012 
2014 
Total Portfoio 

ARiF 
AIAmana-Maroc 
Alliances 
AkeriMed Mahreb 

8QP 

BiCE 

CNAV FundI 
CapRal N Africa 
FBPMC 
FONDP 
aM 

a.iWh 

Maohreb Inv. At 
Maahreb investP 
Mediterrania 1 
MtaAfrica 

ETAL 

Saharn Finances 
Zalaoh Holdin 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20.00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00 
0 
0 
20.00 

10.95 
0 
30.00 
6.25 
51.76 
0 
13.73 
4.21 
0 
0 
7.00 
5.72 
0.02 
0.00 
20.69 
0.88 
0.00 
69.04 
24.00 
244.25 

0 
1.15 
25.00 
0 
0 
96.55 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

122.70 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8.95 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8.9 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

10.95 
1.15 
55.00 
6.25 
51.76 
96.55 
13.73 
4,21 
20.00 
8.95 
7.00 
5.72 
0.02 
0.00 
2069 
088 
0.00 
69.04 
24.00 
396.91 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00 
0 
0 
0.00 

3.54 
0 
0 
0.77 
51.07 
0 
2.28 
2,44 
0 
0 
7.00 
5.72 
0.02 
0.00 
0.45 
0.88 
0.00 
69.04 
2400 
167.21 

0 
1.15 
0 
0 
0 
96.55 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
97.70 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.35 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0.3 

Report Run Date: 03t20/2014

Page 1

0.00
000
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0 00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

354 
1.15 
0 
0.77 
51.07 
96.55 
2.28 
244 
0 
0.35 
7.00 
572 
0,02 
0.00 
0.45 
0.88 
0.00 
69,04 
24.00 
265.26 

116

