Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 69510-MH

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS
FOR THE PERIOD FY13-FY16

February 19, 2013

Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea and Pacific Islands Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific

This document has a restricted distribution and many be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit:
United States Dollar (USD)
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB
COBP
CPAP
CPS
CTF
GDP
Gbps
GEF
GFDRR
GNI
GPO
IBRD
ICT
IDA
IDF
IFC
IMF
MDG
MEC
NGO
NTA
PNA
PROP
RMI
SDR
SOE
SPC
TRAM
UNDP
UNFPA
UNICEF
UNV
US
WDO

Asian Development Bank
Country Operations Business Plan
Country Programme Action Plan
Country Partnership Strategy
Compact Trust Fund
Gross Domestic Product
Gigabits per second
Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Gross National Income
Global Partnership for Oceans
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Information and Communication Technologies
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Millennium Development Goals
Marshalls Energy Company
Nongovernmental Organization
National Telecommunications Authority
Parties to the Nauru Agreement
Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program
Republic of the Marshall Islands
Special Drawing Rights
State-owned Enterprise
Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Tax and Revenue Reform and Modernization Commission
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Volunteers
United States
Women in Development Office

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

IDA
Axel van Trotsenburg
Franz Drees-Gross
Piers Merrick

IFC
Karin Finkelston
Sergio Pimenta
Gavin Murray

THE REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................... i
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ................................. 2
Sociopolitical Context ............................................................................................................ 2
Millennium Development Goals, Youth Development and Gender ...................................... 2
Economic Context .................................................................................................................. 4
Poverty.................................................................................................................................... 8
Macroeconomic Outlook and Debt Sustainability ................................................................. 8
Government Priorities and Development Framework .......................................................... 11
Development Partner Engagement ....................................................................................... 11
III. WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT IN THE PACIFIC..................................... 13
Translating Pacific Themes into the Marshall Islands Program ........................................... 14
Selectivity, Flexibility and New Ways of Doing Business .................................................. 17
Financing Terms and Sources .............................................................................................. 18
IV. MANAGING RISK ............................................................................................................. 18
Boxes
Box 1: Republic of the Marshall Islands’ Compact Trust Fund ............................................. 6
Box 2: Proposed Analytical, Advisory and Technical Assistance Activities ....................... 17
Tables
Table 1: Recent Fiscal Trends FY2007-2012 ........................................................................ 5
Table 2: Summary of Medium-Term Macroeconomic Indicators ......................................... 9
Table 3: The Marshall Islands: Indicative IDA and Trust Fund Operations – FY13-16 ..... 18
Annexes
Annex 1: Development Partner Engagement by Sector ....................................................... 20
Annex 2: The Marshall Islands CPS Results Matrix ............................................................ 21
Annex 3: The Marshall Islands: At A Glance ...................................................................... 23
Annex 4: The Marshall Islands: Key Indicators Table, FY2008–13 .................................... 26
Annex 5: Map of the Republic of the Marshall Islands........................................................ 27

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
This is the first World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the
Republic of the Marshall Islands. The World Bank Group has been scaling up its engagement
throughout the Pacific and this CPS reflects the commitment to transition from a regional
engagement framework to individual country strategies that permit a more detailed analysis of a
country's specific development challenges. This CPS outlines a program of assistance intended
to strengthen economic governance to improve living standards and enhance service delivery.
The CPS is presented together with the country's first International Development Association
(IDA) operation.
ii.
The Marshall Islands is one of the world’s smallest, most isolated and vulnerable
nations. The country consists of 29 atolls and 5 isolated islands (24 of which are inhabited) and
has a total land mass of just 181 km2 set in an ocean area of over 1.9 million km2. The
population of the Marshall Islands is estimated at 53,000 of which close to half are resident in
Majuro, the capital city. The country is vulnerable to occasional typhoons and its 370km
coastline renders it particularly susceptible to extreme waves and high tides.
iii.
The Marshall Islands faces many of the development challenges common to small,
remote economies. Small size and remoteness increase the costs of economic activity and make
it difficult to achieve economies of scale. Remoteness also imposes transport costs that increase
the costs of trade and fundamentally constrain competitiveness of exports of goods and services
in world markets. These same factors also increase the cost and complexity of providing public
services. There is also an opportunity and a need to bring greater attention to gender concerns in
the Marshall Islands and all World Bank Group interventions will be informed by a consideration
of these issues.
iv.
The World Bank Group program will focus on strengthening economic governance
and promoting the effective use of public resources to enhance living and service delivery
standards for all Marshallese. To help mitigate the effects of economic isolation, the World
Bank will seek to help the Marshall Islands take advantage of opportunities from closer regional
and global integration. The World Bank Group will support the liberalization and regulation of
the telecommunications sector with the aim of connecting more Marshallese to social and
economic opportunities. The Marshall Islands has indicated it will participate in a proposed
regional fisheries operation that would strengthen the governance and sustainable management
of tuna fisheries and help increase the share of revenue captured by the Marshall Islands from
this significant natural resource. The Government has also signaled a willingness to address
important structural reforms in the energy sector, to improve management of Compact Trust
Fund assets and to enhance the investment climate, all of which could also be supported by the
World Bank Group.
v.
World Bank Group support to the Marshall Islands will require an agile and flexible
approach. As the World Bank Group deepens engagement in the Marshall Islands, there will be
a need to balance selectivity with a willingness to support emerging development priorities and
opportunities. Moreover, all World Bank Group interventions will need to be informed by an
appreciation of the extraordinary capacity constraints facing the Marshall Islands.
i

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The World Bank Group has been scaling-up analytical and financial support
throughout the Pacific and is now well-placed to provide International Development
Association (IDA) support to the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI). The Marshall
Islands became a member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
in May 1992, of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in September 1992, and of IDA in
January 1993. Upon membership, the Marshall Islands was classified as IBRD due to a high per
capita income level. However, in part because of creditworthiness concerns, the Marshall
Islands was unable to access IBRD resources, and the country’s engagement with the World
Bank was limited to support provided under the Institutional Development Fund (IDF), the
Global Environment Facility (GEF), and analytical work. In July 2011, in the wake of
successive food and fuel price increases and the lingering effects of the global financial crisis,
the Marshall Islands was reclassified to IDA-only status under the exception for small island
economies. This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) signals the World Bank Group’s long-term
commitment to supporting the Marshall Islands’ development and will be presented together
with the First Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Sector Development Policy
Operation.
2.
This CPS outlines a World Bank Group program that responds to the Marshall
Islands’ development priorities and that is informed by the broader themes guiding the World
Bank Group’s engagement in the Pacific. The practice of developing individual country
strategies for all Pacific country members reflects that, while Pacific island countries face many
common development challenges, Pacific members benefit from strategies that address their
specific country conditions. Through this CPS, the World Bank Group aims to adapt its
instruments to the Marshall Islands’ country context, and to refine implementation approaches
based on experience derived from engagement elsewhere in the Pacific. Country strategies in
“micro-states” such as the Marshall Islands will of necessity be concise, selective, highly
flexible, and seek to draw upon the full range of available instruments. As a result, the CPS
should be viewed as providing a framework for engagement rather than a precisely detailed
program as might be expected in a larger country or where Bank engagement is more
established. The Government of the Marshall Islands is strongly supportive of the preparation of
an individual CPS and of the program it outlines.
3.
To deepen the World Bank Group’s understanding of the Marshall Islands’ context
and priorities, the program will draw upon the analytical work and operational experience of
more established development partners. The World Bank has participated in recent
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV missions, and the proposed interventions have
been shaped through consultation with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the United
States (US) Government.

1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Sociopolitical Context
4.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands is a Micronesian Island nation with a history of
settlement stretching back 4,000 years to the arrival of the first navigators. The chance arrival
of the Spanish voyager Alonso de Salazar in 1526 marked the first European contact with the
country, and it was not until 1788 that British Naval Captain William Marshall named it when
sailing through the area while transporting convicts to Australia. In the period 1885-1914, the
Marshall Islands was annexed to Germany until its capture by Japan in the First World War.
Japan governed the Marshall Islands until the allied occupation in the Second World War and the
country’s subsequent transfer to US control. From 1946-1958, the United States tested 67
nuclear weapons in the Marshall Islands including those in Bikini Atoll, and the 1952 test of the
first US Hydrogen bomb that destroyed an island in Enetewok Atoll. The health effects from
radioactive contamination persist, and in the period 1956-1998, the US provided US$759 million
in compensation to affected Marshallese.
5.
The Marshall Islands became self-governing in 1979. It achieved formal independence
in 1990 and is governed as a mixed parliamentary-presidential system. General elections are
held every four years (most recently in November 2011) with each of 24 constituencies electing
one or more representatives (Senators) to the lower house of the bicameral legislature Nitijela.
The President, and Head of State, is subsequently elected by the 33 Senators. The upper house
The Council of Iroij is an advisory body comprising 12 tribal chiefs.
6.
The Marshall Islands is one of the world’s smallest, most isolated and vulnerable
nations, and is already beginning to feel the effects of climate change. The country consists of
29 atolls and five isolated islands (24 of which are inhabited) and has a total land mass of just
181km2 set in an ocean area of over 1.9 million km2. The population of the Marshall Islands is
estimated at about 53,000 1 of which over half are resident in the capital city of Majuro. The
country is vulnerable to occasional typhoons and, like other low-lying Pacific nations, its 370km
coastline, which is home to 99 percent of the population, renders it particularly susceptible to
extreme waves and high tides. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concluded in
their 4th Assessment Report (2007) that sea-level rise is likely “to be of a magnitude that will
disrupt virtually all economic and social sectors in small island nations…”
Millennium Development Goals, Youth Development and Gender
7.
Data suggest that the Marshall Islands’ progress towards the Millennium Development
Goals (MDG) has been uneven. A 2011 MDG Tracking Report 2 notes that the Marshall Islands
is not on track to meet the MDG Goals on Eradicating Extreme Poverty (Goal 1) or Combating
HIV/AIDS and Other Diseases (Goal 6). The country has made mixed progress towards
Achieving Universal Primary Education, Promoting Gender Equality and Empowering Women,

1
2

The RMI 2011 Census of Population and Housing Summary Report.
Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. 2011 Pacific Regional MDGs Tracking Report pp.74-75.Suva.

2

and Ensuring Environmental Sustainability (Goals 2, 3, and 7, respectively). It is on track to
meet Goals 4 and 5 (Reduce Child Mortality and Improve Maternal Health).
8.
A median age of 21 3 years makes the Marshall Islands one of the youngest Pacific
nations in demographic terms. A high birth rate, the continuing effects of urbanization, and a
largely stagnant economy are generating significant pressure on the country to provide increased
educational and employment opportunities, and to provide social services. Urbanization has
resulted in high population density in major capitals. Under these pressures traditional social
structures (as reflected in the Marshallese saying "jake jobol eo” or "no person will go hungry
through sharing") are beginning to break down. The Marshall Islands enjoys a relatively high
and equal level of primary education for boys and girls. Among youth, unemployment levels are
estimated to be more than twice the national unemployment rate and widely acknowledged as a
major source of social tension. It is estimated that around 11,000 people emigrated between 1999
and 2011.
9.
There is compelling evidence of the need for greater efforts to address gender disparities.
The recent "Stock-Take of the Gender Mainstreaming Capacity of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands" published by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) in April 2012 provides a
comprehensive analysis of the issues facing women and girls in the Marshall Islands. Teen
pregnancy in the Marshall Islands is higher than for most other Pacific Islands and accounts for
nearly 20 percent of all pregnancies. While two out of three men are economically active, only
one in three women is, and unemployment rates are significantly higher among women than men
(37 and 28 percent respectively). There is currently only one female member of the 33 seat
Nitijela, and only three women out of twelve appointees in the largely consultative Council of
Iroij. The report finds that 30 percent of women have experienced violence since the age of 15
(primarily at the hands of their husband or partner) and over 22 percent of all women have
experienced violence in the last year. The Women in Development Office (WDO) was
established by the Government in 1979 to serve as the designated policy coordination unit
responsible for government-wide mainstreaming of gender issues. The WDO is significantly
under-resourced (WDO currently receives an annual budget of about US$72,000) and has
recently been absorbed into the Ministry of Internal Affairs. As a result, there is no ready
mechanism by which gender considerations can be systematically integrated into national
legislation or inform budgetary processes.
10. There is scope for the World Bank Group to provide a more systematic consideration of
gender issues and to initiate assistance that could catalyze increased donor effort. The World
Bank will be assessing a number of the recommendations in the SPC report including the
possibility of providing technical assistance for the development of a national gender policy,
supporting the collection of gender-disaggregated statistics, and organizing a donors’ meeting to
enhance awareness and coordination on gender issues. All World Bank Group interventions will
seek to include gender disaggregated indicators where possible, and all operations will be gender
informed to the extent possible. A quantitative study to assess the impact of ICT reforms on
women is proposed as part of the First ICT Sector Development Policy Operation, which may

3

The RMI 2011 Census of Population and Housing Summary Report.

3

help to confirm the anecdotal reports of the positive impact of these reforms in the Pacific and
elsewhere. The World Bank Group is exploring a range of possible interventions that may
include collaboration with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to present the findings of the World
Development Report on Gender to the Cabinet, an analysis of the existing legal framework
applying to domestic violence (in the context of international conventions ratified by the
Marshall Islands). A targeted trust-funded project might also be considered with the aim of
strengthening the department within the Ministry of Internal Affairs responsible for women’s
issues.
Economic Context
11.
The Marshall Islands faces many of the challenges common to small remote
economies. Its size and remoteness increase the costs of economic activity and make it unable to
achieve economies of scale. Remoteness also imposes transport expenses that increase the costs
of trade, and fundamentally constrain the competitiveness of exports of goods and services
internationally. These same factors also push up the cost and complexity of providing public
services and fulfilling the basic functions of Government.
Moreover, geographical
characteristics, including populations centered on small, low-lying atolls, make the country
vulnerable to natural disasters.
12.
These barriers have led to an undiversified economic base and persistent current
account deficits.
With limited export and domestic production opportunities, public
administration and social services constitute the largest share of the economy – 40 percent of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The fisheries sector comprises around 10 percent of GDP,
while manufacturing makes up less than 2 percent. Copra and fisheries are the most significant
exports, while the Marshall Islands is almost completely reliant on imports for food, fuel, and
other basic needs. Imports of goods and services totaled US$176 million in 2011, compared to
total goods and service exports of just US$65 million. The current account deficit excluding
grants has averaged 47 percent of GDP since 2007.
13.
With substantial constraints to export-led growth, the Marshall Islands is heavily
dependent on aid and other fiscal transfers. The current account deficit is largely financed by
grant inflows. Aid and fiscal transfers, primarily from the US, support reasonable standards of
living for the majority of the population, with Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of
US$3,910 in 2011. On-budget grant income from various sources is equivalent to 49 percent of
GNI, and official development assistance per capita was over US$3,450 in 2010 4.

4

OECD, World Bank.

4

14.
Public expenditure in the Marshall Islands has expanded rapidly since 2003 with the
US Compact of Free Association 5 and other grants, supporting reasonable levels of growth.
The 2003 amended Compact includes various military and other access arrangements, and
provides a 20-year stream of funding. Beginning 2005, the US also began to provide the
Marshall Islands with a Supplemental Education Grant. Together, these grants were equivalent
to, around 40 percent of GDP in 2011. This Compact agreement replaced the first agreement,
which ran from 1986 to 2001, and included additional fiscal resources provided to the
Government of the Marshall Islands. Increased fiscal resources allowed a period of rapid public
sector expansion through FY2007. 6 Public expenditures grew by an annual average rate of 12
percent between FY2003 and FY2007, and employment in the public sector expanded by 507
jobs or at an annual average rate of 6 percent over the same period. Expansion in public
spending fueled growth of 1.9 percent between FY2003 and FY2007, peaking at 3 percent in
2007.
Table 1: Recent Fiscal Trends FY2007-2012
(Millions of U.S. Dollars)

Source: IMF

5

The Compact of Free Association defines the relationship between the Marshall Islands and the US under which,
while remaining a sovereign state, the Marshall Islands is considered an associate US state. The Marshall Islands
receives guaranteed financial assistance from the US in exchange for relinquishing full defense authority and
responsibilities.
6
The Marshall Islands’ Fiscal year runs from October 1 – September 30.

5

15.
Under the Compact of Free Association, the Marshall Islands receives annual funding
and access to domestic US Federal Government programs. These include disaster response and
recovery, US Postal Service, Federal Aviation Commission, and Federal Communications
Commission. Total recurrent annual funding (including Compact sector grants - US$35.2
million, Compact Trust Fund contributions – US$12.5 million, Kwajalein land owner
compensation - US$17.0 million, and Supplemental Education Grant – US$5.9 million) currently
stands at US$70.6 million. Compact sector grants focus on the education and health sectors,
public sector infrastructure projects, capacity building programs, as well as special allocations
relating to the US-operated military facilities. Compact sector grants are scheduled to decline in
real terms going forward, matched by increases to Compact Trust Fund contributions. The US
has established the Compact Trust Fund (CTF) that is designed to “contribute to economic
development and long-term budgetary self-reliance after FY2023” 7(that is, after the Compact
has expired: see Box 1).
Box 1: Republic of the Marshall Islands’ Compact Trust Fund
Established in 2004, the RMI Compact Trust Fund was established as part of the Compact
of Free Association (the “Compact”) agreement with the US. The CTF is designed to replace
annual grant assistance from the US beyond 2023 and to contribute to economic advancement and
long-term budgetary self-reliance. The CTF currently receives annual savings from fiscal
surpluses along with donor contributions from the US (under the Compact) and Taiwan, China.
The RMI CTF has a sophisticated setup, and is not fully controlled by RMI. The RMI CTF
consists of four inter-related accounts (a "capital" account, a "disbursement" account, a "buffer"
account and a "windfall" account) with no withdrawals expected until 2024. Thereafter, CTF
returns from the previous year can be transferred to government up to a limit equivalent to the
annual grant assistance in 2023 (in real terms). The governance of these funds falls on the CTF
committee (with the United States holding 4 out of 7 votes), which further appoints a trustee,
investment manager, and independent auditor for the daily management of the assets.
The market value of the CTF fell significantly during the global financial crisis, given
significant exposure to growth assets. The market value of the CTF stood at US$142 million
(82 percent of GDP) as of end-June 2011. The assets of the CTF are invested in approximately 30
percent defensive assets and 70 percent growth assets. Returns of 11.8 percent and 15.6 percent
were noted in FY2006 and FY2007 respectively. However during FY2008–09, when the global
financial crisis occurred, the CTF faced a cumulative investment loss of over 20 percent, while
the economy contracted by between 1½ - 2 percent in both 2008 and 2009.
Under current policies, the build-up in government assets in the CTF is projected to fall
short of replacing Compact grants expiring in FY2023. Recently, the global financial crisis
has resulted in capital losses and reduced investment returns, and has made it more difficult to
achieve long-term budgetary self-reliance. Achieving longer term fiscal sustainability will require
a combination of fiscal consolidation and a higher level of grants than currently projected.

7

Public Law 108-188. 117 Stat, 2814. 2003. P. 77

6

16.
The Marshall Islands was hit hard by the global food and fuel and economic crises.
Growth in public expenditure was already slowing in 2008, and a range of major donor-financed
projects had reached completion when fuel and food prices reached record levels. Heavily
reliant on imports, inflation in the Marshall Islands reached 15 percent, eroding domestic real
incomes and reducing demand from local businesses. Record fuel prices brought about a severe
cash flow crisis at the state-owned electricity utility, the Marshall's Energy Company (MEC),
requiring the Government to step in to meet the cost of fuel purchases. Domestic revenues
declined slightly as the economy slowed. Facing a cash-flow crisis, the Government of the
Marshall Islands imposed emergency measures.
17.
Recovery resumed in 2010 and is being sustained through moderation of global
commodity prices and progress with fiscal management, although risks remain. The economy
grew by 5.6 percent in FY2010, driven by an expansion of fishery capacity and exports, a
recovery of external demand and the moderation of fuel prices. Growth fell sharply to 0.8
percent in FY2011, as a result of high commodity prices, labor shortages, and a delay in the
airport renovation project. Inflation stabilized in FY2010, falling to 1.8 percent but has remained
elevated at above 5 percent since FY2011, driven by strengthening import prices. Government
finances have also improved since FY2009 through the imposition of successive across-theboard spending cuts in FY2009 and FY2010 that have reduced total recurrent spending by more
than 10 percent. The combination of economic recovery and expenditure control measures
allowed the Government to avoid cash-flow problems in FY2011, and to generate a fiscal
surplus, equivalent to about 3.7 percent of GDP. However, the FY2012 budget deficit is
estimated at about 1.1 percent of GDP, with volatile domestic revenue, declining foreign grants,
and occasional off-budget spending posing threats to fiscal management. Financial assistance to
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the form of subsidies and capital transfers remains sizable.
18.
While confronting fiscal challenges, the Marshall Islands is also struggling to address
key vulnerabilities in the management of SOEs. SOEs are economically significant, holding
assets of US$116 million as of end-FY2008 (about 76 percent of GDP) but the performance of
many SOEs is poor, with Government subsidies to the SOE sector reaching an average of
US$7.2 million per annum between FY2007 and FY2010 (around 4 percent of GDP). Poorly
performing SOEs represent a fiscal risk for Government while also constraining growth
providing poor service and charging high prices.
19.
The Government is continuing to progress on key economic and public sector reforms,
but challenges remain. Among the ongoing reforms are the Comprehensive Adjustment
Program Advisory Group, created in 2010, and whose recommended priorities for fiscal and
structural reform have been endorsed by the Cabinet. The Tax and Revenue Reform and
Modernization Commission (TRAM) has also been created, and its recommendations are soon to
be implemented through a program of reform supported by the Pacific Financial Technical
Assistance Center. A report on SOEs was prepared with ADB assistance, which led to the MEC
Board adopting a comprehensive recovery program. The ADB is supporting these reform efforts
through a Public Sector Program including loan refinancing of the external debt of MEC. A
recent review of the current status of the Public Sector Program has indicated that, while some
reforms are on track (such as tax reform) others (such as generation of a sustained fiscal surplus
and expenditure compression) are not.

7

Poverty
20.
While the incidence of extreme poverty is low in the Marshall Islands, progress toward
MDG 1 (Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger) has been uneven. The 2011 GNI per capita
figure of US$3,910 classifies the country as “lower middle-income” although there are
substantial disparities in cash incomes, which are high in Majuro and Kwajalein (due to a greater
concentration of highly paid public servants) relative to outer atolls. Although the incidence of
absolute poverty is low, data indicate high levels of inequality, evidence of malnutrition in urban
areas, and limited access to cash incomes in rural areas. Incomes in communities affected by
nuclear testing and receiving compensation (such as Enewetak and Kili) are significantly higher
than those in other islands. Elsewhere, lack of income-earning opportunities has led to concerns
over rising unemployment, financial hardship (including declining real incomes and higher levels
of consumer debt), and hunger. These factors provide powerful incentives for migration from
outer atolls to the two major urban centers, as well as externally to the United States.
21.
The benefits of economic growth have not been shared evenly and there is evidence of
growing inequality. Economic growth has been driven by expansion in Government expenditure
and payments to land-owners in certain islands, disproportionately benefiting urban populations
and those with land title, with populations in outer islands left further behind. According to 1999
data, the Gini coefficient 8 in the Marshall Islands was 0.54, greater than Fiji at 0.46, Papua New
Guinea 0.46, Samoa 0.43, Tuvalu 0.43, Tonga 0.42 and the Federated States of Micronesia 0.41.
Rapid inflation over recent years is reported to have severely impacted the poor. Government
revenue policy and expenditure do not counter existing inequalities, with an outdated tax system
and various implicit and explicit exemptions and subsidies having a strongly regressive impact.
22.
Improving the quality and availability of poverty data remains a priority for the
Marshall Islands. The most recent census data documented in the 2011 Census of Population
and Housing (previous census completed in 1999). A Household Income and Expenditure
Survey was undertaken in 2002 but did not include a formal poverty analysis. A Community and
Socioeconomic survey, and a Demographic and Health Survey were completed in 2006 and 2007
respectively. In similar situations throughout the Pacific, the World Bank has been able to work
with respected regional partners – such as SPC – to prepare a comprehensive poverty
assessment. An updated Household Income and Expenditure Survey would be a necessary
prerequisite and might be conducted by SPC with the World Bank providing technical peer
review and direct inputs during the analytical phase of work.
Macroeconomic Outlook and Debt Sustainability
23.
The Marshall Islands faces important challenges over the medium-term. Economic
growth is expected to remain moderate at around 2 percent in FY2012 and FY2013, supported by
rising fisheries exports, a US Federal Aviation Administration-financed airport rehabilitation

8

A Gini coefficient is a statistical measure that can be used to measure income inequality. Gini coefficients are
scored from zero to one, with a score closer to zero indicating a society with little income inequality, and a score
closer to one indicating a society with significant income inequality.

8

project, and the planned Ebeye water and sanitation project. Beyond the short term, growth is
expected to be subdued as a result of the gradual reduction in Compact inflows, planned
downsizing of the Kwajalein military base, and the impact of poorly performing SOEs. Potential
sources of growth over the medium-term include further donor-financed capital projects, an
expansion of existing fishing operations, and an increase in fishing license revenues following
recent international negotiations. Increased employment opportunities at the Kwajalein base
may also materialize with the possible commencement of a new satellite project.
24.
The prospective end of Compact funding presents a key challenge to fiscal
sustainability. No Compact financing is assured beyond the life of the current arrangement.
While the CTF was established to replace Compact grants from 2024 onward, based on current
projections, contributions to the CTF are inadequate to assure a smooth transition, and annual
CTF income can be expected to fall US$11 million (in 2011 prices) short of what is needed to
replace Compact grants in 2024. Current public sector and structural reform measures if
successfully implemented will help to significantly increase accumulation in the CTF. However,
for the CTF to reach adequate capitalization by 2023 and for fiscal sustainability beyond 2023
additional grant support will likely be required under any realistic scenario.
Table 2: Summary of Medium-Term Macroeconomic Indicators
Output and Prices
Real GDP (percent change)
Consumer Prices (percent change)
Central Government Finance
Total Revenues & Grants
Total Domestic Revenues
Grants
Total Expenditure & Net Lending
Current
Capital
Overall Balance
Compact Trust Fund Balance
Compact Trust Fund Balance
External Debt
External Debt
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP

2010

2011

2012

2014

2015

2016

5.6%
1.8%

0.8%
5.4%

1.9%
2.3%
0.6%
5.7%
3.9%
1.7%
Percent of GDP

1.4%
1.9%

1.6%
2.0%

56.6
22.4
34.3
55.8
46.6
9.3
0.8

55.4
22.1
33.4
54.4
45.5
8.9
1.0

67.0
24.7
42.3
62.4
51.7
10.7
4.6

2013

63.7
60.8
61.1
25.3
22.6
21.6
38.4
36.6
39.5
60.0
61.9
61.1
49.3
50.5
49.0
10.7
11.4
12.1
3.7
-1.1
0.0
US Dollar Millions (end of

57.9
22.5
35.3
57.2
44.6
9.6
0.7
period)

112.8

125.2

165.7
192.6
220.2
Percent of GDP

250.1

282.4

64.2

64.1

57.2
53.8
49.3
US Dollar Millions

44.8

40.4

163.2

170.7

203.6

211.0

182.4

192.7

197.1

Source: IMF and World Bank
25.
Measures are in place to address fiscal sustainability challenges. The Public Sector
Program supported by the ADB has led to the identification of several priorities for achieving
savings and improving the effectiveness of public expenditure. An audit of public sector
functions is expected to reveal duplication of certain roles and opportunities to reduce the wage
bill, while the Ministry of Finance is working to eliminate unfilled positions. A review of
Government allowances and benefits could deliver further savings. While these initiatives are
9

likely to produce some savings, further substantial reductions in payroll expenditure and overall
public spending are unlikely to be achievable without broader counterproductive economic
impacts, given the key role that Government plays as a source of employment, income, and
demand. The priority for Government is therefore to improve efficiency and effectiveness of
public spending, and to address structural barriers to private sector growth and revenue
generation. Planned revenue reform under the TRAM process is expected to be largely revenue
neutral, but the accompanying simplification of the tax regime may allow some gains through
increased compliance, and make the economy more business friendly.
26.
With external debt of around 57 percent of GDP, the Marshall Islands is at high risk of
debt distress. Under the IMF-World Bank debt sustainability framework, the Marshall Islands
exceeds several policy thresholds under baseline and stress-test scenarios of the draft 2011 Debt
Sustainability Analysis prepared by the Bank. External debt is mostly in the form of
concessional ADB loans but also includes new Government guaranteed debts in the SOE sector.
Debt servicing obligations are equivalent to 16 percent of exports, although this is expected to
decline to less than 5 percent of exports by 2016. Debt servicing is currently equal to around 20
percent of revenue, and is expected to decline gradually to below 10 percent of revenue in 2024.
Debt dynamics vary substantially according to projected growth and export performance. Policy
relevant thresholds are breached under any plausible scenario. The most extreme stress-test
scenario (maintenance of historical averages minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013) would
see the present value of public and publicly guaranteed debt exceed 350 percent of GDP over the
next two years. Previous arrears to ADB have now been cleared, but the Government has yet to
develop a clear debt management strategy that can address looming debt service payments.
Debt management is an area in which the World Bank has a comparative advantage and is
expected to be an area of focus as engagement evolves in the Marshall Islands.
27.
The Marshall Islands remains heavily exposed to changes in global prices, but risks to
external balances are limited. Inflation is expected to moderate to under 4 percent in FY2013 as
fuel and other import prices ease. Current account deficits are expected to remain wide until
FY2013, driven by imports for fisheries and airport expansion financed by foreign investment
and capital grants. Compact-related funding is expected to continue to provide a reliable source
of import financing over the next decade, and the current account deficit is expected to be close
to around 5 percent of GDP over the medium-term. Exports have recently expanded in contrast
to most Pacific Island countries, although this trend – driven by strong agricultural commodity
prices and new fisheries investments – cannot be relied upon to continue. In the longer-term, the
expiry of Compact funding could lead to an erosion of foreign assets, undermining external
stability.
28.
The macroeconomic policy framework is dependent on continued availability of grants
from development partners and is subject to high levels of uncertainty. A sharper than
expected rise in global commodity prices would exacerbate inflation and lead to further
contraction of the Marshall Islands’ economy. The macroeconomic policy framework also
depends on the continued availability of grants from development partners over the mediumterm, especially the US, and the inadvisability of borrowing to fund fiscal deficits. Any change
in Compact arrangements or in the Marshall Islands’ capacity to access federal grants, or from
further effects of the global economic slowdown would have a significant and negative impact
on macroeconomic stability. Uncertainty regarding the US plans for the Kwajalein military base
10

poses risk in terms of potential job losses but these may be offset by new projects. Finally, the
country remains vulnerable to a variety of natural disasters that may also place considerable
stress on the macroeconomic policy framework. In regard to the latter, the Marshall Islands has
recently joined four other Pacific countries in a pilot catastrophic risk pool. This initiative is coled by the World Bank, SPC/SOPAC 9 and ADB with financial support from the Government of
Japan, and aims to increase the financial resilience of Pacific countries by providing them with
access to a market-based catastrophe risk transfer mechanism as part of their comprehensive
disaster risk financing strategy.
Government Priorities and Development Framework
29.
The Marshall Islands’ national strategic development plan is outlined in “Vision 2018”
a framework for achieving a “…country within an interdependent world, with enhanced
socio-economic self-reliance, [and] an educated, healthy, productive, law abiding and Godloving people…” The strategic development framework, drafted in 2001 is a wide-ranging
document that sets out to address “Ten Challenges” essential to fulfilling the “Vision”: i) good
governance, political stability and a competent and honest public sector; ii) investment in
education and research; iii) a culture of savings, investment and productivity; iv) a country able
to take advantage of global trends; v) effective and responsible economic and financial
institutions; vi) equitable development of the Outer Islands; vii) strengthening the spirituality of
the Marshallese people; viii) promotion of healthy lifestyles, the prevailing culture and
sustainable environment; ix) fostering fundamental change in the attitudes and behavior of
citizens, Government, businesses, corporations and non-governmental organizations; and x)
effective partnership between national and local Governments, NGOs, the private sector, civil
society and citizens. In consultation with the World Bank Group and other stakeholders, the
Government has identified areas in which the World Bank Group could provide support for more
effective management of public and external resources and to improving living and service
delivery standards.
Development Partner Engagement
30.
Given the geographic and economic constraints facing the country, external assistance
is unlikely to be a transitional phenomenon in the Marshall Islands. In common with many
small island states, the Marshall Islands is heavily reliant on external assistance with on-budget
grant income estimated to account for 40 percent of GDP. Development partner support being
provided includes the following:
Under the Compact of Free Association with the US, the Marshall Islands will receive at least
US$57 million in grants every year until 2023 including contributions to the jointly managed
CTF (see Box 1). This figure is scheduled to increase to US$62.7 million per annum from
FY2014 onward. At the end of this period, financial assistance from the US will end at which
point the CTF is expected to serve as the country’s principal source of budget revenue. The

9

SOPAC is SPC’s Applied Geoscience and Technology Division.

11

domestic economy is already highly dependent on the income generated by the disbursement of
Compact funds to finance the public wage bill and major construction projects.
The ADB’s Country Operations Business Plan (COBP) for 2012-14 identifies four areas of
focus: i) macroeconomic and fiscal management; ii) private sector development; iii) human
capacity development; and, iv) the environment and climate change. The overarching objective
of ADB support is to help restore macroeconomic stability following the global financial crisis
and to achieve long-term fiscal sustainability. The COBP identifies an indicative lending
program of US$5m with the country eligible for funding from both the Asian Development Fund
and Ordinary Capital Resources. This is expected to be supplemented with complementary
technical assistance (largely focusing on economic planning and policy and enhancing public
service delivery). The ADB is providing leadership in the critical area of SOE reform and
recently signed a US$5m loan for public sector reform Other activities in the Marshall Islands
include technical assistance provided under regional initiatives to strengthen capacity to respond
to the effects of climate change and technical assistance to design technical and vocational
training.
The Government of Australia has a small program of assistance in the Marshall Islands relative
to the scope of Australia’s engagement elsewhere in the Pacific. Support focuses on two areas:
energy sector reform and improving access to clean water and sanitation. Australia’s program in
the Marshall Islands is outlined in the Partnership for Development signed by both countries in
August 2010.
The European Commission’s strategic framework for assistance is set out in the Country Strategy
Paper for the Marshall Islands 2008-13. An indicative under the 10th European Development
Fund focuses on support to the water and energy sectors, specifically sustainable energy supply
to the country’s outer islands. The program is also informed by cross-cutting issues that include
climate change, environmental sustainability, gender equality, and the fight against HIV/AIDS.
The Government of Japan’s Rolling Plan for the Marshall Islands identifies solid waste
management, disaster risk management, the response to climate change, and strengthening of
health services as priorities in a multi-year program of technical assistance.
Taiwan, China is a longstanding donor partner to the Marshall Islands and provides an annual
grant and a range of technical assistance in areas including infrastructure rehabilitation, disaster
risk management, support to public works projects, and health care. Funding provided by
Taiwan, China in 2012 included budgetary support, a contribution to the CTF and assistance with
debt service payments.
The United Nations System’s Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP) for 2008-2012 outlines a
program of assistance that leverages the technical expertise of UN organizations including
UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and UNV. The CPAP focuses on: achieving MDG targets; livelihood
development and employment generation activities with an emphasis on women and youth;
strengthening of accountability and capacity of the national parliament; good governance;
disaster risk management; environmental sustainability and civil society strengthening.

12

31.
Throughout the implementation of the CPS program, the World Bank Group will seek to
draw on the experience and expertise of the Marshall Islands’ development partners to ensure
that the assistance provided is closely aligned with existing programs and the country’s
development priorities.
III.

WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT IN THE PACIFIC

32.
The World Bank Group’s engagement with Pacific island countries reflects the fact
their development trajectories will be shaped – more than perhaps any other nations – by their
economic geography. The World Bank Group’s Pacific island member countries (excluding
Papua New Guinea) 10 have a combined population of about 2 million people spread across
hundreds of islands in an ocean area equivalent to about 15 percent of the globe’s surface. Given
the permanent vulnerabilities that confront Pacific island countries stemming from intrinsic
factors such as their small size, isolation, and enduring institutional and human capacity
constraints, sustained development support is a long-term proposition requiring collaboration
with international partners. Island states themselves also have a central role to play in
establishing a policy environment that supports and promotes long-term development outcomes.
33.
The World Bank Group continues to expand its programs and presence throughout the
Pacific. Both IDA and IFC have been increasing their engagement in the Pacific significantly.
As well as scaling-up in established clients, there is a renewed emphasis on forging relationships
in countries – such as the Marshall Islands – in which the World Bank historically has been less
active. The development of individual CPSs for each Pacific island member reflects a
commitment to a sustained process of country engagement. The growth of World Bank IDA and
trust fund commitments made to the Pacific in the last four years – amounting to about US$250m
– is more than in prior history, as are IFC commitments of almost US$90m. Reflecting the
common challenges facing Pacific countries, World Bank Group engagement in the Pacific has
focused closely on four overarching themes: i) strengthening regional and global integration; ii)
building resilience to economic shocks, natural disasters and climate change; iii) encouraging
economic reform and private sector development; and, iv) improving health, education, and
social services. This CPS is informed by these themes and aims to address the Marshall Islands’
country-specific development challenges through an adaptive combination of analytical work,
technical assistance, and lending operations based on the World Bank’s comparative advantage
and in partnership with other donors.
34.
In countries where development is fundamentally constrained by economic geography,
the objectives of development assistance and the delivery mechanisms used, need to be
considered carefully. Economic growth alone is unlikely to generate automatic development
progress. Development outcomes should be measured in pragmatic terms such as improvements
in social indicators, more effective delivery of public services and in increased opportunities for
the Marshallese. Since a proliferation of projects would place an unsustainable burden on
already overstretched public sector, the World Bank will seek to employ modalities that can help

10

Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

13

strengthen the country's own systems (such as development policy lending and accessing
regional programs), help leverage the country's IDA allocation and maximize benefits to
countries facing common regional challenges.
35.
A World Bank Group priority will be to translate the credibility and trust generated by
deepening engagement in the Marshall Islands into a more substantive and coordinated
dialogue to support its own reform efforts. The value of World Bank Group engagement is not
principally defined in terms of the volume of lending, but in the extent to which the World Bank
can “bundle” its expertise and financing, collaborate with other development partners, transfer
global knowledge, develop institutional capacity, and support changes that result in significant
and sustained development progress.
Translating Pacific Themes into the Marshall Islands Program
36.
Like many small Pacific island states, the Marshall Islands faces significant obstacles
to development. Isolation, small size, dispersed populations, and the high fixed cost of providing
public services, present challenges to achieving sustained economic growth in the Marshall
Islands. Moreover, "thin" institutional, human, and technical resources demand that limited
reform capacity be tightly focused on mitigating these disadvantages to the extent possible.
Increasing economic integration, promoting access to labor markets, employment and
educational opportunities in metropolitan neighbors and the US, and retaining a more equitable
share of revenues from natural resources (such as fisheries), will be central to the long-term
future of the Marshall Islands.
37.
Reflecting the Government’s development priorities and the World Bank Group’s
engagement in the Pacific, the program in the Marshall Islands will focus on strengthening
economic governance and promoting the effective use of public resources to enhance living
and service delivery standards for all Marshallese. Each of the proposed interventions outlined
in this joint CPS is designed to address this overarching objective.
38.
The first IDA operation for the Marshall Islands, to be presented with this CPS, seeks
to liberalize the ICT sector to foster market competition and to increase access to ICT services.
The Marshall Islands is one of the least "connected" countries in the world. About 35 percent of
the population subscribes to ICT services. Mobile phone penetration is around 26 percent of the
population. Less than 2 percent of the population subscribe to an Internet connection. Mobile
broadband is not yet available. Total broadband Internet 11 take-up is approximately 520
subscribers, or around 1 percent penetration (although only 120 subscribers have subscribed for
speeds of 512kbs or greater). This is despite the fact that Majuro and Kwajalein are connected to
a 10 Gbps capacity fiber-optic cable system that links the Marshall Islands to Guam. Cable
capacity is presently under-used, in part due to the monopolistic market environment.

11

NTA classifies broadband Internet as speeds 128kbs or greater; the International Telecommunications Union definition of
broadband is a minimum download speed of 256kbps

14

39.
The ICT Sector Development Policy Program is the first in a planned series of three
development policy operations (DPOs) that aim to support ICT sector reform and reduce the
economic costs of distance through greater regional and global integration. The first DPO
prepares the foundation for the legal and regulatory reforms that are needed to support sector
liberalization, with the ultimate objective of increasing access to telecommunications and
promoting the widespread use of ICT services. Specifically, the operation will support the
transition from a monopolistic to a liberalized telecommunications market, reform and
restructure the National Telecommunications Authority (NTA), help develop a new legal and
regulatory framework, and establish an independent regulatory function. The ICT DPO program
has been informed by recent experience of budget support operations in the Marshall Islands
(such as ADB’s Public Sector Reform Program), and the World Bank Group’s
telecommunications assistance in the Pacific and elsewhere. It has also benefitted from the
application of international best practice and the IFC’s considerable experience in supporting
private sector investment in liberalized telecom markets throughout the Pacific.
40.
The Marshall Islands' reliance on expensive imported fuel and the current fuel pricing
model continue to impose severe fiscal challenges, with effects felt throughout the economy.
World Bank engagement in the energy sector was initiated shortly after the Marshall Islands
became a member of the World Bank Group in 1992, when the Government requested analysis
to be undertaken on the energy sector and, specifically, on the role of the state-owned MEC.
That study, and the assessments undertaken by other partners since then, identified a range of
important reforms intended to help address the structural challenges facing the sector. While
some of the reforms were undertaken, the relative stability and low price of fuel imports in the
period 1992-2008, reduced the urgency for fundamental reform. However, the fuel price spikes
and increasing volatility in 2008 (reaching a high of US$160 per barrel), compounded by a fire
that disabled the Majuro Number 1 power generation facility, precipitated an economic crisis in
the country. The Government was forced to declare an "Economic State of Emergency", as the
country experienced power rationing and blackouts. A Government Taskforce was convened to
review the state of the energy sector and, in 2010, requested further World Bank technical
assistance.
41.
While the Government has expressed renewed interest in undertaking energy sector
reform, successfully implementing these complex and wide-ranging measures will be difficult
and require sustained commitment. Since 2010, the World Bank has undertaken dialogue on
energy sector reform, and has outlined a set of carefully sequenced measures that could be
implemented under a DPO program. The reforms proposed would seek to move away from the
current policy that aims to provide cheap power to businesses and citizens and results in just 23
percent of diesel sold in 2010 being sold at a profit. The current policy exposes MEC to
significant cash flow problems, insufficient funding of critical routine maintenance, inefficient
use of power, and substantial technical inefficiencies. While key elements of a DPO program
have been identified, detailed analysis on the potential poverty and social impacts of tax and
price reforms will be needed. This analysis will also examine potential gender-specific effects of
reform.

15

42.
The Marshall Islands and the other seven member states of the Parties to the Nauru
Agreement (PNA) 12 account collectively for approximately one-third of global pelagic tuna
stocks. The abundant Pacific oceanscape is a shared natural capital asset for the entire region. It
provides fish for food, key biodiversity and habitats that support tourism and carbon storage.
Pacific tuna fisheries yield about 2.4 million tons per annum (58 percent of the global total) with
a value on the order of US$4.5 billion. However, little of that annual revenue is captured by
Pacific island countries as economic rent. Until 2007 license fees paid to Forum Fisheries
Agency member countries in exchange for rights to fish tuna totaled only about US$8m each
year (or about 7 percent of the first sale revenue received). The introduction of a rights-based
regime for fishing effort (i.e. the total number of fishing days permitted, known as the Vessel
Day Scheme) by PNA nations has already resulted in increases to licensing payments made by
deep water fishing nations to PNA members of US$5,000 per day or about 10 percent of landed
value with the expectation that the cost vessel days will continue to increase.
43.
The Marshall Islands has expressed interest in participating in the Pacific Islands
Regional Oceanscape Program (PROP) 13. This regional operation will be the first operation
piloted under the Global Partnership for Oceans (GPO) 14 that was recently launched. The
PROP aims to support Pacific Island Countries in the sustainable management of the region’s
oceanic fisheries, coastal fisheries and the critical habitats that support them. The PROP
investment in the Marshall Islands is expected to concentrate on three areas: (i) strengthening
regional governance through the implementation of a rights-based fishing management system;
(ii) supporting systems to improve the management of coastal and reef fisheries, and (iii)
developing regional frameworks and market systems to improve coastal and regional fisheries
management. Assistance to undertake assessments of the relative costs (including gender based
social costs) and benefits of investments in onshore processing and services associated with tuna
product value chains would also be supported.
44.
The World Bank Group aims to help support the Marshall Islands in making
preparations to manage its “Post Compact” future. Although the Compact of Free Association
does not expire until 2023 (and managing this transition will require concerted attention beyond
the period of this CPS), the World Bank Group proposes to provide targeted technical assistance
to strengthen the management of CTF assets. The World Bank Treasury department is currently
exploring the development of a regional approach to asset management that will assess the
strengths and weaknesses of current asset management approaches in the Marshall Islands and in
countries with similar trust fund arrangements (such as the Federated States of Micronesia and
Tuvalu). In addition to strengthening asset management, evidence from the Cost of Doing

12

The PNA is a sub-regional agreement that controls fishing in the world’s largest sustainable purse seine fishery.
The PNA administers fishing activity in the exclusive economic zones of seven Pacific island countries including
the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands,
and Tuvalu.
13
PROP is a regional project designed to strengthen the governance and sustainable management of the region's
fisheries, and to ensure that Pacific countries receive a more equitable share of benefits from this resource.
14
The GPO is a growing alliance of more than 100 governments, international organizations, civil society groups,
and private sector interests committed to addressing the threats to the health, productivity and resilience of the
world’s oceans. It aims to tackle widely documented problems of overfishing, pollution, and habitat loss.

16

Business Indicators and enterprise survey data suggest that there may be a range of reforms that
might enhance the climate for private sector investment. The joint IFC/WB Indicator-based
Advisory Group stands ready to help develop a Reform Memorandum that would diagnose the
principal challenges in the Marshall Islands and could serve as a roadmap for subsequent
reforms. Beyond this, as the World Bank Group engagement deepens in the Marshall Islands,
additional opportunities may be identified in which IFC can support greater private sector
involvement and investment. IFC’s Pacific Investment Climate Rapid Response project could
also provide IFC expertise to assist the Government in identifying potential for private sector
involvement in service delivery.
Selectivity, Flexibility and New Ways of Doing Business
45.
In providing support to the Marshall Islands, the World Bank Group will exercise a
high degree of selectivity. At this initial stage of reengagement in the Marshall Islands, the
World Bank Group has yet to develop the depth of knowledge and country experience that would
permit a more expansive program. The program outlined in this CPS is informed by the themes
that guide the World Bank Group's engagement throughout the Pacific, and aims to replicate
successful approaches in the World Bank's other Pacific country programs. Acknowledging the
challenge of calibrating World Bank Group interventions to the limited capacity of this small
state, all activities will be carefully designed in collaboration with the Government, and
instruments more suitable to low capacity contexts, such as development policy lending and
regional approaches, will be utilized wherever appropriate. The World Bank Group will retain
flexibility and, as the partnership with Government deepens, the World Bank expects to play a
greater role in addressing the substantial threats that the Marshall Islands faces from natural
hazards, the effects of climate change and sea-level rise.
46.
Developing leadership and institutions in the Marshall Islands capable of successfully
implementing reforms demands World Bank Group commitment to a sustained capacity
enhancement effort. The Marshall Islands, and islands throughout the Pacific, face significant
challenges in recruiting and retaining domestic expertise. In "micro-states" such as the Marshall
Islands, the size of the population and the pull of opportunities overseas only increase this
challenge. By being selective, flexible, and by adopting a pragmatic approach to these
constraints, the World Bank Group will place a premium on coordination, intensive
implementation support and on projects whose design is carefully calibrated to the country's
capacity.
47.
A targeted program of analytical work that focuses on sectors in which the World Bank
Group is initiating engagement and complements analysis being undertaken by other partners
is proposed. Indicative analytical and technical assistance activities anticipated during the CPS
period are set out below:
Box 2: Proposed Analytical, Advisory and Technical Assistance Activities
• Poverty Assessment
• World Bank Treasury Asset Management CTF Diagnostic
• Investment Climate Diagnostic
• Beneficiary Impact Assessment on ICT Reform with Gender Focus
17

Financing Terms and Sources
48.
The indicative IDA16 resource envelope is on grant terms and amounts to SDR7.6m
(US$ equivalent 11.4m). The CPS spans two years in the IDA16 period (FY13 and FY14) and
two years in the IDA17 period (FY15 and FY16). It is assumed that the IDA17 envelope will be
equivalent to the IDA16 level, but only the FY13 amount is firm, while the amounts for FY14-16
are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on: i) the country's own performance; ii) its
performance relative to other IDA recipients; iii) the amount of overall resources available to
IDA; iv) changes to the list of IDA-eligible countries; and v) terms of financial assistance
provided (grants or credits). Also, the Marshall Islands could potentially benefit from additional
resources from the IDA Regional Program, which provides financing on top of national IDA
envelope to promote regional integration by supporting qualified multi-country regional
operations. Furthermore, in case of severe economic shocks and natural disasters, the Marshall
Islands could potentially access the IDA Crisis Response Window. 15
Table 3: The Marshall Islands: Indicative IDA and Trust Fund Operations – FY13-16

ICT Development Policy Operations
Pacific Island Regional Ocean Operation
Energy Sector Development Project
Addressing Gender-based Violence

Fiscal Year

IDA

Co-Financed/Trust Funded

FY13-16
FY14
FY14
FY14

Y
Y
Y
N

PRIF
tba
tba
JSDF/IDF

49.
The World Bank's expanded program of Pacific engagement has been made possible
through access to trust funds, and IDA is expected to leverage trust fund resources in the
Marshall Islands. While the principal trust fund resources available to the Pacific countries
have been from donors (e.g. Australia and New Zealand) with longstanding relationships in the
South Pacific, it is expected that as the World Bank Group’s program in North Pacific countries
such as the Marshall Islands are developed there will be opportunities to provide increased trust
fund resources. Looking to global programs, both the GEF and the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) are also expected to provide support.
IV.

MANAGING RISK

50.
Absolute capacity limitations could constrain program implementation. The enduring
nature of capacity constraints in micro-states such as the Marshall Islands pose extraordinary
challenges to effective implementation, and is only exacerbated by the lack of in-country
presence. Experience from the World Bank Group's engagement in other small states such as
Kiribati and Tuvalu underscores the importance of calibrating and sequencing interventions

15

For details of the eligibility criteria, see Annex 3 of IDA (2011) “Additions to IDA Resources: Sixteenth
Replenishment,” available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/IDA/Resources/IDA16_Report-English-Final.pdf.

18

carefully, and in designing operations that account specifically for the current level of capacity.
An explicit recognition of the need for intensive and sustained implementation support will be
paramount.
51.
The Marshall Islands remains highly vulnerable to external shocks, and subject to
many factors beyond its control. Reliance on imports whose prices are subject to considerable
volatility (particularly petroleum products) poses significant macroeconomic threats to the
Marshall Islands. The World Bank Group stands ready to offer continued support under this
CPS to reform efforts in the energy sector to mitigate these risks. The Marshall Islands is also
highly vulnerable to natural disasters and sea-level rise. The World Bank will look for
opportunities to strengthen the disaster risk management capacity of the Marshall Islands, and to
help the Marshall Islands build resilience to external shocks, including natural and man-made
disasters. Additionally, the World Bank Group will promote stronger regional and global
integration through enhanced ICT connections, as well as making appropriate use of regional
interventions that encourage exchange and closer integration with neighboring countries. The
World Bank will also work with the authorities to fully explore the flexible use of IDA
assistance, including of the Immediate Response Mechanism that allows the inclusion of
emergency related contingent components in selected projects to further support rapid response
in eligible crisis and emergency situations.
52.
The macroeconomic policy framework is dependent on continued availability of grants
from development partners, and subject to high levels of uncertainty. A sharper than expected
rise in global commodity prices would exacerbate inflation, and lead to further contractions of
the Marshall Islands economy. The macroeconomic policy framework also depends on the
continued availability of grants from development partners over the medium-term, especially the
US, and the inadvisability of borrowing to fund fiscal deficits. The World Bank Group will
continue to work in close collaboration with the IMF as well as with other donors including the
ADB, Australia, and the US to monitor changes in the macroeconomic situation and ensure that
the World Bank Group’s assistance is effectively coordinated and aligned with Government
priorities.
53.
The prospective end of Compact funding presents a fundamental challenge to fiscal
sustainability in the Marshall Islands. No further Compact financing is assured beyond the life
of the current arrangements. The CTF that has been established to replace Compact grants from
2024 is not currently at a level which would ensure a smooth transition to budgetary selfreliance. The World Bank Group's program is intended to support the important structural
reforms that are needed to return the Marshall Islands to a more sustainable fiscal path.
54.
To mitigate the above risks, the World Bank Group will continue to draw on the
experience and expertise of longstanding partners, and will find ways to adapt its approaches
and operational models to achieve results on the ground. The World Bank Group is proposing
a program that is intended to be both pragmatic and flexible, and one that draws on relevant
regional and global experience, as well as that of partners with a longer track record in the
Marshall Islands. The absence of the World Bank Group in-country presence underscores the
need for donor coordination issues to be carefully and creatively managed.

19

Annex 1: Development Partner Engagement by Sector

ADB

Australia

Human
Development
Macroeconomic
& Fiscal

X

X

X

Public Admin.

X

UN

US

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Taiwan,
China

X

X

Finance/Private
Sector

Japan

X

Infrastructure/
Rural/Community
Development

Water &
Sanitation

IMF

X

Energy

Climate
Change/DRM

EU

X

X

X

X

WB

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

ICT

X

Fisheries/Oceans

X

20

X

Annex 2: The Marshall Islands CPS Results Matrix 16
Medium-term Goals

Key Issues

Expected CPS Outcomes

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Strengthening economic governance to improve living standards and enhance service delivery

Increased economic
competitiveness and
enhanced regional and
global integration
through ICT reform and
market liberalization.

One of the least connected
countries in the world where
only 35 percent of the
population has internet access.

Improved access of
population to ICT services:
• Increase in number of
mobile phone subscribers
from 26 percent of the
population to 40 percent of
the population.
• Increase in internet
subscriptions from 2
percent of the population
to 30 percent of the
population.
• Quantitative analysis on
the impact of ICT reform
on vulnerable and
underserved groups
including women.

16

• Government adoption of a
sector policy
implementing a new legal
framework and
introducing competition
• Establishment of an
independent ICT
regulator
• Government approval of a
financial, ownership and
operational restructuring
plan for the NTA
• New licenses offered
permitting a second
national operator to
supply services to the
public using its own
infrastructure.

•
•
•

Series of IDA-financed
Development Policy
Operations
IDA-financed Technical
Assistance to support
market liberalization
IFC
advisory/investment
assistance to private
sector market entrants

This CPS results matrix reflects the initial scope of the World Bank’s program in the Marshall Islands and will be adjusted as the engagement evolves and
activities are confirmed over the CPS period. Items in parentheses are indicative only and not currently part of the CPS framework. It is anticipated that
additional activities will be formally integrated into the CPS results framework at the time of the CPS Progress Report.

21

Medium-term Goals

Key Issues

Enhanced energy
security through
effective regulation,
management and
governance of the energy
sector

Outdated MEC business model
and fuel price volatility has
resulted in economy-wide
impacts, poor service, high
cost, and inadequate
maintenance of MEC assets.

Increased net economic
benefits to the country
from its fisheries,
through transparent and
sustainable management
of ocean resources

Enhanced capacity to
manage the PostCompact transition to
increased budgetary selfreliance

Expected CPS Outcomes

Cost reflective fuel tariffs
introduced:
• Reform MEC’s fuel prices
such that: a) the full cost
of supply e.g. capital costs,
depreciation and O&M are
recovered; b) capital
expenses to upgrade
MEC’s fuel tank farm to
safe standards can be
financed
• Technical and nontechnical losses reduced
from 18 percent (2010) to
14 percent over a 4 year
period
Pacific tuna fisheries yield
• Increase in the percentage
about 58 percent of the global
of the landed value of the
total with an estimated value of
tuna caught in RMI's
US$4.5 billion but countries
waters that is retained by
such as the Marshall Islands
the country via sale of
retain only 7 percent of the first
access rights, from 10
sale revenue
percent to 12 percent
Expiry of Compact funding
requires effective management
of public and external resources
and increased support for
private sector development

• CTF objectives, strategic
asset allocation and
investment management
strategies reviewed and
options identified to
improve long-term
sustainability in response
to economic and financial
market volatility
• Legislative and regulatory
improvements to
investment climate

22

Milestones
• Government adoption of
electricity tariff review
proposals
• Undertake essential
maintenance of auxiliary
generators
• Increase frequency of
meter-reading, improve
billing and collection
rates

WBG Instruments and
International Partners
Technical Assistance; AAA;
IDA Development Policy
Operation

• Introduction of market
mechanism permitting the
trade of fishing licenses at
international market rates.

•

• Government and CTF
stakeholders undertake
review of fund objectives
and asset management
framework

World Bank Treasury
Technical Assistance;
Australia, New Zealand and
US support

•

PIRO IDA regional
investment
GPO support

Analysis and Technical
Assistance from IFC/WB
unit

Annex 3

Marshall Islands at a glance
Key Development Indicators

Marshall
Islands

2/12/13
East
Asia &
Pacific

Lower
middle
income

Age distribution, 2010

(2011)

Male (..)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

0.05
0.2
1.4
72

1,962
16,302
0.7
46

2,519
23,579
1.5
39

0.2
3,910
..

7,249
3,696
6,657

4,078
1,619
3,632

5.0
3.5

9.7
8.9

6.9
5.3

..
..
..
22
..

14
33
72
20
6

..
..
65
50
25

..
..
102
101

96
91
111
112

80
62
110
104

Female (..)

75- 79
60- 64
45- 49
30- 34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

15- 19
0-4
0

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

0

0

1

1

1

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2005–2011)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

94
75

90
66

30
20
10
0

87
47

1990

1995

2000

Marshall Is lands

Net Aid Flows

1980

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
United States
Japan
Australia

1990

2000

2011

..

0

57

91

..
..
..

0
0
0

43
3
1

68
13
2

38.9
1,098

45.9
1,677

2010

Eas t As ia & Pac ifi c

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
5
0

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

..
..

..
6

-5
-10

Long-Term Economic Trends

-15
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..

0.7
5.0

1.4
-3.0

9.5
1.5

1.0
..

1.0
..

1.0
..

1.0
..

7.4

05

GDP

GDP per c apita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–11
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.0
31

0.0
78

0.1
111

0.1
174

4.4
7.0

1.0
0.4

0.5
1.5

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2010.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

23

Marshall Islands
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2011
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

15
55
-93

41
106
-119

-23
-20.6

-22
-12.6

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

..

..

Reserves, including gold

..

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

Voice and accountability
Polit ical stability and
absence of violence
Regulat ory quality
Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

2

Central Government Finance

2010

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

66.8
15.4
47.7

63.6
14.3
51.6

8.1

1.4

..
..

..
..

2000

25

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

100

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Worldw ide Governance Indicators (w w w .govindicators.org)

Technology and Infrastructure
Overall surplus/deficit

50

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2010
..

..

9

15

..

..

72
72.2
3.1

72
72.2
3.1

..
..

..
..

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

92
22
–

117
9
–

82.8
31.5

67.4
9.7

..
..

..
..

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)
CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

1.5

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

1.9

..

Composition of total external debt, 2010
610

IDA,
IMF,00 0
Private,
IBRD, 0
Short-term,
Bilateral, 00

World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2010

(US$ millions)

Other multilateral, 113

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2011

–
–
–
2000

17
17.3
..
2010

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

–
–
–

–
–
–

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

–
–
–

–
–
–

–

–

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

24

2/12/13

Millennium Development Goals

Marshall Islands

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Marshall Islands

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
..
..
..
..

2000

2010
..
..
..
..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

96
93
68
..

..

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

..
..
..

..
..
..

102
29
3

101
..
3

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

52
41
52

44
35
57

38
31
94

26
22
97

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..

99
97
99

..

..

37

95
34

..
137
37

..
190
57

..
263
25

..
536
70

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

95
64
..
..
1.0
..

95
67
..
..
1.3
..

95
70
72.2
3.1
1.5
..

94
75
72.2
3.1
1.9
..

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

1.1
0.0
0.0
..

6.2
0.5
0.0
..

7.7
0.9
1.5
..

8.1
7.0
3.5
..

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

86
45

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
20

100

100
75
75
50

10

50

25
25

0
2000

2005

2010
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2005

2010

Prim ary net enrollment ratio

Ratio of girls to boy s in primary & sec ondary educ ation

Marshall Is lands

Eas t As ia & Pac ifi c

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

25

Fix ed + m obi le s ubs cribers

Int ernet users

2/12/13

Annex 4: The Marshall Islands: Key Indicators Table, FY2008–13

1/

Sources: RMI authorities and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Small discrepancies exist between table presented in the text and the one above, partly explained by differences in the level of grants.
1/ Fiscal year ending September 30 unless otherwise stated.
2/ Official transfers include current transfers, but exclude capital transfers and Trust Fund contributions.
3/ Government and government-guaranteed debts, which include the first tranche disbursement of $9.5 million in FY2011 and a projected second tranche
disbursement of $5 million in FY2013 from ADB

26

162°E

164°E

166°E

168°E

170°E

BIKAR

172°E

Bikar I.
12°N

12°N

ENEWETAK

Enjbei I.
Runit I.

BIKINI

Bikini I.
Enyu I.

Medren I.
Eniwetok I.

RONGELAP

RONGERIK

UTIRIK

Bock I. Rongerik I.
Eniaetok I. Eniwetak I.
Rongelap I.

AILINGINAE

Utirik I.
Taka I.

R

Sifo I.
Mogiri I.

Aon I.

TAKA

A

Mato I.
Kapenor I.

Lukunor I.

Ujelang I.

ROI

ERIKUB
Erikub I. Bogengoa I.
Kaven I.

R

Kwajalein I.

A

LIB Lib I.

L
K

Anil I. Mae I.
Luen I.

C

MARSHALL
ISLANDS

AUR

Namu I.
Kaginen I.
Bock I. NAMU

I

8°N

Enibin I.

AILINGLAPALAP

H

A

I

N

MALOELAP
Taroa I.
Airik I.
Tabal I.
Aur I.

8°N

JABWOT
Jabwot I.
Jih I.

Wotja I.

Bigatyelang I.
Ailinglapalap I.

I N

Ebadon I.
Enylamieg I.
Ebbetyu I.
Bock I.
LAE
Ujae I.
Lae I.

UJAE

OCEAN

Ormed I.
Wotje I.

Goat I.

WOTJE

Roi-Namur I.

A

PACIFIC

10°N

Lado I.
Likiep I.

H

SOUTH

Mejit I.

Ailuk I.

Jemo I.

C

UJELANG

LIKIEP

K

Wotho I.

Kapen I.

A

10°N

WOTHO

T

AILUK

Aguilue I.

MAJURO

Airek I.

MAJURO

Arno I.
Eroj I.

ARNO

Delap I.

Bogenaga I.

JALUIT

6°N

Pinglap I.

NAMORIK

Namorik I.

MILI

Mili I.
Enajet I.

Aineman I.
Jabor I.

6°N

KNOX

Jaluit I.
Kili I. KILI

162°E

F ED ER AT ED STAT ES
OF M I CRO NESIA

MARSHALL
IS LAN D S
NATIONAL CAPITAL

4°N

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

164°E

Ebon I.

0

0

50

100

50

150 Kilometers

100

150 Miles
4°N

166°E

168°E

170°E

KI R I B AT I

172°E

IBRD 33444

MARCH 2005

CORAL REEFS

EBON

