Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 79701-MD

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
FOR THE PERIOD FY14-17

August 9, 2013

Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation

Central and Eastern Europe Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy (46822-MD) was December 23, 2008 and
the date of the last CPS Progress Report (61923-MD) was May 12, 2011
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

(Exchange Rate Effective August 1, 2013)

January 1 to December 31

Currency Unit = MDL (Moldovan Leu)
USD 1 = MDL 12.69

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AEI
AF
A2F
BEEPS
BEM
CEM
CEP
CFR
CIS
CPAR
CPI
CPIA
CPS
CPS PR
CPS CR
CSO
DCFTA
DFID
DH
DHS
DRG
DPO
EBRD
EC
ECA
EFA/FTI
EIB
EMIS
ENPI
ESRP
EU
FDI
FLEG
FY
GAC
GDP

Analytical & Advisory Activities
Alliance for European Integration
Additional Financing
Access to Finance
Business Environment and Enterprise
Performance Survey
Banca de Economii
Country Economic Memorandum
Competitiveness Enhancement Project
Corporate Financial Reporting
Commonwealth of Independent States
Central Public Administration Reform
Consumer Price Index
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report
Civil Society Organization
Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area
UK Department for International Development
District Heating
Demographic and Health Survey
Diagnosis-related Group
Development Policy Operation
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
European Commission
Europe and Central Asia
Education for All/ Fast-Track Initiative
European Investment Bank
Education Management Information System
European Neighborhood and Partnership
Instrument
Economic Stabilization and Recovery Program
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Forest Law Enforcement and Governance
Fiscal Year
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Gross Domestic Product

GEF
GeT
GHG
GPSA
HBS
HD
HMIS
IBRD
ICT
IDA
IDF
IFAD
IEG
IFC
IFI
IFRS
IMF
IOM
IWRM
KfW
LFS
LOS
MACP
MCC
MDG
MDL
MDTF
MERP
MIGA
MITC
MMR
MP
MSIF
NBM
NBS
NCD
NCFM

Global Environment Facility
Governance e-Transformation
Greenhouse Gas
Global Partnership for Social Accountability
Household Budget Survey
Human Development
Health Management Information System
International Bank for reconstruction and
Development
Information and Communications Technology
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institution
International Financial Reporting Standards
International Monetary Fund
International Organization for Migration
Integrated Water Resource Management
KfW Entwicklungsbank
Labor Force Survey
Law on Official Statistics
Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Millennium Development Goal
Moldovan Leu
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Moldova Education Reform Project
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Information and Communications
Technology
Maternal mortality rate
Member of Parliament
Moldova Social Investment Fund
National Bank of Moldova
National Bureau of Statistics
Non-communicable disease
National Commission of Financial Market

NDS
NEET
NHIC
NPLs
NSS
OECD
OSCE
PAD
PAR
PAYG
PCG
PEFA
PER
PFM
PforR
PHC
PISA
PM
PPG
PPP
PPPs
PRSC
PSD
QER
QERM
RBF

National Development Strategy
Not in Education, Employment or Training
National Health Insurance Company
Non-performing Loans
National Statistical System
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development
Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe
Project Appraisal Document
Public Administration Reform
Pay-As-You-Go Pension System
Partial Credit Guarantee
Public Expenditure & Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Program-for-Results
Primary Health Center
Program for International Student Assessment
Prime Minister
Public and Publicly Guaranteed
Purchasing Power Parity
Public Private Partnerships
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Private Sector Development
Quality Enhancement Review
Quality Education in Rural Areas of Moldova
Results-based Financing

RF
RFP
RISP
ROSC
SABER
SD
SDR
Sida
SLM
SME

Results framework
Request for Proposals
Rural Investment and Services Project
Report on Observance of Standards and Codes
Systems Approach for Better Education Results
Sustainable Development
Special Drawing Right
Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency
Sustainable Land Management
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises

SPS
STEP

Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Skills Toward Employability and Productivity

TA
TF
TSA
UNDP
UNICEF
USAID

Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
Targeted Social Assistance
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children's Fund
United States Agency for International
Development
United States Dollar
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Economic Forum
World Health Organization
Work Program Agreement

USD
WB
WBG
WBI
WEF
WHO
WPA

The World Bank Group Team
World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leaders

Laura Tuck (Acting)
Qimiao Fan
Abdoulaye Seck, Carolina Odobescu

IFC
Vice President
Country Manager
Task Team Leader

Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Ana Maria Mihaescu
Hester Marie DeCasper

The Moldova Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY14-17 was prepared under the guidance of
Qimiao Fan, Country Director, ECCU2, and Philippe Le Hou6rou, former ECA VP. The core CPS
team included Abdoulaye Seck, Carolina Odobescu, Ana Maria Mihaescu, Hester Marie DeCasper,
Yulia Snizhko, and Faith Tempest. Strategic input and leadership in team coordination was provided
by the Country Sector Coordinators' team: Marius Vismantas, Alexander Pankov, Paolo Belli, Tamara
Sulukhia, Ruslan Piontkivsky, and Lalita Moorty. The core CPS team is thankful to Menahem Prywes,
Siddhartha Raja and Sarosh Sattar for their contributions. The IMF country team (Nikolay
Gueorguiev, Tokhir Mirzoev, and Michael Gorbanyov) provided written feedback and participated in
review meetings. Contributions are gratefully acknowledged from M. Willem van Eeghen, E. Gail
Richardson, Benu Bidani, Connie Luff, Alejandro Cedeno, Gregory Jedrzejczak, Peter Nicholas,
Kevin J. Barnes, Elena Segura, Kanta Kumari Rigaud, Massimo Mastruzzi, James Stephens, Victor
Sulla, Scherezad Latif, Shinya Nishimura, Rajeev Swami, Andrei Busuioc, Martin Melecky, Mariana
Doina Moarcas, Sandra Sargent, Caterina Ruggeri Laderchi, Lidia Ceriani, Moritz Meyer, Jose
Montes, Joao Pedro Wagner De Azevedo, Mame Fatou Diagne, Mikha-Petteri Torhonen, Melissa A.
Rekas, Uzma Khalil, Sharon Felzer, Svetlana Markova, Stefanie Stallmeister, Keta Ruiz, Onur Erdem,
Iryna Trach, Sophia Muradyan, Heidi Humala, Irina Ramniceanu, Andreas Schliessler, Elena
Nikulina, Oleksiy Balabushko, Shilpa Pradhan, Knut Leipold, Ronnie Hammad, Rebecca
Chamberlain-Creanga, Elisabeth Huybens, Sarah Michael, Sophia Georgieva, Nicolas Perrin, Arcadie
Capcelea, Tatyana Leonova, Zoran Anusic, Julia Smolyar, Felicia Pricop, Anatol Gobjila, Elena
Corman, Victor Neagu, Diana Calugher, Anna Olefir, Ghenadie Cotelnic, laroslav Baclajanschi,
Marcel Chistruga, Sandu Ghidirim, Oxana Druta, Irina Guban, Elena Kladova, Artem Kolesnikov,
Elena Prodan, and Eugeniu Osmochescu. Administrative support was provided by Olesya Gafurova,
Amanda Schneider, Nejme Kotere, Ala Muntean, and Valentyna Golokoz.

FY14-17 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Sum m ary .....................................................................................................................................
I.

Country Context ...................................................................................................................................

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

i
1

Political Context..........................................................1
Recent Economic Developments
....................
................. 22.......
Macroeconomic Prospects and Debt Sustainability.............................3
Poverty, Inequality, and Vulnerability..........................................4
Social Context ..........................................................
7
Gender.................................................................
7

II. Development Challenges and Government Program....................................................................8
III. W orld Bank Group Partnership Strategy ....................................................................................

15

A.
B.
C.

15
16

Lessons Learned and Stakeholder Feedback......................................
Proposed World Bank Group Strategy..............................................
Implementing the FY14-17 CPS.............................................25

IV . M anaging Risks ..................................................................................................................................

29

Boxes, Figures, and Tables
Box
Box
Box
Box

1:
2:
3:
4:

WBG goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity: Moldova ...................
ICT - an enabler of economic growth and good governance..........
.................
Supporting investments in human capital through enhanced access to social infrastructure..........
One World Bank Group in Moldova
............................
.....
.........

Figure 1: Baseline (2011) and Poverty Projections (2012-17)...............5......
Figure 2: CPS Outcomes and Proposed WBG Program
........................
Table 1: Main Macroeconomic Indicators, 2009-17

6
9
12
17

......... 5
.......... 19

.........................................

3

Annexes
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

1: CPS Results Matrix ....................................................
31
2: World Bank Group FY09-13 Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report ................... 37
3: Mapping of Key Development Partner Support to Moldova ........................
79
4: Gender Assessment ....................................................
80
5: Progress Towards Achieving the MDGs in Moldova
............................. 85
6: GAC Filter at the Pre-Concept Stage
.............................
....
........ 87
7: Transnistria: A Development Challenge and an Opportunity
...................
88
8: Country Systems and the Fiduciary Environment...........................
90
9: Review of the National Statistical System.
...............................
..... 92
10: CPS Stakeholder Consultations and Client Opinion Survey Findings .................
96
11: Overview of Main Trust Funds in Moldova..................................99
12: Country Financing Parameters Summary Table
....................................
102
13: Standard CPS Annexes...........................................
...... 103

Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

1: A2
2: B2
3: B3
4: B4
5: B5
6: B8
7: B8

-

......
Moldova at a Glance .....................................
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .................
...........................
Summary of Indicative Lending Program
Summary of Proposed AAA
..............................
......
............................................
Social Indicators
IFC Statement of Committed and Outstanding Investment Portfolio...................
.......
..................
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

103
105
106
107
108
112
113

MOLDOVA
FY14-17 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
Executive Summary
1.
European integration anchors the Government of Moldova's policy reform agenda
but tensions between the majority coalition and the opposition, and within the majority,
had slowed reforms. Negotiations with the European Union (EU) on an Association Agreement
and a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA) were recently finalized.' The visa
liberalization dialogue is progressing. Yet, there are differing views in society on the appropriate
direction, pace and depth of reforms, and these were reflected in differences not only between
the majority and the opposition, but also within the ruling coalition, and have hampered reforms.
These tensions led to the resignation of the Government after a no-confidence vote in March
2013. Although the Parliament elected in May 2013 a new Prime Minister (PM) who has formed
a government from the ruling coalition, early parliamentary elections before those scheduled for
2015 may still be a possibility.
2.
Moldova's economy has recovered from the global financial crisis of 2008-09, but
growth halted in 2012. During 2010-11, Moldova's economy grew at an average rate of 6
percent, bringing down the fiscal deficit and inflation below 3 and 5 percent respectively in
2012. However, growth came to a halt in 2012, revealing Moldova's vulnerability to the
Eurozone crisis and climatic events such as droughts. Risks to the macroeconomic outlook are
substantial due to a large current account deficit and problems with a majority state-owned bank
facing high non-performing loans and low capital. Still, risks of debt distress are low, as long as
growth rates remain positive.
3.
Despite a sharp decline in poverty in the 2000s, Moldova remains one of the poorest
countries in Europe. Based on the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) poverty line of USD 5/day at
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), 55 percent of the population was poor in 2011, and extreme
poverty (poverty line of USD 2.5/day at PPP) was 10 percent. The most vulnerable groups at risk
of poverty in Moldova remain those with low education levels, households with three or more
children, those in rural areas, families relying on self-employment, the elderly, and Roma
population. Moldova performs well in some areas of gender equality, yet disparities persist in
education, health, economic opportunity, agency and violence against women. Human trafficking
is an issue. Moldova is a source, and to a lesser extent a transit and destination country, for both
sex trafficking and forced labor.
4.
Recent growth performance has promoted shared prosperity and reduced poverty.
Most of the observed poverty reduction has been driven by growth. Growth in consumption of
the bottom 40 percent of the population outpaced average growth in consumption during 200611: 5.8 percent compared with 2.9 percent for the general population. However, evidence
suggests that the bottom 40 percent are particularly affected by weaknesses in the quality and
efficiency of health and education services, and especially vulnerable to climate shocks.
5.
Moldova has made significant strides in its economic and political transition, but
much remains to be done. Moldova lags far behind the rest of the region - a result of policies

The aim is to initial the Association Agreement in the fall of 2013 and sign it in 2014.

i

and history. Moldova has a small domestic market with limited competition and weak drive for
innovation. Yet these challenges could be overcome by reducing the economic distance to larger
regional markets and reaping the benefits of openness. Unfortunately, Moldova has high crossborder costs, and is not taking advantage of its proximity to wealthier regional markets due to its
low endowment in institutional, human and natural capital.
6.
Moldova's National Development Strategy (NDS) Moldova 2020 sets seven strategic
priorities. These are justice and fight against corruption; national education system aligned with
labor market requirements; pensions; business environment; roads infrastructure; accessible and
inexpensive finance; and energy efficiency. The Strategy is intended to prioritize state
interventions to deliver the overarching goal of bringing about qualitative economic development
and poverty reduction. The NDS was adopted by the Parliament as national law. The NDS and
its consolidated action plan include some measures to reduce inequality and address key crosscutting themes, such as social inclusion and gender equality, environmental preservation, climate
change and disaster events, and reintegration of localities from the left bank of the Nistru River
(Transnistria).
7.
The CPS will support Moldova to boost shared prosperity and reduce poverty by
capturing the full benefits of openness and integrating with the EU and the global economy.
Growth in Moldova has been favorable to the bottom 40 percent who have experienced higher
consumption growth than average. The CPS will help address the remaining impediments
towards a stronger and inclusive growth. Three pillars are proposed, which will help Moldova
diversify and expand its endowment of institutional, human and natural capital. The three pillars
are:
* Increasing Competitiveness: continued institutional reforms for a business enabling
environment and governance, access to finance, transparency in the financial sector, and
targeted activities to help improve companies' competitiveness are needed to reduce
barriers and to translate economic openness into concrete benefits of more jobs and
higher income.
* EnhancingHuman Capitaland Minimizing Social Risks: the widening gap with EU28 in
education and health outcomes needs to be progressively closed. Demographic challenges
need to be addressed, and vulnerabilities can be tackled by strengthening social
protection systems.
* Promoting a Green, Clean and Resilient Moldova: the debilitating effects of climatic
events on agriculture and rural livelihoods need to be addressed, natural resource
management improved, and energy security and efficiency achieved to ensure sustainable
development.
8.
Going forward, the CPS will support an agenda on knowledge and learning that will
deepen our understanding of the main drivers of poverty reduction and shared prosperity.
In particular, a Poverty Assessment has already been scheduled for FY15 and will provide input
to the CPS Progress Report during mid-term review.
9.
The CPS has governance and gender lenses, and a calibrated engagement in localities
from the left bank of the Nistru River (Transnistria) will be considered in close consultation with
the authorities of the Republic of Moldova.
10.
The CPS has been the subject of broad consultations. Non-governmental
organizations, academia, youth and students, think-tanks, central and local public authorities,

ii

development partners and parliamentarians were consulted on the proposed areas of engagement
in the Strategy, as were the main political parties that have confirmed their agreement with the
Strategy's three pillars and its key results.
11.
Risks to the CPS are high, ranging from a volatile political situation and reform
slowdown that may come from state capture, and the recurrent threats of early elections. In
addition, headwinds from the Eurozone and broader global economy; fiduciary risks; capacity
risks in the public sector and with private contractors; and vulnerability to extreme climate
events and natural disasters are considerable risks. The risks would be mitigated by engaging all
parties across the political spectrum and introducing a governance filter in all operations,
supporting competitiveness reforms, diversifying the economy and strengthening social safety
nets.
12.
Other measures to reduce implementation risks could include emphasizing the need
for improved public financial management and assisting with implementing procurement
reforms; engaging in areas where results have been already attained; and implementing public
administration reforms emphasizing accountability and capacity building. Additional measures
include assisting with building resilience to climate impact and taking advantage of flexible
financing instruments when disasters strike.

111

I.

Country Context

1.
Moldova still faces the challenges of political and market transitions and has to
prepare for new ones such as a declining and graying population and a warmer climate.
Moldova has established a parliamentary regime with an uninterrupted cycle of democratic
transfer of power since independence. However, entrenched divisions, geopolitical factors and
lack of civic identity make political competition fierce, and result in tepid and incremental
reforms. Moldova has also established the formal institutions of a market economy. After hitting
bottom in the late 1990s Moldova has gained lower middle income status, and poverty has been
sharply reduced. Still, to sustain progress and attain levels of well-being comparable to its EU
neighbors, Moldova needs to improve governance and the business enabling environment. To
maximize the potential of its people - especially the bottom 40 percent - Moldova needs to
invest in human capital and narrow the widening human capital gap with EU28. The debilitating
effects of climatic events on agriculture and rural livelihoods, which affect most the bottom 40
percent of the population, also need to be addressed. Dealing with these challenges will help
Moldova achieve its ambitions of shared prosperity for its people.
A.

Political Context

2.
European integration anchors the Government's policy reform agenda. Negotiations
between Moldova and the EU on an Association Agreement and DCFTA began in 2010 and
were recently completed. The dialogue on visa liberalization is also progressing. During recent
visits to the country, the German Chancellor and President of the European Commission
acknowledged the EU integration efforts undertaken by the Government. Critical to achieving
Moldova's development priorities, and to deeper political association and economic integration
with the EU, are improved governance, stronger public administration, independent judiciary and
strengthened rule of law.
3.
A history of difficult relations among the constituent parties of the ruling alliance
carries a risk of political discontinuity. Having won a parliamentary majority in elections in
July 2009 and November 2010, the three parties of the Alliance for European Integration (AEI)
formed a government, but fell short of the necessary majority to elect the President. In March
2012, with the support of Members of Parliament (MPs) who left the Communist Party, the AEI
garnered the necessary votes to elect the President, avoiding new parliamentary elections.
However, AEI's common bond towards EU integration has never suppressed stark divisions over
values, as well as personal rivalries and control of state institutions. These culminated in
February 2013 in a call from the senior partner of the coalition (and the PM's party) to negotiate
new terms of the power-sharing agreement. The next parliamentary elections are scheduled for
2015, but on March 5, 2013 the Government fell after a no-confidence vote in the Parliament.
Subsequently, the Parliament elected the new Speaker and PM, re-establishing the AEI
Government. It remains to be seen if tensions have been fully resolved, and the prospect of early
elections cannot be discounted.
4.
Transnistria's unresolved status hinders development progress, but while significant
uncertainties remain, there have been recent positive developments. Authorities in
Transnistria, the territory of the Republic of Moldova located on the eastern side of the
Dniestr/Nistru River, proclaimed an autonomous Republic in 1991, following the independence
of Moldova. In March 1992 violence erupted and escalated in a five-month civil war.
Transnistria operates as a de facto state but is not recognized by any international party. This

1

situation has continued to weigh on Moldova's development path, including on negotiations for
the EU-Moldova Association Agreement and DCFTA. The resumption of dialogue - the socalled 5+2 settlement process - in February 2012, after being stalled for six years, provides an
opportunity for further progress on the settlement process,2 although the recent adoption of a socalled "border law" by Transnistria representatives is a source of risks. The framework for
international support to the settlement process is one of 'confidence-building', seen as an avenue
to cement the positive developments in the negotiation process. Confidence-building measures
and negotiations brokered by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
play an important development function in keeping infrastructure and supply networks open
between the regions and eastwards. Addressing now the needs within Transnistria and its
relationship with Moldova will facilitate its prosperity and economic integration in the region
regardless of its future status.
B.

Recent Economic Developments

5.
The economy has been volatile over the previous CPS period, reflecting exposure to
global economic and climatic conditions. Moldova's economy has recovered from the global
financial crisis of 2008-09, but growth halted in 2012 due to the Eurozone sovereign debt and
banking crisis, and drought (see Table 1). Recovery of remittances and investment growth
fuelled domestic demand in 2010-11. By the end of 2011, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
had recovered to above pre-crisis levels. However, real GDP dropped by 0.8 percent in 2012 as a
fall in exports to the EU coincided with the drought that severely hit agriculture and food
industry. In the first quarter of 2013 the economy recovered again by 3.5 percent year on year.
6.
Macroeconomic management has improved. In early 2010 the Government began
implementing a program to address macroeconomic vulnerabilities and withstand the economic
crisis. The program rests on four pillars: (i) fiscal policies to restore sustainability while
safeguarding public investment and social spending priorities; (ii) flexible monetary and
exchange rate policies to keep inflation under control, facilitate adjustment to shocks, and rebuild
foreign reserves; (iii) policies to ensure financial stability through early detection of bank
difficulties, and strengthening the legal framework for bank rehabilitation and resolution; and
(iv) structural reforms to raise the economy's potential. It was supported by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), and five reviews were successfully completed by late 2012. The general
government's fiscal deficit decreased from 6.3 percent of GDP in 2009 to 2.1 percent in 2012.
Inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), was 4.6 percent in 2012.
The current account deficit narrowed to 7 percent of GDP in 2012, and continued to
7.
be financed by private sector borrowing and official inflows. While the trade deficit remained
large, export growth outpaced import growth in 2011-12. Remittances recovered in 2010-12 but
still have not reached pre-crisis levels. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) net inflows dropped to
only 2.2 percent of GDP in 2012, underscoring the importance of reforms to attract investments
to achieve sustained recovery and spur modernization. The current account deficit was therefore
mostly financed by private and public debt. Foreign exchange reserves reached USD 2.5 billion
in mid-2013 - exceeding pre-crisis levels and covering over four months of imports.

Moldova, Transnistria, Ukraine, Russia, and the OSCE are direct participants in this process, and the United States and the EU act as external
observers. With Ukraine assuming Chairmanship of OSCE in 2013, further momentum is expected.
2

2

Table 1: Main Macroeconomic Indicators, 2009-17
2009

2010
2011
Actual

2012

Nominal GDP, MDL billion

60.4

71.9

82.2

87.8

96.7

Real growth rates:
GDP, % growth
Export,% growth
Import, % growth

-6.0
-12.1
-23.6

7.1
13.7
14.3

6.4
28.6
19.3

-0.8
2.3
2.5

Real Effective Exchange Rate (2000= 100)
CPI, %average

111.1
0.0

117.5
7.4

129.2
7.6

Current Account Balance, % GDP
Remittances, %growth in USD
International Reserves (USD million)
Terms of Trade, % change
FDI, net (% GDP)

-9.8
-37.4
1480
14.8
2.7

-9.8
13.2
1718
-2.1
3.4

Fiscal Balance, % GDP

-6.3

External Debt, %GDP
PPGDebt,%GDP

80.2
21.0

2013
2014
Projections

2015

2016

2017

105.9

115.7

127.0

139.2

4.5
6.6
6.6

4.0
4.7
5.6

4.0
4.8
4.8

4.5
5.1
5.1

4.5
5.3
5.4

124.2
4.6

...
4.9

5.0

4.8

4.6

4.3

-12.6
21.7
1965
-14.3
4.0

-7.0
11.9
2515
-0.8
2.2

-7.0
5.5
2614
0.1
1.9

-7.9
5.4
2877
-1.0
1.9

-7.9
5.1
2906
-0.2
1.8

-8.1
5.1
3073
-0.1
1.9

-8.3
4.9
3493
-0.1
1.9

-2.5

-2.4

-2.1

-1.6

-1.4

-1.2

-1.0

-0.9

82.3
23.2

77.6
21.7

84.5
24.3

81.1
24.5

80.6
24.0

76.7
23.1

73.7
21.7

69.4
20.3

...

Source: National Statistics and World Bank staff calculations.

C.

Macroeconomic Prospects and Debt Sustainability

8.
While Moldova remains vulnerable to a variety of shocks, the macroeconomic policy
framework is expected to remain adequate with moderate growth and low inflation.
Moldova's macroeconomic policies of maintaining flexible exchange rates and inflation
targeting, as well as low public debt levels, have reduced the main macroeconomic risks. After a
recession in 2012, GDP growth is expected to rebound to 4.5 percent in 2013, as recovery in
agriculture will likely lead to growth acceleration in the second half of 2013. We project growth
of 4-5 percent over 2014-17, with higher external demand for Moldova's exports, which will be
supported by higher consumer and investor confidence. Prudent monetary policy is anticipated.
Inflation is expected to remain within the target of 5 percent plus/minus 1.5 percent in line with
targets set by the National Bank of Moldova (NBM). Resuming an IMF-supported program3 as
an anchor of prudent fiscal and monetary policies will further strengthen the macroeconomic
framework for sustained recovery.
9.
Budget consolidation is projected to continue in the medium term. We expect that the
fiscal deficit will remain below 2 percent of GDP in 2014-17, but significant fiscal pressures
remain. The public sector wage bill at central, and particularly local, government levels remains
high. Education and health sector inefficiencies are still large. The Government has undertaken
reforms to improve expenditure composition, especially in education, but much more needs to be
A staff team from the IMF visited Chisinau during June 19-24, 2013. They noted that Moldova's recent three-year IMF-supported program
largely achieved its main objectives, notwithstanding the non-completion of the last program review. However, the team also noted that some
recent developments and policy initiatives put these gains at risk, including a planned radical makeover of taxation in agriculture; the re-opening
of loopholes in the value-added tax regime; and the ad-hoc increase in pensions and salary hikes for public dignitaries; the need to rehabilitate
Banca de Economii through a substantial capital increase, strengthening of its management, and subsequent open and transparent privatization;
the need for comprehensive enforcement of shareholder transparency and suitability requirements, as well as protection of property rights in
banks, along a speedy implementation of the ongoing judicial reform are crucial. The staff team remains available for further policy discussions.
3

3

done, for instance the implementation of the per student financing nation-wide program. These
inefficiencies are crowding out productive expenditure in infrastructure and public services, and
spreading scarce investment resources too thinly to be effective. Moldova also remains
vulnerable to changes in import energy prices with critical effects on social assistance
expenditures, as well as on tariffs, debt accumulation and arrears in public utility companies.
10.
The current account deficit is expected to remain at single digits in the medium run,
and the risks of debt distress remain low. Assuming a lagged positive effect of ongoing
structural reforms, higher value added exports would help to narrow the trade imbalance over
time. Growth of remittances is expected to be modest over the forecast period. FDI is projected
to gradually increase if the business climate continues to improve. The Joint IMF-World Bank
(WB) Debt Sustainability Analysis Update (2012) assesses the risks of debt distress as low.
Public and Publicly Guaranteed (PPG) debt sustainability is most sensitive to a shock in output
growth, while total external debt is most sensitive to a one-time nominal depreciation shock.
11.
Risks to the macroeconomic outlook are substantial. First, a worsening of the debt
crisis in the Eurozone could undermine exports and remittance flows. Second, a negative oil
price shock could slow Russia's growth further, resulting in a significant drop in remittances
from and exports to Russia. Third, a large structural current account deficit increases
vulnerability to sudden stops in FDI or external aid. In particular, slippages in implementing
macroeconomic and structural reforms could potentially reduce external support and complicate
efforts to finance the current account. Fourth, agriculture remains vulnerable to extreme weather
conditions. Fifth, while aggregate banking performance indicators show positive trends,
significant risks exist due to credit quality and capital adequacy concerns at Banca de Economii
(BEM), a majority state-owned bank of systemic importance. Disorderly resolution of problems
with BEM is a risk through contingent fiscal liabilities. Quality of governance and lending to
related parties remain potential risks in the financial sector more generally.
D.

Poverty, Inequality, and Vulnerability

12.
Despite a sharp decline in poverty in the 2000s, Moldova remains one of the poorest
countries in Europe. Based on the ECA regional poverty line of USD 5/day at PPP, 94 percent
of the population was poor in 2002 but this had declined to 55 percent by 2011. The incidence of
extreme poverty (based on the ECA poverty line of USD 2.5/day at PPP) declined dramatically
over the same period from 57 to 10 percent. Both rural and urban areas benefited from sharp
poverty reduction, but it occurred faster in urban areas. However, based on the ECA regional
poverty line, Moldova's poverty rate is double the ECA average, with extreme poverty also
significantly higher than the regional average.
13.
National poverty estimates indicate positive trends in poverty reduction. Published
reports indicate that national poverty rate fell from 30.2 percent in 2006 to 17.5 percent in 2011.
Poverty reduction has been particularly strong for those over 60, especially those living in single
person households, 75 percent of whom are women.6 Figure 1 indicates that during 2006-11
4 NPLs increased to 14.5 percent by end-2012 due to weakening economic activity and worsening balance sheets of some banks, including BEM.

BEM (with 11 percent of total assets in the banking sector and the largest number of individual depositors) needs urgent action to repair its
balance sheet and improve risk management practices.
5 The national poverty line was MDL 1093/month in 2011, equivalent to USD 3 dollar/day (current). The national threshold for extreme poverty
was MDL 591.2/month in 2011, equivalent to USD 1.6/day (current).
6 Interestingly, in this population group poverty declined more for single elderly men living alone (by 52 percent, to 18 percent) than for single
elderly women living alone (by 39 percent, to 20 percent).

4

extreme poverty fell from 4.5 percent to 0.9 percent. Most of the observed poverty reduction has
been driven by growth, and the main channels have been private transfers such as remittances,
and greater employment and higher earnings. Going forward, based on the current
macroeconomic framework, simple projections based on constant inequality show that such
positive trends should continue over the CPS period. This will require consistent monitoring,
especially given the continuing debt crisis in the Eurozone, potential weakening of remittance
flows, and vulnerability of agriculture to extreme weather conditions. Boosting competitiveness
for more and better jobs will be critical.
Figure 1: Baseline (2011) and Poverty Projections (2012-17)
20%

17%

18%

15%-

5%
0%

U.6/%

%

!9%

7

10%
U.6/%

0.79%

0.62%

0.50%

0.38%

0.27%

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

B
2011

momAbsolute Poverty

m

Extreme Poverty

Source: Household Budget Survey (HBS) 2011 and World Bank staff calculations.

14.
Moldova's recent economic performance has promoted shared prosperity (see Box 1
on WBG poverty and shared prosperity goals). Growth in consumption of the bottom 40 percent
of the population outpaced average growth (estimates for 2006-11 suggest an annualized overall
growth in consumption of 2.9 percent over the period, as compared to 5.8 percent for the bottom
40 percent). Decomposition analysis shows that labor market developments helped the bottom 40
percent by increasing the returns to labor. Estimates in 2011 also show a statistically significant
association between educational attainment and income levels for both the top 60 percent and
bottom 40 percent of the population. However, the bottom 40 percent tend to have lower
education attainment, and quality of education is an issue, with rural students lagging behind
their urban peers by more than a year of schooling. 8 This calls for reallocation of resources from
maintaining an oversized schools network towards funding quality programs in consolidated
schools in rural areas where most of the bottom 40 percent live. The bottom 40 percent are
particularly affected by weaknesses in the quality and efficiency of education (and health)
services. The Life in Transition Survey (2010) indicates that for primary and secondary
education, as well as for health services, satisfaction with public services was lower among the
bottom 40 percent than the top 60 percent. Gender factors, captured by the gender of the

These projections do not factor in any type of distributional changes, such as those that could come from an expansion of social assistance - to
the extent that the ongoing trends in reducing inequality continue, these projections might underestimate the extent of poverty reduction over the
CPS period. Also, the high vulnerability of the Moldovan economy described in the previous sections should not be underestimated.
8 The OECD Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) tests 15 year-olds competencies in reading, mathematics and science, and
assesses how far students near the end of compulsory education have acquired the knowledge and skills that are essential for full participation in
society. According to PISA 2009 Plus results, Moldova's quality of education remains at the bottom of Europe. The scores were particularly low
in rural areas that account for 57 percent of student population.

5

household head, appear to have played no statistically significant role in explaining the growth of
either group, though non-income dimensions warrant a continuous focus on gender.
Box 1: WBG goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity: Moldova
The WBG has recently adopted two new goals to anchor its overarching mission of a world free of
poverty and to galvanize international and national efforts in this endeavor: ending extreme poverty by
2030 globally and promoting shared prosperity.
National estimates of extreme poverty in Moldova in 2011, measured on the basis of a MDL 591 per
adult equivalent poverty line, already show that extreme poverty has been all but eradicated in the
country. A similar assessment can be reached using the poverty line of USD 1.25 a day at PPP used to
monitor the extreme poverty target at global level. Arguably, however, the global poverty line,
calibrated to reflect the poverty lines of the 20 poorest countries in the world, does not do justice to the
nature of poverty in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. Applying the same methodology - as at the
global level - results in the ECA extreme poverty line of USD 2.50 a day at PPP. This reflects the
significant onus that the region's variances in weather put on households in terms of higher caloric
requirements, and higher expenditure on energy, clothing and transportation. Thus, despite the
significant progress in the recent past, Moldova's extreme poverty is still higher than the region's
average, suggesting that the WBG global goal of ending extreme poverty remains relevant for the
country and for this CPS.
The second goal focuses on the promotion of wellbeing of the lower 40 percent of the distribution. It
underscores that while growth is necessary, countries should aspire to growth processes of which the
less well-off are integral parts. Moldova's recent performance is rather positive. The overall growth
pattern over the last five years (2006-11) shows that lower income groups have experienced higher
growth rates than better-off groups. This pattern also explains why inequality has decreased.
Going forward, this CPS will support an agenda on knowledge and leaming that will deepen our
understanding of the main drivers of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. In particular a Poverty
Assessment has already been planned for FY15.
15.
The bottom 40 percent are particularly vulnerable to climate change risks. Forty
percent of people in Moldova are extremely concerned about climate change, the highest
proportion in Europe and Central Asia according to the Life in Transition Survey, 2010. While
the bottom 40 percent of the population is equally concerned about climate change as the top 60
percent, given the concentration of poverty in rural areas, the effects of climate change on
agriculture represent a major threat to the bottom 40 percent. Rural poverty rates in Moldova
remain high at 30 percent (to compare with 10 percent in urban areas in 2010). Poverty rates are
highest among farmers and agricultural workers (at 36 and 45 percent respectively) and,
together, these two categories account for 40 percent of Moldova's poor. They are also most
vulnerable to climatic risks such as higher frequency of droughts or floods.
16.
Progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in Moldova has
been uneven. The poverty and the under-5 mortality targets are likely to be met. However,
fluctuations in several goals in recent years give rise to questions as to whether all 2015 national
MDG targets will be met. Among the areas of concern are maternal mortality rates (MMR),
incidence of HIV and rate of mortality associated with TB. A comprehensive discussion of the
MDG status is provided in Annex 5.

6

E.

Social Context

17.
Certain groups remain at high risk of poverty and vulnerable to social exclusion.
The most vulnerable groups at risk of poverty remain those with low education levels,
households with three or more children, those in rural areas, families relying on selfemployment, the elderly, and Roma population. 9 UNICEF (2011) reports that only 16 percent of
families with children in the poorest quintile are receiving social assistance through the Ajutor
Social program.1 0 Vulnerability of the elderly is a particular concern given population aging
trends. UNDP (2007) shows poverty incidence of 59 percent among Roma population in 2007,
compared to the national average of 24 percent." Roma children are less likely to attend school
(43 percent compared to 6 percent for non-Roma children), and only 23 percent of Roma
households have medical insurance compared to the national average of 78.6 percent. 12 There is
little gender differentiation in poverty rates.
F.

Gender

18.
Moldova performs well in some areas of gender equality. Gender equality is included
in the constitution and elaborated in the 2006 Law on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men.
The 2008-15 National Strategy on Gender Equality establishes policy objectives on gender
equality and priority actions. Moldova has ratified a broad range of international conventions that
mandate gender equality, including the MDGs and the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
19.
Yet in other areas disparities remain. While the policy foundation for gender equality
is laudable, patriarchal norms have been resistant to change. Gender equality policies and norms
have not been supported by adequate resources and implementation. Public authorities such as
courts have been unwilling or unable to apply gender equality laws. Life expectancy is among
the lowest in Europe, at 73 years for women and 65 years for men. A wide gender gap in age is
driven by the high male mortality rate, in part resulting from lifestyle choices by men consuming
large amounts of tobacco and alcohol. Gender gaps in education are most obvious at the tertiary
level, with only 33 percent of enrolled men compared with 44 percent of women. Secondary and
tertiary schools appear to be the beginning of occupational segregation, which eventually results
in gender segregation in the labor market (see Annex 4). Partly due to this sector segregation,
women earn 73 percent of what men earn and are less likely to advance to leadership posts, and
only 8 percent of firms have any female ownership. Female participation in leadership is low:
only 20 percent of female MPs and representation is even lower in other areas of government.
20.
Human trafficking is a critical issue in Moldova as a source country, and to a lesser
extent a transit and destination country, for both sex trafficking and forced labor. It is
estimated that Moldova has one of the highest rates of human trafficking among neighboring
countries.13 However, substantial improvements were achieved through implementation of the
national action plan, and the structure of the anti-trafficking national system is built on multi' The size of the Roma population is not known. The 1989 census established the number at 11,600 (0.3 percent of the population), and the 2004
census enumerated 12,271 "gypsies". Census data probably underestimates the actual size of the Roma population, which some estimates put at
100-150 thousand.
'0 UNICEF 2011, Impact of cash transfers on poverty and well-being of the most vulnerable families in the Republic of Moldova, within the
context of transition from category-based to means-tested social assistance.
" UNDP 2007, "Roma in the Republic of Moldova".
12 UNDP 2011, "National Human Development Report: From Social Exclusion Towards Inclusive Human Development".
1GfK 2006. Human trafficking survey: Belarus, Bulgaria, Moldova, Romania, and Ukraine. Prepared for IOM in Ukraine.

7

agency cooperation, including with civil society. 14 Research has also linked human trafficking to
domestic violence, and an estimated 40 percent of Moldovan women have been victims of at
least one violent episode.15 Measures taken within the legal and regulatory framework have not
sufficiently addressed domestic violence, and the level of public awareness remains low.
II.

Development Challenges and Government Program

21.
Moldova has made significant strides in its economic and political transition, but
much remains to be done. Moldova lags far behind the rest of the region as a result of policies
and history. It has a small domestic market, with limited competition and weak drive for
innovation. Yet, these challenges could be overcome by reducing the economic distance to larger
regional markets and reaping the benefits of openness. Unfortunately, Moldova has high crossborder economic costs as evidenced in its 1 3 2 th rank of 155 countries in the 2012 Logistics
Performance Index. Why Moldova is not taking advantage of its proximity to wealthier regional
markets can be analyzed through its endowment of institutional, human and natural capital.16 17
InstitutionalCapital: Governance and Business EnablingEnvironment
22.
Moldova has made progress in legislative reforms for improved governance but
poor enforcement creates governance challenges. Institutional and administrative capacity
remains weak, but perhaps more crucial are concerns regarding transparency, accountability and
corruption. Although Moldova improved its position in the Transparency International
Corruption Perceptions Index from 1 1 2 th of 180 countries in 2011 to 9 4 th of 174 countries in
2012, it is still poorly ranked in comparison with its neighbors to the west. Although Moldova's
overall rating in the 2012 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) improved to 3.8,
it scored only 3.5 out of 6 in the 2012 CPIA Transparency,Accountability and Corruptionin the
Public Sector indicator, reflecting challenges including corruption, poor accountability
mechanisms, and politicization of the judiciary. Moldova's lowest CPIA score (3) corresponds to
quality of public administration. Although legislation is in place, better enforcement is needed to
make it more effective and reduce the incidence of corruption. The anti-corruption body is vested
with significant powers but has a modest performance record, and there is a public perception of
an agency over-reaching itself in fighting petty crimes or one used for political purposes.
23.
There is still progress to be made in building the capacity of the public sector to
perform better. Improved strategic planning and policy coordination and mechanisms to
establish a professional and merit-based civil service have created a good foundation for a more
effective and efficient government. However, public administration will need to continue to
enhance public sector capacity by better defining performance targets, evaluating budget
programs, and allocating resources to priority programs more strategically - all leading to
increased transparency, accountability and efficiency. Recent legislation to introduce the position
of state (permanent) secretary should further professionalize the civil service. Its implementation
requires new regulations on competences, appointment, and other human resource management
procedures, as well as support to capacity building of a new cadre of state secretaries.

14 5th Progress Report of the European Commission on the Implementation of the EU-Moldova Visa Liberalization Action Plan from June 2013:
Assessment Block 3 / topic lb - Preventingtrafficking in human beings.
"sU.S. Department of State, 2010. Human Rights Report on Moldova. http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/160203.pdf
16 ECA Regional Diversification Flagship "Diversified Development: Making the most ofNatural Resources
in Eurasia".

" Moldova does not fare well on a fourth dimension of physical capacity, but this could be addressed with progress under the other dimensions:
e.g. more effective government and better business climate could accelerate the public and private financing of much-needed infrastructure.

8

24.
Despite reform efforts to improve the business enabling environment, there is still
much work to be done. Moldova ranks 83rd in the world on the "Doing Business" index, scoring
especially poorly in dealing with construction permits (168 h), trading across borders (142 d), and
paying taxes (109th). It ranked 87th out of 144 economies on the 2012-13 Global Competitiveness
Index, lagging behind most of its neighbors and countries in the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS). More needs to be done to attract FDI without granting revenue-eroding tax
concessions. Customs and tax administration suffer from lack of transparency and a high degree
of discretion applied by officials. Companies cite unfair competition in domestic markets,
primarily from companies using various tax evasion schemes and those protected by political and
business interests through restrictive policies of various state agencies. Competitiveness and the
ability to penetrate new markets are a problem, with very little expansion of Moldovan products
(versus additional processing of imported goods) to new destinations. Vocational and tertiary
education needs to improve to meet labor market needs, especially in export-oriented sectors.
Box 2: ICT - an enabler of economic growth and good governance
The Digital Moldova Strategy supports the development of the Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) industry and good governance through improved public service delivery. The WB
is supporting these through the Governance e-Transformation (GeT) project. Moldova's EU
aspirations motivate continued modernization of administrative systems. An agenda of improving
access, equity, effectiveness, and efficiency of public services is unfolding but will require sustained
efforts and investments in information infrastructure.
ICT infrastructure is improving but needs further development. Telecommunications reforms have
spurred competition, but the state still plays a dominant role. Rural areas are not completely covered
by broadband services. Infrastructure gaps could be closed through reforms of the state's role, and
strengthened independent regulator's role. Moldtelecom needs to be prepared for privatization, and
more concerted efforts could be made to increase access to and use of ICT in rural areas, and to ensure
efficient management of the radio spectrum to maximize the impact of wireless telecommunications.
A main constraint is the limited talent pool in ICT. University education in the ICT sector is of
inconsistent quality and curricula are not relevant to the job market. There needs to be a concerted
effort to bring more women in the ICT sector, especially in technical fields where they are still underrepresented. Such improvements would set the stage for a new generation of ICT innovators.
25.
The Government has introduced reforms to the statutory framework for corporate
financial reporting and adoption of modern financial reporting and auditing standards, but
enforcement remains weak. The Government adopted new accounting and auditing laws in
2007, which are based on the EU acquis communautaire principles, and has undertaken some
steps towards their implementation, such as official adoption of International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS), establishment of the audit public oversight function and a public registry of
financial statements. Constraints to full implementation and enforcement include poor awareness
of the importance of accurate and transparent disclosure of financial information, and the EU
requirements on corporate financial reporting. Other constraints are poor capacity and limited
understanding of the Ministry of Finance's role in setting policy and accounting standards, weak
professional accountancy education and limited capacity of the audit public oversight system.
26.
Financial intermediation remains underdeveloped and access to finance continues to
be one of the most important constraints cited by companies. The banking sector generally
remains liquid, well capitalized and profitable, other than BEM, but credit to the private sector is
only 38 percent of GDP, an indication of the relatively low level of financial intermediation

9

compared to other ECA countries. Financing at terms longer than one year is scarce, collateral
requirements are relatively high, and many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) do not
have the type or quantity of collateral required by banks. Although interest rates are in line with
comparator countries' rates, companies perceive that they are high, reflecting demand-side issues
of low and inconsistent enterprise profitability. In addition, alternatives to bank financing remain
limited. The capital market is nascent and the government bond market consists of only shortterm issues, with almost no secondary market trading. Developing the capital market can create
competition with the banking sector and provide companies with more financing alternatives and
longer-term deposit instruments against which banks can provide longer-term loans.
27.
Agriculture remains a mainstay of the economy and a major income source for the
bottom 40 percent, although agricultural output is volatile and low market competitiveness
is a key bottleneck. With 12 percent of GDP, agriculture trails the service and manufacturing
sectors, but it employed 28 percent of the labor force in 2010, and when combined with the agrofood sector, it represents about 50 percent of total exports. High volatility in agricultural output,
namely crops, is a reflection of the high vulnerability to climate hazards like droughts, floods,
frosts, and severe storms. Competitiveness is hampered by a complex set of factors, including
distortions and imperfections in agriculture input and output markets, poor quality public
services in areas like agricultural education, incomplete farm restructuring, underdeveloped land
market, lack of access to finance, and unsustainable natural resource management. Most
agricultural produce, especially high value products, do not meet market rigor for safety, quality,
quantity, variety, or packaging. The private sector needs support to embark on the sophisticated
and costly process of adopting and implementing EU food safety and quality standards.
Human Capital
28.
Demographic and fiscal realities are a challenge for quality schooling aligned with
the needs of the labor market and broader economy. The sector is characterized by an
oversized network of increasingly small schools and a high number of poorly paid teachers and
non-teaching staff. Of the 1,394 general education institutions, three quarters are located in
nearly 1,000 villages, yielding an average of 1.1 schools per village. An average school operates
at 54 percent capacity, leading to wasteful expenditures in the form of heating bills and public
utilities. A study by the Ministry of Education concluded that up to half of rural schools may
need to be reorganized or closed in the next three to five years to respond to the sharp population
decline over the last 20 years.
29.
The Government is acutely aware of the efficiency challenges facing the education
sector. With the piloting of per student financing under the WB-supported Quality Education in
the Rural Areas of Moldova (QERM) project, the Government took critical steps to improve the
efficiency of resource allocation in general education. This commitment was further strengthened
by legislative changes to create an enabling environment that allows for the implementation of
efficiency reform measures such as the introduction of per student financing nationwide and
change in school ownership from mayors to local municipalities.
30.
The sector demonstrates uneven education quality. Moldova's performance in the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Program for International
Student Assessment (PISA) 2009 Plus suggested that 57 percent of students lack basic levels of
" Policy options to support the school network optimization process in the Republic of Moldova Feasibility Study, IPP, 2010.

10

proficiency in reading needed to participate effectively and productively in society (61 percent in
mathematics). These results show the need to continue consolidating the school network and
extending reforms in curricula, student assessments, teacher training, and textbook design.
31.
Teacher quality is one of the most important contributing factors to improving
student achievement, but Moldova's teaching profession is under-qualified and aging. Of
the 36,000 teachers employed in general education institutions, only two thirds hold a teaching
qualification and 19 percent are past retirement age. During 2002-07 the share of teaching staff
of retirement age more than doubled, indicating a rapid aging of the profession. The standard
teaching load of 18 hours per week - equivalent to about 666 instructional hours per year - is
light compared with that of teachers in OECD countries, 19 but in small rural schools teachers
cannot fill even the basic 18 hour load. Resources for teacher training are spread too thinly
across a large number of under-qualified teachers, leading to under-investment in the current and
future workforce. Recruitment, training, accreditation, quality assurance, and incentives for both
teachers and school directors are key areas that require alternative and modern systems.
32.
Human capital is one of Moldova's potential comparative advantages but
businesses, especially exporters, complain of difficulties finding skilled workers. As many as
a third of enterprises have problems in filling vacancies, especially for skilled staff. The most
affected sector is construction (92 percent), followed by industry (69 percent), transport, business
services and health services (67 percent each). While the problem is mainly attributed to low
wages (54 percent of respondents) it is also a function of low level of skills (35 percent). The
latter is mainly attributed to the lack of education relevance to labor market needs. Some foreign
investors in the manufacturing sector have particularly highlighted the lack of adequate technical
skills among the labor force as a constraint to their operations in Moldova.
33.
The health sector reform agenda remains unfinished. The Government has increased
spending on health in recent years and implemented important reforms such as the establishment
of the National Health Insurance Company (NHIC) in 2002 and development of primary care.
However, challenges remain in the delivery of health care and in health financing.
34.
Four key challenges affect health care delivery: (i) funds for hospital care (more than
50 percent of the total) are currently spread thinly over 72 facilities, many of which are
underutilized and unsafe, alongside the problem of duplication, which is particularly severe in
Chisinau; (ii) there are obvious duplications in the laboratory network; (iii) primary care doctors
are not accountable for their performance and despite ten years of investments in primary care,
most patients go directly to hospitals, further exacerbating the issue of underutilization of
primary health centers; and (iv) dilapidated hospital infrastructure, with obsolete equipment.
35.
Health financing is under stress. Most people get free insurance coverage: about
1,800,000 out of 2,700,000 insured do not pay contributions. It is difficult for the NHIC to fulfill
the Government's promise of completely free care for a broad set of services, and out-of-pocket
spending is at 45 percent of total spending, i.e. about USD 100 per year per capita. The bottom
40 percent spend a higher share of their income in out-of-pocket spending. There are no financial
incentives for providers and doctors to become more efficient or provide better quality services.

9 In

the Netherlands, for example, the load is 1,000 hours per year and in France it is 923 hours.

11

36.
Despite Government efforts to improve transparency, accountability and openness
in public service delivery, governance challenges remain, especially in health and
education. Informal payments in these sectors are widespread, and are a factor of exclusion for
the poor. They also undermine the current health insurance system, the Government's stated
commitment to the education sector and the integrity of the education national testing systems.
Box 3: Supporting investments in human capital through enhanced access to social infrastructure
The Moldovan road network (excluding Transnistria) has changed little over the last 20 years, and
shortfalls in road maintenance have been exacerbated by increased economic activity, with higher
traffic volumes putting more strain on debilitated roads. Almost two thirds of roads are classified as
local roads but less than half of local roads are paved.
The focus on rehabilitation rather than further expansion has considerably increased resources for
road maintenance during the last four years, together with important road rehabilitation works, funded
largely from external sources. These investments are gradually improving road conditions but have
benefitted national roads almost exclusively. Local roads continue to be in poor condition, which
hampers rural people's access to markets as well as to social and administrative services. This hinders
the effectiveness of programs in other sectors, e.g. the school consolidation program depending on
efficient and reliable transport for students to hub schools. Good local and main roads are also critical
to Moldova's model for future economic and social development based on export-led growth, making
use of its agricultural potential and advantageous conditions for further developing light industries.
37.
Moldova operates an extensive social protection system but inefficiencies and
demographic changes threaten its financial sustainability. The social protection system
includes both contributory social insurance and non-contributory social benefits. Total social
protection spending in Moldova is large by regional standards: it grew from 9 percent of GDP in
2003 to 11 percent in 2011. Of this, almost 9 percent of GDP was spent on social insurance
(mostly pensions), and about two percent was used for non-contributory social assistance
programs. The rapidly aging population and shrinking labor force create multiple pressures on
the social protection system and call into question its financial sustainability in the longer term.
38.
The current Pay-As-You-Go (PAYG) pension system faces several challenges.
Pension benefits are inadequate and the system struggles with compliance, weakening incentives
to participate and contribute to it. Emigration, unemployment and large informal economy have
reduced contribution coverage of the working-age population, from 60 percent in 2002 to 32
percent in 2012. Shrinking coverage has implications for future poverty among the elderly and
for social assistance and pensions in the long run. Structural problems need to be addressed to
create a fiscally and socially sustainable PAYG system. Fixing the benefits formula and
indexation would improve pension adequacy and maintain its real value. Gradually equalizing
the retirement age for both sexes at 6220 and then gradually increasing it to 65 will improve longterm fiscal sustainability and provide space for further reforms. The policy package should
include measures to strengthen PAYG system incentives through a tighter link between
contributions and benefits. 2 1 These measures would improve PAYG finances and provide
additional fiscal space for PAYG benefit improvements, contribution rate reduction, and/or
introduction of a second fully funded pension pillar when the time is right.
20 Retirement age is currently 57 years for women.

This would include measures such as improving compliance, adjusting minimum pension and contribution levels for self-employed and
farmers, reducing opportunity for simultaneous retirement and full-time employment, and difference between general and privileged benefits.
2'

12

Natural Capital
39.
Moldova's main endowment with natural capital is its highly fertile and productive
black soil, but this and other natural resources are under threat as a result of poor
environmental practices. Black soil covers 75 percent of the country, but there are indications
that 34 percent of agricultural land is eroded to some degree, this figure rising by 0.9 percent and
causing losses estimated at USD 251 million annually.2 2 Soil erosion and other degradation
processes result from poor agricultural practices (tillage, insufficient crop rotations), poor land
governance and management, overgrazing and destruction of protective forestry belts and buffer
strips. Moldova is the least forest-covered country in Europe, and the modest territory acreage of
11.1 percent is overexploited. Access to centralized potable water supply is the privilege of only
47 percent of the population. In rural areas, more than 80 percent of the population draw their
water from groundwater sources, many of which do not meet quality standards for potable water
because of pollution from untreated wastewater, inappropriate management, storage and disposal
of animal manure and waste, and nutrient run-off from agricultural fields.
40.
Climate change will exacerbate the stress on natural capital through more frequent
and intense extreme weather events, and adaptation and capacity building measures should
be a high priority. The severity and frequency of extreme events have increased over time (e.g.
droughts of 2007 and 2012 and heavy flooding in 2008 and 2010), and are predicted to continue
growing. Moldova is getting warmer and dryer. The 2009 National Human Development
Report 23 has reviewed the impact of climate change on many sectors24 and provides a strong
basis to expand national knowledge/resources to address climate change and build resilience.
41.
Moldova is particularly vulnerable to the impact of climate change because of
structural factors and severe adaptation deficit. Risk factors include a high percentage of the
population employed in agriculture, dependency on rain-fed agriculture with less than 10 percent
of agricultural production from irrigation, poor infrastructure (about 40 settlements are cut off
annually due to transport disruption), and high rural poverty. Work has already been undertaken
to identify the impact of climate change on agriculture,2 5 but more investigation is required into
the impact on other areas, such as water supply systems and rural infrastructure. Agricultural
technologies to mitigate climate change risks, i.e. drought-resistant seeds and seedlings, need to
be imported but the restrictive import regime is a serious impediment to quick transfer of
technology. Moldova ranks 23rd out of 28 ECA countries on adaptive capacity to climate change
26
from years of underinvestment in infrastructure and legacy of poor environmental practices.
42.
The forestry sector plays an important role for competitiveness and climate change
but has not received the attention it deserves. Low forest acreage is a significant factor
contributing to the high level of soil erosion, landslides, degradation of water resources, and
intensified droughts.2 7 It also contributes to floods. Capacity to enforce forest legislation has
improved recently although the state of communal forests remains a concern. There is potential
for scaling up afforestation activities that would generate additional revenues, mitigate natural
hazards and land degradation, and provide new financial resources from the world carbon
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2005, "Second Environmental Performance Review in the Republic of Moldova".

23 UNDP 2009, "National Human Development Report".

24These sectors are: natural ecosystems, agriculture, water supply and sanitations, health, energy and transport.
2 World Bank 2010, Republic of Moldova: Climate Change and Agriculture Country Note.
26 The World Bank, ECA Region 2009, "Managing Uncertainty: Adapting to Climate Change in ECA countries".
27UNECE 2005, Second Environmental Performance Review.

13

market. Further research on the economic and social benefits of forests, including their role in
providing ecosystem services, may inform a new national forest strategy to best meet sector
needs in support of the country's economic development and climate change agenda.
43.
If adaptation actions are not taken, water scarcity will increase, leaving a gap in
unmet irrigation demand. Increasing irrigation water demands means that climate change will
lead to conflict over water resources. While much of this conflict is expected to be in local
municipalities, decreasing Nistru River resources could also exacerbate Moldova-Transnistria
relations, as there has never been an agreement on how to use Nistru River resources although
there are right-bank Moldovan towns still receiving their water supply from Transnistria. River
basin specific water modeling suggests that even without climate change, increases in nonagricultural demand for water will cause shortages in the next decades. Integrated Water
Resource Management (IRWM) becomes a key element of the adaptation agenda.
44.
Energy efficiency is low with adverse fiscal, trade, security and social impact.
Moldova's economy has high energy intensity, twice the level of Romania and about three times
that of the EU28. Increased efficiency will reduce energy imports that are 24 percent of total
imports, and will help alleviate pressure on the large current account deficit. Furthermore, the
high cost of energy supply due to inefficiencies caused by deteriorating and obsolete
infrastructure poses a threat to the welfare of the bottom 40 percent and vulnerable population in
Moldova, as well as a serious bottleneck to growth and competitiveness of the national economy.
45.
A number of governance challenges need to be addressed to enhance human capital.
This includes coordination of environmental issues, currently spread across the Ministry of
Environment, the State Forestry Agency, the State Cadastral Agency, and the Ministry of
Agriculture. Climate change considerations are not integrated into the majority of government
policies. Forest governance has been weak, but is being strengthened with support from the
European Neighborhood Partnership Instrument (ENPI) East Countries Forest Law Enforcement
and Governance (FLEG). Legislative and regulatory issues impede agricultural land markets'
good functioning, including incomplete/incorrect title records for land parcels, cumbersome land
inheritance procedures, excessive and irregular notary fees increasing land transaction costs, and
restrictions on foreign land ownership. Fragmentation resulting from land privatization after
independence is a major concern. The overall land governance framework needs improvement.
Government Vision and Priorities
46.
The NDS Moldova 2020, which benefited from a broad public debate, sets seven
strategic priorities based on an analysis of binding constraints to growth. These are justice
and fight against corruption; tertiary education; social insurance and pensions; business
environment; road infrastructure; accessible and inexpensive finance; and energy efficiency. The
NDS prioritizes state interventions to deliver the overarching goal of qualitative economic
development and poverty reduction. By 2020, per capita income is expected to be 79 percent
higher than in 2011, and poverty headcount lowered from 21.9 percent in 2010 to 12.7 percent.
The Government held several NDS consultations, including with the National Participatory
Council (NPC)28 and development partners. The NDS was adopted as national law.29
The NPC's thirty members represent civil society and its mission is to contribute to the development of public policy which represents the
interests of society.
2 A comprehensive review of the NDS is presented in the IMF-WB Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN).
2

14

The NDS is being implemented through a consolidated action plan that reflects the
47.
themes of the earlier Government Activity Plan 2011-14 European Integration: Freedom,
Democracy, and Welfare. The Activity Plan outlines two major objectives: improving citizens'
living standards and European integration. To achieve these objectives, a number of actions are
envisaged in relation to social protection, economic development, strengthening the rule of law,
job creation, development of relations with external partners, attracting investment, visa
liberalization, and other actions that will improve the lives of Moldovan citizens. The Activity
Plan includes some measures on inequality in the country and key cross-cutting themes, such as
social inclusion and gender equality issues, environmental preservation, climate change and
disaster events, and reintegration of Transnistria. Following the formation of a new AEI coalition
government, these priorities have been re-confirmed.
III.

World Bank Group Partnership Strategy

A.

Lessons Learned and Stakeholder Feedback

Lessons from the CPS Completion Report (CPS CR)
48.
Partnerships with the client country are a long-term relationship that should be
sustained through difficult times of economic and political uncertainty to reap reform gains
when windows of opportunity open up. The FYO9-13 CPS took the opportunity when it arose
to support the Government in implementing a challenging reform agenda. However, experience
has demonstrated the risk to such an approach - the political environment has remained polarized
and challenging, hampering the delivery of key reforms.
49.
Advocacy and political economy considerations should precede difficult social sector
and fiscal reforms to avoid weak ownership, opposition or rejection. Delays in some social
sector reforms (including in the health sector and on pension reform) reflect real concerns about
their impacts. It may be more appropriate to sequence such reforms through more selectivity and
based on broad consultation on how best to address such reform.
50.
The World Bank Group (WBG) is most effective when it combines policy dialogue,
knowledge (AAA), lending and private sector investment and advice in support of longterm strategic goals. It is important to ensure that sufficient attention is given to AAA. Underinvestment in AAA can lead to a poor knowledge base from which to develop policy based
lending, such as Development Policy Operations (DPOs), as evidenced during this CPS.
Evidence-based selectivity for engaging in AAA is required, and to maximize the impact and
provide customized world-class knowledge, the WB should systematically evaluate its AAA
work, looking especially at its true usefulness in client countries and potential impact. Staff need
time and resources to manage AAA, which may be limited if the project portfolio is large and/or
fragmented, requiring significant implementation support from staff. A more focused portfolio
with fewer projects (and more investment in them) allows greater resources for policy dialogue
and support for AAA as needed. The large investments in education and health projects during
this CPS have benefited from this approach.
51.
In Moldova, the WBG has an exceptional convening power and ability to
coordinate, engage and leverage other development partners on the implementation of a
broader strategy. This was shown clearly in WB support to the transport sector and the
development of a strategic plan for the roads sector. Given the limited resource envelope, it is
important to work further with other development partners, and the WBG needs to maintain its
role as a convener in the development partner community. The WB should seek increased

15

partnerships with the EU and other development actors to ensure coherence in understanding of
and support for critical reforms with a view to achieving maximum impact. A key focus should
be on where other partners' resources complement financially the AAA program.
52.
CPS preparation also provided the opportunity to learn from earlier WBG
experience in Moldova beyond the FYO9-13 CPS. The FY14-17 CPS design is anchored on
both current CPS CR lessons and those learned from earlier WBG engagement and documented
in earlier CAS Completion Reports and Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) Evaluations. The
team has also reviewed more specific lessons pertaining to the past and current engagement in
agriculture, and considered specific challenges posed in the ICT portfolio - an important area in
the Moldova CPS. (See CPS CR (Annex 2 to this CPS) Tables 4 and 5 for details).
Feedbackfrom the Client Opinion Survey and CPS Consultations
53.
The FY12 Client Opinion Survey identified growth as the most critical development
priority in Moldova. Governance and anti-corruption, job creation, improving the business
environment, deregulation and private sector development were also considered important. A
quarter of respondents see a key role for the WBG in agriculture, and two out of ten said the
WBG should be involved in critical areas of business environment deregulation and private
sector development. See Annex 8 for further details.
54.
The proposed FY14-17 CPS areas of engagement were the subject of a broad
ranging consultation process. Stakeholders consulted included central and local public
authorities, non-governmental organizations, academia, youth and students, think-tanks,
parliamentarians, political parties, and development partners.
B.

Proposed World Bank Group Strategy

PrinciplesofEngagement
55.
The CPS stresses selectivity within the available resource envelope and builds on the
WBG's implementation track record. The selection of programs is consistent with the
Government's development priorities, the WBG twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and
boosting shared prospect in fiscally, environmentally, and socially sustainable ways, and WBG
comparative advantages (see Box 4), also recognizing areas where other partners have the lead.
Specifically, the WBG will ensure its programs focus on activities that are transformative and
yield a large developmental pay-off, especially for the bottom 40 percent. The CPS envisions
around three new operations a year for the WB, one of which would be a DPO, should conditions
allow, alongside IFC advisory and investment services.
56.
The CPS is intended to catalyze additional resources. The CPS recognizes that
financial resources for Moldova will come primarily from its citizens (tax and remittances) and
other external partners (official and private). The WBG will use its convening power to help
these other resources materialize and expand. The CPS will help establish an environment of
lower risks, level the playing field for private investors, and bring about conditions for enhanced
aid effectiveness. Besides informing the reform agenda through flagship AAA, and supporting
these reforms through DPOs and institution-building financing, the CPS will use guarantee
instruments, whenever possible in each of the new operations, to draw in other financiers.
57.
Governance and gender are cross-cutting themes. This CPS continues to address
governance issues at the country, sectoral and operational levels across the strategy.
Interventions will be pursued to improve the business enabling environment; enhance public

16

administration reform and quality of public service delivery; and improve public financial
management and procurement systems. The CPS will use a governance filter to ensure that
governance is systematically tackled in all operations (AAA and lending); it will also support
enhanced involvement of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) through the Global Partnership for
Social Accountability (GPSA) to which Moldova has opted in. At the operational level, WBG
will ensure the highest fiduciary standards in projects it supports while helping the Government
to strengthen country systems. This CPS is informed by a gender assessment, the outcomes of
which will be discussed at the concept stage of each relevant new operation (AAA and lending).
Women's groups and development partners active in gender issues have been heavily involved
during the CPS consultations, and their feedback reflected in the strategy. The CPS results matrix
includes gender-sensitive indicators.
Box 4: One World Bank Group in Moldova
The WBG has a solid record in Moldova. Since establishing partnership with Moldova some 20 years
ago, the WB has committed over USD 1 billion, while IFC and MIGA have provided finance and
guarantees for over USD 300 million. The close cooperation between IFC, MIGA and the WB reveals
the comparative advantage of the WBG while maximizing the benefits to clients in Moldova.
The CPS CR (Annex 2) describes joint achievements in the period of the FYO9-13 CPS. Highlights
include the Competitiveness DPO (FY13), for which IFC led the analytical work on regulatory
reforms. In the health sector, the WB contributed to a new Legislative Framework for Public Private
Partnerships (PPPs), and subsequently IFC provided TA to the Ministry of Health for implementation
of PPPs in tertiary care and on diagnostic imaging services. MIGA has also continued to offer its
guarantee products, ensuring consistency with the overall WBG goals.
The solid foundation is being carried over into the new CPS. IFC and WB are now collocated,
facilitating better communication and learning across staff IFC and WB staff have also identified
selected areas for enhanced collaboration and results.
Business Climate and Access to Finance
The WBG will capitalize on IFC's on-going Investment Climate Advisory Services in: (i) business
inspection; (ii) construction permits; (iii) insolvency; and (iv) agribusiness regulation and regulatory
reform. The WB will seek to link these services to the planned DPO series. In improving SME access
to finance, IFC and WB will explore a risk-sharing facility, provided reforms to strengthen
shareholder rights are implemented and effective supervision by the NBM is decreasing the
reputational risk in the banking sector, while considering complementary advisory services for
investee enterprises.
Climate Actions
The WB will assist the Government in the reform of District Heating (DH) Services in Chisinau.
Reforms include debt restructuring and corporate reform for the Chisinau DH Company and two
Combined Heat and Power companies. The reforms should pave the way for IFC and private
investment to improve energy efficiency of DH operations. In turn, the improved operations of DH
will improve the creditworthiness of the Chisinau Municipality and may allow energy efficiency
investments by IFC. The WB will also carry out a comprehensive energy supply survey that will
inform options for feed-in tariffs, thus enhancing the prospects of the investment IFC is considering in
the renewable energy field.
Monitoring and Evaluation
The CPS results matrix integrates on-going and planned engagements of IFC and WB. The two
institutions will coordinate implementation through joint annual review of progress toward reaching
the CPS outcomes. IFC and WB will jointly prepare the CPS PR and the CPS CR.

17

58.
The WBG is mindful of the political economy of reforms. The CPS is geared toward
helping the Government manage the short-term costs and risks of reforms and reap long-term
rewards of credible policy commitments. Policy makers recognize the long-term benefits of
reforms, but policy reversals have often been triggered by disorderly management of political
risks created by possible adverse impacts of reforms in their initial stages. In the absence of
popular support and comprehensive and well-designed risk management, policy makers have not
been able to take on vested interests, thus prolonging the status quo and holding back changes
that would significantly benefit the bottom 40 percent. The CPS could help accelerate and
sustain the pace of reforms by anticipating and mitigating risks, thus locking in policy
commitments, and ultimately bringing results that will sustain the reforms in the long run.
59.
The CPS incorporates flexibility for adequate responses to pressing needs that may
emerge as a result of headwinds from the Eurozone and beyond. Responses may include
larger balance of payments and budget support to buttress macroeconomic stability, and
increased support to means-tested social safety nets mechanisms that cater to the poorest.
Flexibility will allow adjustment to the circumstances of new parliamentary elections. A CPS
Progress Report (CPS PR) will be prepared after parliamentary elections to allow recalibration.
Strategic Engagement Overview
60.
The CPS recognizes openness as a necessity for Moldova to overcome the penalty of
smallness, reach larger export markets and accelerate improvements in wellbeing, shared
prosperity and poverty reduction. Moldova's development gains of recent years offer a clear
illustration of the benefits of openness: it has reaped the benefits of integration with the labor
markets of its two largest neighbors, bringing with it remittances exceeding USD 1.5 billion a
year (about 23 percent of GDP in 2011), and contributing to higher consumption growth for the
bottom 40 percent, while bringing extreme poverty - based on USD 1.25/day - below 1 percent.
If Moldova is to meet its development priorities and further boost shared prosperity, it needs to
expand this integration into regional finance, goods and services markets. Moldova lags behind
within the region because of relatively shallow integration into these markets.
61.
The FY14-17 CPS will support Moldova to boost shared prosperity and reduce
poverty by capturing the full benefits of openness and integration with the EU and broader
global economy. Three pillars are proposed, which will help Moldova diversify its endowment
of institutional, human and natural capital:
*

*

*

Increasing Competitiveness: continued institutional reforms for a business enabling
environment and governance, access to finance and transparency in the financial sector, and
targeted activities to help improve companies' competitiveness are needed to reduce barriers
and to translate economic openness into concrete benefits of more jobs and higher income.
Enhancing Human Capital and Minimizing Social Risks: The widening gap with EU28 in
education and health outcomes needs to be reduced and progressively closed. Demographic
challenges - the third transition - need to be addressed, and vulnerabilities would be tackled
by strengthening social protection systems.
Promotinga Green, Clean and Resilient Moldova: the debilitating effects of climatic events
on agriculture and rural livelihoods need to be addressed, natural resource management
improved, and energy security and efficiency increase to ensure sustainable development.

18

Results Framework
62.
The success of the WBG
strategy will be measured by the achievement of CPS
outcomes aligned with selected priorities from Moldova's development strategy. The results
framework identifies outcomes to which the CPS is expected to contribute and provides
measurable indicators to assess the achievement of each outcome. The core CPS outcome
indicators and links to the proposed lending and AAA program are summarized in Figure 2.
Figure 2: CPS Outcomes and Proposed WBG Program

Overarching
Objective ofnthe
Country Partnership Strategy

Prora

CiaeCag

i lPillar

II:
Povertymet AEnhancingHuman Capitalan
OutgomnAi aMinimizing Social Risks

Pillar III:
an Green, Clean, and ResilientMoldova

Prest
e

t mprerbsiness (Reiro and
*
proved quality ofand access to health
Greateradaptation andresil iliencmate change
Foo Scuit an Ariulura
Pliyo b sormlaio
Bofstuchred
Ciysteti
ideeg
Specong,ing
oand education
services FY16) y,Reuc Po
* sbert
Improved
naturalresources
manage
stent
Ectcomestwhich Iponoi coptStudy
s (FY16)
IDric r e Fiscally sustainable and equitable *oIncreased energ P efficiency and security
iPi Sectorbu Dvpension and social assistancesystems
Lending:
Leading
DPOr sC AU
e
GlO Pres
for c a T
o
Governancee-Transformation
(ongoing)
PnblicAdniation
R efo Md
in
Moldova
Agriculture Competiiveness (ongoing)i
StrengtheningPFMand Tax Administration (FY4)
Md E ci
Rbport
PrivateSectorDeveloprnt/Access to Finance
of soe Seic
(FY15) Competitiveness
1e nrs
IFC investment and financing (CPS cycle)nvionm et an ifrastr
AAA:

63.gTis

LclRast

potnte

n

oil

Fnaing
G
v Dis aster and Climate Risk Management
lding (ging)
en
proe t ( )

Ccycle)y

tuare aio n de e n iencto t7
re

Fresiness
piaesco

operin

opne

Food Securityand Agricultural Policy Formulation
TA(ongoing)AA:A:
HD TA
programmatic
CP
to
e operan
Ffor
c
inf
environmentand
lannimprend bPovertyAsssment (FY15)
ERI
mrvmn
etrRsrcuigadEfcec
F1)Eeg
PvryAssmn
Review
PublicExpenditure
p
andAAA
ro TradeStudy(programmatic)
DPO
serielsDAAT
(CPSing cycle)rvtonPojc(noig
Pormai
ogig
StrengtheningAuditingandReportingin Countries of an g
A
i
p rt
ic
N
c
(ongoing)sty
roet onoig
theEasternPartnership
(STAR/EaP)
andFinSAC
eaonoflmtChneCutyAeset
(ongoing)WBPPPtsSoilD
EconomicGeography
Study(FY16)MEgatfrMdclUiestPosbeICPPAvsrPrgaoneoueefcecyorS
Puli dmnitatonRfom M oldaE dcto Refor (ongoing
s
Aging Study(FY17)
NwT tin
o thSEfeti
pndt ednsenesseseto
SA
odv rn oe etrNt
Goverance
ilterin alW3
supotepren
thengocia h rcreetID
Jobs Study(FY17)MiityoHelhICGiInecncinSud
Globl
ocia forR/bFlt projec ineriato healthl (FY14)vie roeteteso
FinancialSectorDevelopmient
TAPatnerhipfor
(programmatic)
Governance
Lca Roadssormtoo Opot fii s oe nd avce Sociala evlpmnaecis
FSAPUpdateTFFnnigTFiacn:
aaeetCpct
iatradCiaeRs
odv
GDR
F(non)
o dcto
atesi
Goa
ROSC A&AUpdate
B ldg(non)
MDF(gog)
IFC Investment Climate Project (ongoing)PulcAiiitainRfr
n nertdFrs
o utial
rga
upr
omnt
rn
n eeomn
iuiiy
JpnPR
TF Financing:

~Programmatic

~~ ~

Outcome 1. 1: Improved business en iomn n nfrastructure (FY16)es
Outcme 12: mproed

ompeitie

peato

PrograaicutAAA

rainbyspotn
63. This CPS pillar will contribute tPogrmatic HD to TAwhadjo
rogamanti Publifxpenditure Reviewssoertontrog
an improved businss enablingen
greatertransparencyNe TFonablt

for goenadne ssessmentlof theutmsad
MiityofHat

a

administration, financial reporting and auditing, as well as improved access to finance. The
agricultural competitiveness agenda will address the shortcomings identified in paragraph 27.
Achieving these CPS outcomes will help deliver the WBG twin goals of eliminating extreme
poverty (based on the ECA poverty line of USD 2.5/day at PPP) and boosting shared prosperity
given the pro-poor feature of growth in Moldova, reliance of the bottom 40 percent on
agricultural income, and their higher vulnerability to weaker governance.
64.
Improved competitiveness and business environment will benefit from structural
reforms ensuring that: (i) framework laws (competition, capital markets, and inspection)
supported by the FY13 Competitiveness DPO are implemented; (ii) regulatory reform, including
in customs, is further advanced; (iii) financial sector demonstrates greater stability; and (iv)
governance issues, such as property rights and state capture, are addressed. The main instrument
for this structural reform agenda will be a DPO series.
65.
The CPS will also support the Government in its competitiveness and private sector
development efforts through technical assistance (TA). The WBG will provide continued TA
in regulatory and business environment, and targeted activities to help improve the
competitiveness of high-potential sub-sectors and companies. Activities to improve the business
enabling environment will be designed to be consistent with, and help support, the Regulatory
Reform Strategy of the Government of Moldova. Improving sector-specific and company
competitiveness may include assistance with business development services, management and
technical training, and export development. These programs in support of the CPS outcomes will
be delivered through an ongoing IFC Investment Climate project, a proposed WB Private Sector
Development project and TA.
66.
The CPS will also support further reforms and development of the financial sector.
This CPS has the goal of establishing a sound system where additional financing sources for
enterprises can be developed in the longer term, thus allowing private sector-led growth and job
creation. The CPS will assist in reforms aiming at improving the framework for using moveable
assets as collateral, particularly benefiting SMEs; further enhancing the system of credit
reporting to reduce banks' credit risk; facilitating establishment of modern and effective payment
services (including remittances); furthering development of the government bond market; and
improving security of shareholder ownership rights, corporate governance standards, shareholder
transparency and proper supervision by NBM and National Commission of Financial Market
(NCFM), as part of the broader capital markets development effort. Companies' access to
finance could be facilitated through a risk-sharing facility that may be developed in conjunction
with the IFC, provided that critical governance reforms are implemented in the financial sector.
67.
The WB could support, if conditions allow, the strengthening of tax and customs
administration to help improve the business climate and enhance revenue collection. The
WB will support the Government's plan for implementation of the State Tax Service
Development Plan, focused on increasing voluntary compliance and improved service delivery to
taxpayers through modernization of institutional procedures and application of modern
technologies. Increasing voluntary compliance with customs legislation and facilitating an
environment more conducive to beneficial trade may also be supported through the
implementation of the Strategic Development Plan of the Customs Service. Better revenue
collection could translate into more and better investments in social programs, infrastructure and
service delivery for the more vulnerable, including the bottom 40 percent.

20

68.
This CPS supports improved governance by strengthening public sector
management in three core areas: (i) improved Government performance through the
consolidation of strategic planning and policy coordination, better alignment of programs with
resource planning, and better evaluation processes for Government programs; (ii) further
professionalization of the civil service through introduction of state (permanent) secretaries and
strengthened enforcement of merit-based public service management; and (iii) improved access,
quality and efficiency of public services through the redesign of service delivery systems.
69.
Public sector management reform is expected to continue, focusing on strengthening
management, skills, performance and accountability in the civil service. The modernization
of public services is likely to take an important place in the new Public Administration Reform
(PAR) Strategy being developed by the Government. The WB could support this agenda through
a trust fund (2014-16), should there be sufficient interest from development partners, including
the European Union, to finance a program aimed at strengthening governance. A TA credit could
be also an option, based on Government interest.
70.
The WBG will continue supporting the Government's objective to transform the
delivery of selected public services using ICT. Key outcomes include development of open
government data applications, launching a government shared computing "M-Cloud"
infrastructure, and a set of e-services including mobile elD, and e-Payment. The WB is
supporting preparation of an IT competitiveness strategy that will help the ICT sector become an
enabler of innovation and competitiveness. The CPS envisions an Additional Financing (AF) to
the ongoing GeT project to support implementation of such a strategy and consolidate overall
progress under the e-Governance agenda. WB interventions in this area and better service
delivery will directly benefit all Moldovans, including the bottom 40 percent.
71.
The WBG can support an integrated approach to addressing the wide ranging food
safety area as part of the agricultural competitiveness outcome. If it is to secure public health
and access new markets the country needs to ensure safe food from the farm to the fork. Support
for this will come through the ongoing Agricultural Competitiveness project and IFC's
Investment Climate project. Given the high percentage of poor living in rural areas and working
on agriculture, such WBG support will help reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity.
72.
A number of AAA activities are proposed to support Pillar 1 of the CPS. These
include: a Trade Study looking at trade policy, trade agreements, and logistics; a Poverty
Assessment to inform the overall CPS goal of boosting shared prosperity and reducing poverty,
by monitoring recent poverty changes, preparing poverty profiles and better understanding
poverty determinants; an ongoing Programmatic Public Expenditure Review to continue to
analyzing topical issues based on the evolving macro-fiscal picture; an Economic Geography
Study to look at the spatial dimensions of growth, focusing on existing economic agglomerations
and identifying measures to improve and sustain their competitiveness, including coordinated
and multipronged interventions encompassing infrastructure, institutions and incentives.
73.
The WB will consider a calibrated engagement in Transnistria, if conditions allow.
This could start with closing knowledge gaps, engaging youth on both banks of the Nistru River,
and if and when opportunities arise, joining other partners in implementing confidence building
measures in the context of the settlement talks.

21

Pillar2: EnhancingHuman Capitaland Minimizing Social Risks
Outcome 2.1: Improved quality of and access to health and education services
Outcome 2.2: Fiscally sustainable and equitable pension and social assistance systems
74.
This CPS pillar will provide support to the Government to narrow the gaps with EU28
in health and education outcomes, which result from inefficiencies in both sectors (see
paragraphs 28-35). The CPS will provide support to address inefficiencies and demographic
challenges facing the social protection systems (paragraphs 37-38). The bottom 40 percent will
benefit most from progress under this pillar. Indeed, as reflected in the CPS section on poverty,
inequalities and vulnerability, the bottom 40 percent have lower education attainment and higher
dissatisfaction with the quality of education and health services. The CPS includes specific
targets for improving quality and access to these services for the bottom 40 percent. The most
vulnerable will also benefit from a strengthened means-tested social safety net. And, with
pensioners among the poorest groups, reforms in that area will help increase equity.
75.
The CPS will support the Government's efforts to improve the quality and
efficiency of the education sector. Efforts will include an effective implementation of per
student financing, teacher training, upgraded quality assurance standards implemented for hub
schools, and strengthened Education Monitoring and Information System. Support to the
Government program will be undertaken through the Moldova Education Reform project
(MERP), a success to the QERM that will close in FY14. The CPS also envisions additional
financing to the education sector that would reflect lessons learned at the time of the CPS PR.
76.
The WB will support the Government's efforts to align the education system to
labor market needs, thus promoting job creation. WB support will include AAA and TA
interventions for informal employment; informing of strategies for workforce development
through implementation of the Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER); and
provision of labor market and education information - through a tracer study and Employment
Observatory - so that both students and education institutions can take appropriate decisions in
terms of relevant skills for jobs. A Skills Toward Employability and Productivity (STEP) survey
may be undertaken among the working age population and employers to measure supply and
demand of skills and to better quantify any possible skills mismatch.
77.
Other major AAA in support of the CPS outcomes on human capital agenda include
the following - Aging: A study on aging could be programmatic, covering a broad range of
other issues related to aging including labor productivity and growth, fiscal implications going
beyond pensions, social service delivery, innovation, competitiveness and savings. This study
could be part of a regional flagship study. Jobs: Building on the regional Jobs report, the
proposed skills survey and the labor market TA, a jobs report could provide a comprehensive
picture of growth, diversification, integration, financing, constraints to business growth and
entrepreneurship, skill shortages/mismatches, disincentives to work, gender, migration, and labor
market issues. Programmatic AAA will support social accountability throughout the portfolio.
78.
The CPS will continue to support the implementation of health reforms launched in
2012 with the objective of enhancing the quality of health services while supporting
efficiency gains. The WB and World Health Organization (WHO) TA provided support in the
design and launching of the Health Reform Strategy. The WB will support further selected
results, including: reduced share of out-of-pocket expenses in total health expenditure;

22

consolidated hospital network; institutional and financial autonomy for primary health care
centers (PHCs), with their payment linked to performance; physical reconstruction of rural
PHCs; targeted mechanism for free health insurance for vulnerable groups and greater coverage
of mandatory health insurance; strengthened quality assurance systems through licensing of
health professionals and stronger accreditation and continuous quality improvement mechanisms
for medical institutions. The CPS will support these results through a Program-for-Results
(PforR) operation that can provide incentives and coerce policy makers in expediting reforms.
79.
The CPS will support improvements in the efficiency of health and education sectors
through TA to support the Government's reform of payment systems in health and
education. The Government is working towards a system of school financing based on the
number of students they serve, and hospital financing based on the number of patients they see,
adjusted by the severity of their illness. There will be progressive introduction of the principle
that money follows the student and patient, allowing facilities to retain efficiency savings and
use them to stimulate staff and improve quality.
80.
The CPS will support Moldova's agenda for better access to social services in rural
areas, mainly education and health, and improving access by farmers to markets and
export opportunities. Consolidation of social infrastructure is imperative so as to reallocate
resources to improving quality and closing the widening human capital gaps with EU28. With
the inevitable consolidation of social infrastructure, allowing access to larger regional
infrastructure will help reduce opposition to reforms. This support will be provided under a
proposed local roads project that will leverage support from other development partners and
international financial institutions (IFIs).
81.
Moldova is on track to achieve a more cost-efficient spending mix of its social
assistance programs and WB support is instrumental to sustain and enhance these efforts.
The Government is investing in improving benefits administration and management information
systems to integrate the overall social safety net around the platform provided by the targeted
Ajutor Social program. The WB is supporting these efforts through the Strengthening the
Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net RBF, which co-finances the interim transitional costs of
expanding the Ajutor Social program while other benefits are being consolidated. It also invests
in improving administrative efficiency, strengthening institutional roles and capacities, operating
processes and systems, and communications activities to generate support for reforms. Adopting
the reforms and achieving a most cost effective and targeted social assistance program will have
a direct impact on the poor and the bottom 40 percent in general.
82.
The WB has a comparative advantage in contributing to the Government's pension
reform agenda. After advising on pension reform policy changes since 2009, including via a
policy note that offered a comprehensive review of key issues and made a set of policy
recommendations, the WB's technical advice could play a major role in designing the pension
reform in Moldova. The DPO has proved to be an appropriate instrument to foster
implementation of policy reforms in Moldova, and could support the implementation of
necessary policy changes once the Government is ready.
83.
It is crucial to consider the political economy aspects of reforms in social assistance
and pension systems, as well as in health and education. Success and sustainability of any
equity-enhancing reforms will depend on how well they are managed and communicated to the
larger public. Careful efforts to build public support and ensure stakeholders' understanding are

23

crucial to the success and political sustainability of reforms that involve cost-cutting or fiscal
austerity and redistributive effects. Specifically, the WB should be ready to support the
Government in seeking to adopt and implement sensitive pension reforms. To help garner greater
consensus and demand for change, further WB engagement will include advocacy elements.
Pillar3: Promotinga Green, Clean and Resilient Moldova
Outcome 3.1: Greater adaptation and resilience to climate change
Outcome 3.2: Improved natural resources management
Outcome 3.3: Increased energy efficiency and security
84.
This CPS pillar will support Moldova to identify and implement interventions
supporting improved environmental practices and natural resource management, and greater
adaptation to the impact of climate change, as reflected in paragraphs 39-43. Addressing climate
change impact will require further investigation to identify high-impact interventions. WBG
support under this pillar will continue to enhance the country's energy efficiency and security. It
will aim at ensuring that poverty reduction and shared prosperity are delivered in an
environmentally sustainable manner, while also reducing the vulnerability of rural households,
which represent a disproportionately high share of the bottom 40 percent and largely rely on selfproduced foods, to the vagaries of extreme weather events. Rural food security indicators show
clear downturns in the production-distress years, and in some cases these lead to longer-term
negative consequences and chronic food insecurity30 . The CPS will assist in improving underdeveloped weather mitigation instruments as part of adaptation efforts, which leave the rural
population, farmers in particular, highly vulnerable to adverse weather events, thus
compromising their food supply.
85.
The CPS will help Moldova convene broad support to tackle the significant
challenges of preserving its natural capital and adapting to a warmer climate. A series of
AAA products will build the knowledge base and will mobilize partners for sustained financial
and TA support to Moldova. These will include: a Forest Policy Note and a Climate Change
Adaptive Capacity and Resilience Study, and an ongoing Land Governance Assessment
Framework. In addition to the ongoing Disaster and Climate Risk project and TFs such as the
Soil Conservation and the Community Forestry projects, this CPS is proposing a Forest and
Sustainable Land Management (SLM) project that will halt the degradation of lands and restore
agricultural productivity, hence contributing to better natural resource management.
86.
Improved adaptive capacity to climate change is high on the CPS agenda. Expected
results include strengthened resilience and improved natural resource management, adopted
green technologies and practices in agriculture, climate proofing infrastructure, e.g. roads, and
existence of alternative risk insurance mechanisms (e.g. catastrophe bonds, contingency
schemes), as the scope for parametric crop insurance mechanisms is limited. 3 1 Support may
include IWRM and renewable energy. The final scope of WB support will be determined
following a thorough AAA on adaptation challenges. The CPS will also tap into the opportunity

The calorie intake of rural households dropped sharply in 2007 (Moldova's worst drought in decades), and reached a peak low level over the
next 2008 year marked by country-wide floods and rising food prices. By contrast, urban residents passed through the shocks of the last sixseven years (drought, floods and food price rises) with notable improvements in all food security outcomes. (Source: WB Moldova Food Security
Report, draft)
3 World Bank 2010, Republic of Moldova: Climate Change and Agriculture Country Note.
3o

24

of open data platforms for sharing important hydrological (projected peak river flows) and
meteorological (weather forecast, early warning systems) data for climate risk management, and
will seek partnerships with other development partners.
87.
The CPS will also provide support to Moldova's energy efficiency improvement
agendas. Proposed interventions will finance investments in district heating (DH) systems to
contribute to improved energy efficiency and decreased energy demand while improving the
quality of heating services through installation of individual heating stations, metering and
temperature controls; and further investments in insulating buildings. This will result in
significant energy savings. Investing in efficient new technologies will also reduce the cost of
energy supply. The proposed DH Efficiency Improvement project will also prepare an IBRD
Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) to support the restructuring of payment arrears on gas, which
have accumulated as a result of below-cost recovery level tariffs for heating. The PCG will allow
the resolution of the debt issue in a structured manner, and initiate a process in which the
Government may work towards improving the business climate to attract private sector
investments to the energy sector as well.
88.
Another important AAA to support the energy efficiency goal is an Energy Sector
Note to support the Government in diversifying supply and integration with regional trade
and markets. The study would explore various energy market structures and trading models,
including technical, environmental and economic aspects, considering the costs associated with
required regulatory reforms and investments and benefits on improved energy supply, and is
expected to recommend a market structure and investment alternatives to reduce the overall cost
of supply. It will explore ways to strengthen the synergy and incentives between adaptation and
mitigation actions, as Moldova prepares itself to abide by the EC limits on GHG emissions. This
should enhance opportunities for the advancement of innovative technologies and alternative
sources of energy consumption.
C.

Implementing the FY14-17 CPS

World Bank Group Resources
89.
The financing envelope for this CPS includes IDA and IBRD funding, IFC investment,
and advisory services, MIGA guarantees, and development partner trust funds and co-financing,
and grant resources from global programs, fully integrated into the CPS. A summary of proposed
lending is attached in Annex B3, and of proposed AAA in Annex B4.
90.
IDA: The CPS period (FY14-17) spans two IDA replenishment periods (IDA16 for
FY14, and IDA17 for FY15-17). The IDAl6 allocation is Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 100.9
million, equivalent to about USD 150 million. Commitments for IDA operations up to FY13 are
equivalent to USD 109.232 million, leaving a balance of USD 40.8 million. There remain
33
significant uncertainties on Moldova's IDA 17 allocation, and this CPS tentatively assumes an
allocation of SDR 100.9 million, similar to IDA16. Moldova is now creditworthy, and as a blend
country can access IDA hard term credits from FY14. Preliminary estimates are that such access
will be less than USD 1 million a year. Moldova could potentially access the IDA Crisis
Response Window for severe economic shocks and natural disasters. Given the prevalence of
This includes a USD 10 million Drought Emergency Operation approved by the Board in March 2013.
IDA 17 allocation for Moldova will be determined based on the size of the IDA 17 replenishment, Moldova's performance rating as reflected in
CPIA and portfolio scores relative to other IDA countries, GNI per capita and population.
3
3

25

such disasters, flexibility of the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism will be embedded in
selected investment operations.3 4 With a per capita income of USD 2,070 far exceeding the IDA
operational cut-off, Moldova needs to be prepared for a possible IDA graduation by the end of
the IDA17 cycle. To allow a gradual phase-in of IBRD, this CPS will front load the IDA
allocation in FY15-17, and therefore the DPO may be funded through IBRD resources by the end
of the CPS period. As Moldova becomes a blend country, IDA resources will be used for
investment in public goods and projects with high social returns.
91.
IBRD: A 2012 assessment recommended that Moldova be considered creditworthy
for IBRD borrowing. Moldova was classified as IBRD following independence, reclassified as
blend in 1997 and IDA only in 2000 as income fell sharply during the country's transition. Per
capita GNI is now well above IDA operational cut-off. The assessment concluded that Moldova
is creditworthy based on fiscal discipline, low debt, and a reform path to greater integration with
the EU, including a DCFTA. Moldova's creditworthiness could be at risk as a result of
vulnerabilities stemming from a large current account deficit, dependency on remittances;
governance concerns due to the influence of vested business interests in politics, and judicial
system weaknesses; and complications from the unresolved Transnistria situation. IBRD
exposure as of December 31, 2012 is USD 45 million. Existing IBRD loans are scheduled to be
fully repaid by FY18. IBRD lending is planned at about USD 200 million over the CPS period,
of which USD 80 million will be a Partial Credit Guarantee, but the actual level will depend on
government demand, Moldova's performance in the CPS period, choice of lending instruments,
and IBRD's lending capacity and demand from other borrowers. IBRD resources will be
allocated to projects with high private return and those that will strengthen creditworthiness.
92.
IFC: IFC's operations in Moldova will continue to focus on investment and advisory
activities that enable private sector growth and diversification in support of the proposed
CPS pillars. Investments in key sectors, including agribusiness and related industries, will aim at
supporting competitive players, raising standards of service provision, providing an important
demonstration effect, and attracting additional investment. Given supportive market conditions,
IFC will seek to strengthen the financial system, support trade and increase access to finance for
micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) across sectors through advisory and investment
in financial intermediaries. IFC also aims at attracting private sector investors to develop
infrastructure, including through PPPs and other instruments. IFC's Investment Climate Reform
advisory program, which focuses on regulatory streamlining and investment promotion in
agribusiness, will target direct compliance cost savings to businesses of around USD 6 million
by the conclusion of the project. IFC plans an annual funding envelope of about USD 30 million.
IFC exposure as of June 30, 2013 is USD 90.3 million in 18 clients across the financial,
manufacturing, agriculture, telecommunications, water and energy sectors.
93.
MIGA: The net exposure of MIGA in Moldova at the end of 2012 amounted to USD
17.8 million in four projects. All projects are in support of foreign banks' subsidiaries in the
country, including micro-finance organizations and leasing operations. MIGA's continuing
support to these projects signals the Agency's efforts to underwrite projects in Moldova,
encourage inward FDI, and add to the WBG's strategy of encouraging private sector
development in the country.
34 The IDA Immediate Response Mechanism allows the inclusion of emergency-related contingent components in selected investment operations,

to support rapid response in eligible crisis and emergency situations.

26

Co-financing, Trust Funds and Global Programs
Major multilateral and bilateral partners in recent years include the EU, IMF, UN,
Sweden, the US, and Japan, among others. These partnerships will be enhanced and the WBG
will also engage emerging development actors. In helping Moldova address the competitiveness
agenda, the CPS will continue implementing and mobilizing funds from the FIRST 3 5 Initiative in
the financial sector and regional programs such as STAR/EaP 36 , and the ECA Programmatic TF
for PFM will support strengthening of the Court of Accounts. Social sector programs will benefit
from support from the Global Partnership for Education Catalytic Fund, and Japan Social
Development Fund. To support climate change adaption, the CPS will further seek partnerships
with the Green Climate Fund, GEF, Climate Investment Funds, ESMAP 3 7, and E5P. 3 8 The Stateand Peace-building Fund will support a calibrated approach to Transnistria.
World Bank Group Instruments
94.
The CPS proposes a mix of instruments suitable to Moldova's move to middle
income status and renewed focus on results. It gives a strong role to AAA, which will also
cement the WBG role as a convener, and in turn help mobilize additional resources and enhance
the effectiveness of the program. Space for more AAA will be created by consolidating the
current portfolio, considering fewer and larger investment operations, and using AF. During this
CPS, two to three investment lending operations and one DPO are envisioned annually. Building
on the successful introduction of RBF 3 9 , new operations will take the form of PforR whenever
suitable. Wherever possible in each of the new operations, guarantees will be explored to crowd
in additional resources for Moldova's reform agenda. The annual DPO will support tackling the
policy and institutional constraints that hold back progress across the three CPS pillars.
MainstreamingGender
95.
The WBG will continue to ensure that gender is mainstreamed in operations. A
designated gender focal person, with guidance from the Country Management Unit, will ensure
that women's groups are consulted and gender issues are considered in client consultations for
new operations; support project teams in identifying or pointing to relevant sector knowledge on
gender issues; maintain contact with key counterparts on gender issues within government, civil
society and development partners; keep up to date with key developments in gender inequality
such as national legislation and participation in international conventions, and knowing key data
sources. The gender assessment commissioned in preparation for this CPS will inform the design
of new programs. The results framework is engendered, where available information allows.
Managing the Program
96.
The CPS will pursue a two-pronged approach to enhance the development impact of
WBG programs: quality at entry and accountability. Quality at entry will be strengthened
through a readiness filter. Accountability will be enhanced by mainstreaming governance in all
operations and giving voice to citizens and CSOs in implementing WBG-financed operations.

3 Financial Sector Reform
36 Strengthening Audit and

and Strengthening Initiative.
Reporting in countries of the Eastern Partnership.
3 Energy Sector Management Assistance Program.
3 The Eastern Europe Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership - E5P is a multi-donor fund managed by the EBRD designed to promote
energy efficiency investments in Eastern European countries and was set up under the initiative of the Swedish Government.
'
The two largest operations in the program are RBF: USD 40 million Moldova Education Reform project, and the
USD 37 million Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net project.

27

Readinessfor Implementation
97.
The CPS introduces a readiness filter to address at the outset any potential
performance problems. The filter will address design issues, procurement readiness and
realism, fiduciary and implementation arrangements. It will be initiated at the concept stage and
will continue during project preparation and before any new project is submitted to the Board.
The filter will be also applied to TF-financed activities and substantial AAA products.
98.
New activities will build on successful projects, working with agencies with
experience and implementation capacity. Preference will be given to repeat operations and
supplemental financing, continuing to work with agencies with strong project ownership,
established implementation capacity and fiduciary arrangements. For new counterparts, capacity
to manage procurement processes and contract implementation will be assessed, and
implementation and disbursement schedules will be tailored to be consistent with the build-up of
such capacity. The WB will assist project implementation units and final beneficiaries through
training activities to build their capacity in project management, monitoring and evaluation.
MainstreamingGovernance and Anti-Corruption (GAC)
99.
The CPS proposes a GAC filter (see Annex 6) for lending operations, TFs, and AAA
to examine GAC-related implementation risks and potential to influence positively country
GAC outcomes. It will be applied at pre-concept, design and implementation stages, and will
ensure that GAC issues are given appropriate attention, risks are identified and mitigation
measures discussed early on, and opportunities are identified to improve governance. The filter is
intended to guide management and teams on issues that should be given particular attention. It
was introduced in the ECCU2 department under the Ukraine CPS, and is an adaptation of the
Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF) to governance circumstances in the region.
EnhancingSocialAccountability
100.
The CPS seeks to incorporate social accountability (SA) mechanisms in operations
to increase project effectiveness and development impact. For all new operations, efforts will
be made to identify and assess potential SA entry points to reinforce citizen engagement and
voice in WB-supported activities. The focus will be on SA tools that enhance: (i) transparency,
such as information dissemination and demystification; (ii) accountability, such as participatory
monitoring, financial management, and complaint handling mechanisms; and (iii) participation,
such as participatory decision making and participatory management. Retrofitting SA
mechanisms in existing operations will be also considered whenever possible and appropriate.
101.
Favorable circumstances bode well for the impact of SA initiatives. Moldova has
maintained a solid stance in the 2013 World Press Freedom Index of the Reporters without
Borders, ranking 55th out of 179 countries, and has opted in to the GPSA, thus allowing CSOs to
benefit from GPSA grants and build capacity to monitor public programs. Moldova is also the
first WB client to authorize disbursement disclosure at category level for WB-financed projects,
promoting transparency and accountability in the delivery of the WB program. The ongoing GeT
project is supporting the Government in such data disclosure through its e-Government program.
Monitoring CPS Implementation
102.
The CPS results framework (RF) underpins program management and evaluation.
The RF defines interventions intended to deliver CPS outcomes, linking WBG lending,
investments and non-lending activities to specific outcomes, milestones and targets to assess

28

whether implementation and outcomes are occurring as planned. These interventions have been
fully costed and integrated in the work program agreement (WPA) planning. Progress in
achieving the CPS outcomes will be monitored by the management team twice a year, at the time
of WPA to inform allocation of resources, and six months later to provide feedback to task teams
and call for corrective measures. A CPS PR is tentatively planned for early FY16, when
adjustments to the CPS results framework will be made if necessary, based on an assessment of
progress and results.
Trust Fund Program and Strategy
103.
The FY14-17 CPS integrates the role and contributions of TFs in the WBG's
program of support to Moldova, including both lending and non-lending activities. TF
activities are part of the CPS results framework, which specifies their role in achieving expected
outcomes and their link to higher country goals. Aside from being complementary to the lending
portfolio, the TFs will continue to have an instrumental role in strengthening the AAA program.
104.
The WB will seek to use TF resources more strategically to support core objectives,
exploring opportunities for increased partnerships with the EC and others. These partnerships
will build on the Bank's efforts towards a more programmatic approach in mobilizing TFs and
consolidating them to reduce portfolio fragmentation and administration costs.
Developing Partnershipsand StrengtheningAid Effectiveness
105.
The WBG will continue to work with other development partners to deliver the CPS
outcomes. The WBG works closely with the IMF to support macroeconomic policy goals and
financial sector reforms, and explores ways to work more closely with the EU on governance,
which fits well with both its agenda and the EU's Comprehensive Institution Building Program.
Other areas of cooperation with the EC could be in regional development linked to the Bank's
objective to enhance access to local social infrastructure, and Transnistria. Close partnerships
with Sweden support energy, agriculture competitiveness, business climate reforms, and
governance. The US (USAID and MCC) is a key partner in private sector development, business
environment and agriculture. Switzerland in the health sector, Netherlands in governance, and
Austria in health and governance are also key partners. Partnerships with UN agencies are
important in key program areas such as governance (UNDP), agriculture (IFAD), education and
social assistance (UNICEF), and health (WHO).
106.
The WB has been a strong supporter of development partner coordination and
improved aid effectiveness. WB-funded AAA during the previous CPS, together with support
from Sweden and UNDP, led to a new set of Partnership Principles signed between the
Government and 23 development partners in 2010. The subsequent Partnership Principles
Implementation Plan sets out a number of initiatives for improved aid effectiveness.
IV.

Managing Risks

Program implementation capacity
107.
Fiduciary and capacity risks remain. Fiduciary risks continue to be mitigated through
the emphasis on improved public financial management and strengthening the use of country
systems, such as the Supreme Audit Institution for external audit. However, the use of country
systems in procurement hinges on a successful implementation of the ongoing IDF, as well as on
subsequent fiduciary AAA to assist Moldova in the design and the roll out of an e-Government
procurement system acceptable to the WB. Risks associated with limited institutional capacity

29

are also mitigated through selectivity as the WB will emphasize involvement in areas where
results have been already attained. To further mitigate risks, the public sector will continue to be
strengthened by implementing public administration reforms, emphasizing accountability and
capacity building.
108.
Regarding public procurement, the capacity of private contractors has been a
concern in several recent operations. The relatively small size of contracts has neither attracted
the strongest contractors nor brought up their best services. Mitigation will involve advertising
RFPs in non-traditional markets. The WB will continue to remain engaged by assisting the
Government in implementing public procurement reform specifically to carry out
recommendations of the 2010 Country Procurement Assessment Report, setting up third-party
monitoring, and organizing outreach and capacity building activities, including in contract
management, for both implementing agencies and the private sector.
109.
Macroeconomic risks are substantial and may stem from slippages in
macroeconomic and structural reforms, and poor governance in the financial sector. The
WB, together with the IMF and the EU, will continue to support improved macroeconomic
management, and support to improving competitiveness and diversification of the economy will
mitigate macroeconomic risks. The planned series of DPO - along with appropriate TA - will
support reforms aiming at an orderly restructuring of BEM, through adequate capitalization, and
better management and corporate governance. Should structural reforms stall or the
macroeconomic risks materialize, Development Policy Operations will not be considered, and
the CPS will instead focus on programs that alleviate the adverse impact on the most vulnerable
and prevent a decline in human capital. The CPS will continue the knowledge-building program
so there is a strong analytical base to draw from when reforms resume.
Politicaleconomy
110.
Political uncertainty or a change in Government may undermine support for
reforms, or these may stall at the approach of the next elections or vested interests. The
CPS has been consulted widely with all political parties that are in agreement with its outcomes,
and it is expected that even if there were a change in Government, there would be sufficient
ownership by a new government. Previous CPS experience shows that even in a risky
environment, the WB needs to be ready to support reforms when opportunities arise. We will
continue to engage all parties across the political spectrum in CPS discussions. All new
operations will be underpinned by a governance filter and an operational readiness evaluation,
including a political economy assessment that can quantify reform benefits and costs, identify
losers and winners, and inform solid communication campaigns.
Externalfactors
111.
Continued global slowdown, particularly in the Eurozone, will adversely affect
exports and remittances. CPS support to improve competitiveness, diversify the economy and
strengthen the social safety net will help mitigate these risks, which also call for a flexible
approach by the WBG and other development partners to assist Moldova to weather these
external shocks.
112.
Climate change and natural disasters continue to pose risks. The ongoing and
planned support for disaster and climate risk mitigation and consideration of flexible financing
such as the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism should help address these risks.

30

Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix
CountryWolBakGopPorm(n
Development Gonis
Issues and Obstacles

CPS Outcome Indicators

World Bank Group Program (and

Pillar 1: Increasing Competitiveness
CPS Outcome 1.1. Improved business environment and infrastructure for business operation
Improving the business
climate, promoting
competition policies, and
streamlining the
regulatory framework
(Moldova 2020 Priority
#4).

Inefficient revenue administration with high
compliance costs, high frequency of audits and
low efficiency.

Customs administration is insufficiently
predictable and transparent, which leads directly
to increased costs and reduced competitiveness,
As per Doing Business, Moldova currently ranksne
in the world on Trading Across Borders.
14 2

Effective and efficient tax administration that will improve voluntary
compliance and self-assessment and will reduce compliance costs.
Indicator1: Decreased cost of compliance as measured by share of audited
companies selected based on risk profiles
Baseline: 0 percent (2013)
Target:
100 percent (2017)
Indicator 2: Improved effectiveness of tax collection (PEFA P-15

Pipeline:
Strengthening PFM and Tax Administration
Project P127734
World Bank Institute (WBI) (TA)
USAID, EU, Sida

"Effectiveness in collection of tax payments")
Baseline: Dr (2013)
Target: B (2017)

Worldt Bank17
Inttue(WI:(A

Customs procedures are streamlined and more transparent.
Indicator]:Reduced number of days to prepare documents for export
operations ("Trading Across Borders" indicator of Doing Business)

Pipeline:
New Private Sector Development (PSD) /Access
to Finance (A2F) Project (FY15)

TaPeFM:

Sd

16 (2017)

Admin

Trade Study
Partners:
USAID, EU
Despite improvements, compliance with the
regulatory framework, permits, inspections, and
other aspects continues to impose excessive costs
on private enterprises.

Decreased regulatory burden on enterprises.
Indicator1: Reduced management time for regulatory requirement
compliance (annual domestic CODB survey)
Baseline: 10percent(2012)
Target:
8 percent (2017)
Indicator2: Reduced inspection coverage (except tax, customs and financial
banking and non-banking)
Baseline: 100 percent
Target:
40 percent (2017)

Ongoing:
IFC Investment Climate Project
Pipeline:
New PSD/A2F
re (FY1)
-

Possible IFC investment in private education
Partners:
USAID

Indicator3: Reduced number of permits and licenses
Baseline: 317 (2012)
Target:
238 (25 percent reduction) (2017)
Improving the
competitiveness of
enterprises in order to
increase growth and
employment

Relatively low management capacity (business
planning and models, financial management)
keeps Moldova's companies below their
competitive potential.

Strengthened business managers' capacity to make strategic decisions
that increase competitiveness and job creation.
Indicator1: Additional number of managers trained in business strategy,
financial management, and other relevant areas with the support of a new
WBG project/investment
Baseline: 0 (2013)
Target: TBC in the design of the PSD project (FY15)

Creating an innovationdriven and export-focused
ICT industry that
generates jobs and is
globally competitive,

Moldova has a low ranking in measures of the
innovative nature of the economy. ICT innovation
ecosystem is not fully functional and needs to
enable innovation and competitiveness. Limited
talent pool in the IT sector.

Indicator1: IT direct employment (number of people)
Baseline: 21,000 (2012)
Target: 25,000 (2017)

Pipeline:
New PSD/A2F Project (FY15)
Possible IFC investment in private education
AA
New programmatic HD TA
Ongoing:
Governance e-Transformation (GeT) Project AF
P121231
Pipeline:

31

Country
Development Goals
(ICT sectorstrategy)

Issues and Obstacles

CPS Outcome Indicators

Limited broadband reach in second-tier cities and
rural areas.

Improved access to broadband Internet.
Indicator 1: Access to broadband Internet services (number of subscribers per
100 people)
Baseline: 11 percent (2012)
Target: 20 percent (2017)
Indicator 1.1: Access to Internet services for the bottom 40 percent (number
of subscribers per 100 people)
Baseline: 9 percent for bottom 40 percent (HBS 2011)
Target:
at least 16 percent for the bottom 40 percent (i.e. at least 82
percent increase, as targeted for the average population)

Reducing financing costs
by increasing competition
in the financial sector and
developing risk
management tools
(Moldova 2020 Priority
#3).

Moldova's financial sector is less developed than
Improved access of private enterprises to formal sources of finance.
the region's, with a lower share of bank loans and
Indicator:Domestic credit to private sector as share of GDP
deposits to GDP. Major obstacles are: (i) limited
Baseline: 38.8 percent (2011)
availability of loans at terms of more than 3 years
Target:
45 percent (2017)
from commercial banks' own resources; (ii) high
Capital market continues to be strengthened to facilitate increased
requirements.
and often prohibitive collateral
and oten pohibiive ollatralorquireents
Underdeveloped capital market with limited
access to finance.
Indicator:Government bonds listed on the stock exchange
financing options for companies. The government
bond market has only short-term issues and
Baseline: Non-existent (2012)
Target: Government bonds with >1 year maturity are traded on the
secondary market trading is almost non-existent.
stock exchange (2017)
Strengthened CFR institutional framework through improvements in
The Corporate Financial Reporting (CFR)
framework requires further improvements and
A&A ROSC update indicators, i.e. greater alignment of the CFR legislation
alignment with good international practices and
and practice with the EU acquis, namely: (i) Public Interest Entities (PIEs)
EU requirements.
implement IFRS in practice; (ii) quality of external audits is strengthened
thCough an operational audit oversight system; (iii) SME financial reporting
standards are improved; (iv) public availability of financial statements.

World Bank Group Program (and
Partners)
New DPO series (policy and regulation)
AAA:
GeT project TA for MICT's ICT sector strategy
TA on ICT-enabled innovation for
competitiveness in Moldova
TA on telecommunications policy and regulation

Pipeline:
New PSD/A2F project (FY1 5)
New DPO series
Direct IFC investment & possible wholesale
financing through FIs given adequate market
TFs:
Strengthening Auditing and Reporting in
Countries of the Eastern Partnership (STAR/EaP)
P133467
FinSAC (Vienna Center)
AAA:
Financial Sector Development TA (FY1 4-16)
FSAP Update (FY16)

CPS Outcome 1.2. Improved competitiveness in agriculture
Enhancing agricultural
export competitiveness,
attracting investments and
achieving closer trade
integration with the EU.

Current deficiencies in the country's food safety
management system are among the most serious
impediments for a more competitive presence of
Moldovan agricultural produce on international
markets.
Lack of mode post-harvest infrastructure has as
one of the weakest links for fruits and vegetables
vertically coordinated supply chains. Lack ofA
capital and know-how are among the main
culprits for a largely underwhelming progress in
the emergence of properly integrated post-harvest
infrastructure.

Enhanced competitiveness of the agro-food sector by supporting the
modernization of the food safety management system.
Indicator : Completion of targeted food safety actions for approximation to
EU Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) requirements
Baseline: 20 percent (2013)
Target:
100 percent (2017)C
Increased market access for farmers.

Ongoing:
Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project
(MACP) P118518
IFC Investment Climate Project
TFs:
e
h
A

Indicator]1:Increased sales (domestic and exports) of high value crops by
targeted partnerships that receive investment support grants
Baseline: 0 percent (2013)
Target:
50 percent (2017)

DCFTA Preparation Support in Agriculture TA
Food Security and Agricultural Policy
Formulation TA
Pipeline:
IFC investment and possible wholesale financing
through banks under adequate market conditions

Pillar2: EnhancingHuman Capitaland Minimizing Social Risks
CPS Outcome 2.1. Improved quality of and access to health and education services
Strengthening the quality
of education, while
supporting the efficiency

The sector needs to adjust to sharp student
population decline, improve quality and address
skill mismatch,

Strengthened quality of education.
Indicator : Implementation of quality assurance standards for hub schools
initiated and scaled up (percent of hub schools)

32

Ongoing:
Quality Education in Rural Areas of Moldova
Project AF P129552

Country
Development Goals
reforms being
implemented in the
education sector.

Issues and Obstacles

CPS Outcome Indicators

PISA 2009 + showed that, by age 15, Moldovan
students have lost the equivalent of 2 years of
education compared to OECD peers, and 57
percent of students failed to acquire the most
basic skills needed to participate effectively and
productively in the society (scored at or below
Level 1 on the reading part).
Structural reforms in the sector aim at: (i)
ensuring student access to quality education; (ii)
increasing flexibility in labor relations in
education; and (iii) enabling the efficient use of
allocations through per student financing
nationwide. In 2012, the Parliament created an
enabling reform environment.

Increasing access to
quality and efficient
health services with the
aim of increasing life
expectancy, and reducing
premature mortality and
disability,

Moldovans live on average 10 years less than
their European neighbors, and healthcare suffers
from lack of investment and widespread
practices, such as under-the table additional
payments for under-provided services. Many
challenges remain, i.e. improving access to
services for the poorest and their quality and
adequacy; resources are spread too thinly to
support 73 hospitals with limited service
delivery capacity, a large number of
laboratories, several polyclinics and rural
primary care centers. There is a need to develop
NCD prevention and control programs, and
further develop primary care.
Patients have to pay large sums at the point of
delivery, for medicines and tests, but also for
services that are insured. Around 19 percent of
people decide not to buy insurance,

CPS Outcome
Creating an equitable and
sustainable pension
system (Moldova 2020
Priority #6)

Designing and
implementing a welltargeted and sustainable
program of cash transfers
to improve the poverty
impact of resources for
transfers through reduced

Baseline: 0 percent (2013)
Target: 70 percent (2017)
Indicator2: Improved student assessment system
Baseline TBD at the end of academic year 2014/15 for grade 4 tests and
2015/16 for grade 9 examinations. Baseline will try to include, if available,
al to mnor qlit

o

ent fort

World Bank Group Program (and
Partners)
Moldova Education Reform Project P127388
TFs:
Global Partnership for Education TF
Japan PHRD Disability and Development Grant
for the integration of children with disabilities

oup

Improved efficiency of the education sector.
Indicator1: Implementation of per-student financing nationwide (in 2013)
Indicator2: Improved student-teacher ratio
Baseline: 10.5:1(2013)
Target:
11.5:1(2017)
Improved access to quality healtbcare.
Indicator 1: Better population coverage with mandatory health insurance
Baseline: 81 percent (2013)
Target:
85 percent (2017)
Indicator 1.1. Coverage of the bottom 40 percent (140)
Baseline: 71.5 percent (HBS 11) versus 81 percent for the top 60 percent
Target: At least 76.5 percent
Indicator 2: Share of out-of-pocket payments (formal and informal) in
total health expenditure reduced
Baseline: 45 percent (2013)
Target:
35 percent (2017)
Indicator 2.1: Percentage of the B40 who report having spent >10 or 25
percent of their total expenditure on health
Baseline: 14.2 percent of B40 spend more than 10 percent/ 1.2 percent
of B40 spend more than 25 percent (HBS1 1)
Target:
less than 10 percent of B40 spend more than 10 percent /less
than 1 percent of B40 spend more than 25 percent (2017)

Partners:
Japan

Ongoing:
IDF HMIS grant
WB PPP pilots
Pipeline:
IDF grant for Medical University
PforR project in health proposed FY14
Health sector conditionality in new DPO series
Ts
New TF for open data readiness assessment of
Ministry of Health
Public Administration Reform Project (FY15)
MDTF

2.2. Fiscally sustainable and equitable pension and social assistance systems

The structural problems in the pension system
(PAYG pillar) include: (i) weak linkages between
pension contributions and benefits; (ii) low and
declining replacement rates due to distorted
benefit formula and indexation rule; (iii) various
special regimes with preferential treatment to
some groups of retirees. These shortages
combined with poor demographic prospects of the
country make the current pension system fiscally
and socially unsustainable.
Shortcomings of pre-reform social assistance
have hampered the ability to protect the poor and
vulnerable against crisis and shocks. More equity
can be achieved by scaling down and
consolidating categorical benefits, and expanding
and strengthening Ajutor Social.

Fiscally sustainable pension system.
Indicator]:Pension (PAYG) expenditures are kept below 8 percent of GDP
while the pension system's fairness is improved
Baseline: 8 percent (2013)
Target: 8 percent (2017)NeprgamtcH
Indicator 2: Replacement rates are maximized within a given PAYG budget
envelope
Baseline: 28 percent (2013)
Target: 30 percent (2017)
Improved equity of social assistance.
Indicator]: Improved equity in social assistance system, measured as
percentage of population in the poorest quintile receiving Ajutor Social
benefits
Baseline: 14.9 percent (2011)
Target: 20 percent (2017)

33

Pipeline:
New DPO series
AAA:
(eninolyTA
Partners:
IMF
Ongoing:
Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social
Safety Net RBF Project P120913

Country
Development Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CPS Outcome Indicators

inclusion and exclusion
errors, and a system
focused around a welfare
concept of poverty.

World Bank Group Program (and
Partners)

Indicator2: Consolidated categorical benefits: spending on categorical
benefits further reduced by 20 percent
Baseline: 7 percent (2012)
Target: 30 percent (2017)
Pillar 3: Promoting a Green, Clean and Resilient Moldova
CPS Outcome 3.1. Greater adaptation and resilience to climate change

Reducing the country's
adaptation deficit to
climate variability and
climate change.

Climate variability is likely to increase the
frequency and intensity of natural disasters as
evidenced by, most recently, the catastrophic
disasters associated with the droughts of 2007 and
2012 and devastating floods of 2008 and 2010.

Strengthened State Hydro-meteorological Service's ability to forecast
severe weather and Moldova's improved capacity to prepare for and
respond to natural disasters.
Indicator1: Issuing more accurate and specific forecasts of weather
conditions
Baseline: Scale of weather forecasts at 5000 sq. km (2013)
Target: Scale of weather forecasts reduced to 300 sq. km (2017)
Indicator2: Expanded lead-time for weather warnings to users
Baseline: Lead time for severe weather warnings only 10 minutes to 1
hour (2013)
Target: Lead time for severe weather warnings expanded to 12 hours
(2017)
Indicator3: Strengthened capacity to coordinate emergency responses
Baseline: No Emergency Command Center to coordinate response
among relevant agencies
(2013)
amon(213)Community
reevan agncie
Target:
Emergency response drill shows capacity improvements as
compared to the baseline and the recent test of the system (2017)

Ongoing:
Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project
P115634
AAA:
Climate Change Adaptive Capacity and
Resilience Study
Social Dimensions of Climate Change Country
assessment (BNPP)
TFs:
Global Fund for Disaster Risk Reduction:
Moldova Disaster and Climate Risk Management
Capacity Building
Community Forestry Project
Soil Conservation Project
Support Program for Sustainable and
Integrated Forest Management and Carbon
Sequestration through Forestation (SIFMSF)

CPS Outcome 3.2: Improved Natural Resources Management
Aodaptaie
andiene Climate
Reducing environmental
degradation and negative
impacts of economic
activities on the
environment, natural
resources and human
health,

Moldovan soils are prone to severe degradation
which leads to significant loss of productivity
with implication for the country's agriculture and
environment. In addition, the country's forest
cover is limited (11.D1
percent) and vulnerable to a
changing climate. The expansion of f.orest cover
is a sustainable way of reducing erosion and
engendering local and global environmental
benefits. Another important problem is the
deterioration of the country's wide network of
forest shelter belts, with particularly dire
implications in the South and Center.

Cangemn

Sequestration of 2.5 million tons of C02 through forestation of degraded
lands.
Enhanced competitiveness of the agro-food sector by mainstreaming
agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

Ongoing:

Indicator]1:Increased on-farmn area benefitting from sustainable land
management practices
Baseline: 0 hectares (2013)
Target: 10,000 hectares (2017)
Indicator2: Increased area protected by robust anti-erosion shelterbelts
rehabilitated
Baseline: 0 hectares (2013)
Target: 50,000 hectares (2017)

Pipeline:
Forestry and Sustainable Land Management

MACP P 118518
ENPI Forest Law and Enforcement and
Governance 11Program

(FY16)
(FY 17)
AAA:

ndRsiine oClmt Cag

Forestry Policy Note (FY1 5)
TFs:
Community Forestry Project
Soil Conservation Project
Community Support Program for SIFMSF
Potential partners:
GEF, Climate Investment Fund, Green Climate
Fund

34

CPS Outcome 3.3 Increased energy efficiency and security
Increasing energy
efficiency and security,

Reducing the
vulnerability of the power
sector to supply shortfall
due to the limited number
of supply options and the
aging of assets.

Moldova has limited domestic energy sources,
relying on imports for 98 percent of oil and gas
needs and 76 percent of electricity needs. Energy
imports are 23.9 percent of total imports and an
important component of the current account
deficit. A lot of it stems from a very high energy
intensive economy. The DH company in Chisinau
(Termocom) is a big part of the problem due to
deteriorated and obsolete infrastructure and has
accumulated around USD 250 million debt stock
for gas payments (3.7 percent of GDP).

Decreased energy supply costs, increased quality of supply and
improved affordability of heat supply in Chisinau. Implementation of
building level metering and temperature controls, with incentives for
customers to decrease energy use.
Indicator]: Direct beneficiaries in buildings with new individual heat
substations (number), of which female (percent)

Ongoing:
IDA Investments: DH Efficiency Improvement
Project P132443

Indicator 2: Average specific heat consumption of buildings with
modernized heating substations (KWh/m2 annually)
Indicator 3: Total amount of energy saved
Baselines and targets will be determined at appraisal (fall 2013)

P123396
Pipeline:
DH Reforms (FY14)
Possible IFC PPP Advisory Program on resource

Effciecyamprve

t

Res)uturProject

Gas supply that may happen as a result of these
arrears could affect about 40 percent of current
DH consumers, or about 160,000 residents,
affecting the most vulnerable and the poor.

Debt of the new DH Company restructured by 2013 to improve its
creditworthiness, and debt burden to Moldovagaz reduced by at least 20
percent by 2017.

The Government adopted an Action Plan for the
Chisinau DH sector restructuring.
Commercialization of DH supply and
rationalizing energy use needs to be addressed
urgently.

Indicator 1: Debt Restructuring Plan signed with Moldovagaz
Indicator2: Debt repayment of at least 5 percent per annum to reduce the
debt burden by at least 20 percent by 2017
Baseline and target TBC following completion of the financial model by
the consultantSwdnEBDEI,U

adequate maret nitn
PossibleuICDdirectonvesementtotimprgv
resource
efficiency in private sector companies

Domestic electricity supply is small and imports
are limited to generating plants in Ukraine and
Transnistria, operating beyond their economic life
and poorly maintained. The Government needs to
diversify its supply options and improve quality
of domestic supply. Implementation of
commitments under the Energy Community
Treaty would help address the issues by
integrating with the regional markets (ENTSO-E
and ENTSO-G).

Indicator : Identified options for enhanced diversity of supply (Ukraine,
Cuciurgan Power Station (MGRES) and Chisinau CHPs.

AAA:
ESMAP Moldova Power Sector Note
IFC Grid Interconnection Study

efficiency for SMEs
Poss

Swe

n

rD

ofnergeiien

B

Pipeline:
Possible IFC investment in wind energy
Partners:
EU, Sweden, EBRD, EIB

Governance as a cross-cutting theme
Establishing a
professional and
motivated civil service.

Quality of Public Administration is one area in
which Moldova scores lowest - 3.0 in the 2012
CPIA.

Professionalization of the public service increased through
implementation of the position of state secretaries.
Indicator 1: Level of professional management of public services

Pipeline:
Public Administration Reform Project (FY1 5)
MDTF

On November 29, 2012, the Parliament amended
the law on civil service that introduces a position
of state (permanent) secretary in ministries, rather
than political appointments to the civil service.
Implementing legal provisions requires advisory
services to develop and implement the new
employment, professional development (PD),
performance management, and rotation
mechanisms.

Baseline: Ministries and central agencies are managed by politically
appointed officials (2013)
Target: All (percent) of ministries are managed by professional state
secretaries (2017)
Indicator2: Number of PD initiatives implemented, number of state
secretaries involved in professional development programs

Partners:
Sida, EU

Baseline: Number of PD programs for senior executive officials,
including state secretaries (2013)
Target: PD program based on a defined set ofcompetences and
performance requirements is approved and under implementation (2017).
Percent ofEprogram-covered state secretaries (90 percent).

35

Establishing effective and
efficient government
programs, aligned with
national strategic goals.

After creating a good basis for sector strategic
planning linked with budgeting (within MTBF),
the Government plans to implement program
performance evaluation mechanisms that would
enable necessary feedback to the planning and
budgeting systems with the aim to improve.
program targeting, outcomes, and cost efficiency.

The Government evaluates programs and related expenditure programs
as a means of improving strategic decision making and resource
allocation.

Pipeline:

Indicator 1: Number of government programs evaluated
Baseline: No mechanism for program evaluation
Target: Program evaluation mechanism is developed and used. At least
3 programs evaluated for targeting, effectiveness and efficiency of outcomes

Partners:

Public Administration Reform Project (FY15)
MDTF
Sida, Dutch

and impact.
Increasing reliance on
country institutions with
medium-term focus on
strengthening the capacity
of public external audit
and treasury system and
the public procurement
system.

(i) High rate of Court of Accounts (CoA) staff
turnover and need for continuous training and
capacity building activities; (ii) long processing
time for payment orders by the Treasury.

Improved accountability of the Executive for public money spending
through better quality of audit reports.
Indicator]: Involvement of Supreme Audit Institution in audit of World
Bank-financed projects
Target: At least 2 projects are filly audited by the CoA

Ongoing:
Governance Filter in all WB-supported operations
Global Partnership for Social Accountability
(GPSA)

Improved business processes in the Treasury system.
Indicator 1: Capacity building workshops and seminars for Supreme Audit
Institution and State Treasury
Target: (i) Consolidated capacity of auditors to conduct the audit of public
institutions and government programs; (ii) Real-time processing of payment
orders.

WBI support
Pipeline:
Public Administration Reform Project (FY15)
MDTF
GPSA

Enhanced quality of public debate.

AAA:
Financial Management TA

Improved social accountability environment through opportunities and
capacity building for broad citizen engagement in service delivery and
public expenditure management processes.
More participatory nature of decision making processes.

Using ICT to support
effective, efficient,
transparent and accessible
public services to
citizens.

(i) Public procurement procedures are conducted
in paper-based format; (ii) High number of
complaints about non-compliant public
procurement procedures due to the lack of
technical specification standards and updated
public procurement guidance; (iii) Lack of trained
certified public procurement officers.

Improved transparency and efficiency of the public procurement system:
(i) by improved e-procurement system and rolling it out for use by contracting
agencies and economic operators; and (ii) adopted international standards and
practices.

TFs:
Strengthening Public Procurement IDF Grant

Government is yet to take fill advantage of ICT
to ensure more efficient and transparent service
delivery through business process re-engineering
and greater citizen participation in governance.
The Government approved a program of service

Increased number of direct project beneficiaries, including female
(percent)
Indicator 1: Percent of direct project beneficiaries (including female)
Baseline: 20,000 (40 percent female) (2013)
300,000 (50 percent female) (2017)
Target:

Ongoing:
Governance e-Transformation Project
Partners:

improvement that will require coordination, TA,
legal and organizational changes; restructuring
service delivery systems (chains); introducing
digitalized services and single window service,
and service standards and transparent charges.

Increased favorable citizen perception of quality of public service
Iniao1:Ctznpretoofubcsrveqaly(ecntfstsid
by catini
it tfrue
Itizens amrccsiovedprcment ssevic sPrtl
n
t
aote
rs1i3)
2
o perent
agences asin
Tadet: 60 percent (2017)
public si
torcent(

development agencies)

Govenmen
tae ful avantge
is et o o IC

Pr:ojetetension of oel e-s

c

ut

cervicesgna

Annex 2: World Bank Group FYO9-13 Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report
Republic of Moldova
Date of CPS: December 23, 2008, Board Discussion
Date of CPS Progress Report: May 12, 2011
Period Covered in the CPS Completion Report: FY09-13
CPS Completion Report (CPS CR) prepared by Dusan Vujovic, Abdoulaye Seck, Carolina Odobescu,
Yulia Snizhko, Faith Tempest, and Hester Marie DeCasper under the overall guidance of Qimiao Fan,
Country Director (ECCU2) and Ana Maria Mihaescu, Chief Resident Representative (IFC). The CPS CR
team has benefitted from valuable inputs and contributions of the entire World Bank Group Moldova
Country Team.
I.

Summary and Conclusions

1.
The original FYO9-12 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was implemented during
a time of political and economic uncertainty, under continued political stalemate and as the
country was emerging from the global financial crisis. The Strategy was re-focused at midterm in the 2011 Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPS PR) and extended to FY13,
utilizing opportunities created by the election of a pro-European government and the strong
orientation of the Government Activity Program 2009-13 towards integration with the European
Union (EU). Efforts concentrated on building a platform for post-crisis economic growth, and
addressing challenges faced by Moldova on the way to improved competitiveness. The three
pillars were: (i) improving economic competitiveness to support sustainable economic growth;
(ii) minimizing social and environmental risks, building human capital, and promoting social
inclusion, and (iii) improving public sector governance. The International Financial Corporation
(IFC) was able to offer new products tailored to changing market conditions while maintaining a
strong investment program. These included risk management and non-performing loan (NPL)
advisory services and the scaling up of the Global Trade Finance Program.
2.
The overall program performance under the FYO9-13 Moldova CPS is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory. The CPS achieved good progress on most outcomes planned in the
original CPS or adjusted at the time of the CPS Progress Report (CPS PR) despite external
shocks and internal political changes. Insufficient progress was made on several important
outcomes due to overly ambitious targets given the political economy of reforms and moderate
performance issues. The Development Policy Operation (DPO) assisted the Government in
taking steps towards economic recovery from the global crisis, and the World Bank Group
(WBG)'s analytical work provided clear diagnostics of Moldova's development and reform
challenges and helped the new Government to prepare a sound development and reform strategy
and mobilize impressive support from development partners. Policy dialogue and projects
implemented with WBG support produced concrete development results in areas ranging from
enhancing competitiveness of enterprises and the agricultural sector, to greater social protection
and improved access to education, improved government capacity to design and implement
effective policies and manage public resources. Partially achieved or missed outcomes in some
cases indicate moderate underperformance that demands remedial action, but in most cases they
are a combination of somewhat unrealistic targets and moderate underperformance.

37

WBG performance is rated as Satisfactory based on its ability to design a flexible
3.
CPS in a difficult external environment and changing domestic political landscape, and
timely mid-point adjustment. The WBG responded promptly to the emergence of a pro-EU
Government that committed to accelerating reforms, and worked closely with development
partners to design an adequate policy response to external shocks and mobilize necessary
development resources. Three original pillars, 10 goals, and 31 outcomes/milestones were
designed in a pre-crisis environment and with a previous government. The mid-point adjustment
responded to changing internal and external circumstances through a revised lending program
and Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) to better respond to the new Government's needs.
The initial reform impetus was slightly overestimated; hence some goals and specific milestones
were not achieved in the current CPS timeframe. This was duly reflected in evaluating both
program and WBG performance.
II.

Key Developments During the CPS Period

4.
The global financial and economic crisis and the most recent sovereign and banking
crisis in the Eurozone have taken a toll on Moldova's economy. Lower export demand and a
significant drop in remittances reduced consumption-driven growth. The economy recovered
quickly in 2010-11, posting close to 7 percent average annual growth, but was adversely affected
by the Eurozone difficulties in 2012, and it is expected that headwinds from the Eurozone will
continue to weigh on Moldova's economy in 2013. Despite positive developments on the growth
side, employment creation remains weak. On a more positive note, Moldova emerged from the
global financial crisis with more balanced Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth based not only
on consumption, but also on increased investment and exports.
However, high dependence on remittances and a large current account deficit
5.
remain a source of vulnerability. Remittances are below the peak of 30 percent of GDP in
2008, but are still high at 22 percent of GDP in 2011 and have a significant macroeconomic
impact, including on the real exchange rate. Trade deficits are high and the large current account
deficit is mostly financed by private and official debt. Foreign direct investments (FDI) are still
at one third of pre-crisis levels.
6.
The period from 2009 to 2012 was one of political turbulence. Elections in mid-2009
brought to power a coalition Government, the Alliance for European Integration, with a much
stronger reform focus than its predecessor, prioritizing ambitious reforms that would bring
greater European integration. Dialogue with the EU intensified and negotiations began on visa
liberalization, the establishment of a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (DCFTA)
with the EU and on an Association Agreement. The CPS was able to respond to the reform
oriented Government, particularly through AAA, but also with its limited but focused
International Development Association (IDA) resources. This strategy was susceptible to the risk
that the Government would not be able to deliver reforms, but also presented a significant, and
rare, opportunity to support these reforms.
Strong support from the international community helped the Government to
7.
implement wide ranging reforms and policy changes, initially with a focus on economic
stabilization and recovery. The WBG contributed to a successful Consultative Group (CG)
Meeting in 2010, resulting in about USD 2.6 billion pledged by 22 development partners for a
three-year period (2010-13), which, along with new trade and investment opportunities, were
effectively used to support reforms and build economic growth. Such a strong development

38

partner response was due to a coherent government recovery program and a clear coordination
and harmonization framework. The World Bank (WB) played a leading role in both. It enabled
and supported the preparation of the Policy Notes underpinning the Economic Stabilization and
Recovery Program (ESRP), and was instrumental in developing a new set of Partnership
Principles. Together with private resources this enabled a robust growth recovery in 2010 and
2011 (of 7.1 and 6.4 percent, respectively) based on private consumption, investment and
exports. Exports increased by over 40 percent in dollar terms during the two-year period. This
trend continued into 2012 albeit at a much slower GDP growth rate caused by the Eurozone
crisis.
8.
Political challenges remain after the 2009 elections. The inability to elect a President
and the paralyzing threat of early elections until March 2012 slowed reforms. Differences
continue within the parties of the Alliance, and continue to limit the degree to which it can
implement its reform agenda. Splits remain between Government and opposition but also within
society on the appropriate pace and direction of reforms. Political changes in Transnistria have
also supported the resumption of the 5+2 talks intended to identify a settlement to the conflict.
III.

Progress Towards Country Goals

9.
Over the CPS period, poverty indicators have declined due to economic recovery,
assisted by good agricultural performance, rebound in remittances and improved targeting
of social assistance. The number of people below the relative poverty line declined from over 26
percent in 2008-2009 to less than 22 percent in 2010, with an estimated further decline in 201140.
Rural poverty was reduced even more (by 6 percent in 2010) due to a substantial increase in
farm-gate prices (average annual increase in 2010 was 43 percent). The number of people below
the absolute poverty line declined from 3 to 1 percent in 2010 and is now close to zero.
10.
The process of macroeconomic stabilization continues. Both Consumer Price Index
(CPI) inflation and private sector credit growth decelerated considerably during the crisis and
have stabilized substantially below pre-crisis levels, the CPI slowing from more than 12 percent
in 2008 to about 5 percent in 2012, the credit growth rate down from 35 to 16 percent and
continuing to slow down in 2012. Similarly, the level of fiscal deficit dropped from 6.3 percent
of GDP in 2009 to 2.4 percent in 2011. This improvement is entirely due to a strong expenditure
reduction effort (from 40.3 percent of GDP in 2009 to 34 percent in 2011), which outpaced the
drop in revenues (from 38.9 percent of GDP in 2009 to 36.7 percent in 2011), which occurred
despite higher corporate and excise taxes. Critical structural reforms in social assistance and
education are underway, supporting fiscal adjustment and helping the most vulnerable.
11.
Sustaining investment and export growth by promoting a stronger supply response
in agriculture and other tradable sectors is essential for a more sustainable growth path
and containing current account deficits. Impressive export growth in 2010-11 probably owes
more to policy changes (i.e. removal of export constraints), favorable weather conditions and
one-off efforts by individual companies rather than permanently increased export capacity.
Likewise, it remains uncertain to what extent the higher level of investment activity since 2010
will contribute to increased production capacity and greater efficiency (productivity growth).
Policies and reforms that will provide incentives for investment in tradable sectors leading to job
creation, production and export growth are of utmost importance in that regard.
40Unpublished data from the National Bureau of Statistics point to a poverty headcount of 17 percent in 2011.

39

12.
The quality of the business environment is critical to provide the necessary link
between dynamic export-led growth, job creation, macro stability, and fiscal and external
balance. With the opportunities provided by exceptional development partner financing and
potential export expansion into the EU and other western markets, it is critical that likely investor
interest is met by visible improvements in the business environment. Surveys and studies
indicate considerable scope for improvement, leading to lower compliance costs and improved
competitiveness.
13.
Moldova made progress towards achieving some of the customized Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), but missed half of the interim targets. The country has made
significant progress in certain dimensions of human well-being (e.g. infant mortality has been
reduced, continuing a positive trend which led to a decrease from 30 to 11.8 per 1,000 live births
between 1990 and 2010), with more modest progress in other indicators such as maternal
mortality which dropped from 62 to 41 per 100,000 live births during the same period (but which
had been measured at 17.2 per 100,000 births in 2009). Poverty levels were in decline until 2009;
data for 2010 show that the country is on track to meet 2015 targets, thanks in part to increased
agricultural prices and to targeted social protection measures, and has already met 2015 targets
for reduction in absolute poverty. Of a number of dimensions of environmental sustainability,
management of ecosystems (maintaining biological diversity) is the only target to have been met.
14.
A more sustained effort is needed to achieve other national MDG targets by 2015.
The 2010 target for enrolment in general compulsory education will be missed as enrolment rates
have declined consistently since 2003. Women's representation in local public authorities rose
slightly between 2003 and 2011, but it is uncertain that the 2015 target will be met, nor the target
for women Members of Parliament. The incidence of HIV and the rate of mortality associated
with Tuberculosis have both risen since 2002. The 2010 target for access to improved water
sources is unlikely to be met, and the 2015 target will require significant investments if it is to be
met. Access to improved sanitation is also unlikely to be met. An additional indicator of
environmental sustainability, increasing the land area covered by forests, rose slightly from 10.3
percent in 2002 to 10.9 percent in 2009, but neither the 2010 nor the 2015 targets are likely to be
met without significant investment.
15.
Moldova made progress in improving the allocative efficiency and performance of
its social assistance but the pension system remains a concern. In 2009 the Government
introduced a new targeted cash transfer program Ajutor Social and subsequently eliminated the
biggest and poorly targeted category-based benefits program, nominative compensations for
utilities, and transferred resources via the Ajutor Social program to temper the impact of the
growing energy tariffs on the poor. Thus, Moldova achieved a more cost-efficient spending mix
in its social assistance system. Moreover, the overall targeting accuracy of social assistance (SA)
benefits improved: between 2009 and 2011 the share of social assistance transfers received by
the poorest 20 percent of population increased from 39 to 42 percent. Short of reforms in its
pension system, Moldova remains vulnerable in the face of its rapidly changing demographic
landscape with a growing elderly population and shrinking labor force. Moldova has improved
its services at the district and community levels to provide better social care to vulnerable
groups, such as the disabled, children from poor or troubled families, and the elderly.
Community-based social care centers were established, helping decrease the number of people
referred to national large-scale residential institutions.

40

16.
In spite of the global crisis, Moldova has experienced a slow but continuous
improvement in basic health and health financing indicators during the CPS period. Life
expectancy has increased from 69 to nearly 71 years, and the crude death rate has been reduced
from 12 to 11 per 1,000 population; health insurance coverage has increased from 77 to 81
percent of the population, including all the poor who receive Ajutor Social cash benefits; public
health expenditure per capita has increased from USD 120 in 2006 to USD 170 in 2011 (from 4.7
to 5.4 percent of GDP), and the share of private out-of-pocket expenditure has decreased from 52
to 46 percent. The Government continues to develop family and primary health programs. Forty
four (44) primary care centers have been completed or renovated, and 95 have been made
autonomous; initial steps have been taken in the hospital restructuring process, the payment
system of hospitals based on diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) has been piloted and will be rolled
out to the whole country starting in 2013.
17.
Reforms in the education sector have focused on addressing inefficiencies along with
declining quality, and enhancing the relevance of education. WB support in the education
sector focused on improving the quality of education in rural areas and helping implement the
national early childhood development program. Only in the 2011/12 academic year did class
consolidation start to exceed the pace of student decline (due to demographics), leading to a 1
percent class-size increase in the country. At the same time, the student-teacher ratio started to
stabilize at 10.5 students per teacher in spite of continuing student-age population decline. The
gross enrolment rate in pre-school education increased from 66.1 percent in 2004 to 77.1 percent
in 2010. The Education for All - Fast-Track Initiative (EFA-FTI) supported access to preschool
services for about 9,000 children through the renovation and endowment of 65 preschool
institutions (6.4 percent of the total); 512 preschool institutions (37.5 percent of the total) were
supplied with 31,000 books and other learning materials.
18.
The importance of governance is recognized by the Government, but progress has
been uneven. A civil service reform program has made progress in establishing a merit-based,
professional civil service. Legal reforms, strengthened human resource management capacity and
a functional civil service training system have been implemented. Performance management
systems are being introduced but have not yet been broadly applied. Limited political support
may hamper broader systemic changes in the governance culture. A comprehensive initiative has
been launched to transform public sector governance through Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) and six government e-services have been completed. The project has
supported increased transparency through access to information: data sets available on the Open
Government Data website increased from 50 in 2010 to 539 by the end of December 2012.
Public financial management (PFM) reforms related to Governance and Anti-corruption (GAC),
in particular modernization of the public financial management system, have been postponed
because of challenges in finalizing a new Integrated Management Information System. There
have been improvements in external audit, thereby strengthening accountability for the use of
public funds, and progress has been made in the area of public procurement to conform to
international standards. Strengthening accountability and transparency in the social sectors has
become another area of focus, including social assistance payments and support to the
development of health and education information systems.
19.
Despite progress in a number of areas, the political situation meant that the pace of
reforms was slower than expected. The coalition Government elected in late 2009 had
significant support from the international community to implement a sweeping reform agenda.

41

The WBG was instrumental in assisting the Government to identify key areas for reform, some
of which, particularly social assistance and education, have begun. In other areas, i.e. reforms to
stimulate investment in tradable sectors and to improve the business environment, the pace was
much slower. Improvements in governance have not met expectations, and there has been little
change in the judicial sector. Many of the difficulties in implementing reforms stem from the
realities of coalition politics, and the aspirations of 2009 have not been realized. The CPS took
advantage of the election of a strongly reform-oriented Government, but the political
environment was not conducive to delivering all expected reforms, thus hampering the delivery
of program outcomes.
IV.

Development Outcomes of the Country Partnership Strategy

Program Performance
20.
The following section describes briefly the contributions of the WBG to accomplishing
the strategic goals set out in the CPS PR. CPS CR Table 1 provides a detailed assessment of
program outcomes and ratings.
21.
The overall program performance under the FYO9-13 Moldova CPS is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory. The CPS achieved good progress on most major expected outcomes,
as planned in the original CPS or adjusted at the time of the CPS PR, despite external shocks and
internal political changes. Insufficient progress was made on several important outcomes due to
overly ambitious targets given the political economy of reforms, and to moderate performance
issues. DPOs assisted the Government to take steps towards economic recovery from the global
crisis. Good progress was made in improving social assistance, increasing profitability of
traditional exports, lowering barriers to private investments in telecommunications, and
improving road maintenance. Mixed progress was achieved in the energy sector and on cutting
red tape for businesses and individuals. There was little progress in reforming the pay-as-you-go
pension system but solid progress was made in reforming and targeting social assistance.
Projects supported by the WBG produced concrete development results in areas ranging from
enhanced competitiveness of enterprises and the agricultural sector, greater social protection and
improved access to education, to improved government capacity to design and implement good
policies and manage public resources. The WBG analytical work (including a Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM), public expenditure reviews, financial sector reform technical assistance,
and a battery of specialized reports) provided clear diagnostics of Moldova's development and
reform challenges and helped a new government to prepare a sound development and reform
strategy and mobilize impressive development partner support. Partially achieved or missed
outcomes in some cases indicate moderate underperformance that demands remedial action, but
in most cases they are a combination of unrealistic targets and moderate underperformance.
Pillar I: Improving Economic Competiveness to Support Sustainable Economic Growth
The goal of the first pillar was to augment the competitiveness of the enterprise sector, with
some activities particularly focused on the agro-processing sector, as well as to support
development of physical infrastructure critical for improved competitiveness.
Goal 1: Improved competitiveness ofMoldova's enterprise sector
22.
The three outcomes in the results matrix (meeting quality certification standards,
lowering regulatory compliance costs, and increasing the number of enterprises with access to
formal sources of investment) have been achieved. They represent a small sub-set of indicators

42

describing the broader issue of competitiveness, which are being continuously addressed as one
of the priorities in the Competitiveness Enhancement Project (CEP), Competitiveness DPO, and
IFC Advisory Services and financing.
23.
Overall, good (although not sufficient) progress was made in addressing constraints
facing the private sector. A Competitiveness DPO helped reduce the administrative burden of
business regulation, and facilitated the development of the export-oriented real sector through
reduction of non-tariff barriers to trade and gradual harmonization of product standards with the
EU ones. The original CEP (2005-13) and Additional Financing (AF) (2009-13), helped the
Government make substantial progress on regulatory reform; helped companies obtain
internationally recognized quality certifications and business development services; and
improved metrology, standards, testing and quality (MSTQ) services and infrastructure.
Goal 2: Improved management of the road network
24.
Of three outcomes (better maintenance and improved condition of roads, lower vehicle
operating costs and increased road asset value), one has been partially achieved, the second has
been achieved, and the third one is non-observable. The WB established its leading role in the
sector by providing extensive technical assistance on transport and logistics and leveraged
substantial resources from other development partners. Although the IDA-financed credit in the
road sector was cancelled, road improvements continue to be implemented with other sources of
financing provided by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the
European Commission (EC) and the European Investment Bank (EIB).
25.
Possible lessons for the WB: Technical support in the preparation of transport sector
strategy has a large impact as it paves the way for future WB and development partner operations
and ensures the World Bank's continued presence and leading role, even in the absence of WB
financing. Given other development partner preferences to support the rehabilitation of the main
road network, the World Bank can optimize development impact by engaging in support for the
development of secondary roads essential for better access to social and administrative services.
Goal 3: Reduced energy vulnerability through improved energy efficiency and increased
diversification of energy sources
26.
Three outcomes (ten percent reduction in energy intensity, ten percent increase in
production of energy from renewable sources, and heat, gas, and electricity tariffs at full cost
recovery level) have been fully achieved. Energy intensity measured by total primary energy use
- Ton of Oil Equivalent (TOE) per USD 1000 of GDP (at Purchasing Power Parity rate, 2000) fell from 0.28 in 2009 by about 10 percent in 2010 and about 11 percent in 2011 when it reached
0.22.
27.
The Energy II Project (including AF), future lending (District Heating Reform), AAA
work and multiple Trust Funds (TFs) helped finance efficiency improvements, and to define and
steer the necessary legislation and policies to achieve improved energy efficiency. The project
objectives and the embedded policy dialogue were relevant to all three pillars of the CPS,
improving energy efficiency and heating in schools and hospitals and improving the security and
reliability of the electricity transmission.
28.
IFC's financing of Union Fenosa's investment plan in 2009 helped the largest electricity
distributor rehabilitate and rationalize the existing network and substations, and increase
operational efficiency, reducing system losses by 7 percent and resulting in avoided greenhouse

43

gas (GHG) emissions of around 200,000 tons in 2010. In 2012, IFC financed the feasibility study
and development costs for a greenfield wind farm. IFC is likely to invest in the project during the
upcoming CPS period, contributing to further diversification of Moldova's energy sources.
29.
Lessons for the WB: Well-coordinated sector diagnostic work and WB/development
partner operations lead to consistent policy advice and changes in behavior to establish and
maintain the financial discipline essential for the sustainable operation of the energy sector.
Including policy reforms in the investment operations along with development policy operations,
accompanied by priority investments, helped to leverage additional domestic and external
financing.
Goal 4: Agricultural competitiveness
30.
Targets for two specific outcomes (increased number of enterprises with internationally
recognized quality certificates from 30 to 80, land re-parceling in 46 villages, and 50 investment
grants for addressing climate risks) have all been exceeded and the goal of improved agricultural
competitiveness has been achieved.
31.
A large part of WB lending operations and AAA supported improvements in rural
infrastructure, enhancements to competitiveness and mitigating risks in the agricultural sector
and related rural activities. The focus on specific agricultural enterprises (seeking to obtain
certified quality improvements) and on selected villages (aiming for better land and risk
management) provides a well-defined area for the WB's policy and resource intervention. But it
also opens issues of consistency and rationale for WB actions when overall agricultural sector
performance continues to be hampered by institutional and policy constraints. IFC sought to
attract larger players to Moldova's agriculture sector to demonstrate its potential. In 2012, IFC
financed the expansion and upgrading of a leading integrated agro-industrial group focused on
grain origination trading and oilseed crushing in Moldova, mobilizing an additional USD 40
million through syndication and parallel loans.
32.
A lesson for the WB is that the implementation of well-targeted actions is justified by the
broader impact achieved through export and income performance and/or roll-out of successful
piloted models. Otherwise, meager average sector performance may jeopardize the rationale and
success of narrowly focused and pilot operations.
Pillar II: Minimizing Social and Environmental Risks, Building Human Capital, and
Promoting Social Inclusion
This pillar comprised a cross-sectoral program to improve the efficiency and quality of public
services in social assistance, health care, education, and water supply and sanitation. It also
supported efforts to reduce the vulnerability of Moldova's agricultural sector to climate change.
Goal 5: Broader inclusion and better social protection
33.
Of the two outcomes set for this goal, one (better targeting of social assistance) has been
partially achieved, and the other (pension system equity and sustainability) was not achieved.
34.
Better targeting of social assistance is likely to be achieved beyond the CPS since the
impact of major policy reforms in this area will only be measurable by 2014. The Government
has started an ambitious reform of its social assistance system. A number of categorical benefits
were revised and eliminated in 2012, including a costly nominative compensation program. With

44

a targeting efficiency of 78 percent, Ajutor Social - the targeted social assistance program
launched in 2009 - is one of the best targeted last-resort social assistance programs in the region.
The WB supported social assistance reform through a results-based project (Strengthening the
Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net), which co-financed transitional costs of expanding Ajutor
Social and invested in improving the administrative efficiency of the social safety net. The share
of non-contributory transfers going now to the poorest 20 percent stands at 42.5 percent instead
of the targeted 50 percent. Achieving the desired equity and sustainability of the pension system
(through greater reliance on actual paid contributions, extended pension calculation periods and
other reforms) remains uncertain due to lack of political and social consensus on the nature and
scope of reforms. The WB advisory support in this area was not sufficiently effective in the
absence of explicit political economy considerations, lack of stronger prior reform advocacy, and
insufficient coordination with DPOs and International Monetary Fund (IMF) programs.
35.
Two lessons emerge. One is that implementation is a major challenge and often requires
more time than anticipated, even when reforms have strong ownership, proper institutional
arrangements, and required advisory and lending support. Realistic preparation and
determination of achievable outcomes is thus an important aspect of CPS preparation. The other
lesson is that advocacy and political economy considerations should precede pension and other
difficult social sector and fiscal reforms to avoid weak ownership, opposition or rejection.
Detailed lessons on social transfers and pensions are presented in CPS CR Table 1.
Goal 6: Increased quality of and access to education in line with MDGs
36.
Out of three outcomes one has been achieved (increased access to quality preschool
programs) and two have been partially achieved (increased quality of education in rural areas
and improved efficiency of spending on education).
37.
Four WB-financed projects directly supported reforms in these areas. The Quality
Education in the Rural Areas of Moldova (QERM) Project has supported government efforts to
improve education quality and efficiency. It has contributed to curricula revisions and teaching
and learning materials' development; equipping of 1,176 schools with equity school grants and
300 schools with quality grants benefiting students in poor rural schools. It also jumpstarted
efficiency reforms in the sector including the initiation of per-student financing, which will
contribute to a more efficient use of resources, education planning and monitoring. A recently
negotiated IDA-financed Education Reform Project will cement the gains made in efficiency
interventions but will focus substantially on the improvement of the quality of education.
Moldova also completed successfully two EFA-FTI projects in support of the country's Early
Childhood Development Program. These facilitated development and nationwide application of
new child-centered curricula, early learning development standards, professional standards for
teachers, pre- and in-service teacher training curricula, professional development of principals
and preschool teachers. These successful initiatives are currently continued under a follow-up
Global Partnership for Education (GPE) Grant of USD 4.4 million (effective as of April 2012).
38.
A key lesson is that reforms take time and better outcomes could come years after policy
changes and investments, often outside the regular CPS timeframe. Hence, in those cases
performance indicators should be monitored beyond current CPS periods.

45

Goal 7: Improved access to and quality of health, water and sanitation services, and reduced
environmental degradation and health hazards
39.
The five outcomes related to this goal have been partially achieved (increased efficiency
of resource use in health sector, better access to quality health services, improved health financial
risk protection through increased health insurance coverage, increased number of people with
sustainable access to improved water, and ability of state hydro-meteorological service to
forecast severe weather).
40.
A number of IDA- and TF-financed projects (focused on health services, disease
protection, water supply, provision of rural infrastructure through the social investment fund)
failed to produce sufficient progress towards achieving the five relevant outcomes. This was
partially due to overly elaborate and ambitious targets, and partly due to implementation
problems. IFC's investment in the rehabilitation and extension of the City of Chisinau's water
and wastewater network is ultimately expected to improve the system's capacity to handle
wastewater flows, improve living conditions in areas lacking appropriate sewage infrastructure,
and help minimize health risks due to improved coverage and quality of sanitation services.
41.
Key lessons are: good indicators are not easy to construct (e.g. number of primary health
care visits does not really reflect the efficiency of resource use in the health sector) or properly
measure (e.g. quality of specific health services); the gap between government promises (of the
size and scope health care services) and ability to deliver defines the space for informal
payments (i.e. rationing of limited services); some reforms (such as sustainable access to
improved water supply) require both time and huge resources to be implemented.
Pillar III: Improved Public Sector Governance
The third pillar provided cross-cutting support to the strategic goals of the CPS by promoting
better public sector governance and modem, efficient, public institutions through a combination
of interventions in improving the quality of civil service, developing and implementing public
policies, and strengthening processes for resource allocation.
Goal 8: Building a professional civil service
42.
Two out of three outcomes related to this goal have been achieved (merit system and
structure of civil service pay) and one has been partially achieved (performance management
system).
43.
These medium-term reforms have been supported under the IDA-financed Economic
Recovery DPO and the Central Public Administration (CPAR) Multi-Donor TF (MDTF). In
2009 the Government revived the Central Public Administration Reform. The foundations for a
merit-based, professional civil service were laid through legal reform, strengthened human
resource management capacity and a functional civil service training system.
44.
Lessons are that: partnerships with the EU and other development partners are critically
important for the success of public administration and civil service reforms; and that
performance-based management systems in civil service require a lot of time and preparation to
be owned by all stakeholders and be properly used.
Goal 9: Increased capacity of the public sector to develop and implement public policies
45.
One outcome (sector policies aligned with the National Development Strategy) has been
partially achieved and one (improved policy coordination) has been fully achieved. Both

46

outcomes have been supported by the CPAR MDTF. Strategic planning and policy coordination
capacity has increased, but requires further support to embed it across Government. The CPAR
MDTF was recently extended to December 31, 2013 to continue to build the capacity of the State
Chancellery and develop a program for improving the quality, transparency and efficiency of
administrative public services delivered at the central and sub-national tiers.
46.
The general lesson is that pragmatic introduction of simple impact analysis of proposed
sector policies helped to ensure policy consistency with the medium-term National Development
Strategy, as well as the necessary policy coordination.
Goal 10: Increased transparency and accountability in the management ofpublic monies
47.
Of five outcomes related to this multifaceted goal, two have been achieved (improved
effectiveness of external audit, and increased competition in public procurement) and three have
been partially achieved or not achieved (improved budget classification system, improved
management of ICT in the public sector, and improved service delivery in the public sector
though e-government and e-services).
48.
The outcomes have been supported by the IDA-financed Public Finance Management
(PFM) Project, a large number of MDTFs (on strengthening institutional capacity for public
sector external audit, improved ICT management and transparency of public sector), as well as
ongoing procurement review and AAA work. The main component of the PFM Project is the
Financial Management Information System (FMIS), which has not yet been delivered due to
factors including contractor performance, relations, and reporting, and the Project was extended
to December 31, 2013 to allow for the completion of this very important element of public funds
management, supported now by proactive efforts and management on the ground.
49.
Overall, of 31 outcomes listed in the original results matrix, 15 have been fully achieved,
13 partially achieved and three missed. Among those partially achieved the outcome on water
quality is serious. Others should be considered as warnings and should not derail the
performance of the CPS program; they highlight the need for remedial action and close followup. Lack of capacity to predict severe weather can be overcome either through improved service
or reliance on neighboring countries. Outcomes on pension calculation and introduction of egovernment, as well as establishment of the Financial Management Information System (FMIS),
are important but missed outcomes which could have been avoided with more realistic targets or
more proactive management.
50.
Regarding partially achieved and missed outcomes two comments are in order. In some
cases they indicate serious underperformance which demands remedial action, either through
program re-design or significant changes in allocated financial and human resources. In most
other cases they are a combination of unrealistic targets and moderate underperformance. The
best solution combines adjustments on both sides.
V.

World Bank Group Performance

Country Partnership Strategy Design
51.
This self-evaluation of the FYO9-13 Moldova CPS finds that the overall WBG
performance was Satisfactory. Moldova and the WBG promptly responded to external shocks
and changes in domestic political circumstances by adapting the CPS to exploit the window of
opportunity created by the election of a pro-European coalition Government, and to respond to
the challenges to macroeconomic resilience and stability posed by the global financial crisis. The
47

FY09-12 CPS was prepared during a time of economic and political uncertainty. The CPS design
reflected prevailing circumstances and hidden risks, and the program was appropriately kept
flexible and adaptable to possible changes and evolving development priorities. Flexibility of the
lending program in FY09-10 was largely based on the legacy portfolio of the previous CAS. Of
eight operations listed for FY09-10, four were started before the CPS period (i.e. seeking only
AF), two were a continuation of the previous series of adjustment credits (PRSCs), and only two
were new projects. IFC had no advisory operations in the country at the start of the CPS period,
and average annual commitments were around USD 5 million in 2005-08.
52.
The CPS capitalized on its flexibility to realign the program focus and increased the
lending envelope during FY11-13. The CPS PR endorsed the basic pillars of the original CPS
document, but introduced important changes and additions, allowing a focus of lending and
AAA activities to enable Moldova to better respond to the challenges posed by the global crisis
and better adapt to the post-crisis global economy; enhancing the WBG's ability to assist the
reform oriented government in designing critical reforms and policy responses to critical
economic and social issues; and realigning WBG resources (along with leveraged resources of
development partners) to support Moldova's European integration agenda. The CPS PR was
prepared in a very different political and economic environment, which permitted a larger
lending envelope (augmented by more than USD 30 million of exceptional IDA financing), and
allowed a greater specificity in planning individual operations. In 2011 IFC launched two
advisory programs in the Government's priority areas of regulatory reform (with a focus on
agricultural competitiveness) and risk management in banks. Annual investment commitments
similarly increased, reaching an average of USD 29.2 million per year for IFC's account in 200913. The CPS PR added an extra year (FY13) to the program period to enable sustained support to
the Government and allow quality preparation of the next medium-term partnership strategy.
53.
Changes in the CPS design introduced in the CPS PR reflected new Government
priorities. The Government focused on improving the quality of public services, reforming the
education system, strengthening public financial management, improving governance, and
fighting corruption. Since these priorities matched the three pillars of the original CPS, the
progress report focused on accommodating them better in the lending program (through
Education Reform, Governance e-Transformation, Agricultural Competitiveness and PFM
projects), AAA activities and Advisory Services (education rationalization, programmatic fiscal
work, social inclusion and resilience, financial sector risk management, and agricultural
competitiveness, etc.), as well as trust funds. The initial reform impetus might have been
overestimated, impacting on the achievability of some CPS targets within the CPS timeframe.
54.
The CPS design gave a prominent role to the WB's AAA work as a basis of effective
development dialogue, policy and investment lending. Both the initial CPS document and the
Progress Report planned an exhaustive list of more than forty AAA activities ranging from
country studies (like the CEM report on growth issues) and major pieces of economic and social
analysis (such as public expenditure and key social sector reviews), to applied analytical and TA
work, and assessment of country systems. Evidence suggests that the World Bank's AAA work
is in high demand in Moldova and has a large impact on the design and implementation of
critical policies in the social sectors, agriculture, energy, and public resource management. A
more systematic evaluation of AAA work could provide guidance in further improving this
aspect of World Bank work in future country partnership strategies.

48

55.
The CPS design reflected the WBG's continued effort to fully leverage development
partners in project and AAA work and use available trust funds strategically. Given limited
IDA resources, a wide range of country's development needs, and a large development partner
presence in Moldova, the WBG has effectively used its convening power, knowledge and
operational experience to mobilize development partner support and coordinate many grants
(TFs) financing projects and analytical work. This aspect of CPS design gained special
prominence after the change of government, when it allowed a coordinated development partner
response and an impressive pledge of resources in support of Moldova's reform and EU
orientation.
56.
Overall, the CPS design proved effective in meeting the challenges posed by the
adverse global economic environment, as well as demands for support coming from the
Government elected in 2009. The design of the initial two-year CPS program was rightly kept
underspecified and flexible, thus allowing a slow pace of first year approvals, reflecting the
prevailing economic and political circumstances and underlying risks. The design of the
additional three years in the CPS PR moved towards more specificity focusing on
competitiveness, education and public sector governance, and even greater balance between
policy and investment lending. However, this process of adjusting to changing political and
economic changes might have overestimated the political economy of reforms and
implementation timeframe; hence some goals and specific milestones were non-achievable
during the current CPS.
CPS Program Implementation
57.
Moldova continued its partnership with the IDA, the IFC, and the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) during the CPS period. Total new IDA financing of
USD 290 million in this CPS represents an increase by USD 31.2 million over the original IDA
allocation, reflecting USD 20 million of AF and USD 11.2 million of emergency financial
support under the IDA Crisis Response Window to help address the impact of the global crisis.
IFC significantly increased its engagement in Moldova over the CPS period, committing a total
of USD 146 million to 12 projects, and mobilizing an additional USD 52.6 million from partners.
The committed portfolio increased from USD 29.8 million at the end of FY08 to USD 90.3
million as of June 30, 2013. In all, IFC launched three advisory programs focusing on: (i)
banking sector response to the global financial crisis, (ii) improving the business climate, and
(iii) structuring and implementing healthcare public-private partnerships.
58.
The CPS envisaged annual commitments of approximately USD 45-50 million, and
the IDA15 lending envelope of USD 161 million, including an additional USD 20 million
received in FY11, has been fully committed for existing projects. With IDA commitments in
FY09 back-loaded, IDA was positioned to assist the authorities in mitigating the impact of the
crisis in FY10, with overall IDA commitments reaching USD 69 million. Within this, a USD 25
million Economic Recovery DPO (including USD 11.2 million from the IDA Crisis Response
Window) provided much-needed budget support and focused the reform agenda on laying the
foundations for post-crisis recovery. Over this period, the WB scaled up financing for five ongoing, successful projects: Energy 2, Moldova Social Investment Fund 2, Rural Investment
Support Project 2, Health and Social Assistance, and the Competitiveness Enhancement Project.
59.
Effective CPS implementation helped maximize the impact in a difficult external
environment and a changing domestic political landscape. The CPS program scored a perfect

49

delivery result in FY11 and experienced small slippages in FY12-13. The CPS PR presented the
remainder of the program (USD 120 million) which was fully aligned with the original CPS
pillars as it aimed to support competitiveness (USD 60 million split between two DPOs and the
Agriculture Competitiveness Project), health, education, and public financial management.
Health and Agricultural Competitiveness projects were implemented on time. The
implementation of the Competitiveness DPO was delayed and restructured. Due to political
uncertainties the Government asked to move to a stand-alone DPO instead of the planned DPO
series, and sought to review the scope of the operation. The first DPO was therefore merged with
the second and delivered in FY13 for a total of USD 30 million. The amount of the Education
Reform Project was increased to USD 40 million to help accelerate the upgrading of hub schools
after the Government rolled out per student financing nationwide in January 2013 (with
subsequent consolidation of the schools network).
60.
The strong emphasis on partnerships with other development partners has proven
effective in leveraging financing and reforms. Noteworthy examples include the Rural
Investment Support Project and the Moldova Social Investment Fund 2, which attracted the
support of other partners (DFID, EC, GEF, KFW, Netherlands, Sida, UNICEF and USAID), with
additional financing of USD 24 million and USD 36.4 million respectively. Development
partners (DFID, the Netherlands, Sida) have looked to the WB to administer multi-donor TFs for
Central Public Administration Reform and support to the Supreme Audit Institution, and they
have also provided USD 5.5 million as co-financing to the on-going PFM Project (USD 8.5
million IDA). The Swedish Government, the Austrian Ministry of Finance and the Netherlands
Ministry of Foreign Affairs are also providing support for IFC's Investment Climate Reform
Project.
61.
Strong partnerships have allowed the WB to be more selective in its activities.
Following WB assistance to the Government to develop the Land Transport Infrastructure
Strategy, the roads sector has attracted financing from the EBRD, EIB, EC, Romania and MCC
totaling about USD 550 million and further large funding commitments from the Government of
China. The WB has gradually exited the roads sector following the mis-procurement of USD 11
million and given the availability of other development partners to provide more substantive
financing to this area. Dialogue on transport policy, linked to the first pillar of competitiveness
enhancement, will be maintained through the competitiveness DPO and on Trade Facilitation
through a Transport and Logistics Performance Study.
62.
The WB has provided significant support to enhance development partner
coordination and improve aid effectiveness. In consultation with other partners, in particular
Sida and UNDP, the WB supported the development of a new set of Partnership Principles for
the coordination and harmonization of external assistance to Moldova, signed in March 2010 by
the Government and 22 of Moldova's development partners. The WB used its leading analytical
expertise and investment in AAA, i.e. Policy Notes, to engage early with the Government in
outlining the ESRP that provided the basis for the CG meeting on March 24, 2010, jointly hosted
by the WB and the EU, and where development partners pledged USD 2.6 billion to support key
reforms during 2010-13.
63.
During the CPS period the IDA portfolio in Moldova has had an overall solid
performance. It maintained a disbursement ratio above 20 percent, which reached a record high
35 percent at the end of FY12. On average, it had two problem projects with around 16 percent
of the portfolio and 10 percent of commitments at risk. Proactive portfolio management kept the

50

realism rate at 100 percent. IFC's disbursed and outstanding portfolio in Moldova was USD 90.3
million as of June 30, 2013, having tripled in size over the CPS period. IFC portfolio quality
remained high throughout the CPS period, with no non-performing loans (NPLs).
64.
IFC's operations in Moldova during the CPS period represented a significant
increase in investment and advisory activities directly supporting the three pillars of the
CPS. IFC was able to offer new products tailored to changing market conditions, while
maintaining a strong investment program, including risk management and non-performing loan
advisory services and the scaling up of the Global Trade Finance Program. IFC invested a total
of USD 145.7 million in Moldova's private sector and mobilized an additional USD 48.5 million
from partners, including commercial banks and other development finance institutions. Financial
markets investments and related advisory to domestic banks supported trade and Small and
Medium Enterprise finance, as well as risk and NPL management. IFC investments in the real
sectors during the CPS period (USD 68.3 million in six projects plus mobilization of USD 52.6
million) supported the rehabilitation of Chisinau city's water and wastewater network and roads,
modernization of the country's largest electrical distribution company, early stage development
of renewable energy resources, expansion and upgrading of a leading integrated agro-industrial
group, and expansion of an export oriented glass manufacturer.
65.
TFs are integrated in the WB strategy and support key institutional reforms and
project implementation. The WB has administered a substantial TF portfolio, with a largely
satisfactory implementation track record. These TFs provided co-financing to IDA operations,
financed GEF and carbon operations, and provided other forms of support, including for AAA.
The largest TFs included: USD 16.6 million Regional Development and Social Protection TF
with the EC, USD 9.9 million Central Public Administration Reform MDTF, USD 8.8 million
EFA-FTI grants, USD 4.4 million GPE Grant for pre-primary education, and the recent GEF cofinancing (USD 4.4 million) for the IDA-financed Agriculture Competitiveness Project.
66.
The Regional Development and Social Protection TF financed by the EC was the
largest ever in Moldova's portfolio, being multidimensional, with the objective of reducing
economic and social disparities among regions by (i) improving social services at the local and
community level; (ii) improving water management, constructing and rehabilitating small-scale
water supply and irrigation systems, and adequately equipping water accumulation facilities; (iii)
lowering road transport costs for road-users in Moldova, and providing better access to services
by improving the condition and quality of its road network; and (iv) improving the quality of
sanitary services in Orhei. All objectives were complementary to ongoing IDA-financed
operations. The overly complex design of the operation and ambitious DPO generated
implementation issues, which were further exacerbated by external factors, such as the Eurozone
crisis and governance and capacity issues within the beneficiary Ministry of Environment. The
components on social infrastructures and irrigation and water services have been successfully
completed. A third component on roads is substantially completed. The fourth component on the
construction and operation of a wastewater treatment plant will be completed by June 2013, and
the World Bank has mobilized resources under an ongoing IDA project to continue the
supervision of this component and stepped up its supervision efforts with four missions in 2012.
67.
TFs have been instrumental in strengthening the AAA program as well as being
complementary to the lending portfolio. Technical Assistance and sector work support have been
provided in agriculture, energy, education, financial sector, and e-transformation. CPS CR
Tables 2 and 3 provide additional details.

51

68.
Overall, this self-evaluation of the FYO9-13 Moldova CPS finds that the WBG's
performance in CPS program design and implementation was Satisfactory. On the design
side, the WBG was able to produce a flexible and deliberately under-programmed original CPS
fitting the economic and political uncertainties prevailing in 2008, and later skillfully use the
CPS PR to exploit the window of opportunity created by the election of a pro-reform
Government. On the implementation side, the WBG managed successfully the pace and content
of lending and non-lending activities during the CPS period, ultimately fully utilizing all
available resources and leveraging them ten times with resources of other development partners.
VI.

Key Lessons Learned and Recommendations for Moving Forward

69.
Partnership with the client country is a long-term relationship that should be
sustained through difficult times of economic and political uncertainty to reap reform gains
when windows of opportunity open up. The FYO9-13 CPS took the opportunity when it arose
to support the Government in implementing a challenging reform agenda. However, experience
has demonstrated the risk to such an approach - the political environment has remained polarized
and challenging, hampering the delivery of key reforms.
70.
Advocacy and political economy considerations should precede difficult social sector
and fiscal reforms to avoid weak ownership, opposition or rejection. Delays in some social
sector reforms (including in the health sector and on pension reform) reflect real concerns about
their impacts. It may be more appropriate to sequence such reforms through more selectivity and
based on broad consultation as to how best to address such reform.
71.
Implementation capacity remains a major constraint, meaning a longer time than
anticipated to deliver results even when reforms are fully owned, institutional arrangements are
in place and the needed advisory and lending support are available. Underperformance may
demand remedial action, either through program re-design or changes in allocated financial and
human resources. Unrealistic targets coupled with moderate underperformance determines a
combination of both adjustments (to design and resource allocation) and more proactive
management. The examples of PFM and e-Government are instructive, taking a long time to
deliver results, and requiring strong contract management capacity. In such cases, consideration
should be given to increasing supervision and placing senior staff in the field.
72.
Limited IDA resources and a long list of country reform and policy needs often call
for a strong prioritization of IDA's lending and non-lending activities. If resources are too
fragmented they will have limited impact, and are difficult to supervise - problems demonstrated
in WBG support to the water sector during this CPS. The use of robust growth diagnostic
methods may be useful to identify binding constraints and concentrate financial resources and
analytical power to make transformative advances in those critical areas.
73.
The WBG is most effective when it combines policy dialogue, knowledge (AAA),
lending and private sector investment and advice in support of long-term strategic goals.
Under-investment in AAA can lead to a poor knowledge base from which to develop policy
based lending such as DPOs, as was evidence during this CPS. To provide customized worldclass knowledge, the WB should evaluate its AAA work, looking especially at its true usefulness
in client countries and potential impact. Staff need time and resources to manage AAA which
may be limited if the project portfolio is large and/or fragmented, requiring significant
implementation support from staff. A more focused portfolio with fewer projects allows greater

52

resources for policy dialogue and support for AAA as needed. The large investments in
education and health projects during this CPS have benefited from this approach.
74.
Preparation of sector strategies confirms the WBG's comparative advantage in
enhancing knowledge, and ensures its continued presence and lead role even when
investment projects are not feasible. Sector strategies also allow the WB to optimize
development impact by engaging in activities not picked by major development partners. Wellcoordinated sector diagnostic work and WBG/development partner operations lead to consistent
policy advice and changes in behavior necessary to establish and maintain the financial
discipline essential for sustainable operations. Introduction of simple impact analysis of proposed
sector policies helps to ensure policy consistency with medium-term national development
strategy.

75.
Good performance indicators are not easy to define or measure but are critical.
Realistic preparation and determination of achievable outcomes is an important aspect of CPS
preparation. Identifying a set of easily measured and realistically targeted milestones can help
provide the right incentives, measure progress in the relevant institutional/policy area and fully
define comprehensive monitoring concepts. However, the success of well-targeted actions is
better justified by the broader impact achieved through export and income performance and/or
roll-out of successful piloted models. Otherwise, meager average sector performance may
jeopardize the rationale and success of narrowly focused and pilot operations.
76.
In Moldova, the WBG has an exceptional convening power and ability to
coordinate, engage and leverage other development partners on the implementation of a
broader strategy. This was shown clearly in the WB's support to the transport sector and the
development of the Roads Sector Strategic Plan. Given the limited resource envelope, it will be
important to work further with other development partners who may have additional investment

resources, and the WBG will maintain its role as a convener in the development community. The
WB will seek increased partnerships with the EU and other development partners to ensure
coherence in understanding of and support for critical reforms with a view to achieving
maximum impact. A key focus will be on where other partners' resources complement
financially the AAA program.
77.
The WBG should seek to use TF resources more strategically to support core
objectives. The WBG should explore opportunities for increased partnerships with the EU and
other development partners, and other ongoing/planned TFs. These partnerships will build on the
WBG's efforts towards a more programmatic approach to mobilizing and consolidating TF
resources in order to reduce portfolio fragmentation and administration costs. TF resources will,
to the extent possible, complement limited resources to finance WB staff, building on principles
of selectivity, comparative advantage and positive implementation track record.
78.
Further lessons from earlier WBG engagement and evaluations are given in CPS CR
Annexes 1 and 2 below.

53

CPS CR TABLE 1: Summary of CPS FYO9-13 Program self-evaluation
Outcomes the World Bank

Status and Evaluation Summary

expected to influence in the
CPS period

Lending and Non Lending Activities that

Lessons and Suggestions for the new CPS

contributed to the outcome
PILLAR I. IMPROVING ECONOMIC COMPETITIVENESS TO SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH
Strategic Goal 1: Improved competitiveness of Moldova's enterprise sector

1.
MSTQ system
meeting the WTO
commitments.

Outcome 1 has been achieved.
Over 5,200 EU compatible standards adopted
by September 2012.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Competitiveness Enhancement Project and
Additional Financing

Over 200 firms had received international
certificates of quality by mid-2012, with 250

Competitiveness DPO
Partnerships and TFs:

The number of accredited testing facilities
increased from 36 in 2005 to 121 by September

MSTQ is a complex field, which caused delays in
the procurement of high-precision metrological
equipment. It is necessary to recognize the
complexity risks and identify ways to mitigate
them from the start of Project.
New projects including an MSTQ component
should be developed based on detailed study and
understanding of the overall MSTQ infrastructure
in the country and its development needs.

PHRD-Moldova: Competitiveness
Enhancement Project

2012.

2.

Decreased regulatory

Identify and describe in detail how proposed
project activities to enhance the MSTQ
infrastructure, will benefit individual companies/
private sector (final beneficiaries).

Outcome 2 has been achieved.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:

CEP was a good example of a project funding

compliance costs for
enterprises from 16 percent in
2007 to less than 12 percent
(as measured by Cost of Doing

Regulatory compliance costs significantly
decreased from 16 percent in 2007 and have
stabilized at 10 percent over the last thee years
(2010-2012), according to the CODB survey,

Competitiveness Enhancement Project (CEP)
and Additional Financing

Business survey).

Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) made

Regulatory Reform activities not supported by
other development partners.
Key recommendations for the next CPS can be
summarized as follows:

Partnerships and TFs:

mandatory for all new legislation in January
2008, with a standardized consultation

PHRD-Moldova: Competitiveness
Enhancement Project

vaous projects of other development partners.
Focus CPS Regulatory Reform efforts on priority

mechanism, including Government and pnvate

Global Doing Business Report (WB, JFC)

areas, as identified in consultation with other

sector representatives.

development partners.

Some 1,300 government officials and business
representatives trained in principles and
techniques of RIA.

State clear terms and defnitions of indicators
used to measure compliance costs and doing
business costs in general. Ensure consistency of

Yearly number of inspections from State
Agencies per company decreased from 17 in
2004 to 5.2 in 2012.

such terms and definitions in all project and
related documents.
Analyze options and plan for post-project funding
for Regulatory Reform activities.

Number of days required to register a new
company decreased by more than halto fom 20
days in 2005 to 9 in 2012.
3.
Increased share of
enterprises with access to

Outcome 3 has been achieved.
A fully-functioning private credit bureau was

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Competitiveness Enhancement

formal sourcesrof investmente
54

Project

and

The private credit bureau needed an enforcement
mechanism in the form of a NBM regulation in

finance from 17.71 percent
(2005) to 25 percent (BEEPS
survey).

Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Financial Sector Monitoring & TA (includ
Secured Transactions Reform, Modernization
of Payment Systems)

17 loans of over USD 7 million extended from
a revolving fund established, using repayments
from the original CEP credit line.

Moldova Improving Access to Credit

estimated
2006--transport
~
~ baedTonathepimroved
~
~
~

percentage of National Roads
in good, fair, and bad
condition.fanc

While work on enhancing the legal framework is

59 loans in a total amount of USD 22.5 million
extended to exporting companies from the CEP
Credit Line in the period June 2010 to
December 2011.

BEEPS survey data will become available in
late spring.

4.
Increased percentage
of roads in good or fair
condition from 7 percent in

order to kick-star operations.
Enhancement of the legal framework governing
financial institutions and financial services is a
necessary pre-requisite for the long-term
enhancement of access to finance.

established in 2011, covering the entire banking Additional Financing
sector.
Planned Lending: Competitiveness DPO
Payment Services and E-Money Law enacted
in September 2012.
awenctd i SptmbrJFC Global Credit Bureau Group, TA
Capta Mrkts
Capital Markets Law enacted in September
2012.
FIRST TA

~

on-going, it is important to address current
a te
edtline
ing dedr ecs
(c)e Th e
Lfl
a nhe not ared
by
EP
paners:
oThe
-

-

x
n
Speifiall tarte
Lerm,
up
to er oan

program of accounting reform and institutional
strengthening)
Planned AAA:

-

PSD TA & Analytical work (Priority Issues i
MD Private Sector Development)

Important indirect benefits resulting from the
CEP CL:

A&A ROSC Update
Strengthening auditing and reporting (STAR)
in EU neighborhood countes
Corporate Financial Reporting Enhancement
TA as part of the STAR program

-

and advisory services to
bank capacity to serve the
and manage risk; direct
sectors and regional private

-

IFC: Financing
strengthen local
MSME sector
financing in real
equity fund

andl adisr
services
~2 Strategic
ecn
~ ngoooriainb
~Goal ~2: Improved
FC Finacin
management of the road network

-

-

Both investment and working capital
purposes
Choice of currencies (MDL, USD, EUR)

Close monitoring of participating financial
institutions (PFIs), thus of the financial
system
PFIs improved performance indicators,
quality and maturity of capital, enhanced
business practices
Transparent, APR-based pricing of the loans
Competitive procurement procedures

sectordevelopmentxenlprnr
tinfcnl,wt

o

rnpr

Outcome 4 has been partially achieved.
Based on the 2012 road condition survey, the
condition of the network of National Roads has

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
IDA credit for Roads Sector Program Support
Project

fair condition. This is due to (i) increased
estimatedbasedonsrghor
investment in road rehabilitation, and (ii)
increased spending for road maintenance,

tNElheu
tm po
the w
Bankeprovidued ton
tranport, nd logisics
The World Bank's engagement as a lead
an levaed substranal
adtionasurcs
t
development partner in Moldova's transport
invrea sctors adrional prie
ver
Eceen
a
ae
for the transport sector from EBRD, EC, and
fruitful and there is a possibility that the World
EIB.
Bank could take that Lead Donor role again after
Partnerships and TFs:
the MCC compact with Moldova ends.
Regional Development and Social Protection
There are three main issues that external partners
Grant (road component)
will be looking for, namely: (i) adequate road

These results can only partially be attributed to
World Banks advisory and lending activities in
the sector

55

The formal adoption of the new Transport and
Logistics Strategy (being developed now) will be
the basis for continued financial support and

5.
Vehicle operation
costs on the roads improved
under the Road Sector
Program have decreased by at
least 8 percent according to expost economic evaluation.

Outcome 5 has been achieved.
Transport costs on road sections rehabilitated
under the Road Sector Program have been
reduced by about 15 percent on average, based
on economic feasibility studies for those roads.

Ongoing/Completed AAA:

maintenance funding; (ii) good sector policies,

Ongoing TA (2012 - 2013) to support the
Government in preparing a new Transport and
Logistics Strategy, and prioritized Investment
and Expenditure Plan.

and (iii) absence of corruption.
While there is much support by other
development partners for rehabilitating the main
road network, little is being done so far to ensure
access of the rural population to social and
administrative services, and this is where the
World Bank could come in.

Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova
(Delivery date: 16/11/2009)
Transport and Logistics Strategy
Partnerships and TFs:
Additional loans and grants from EBRD, EIB,

EC, MCC and China
6.

Increased Road Asset

Value from USD 8.4 billion in
2007.

Outcome 6 is non-observable.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:

Valuation of road assets in Moldova is not yet
done on a regular basis. The latest full road

IDA credit for Roads Sector Program Support
Project
Partnerships and TFs:

asset valuation took place in early 2010 and
showed a road asset value of USD 4.5 billion.
However this number was derived utilizing a
different methodology and is not comparable to
the baseline number of USD 8.4 billion.
Moreover, this number is based on a road
condition survey carried out in late 2009 and
does not reflect the effects of the new road
investments and of the much increased
spending on road maintenance of the last three
years. It is estimated that about USD 450
million have been invested in road
rehabilitation and maintenance between 2010
and 2012. It is therefore likely that a road asset
valuation, if it were done now based on the
2010 methodology, would show a road asset
value somewhat higher than USD 4.5 billion,
though it is not possible to say if it exceeds

BC Regional Development and Social
Protection Grant (Roads Component)

USD 8.4 billion.
Strategic Goal 3: Reduced energy vulnerability through improved energy efficiency and increased diversification of energy sources
7.
Ten percent reduction
in energy intensity measured
by the total primary energy
use (TOE) per USD 1,000 of
GDP at PPP rate.

Outcome 7 has been achieved.
A new Energy Law was adopted in December
2009 enabling Moldova to meet requirements
and become a full member of the Energy
Community Treaty.

Government approved in November 2011

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Energy 2, including Additional Financing
(closed on April 30, 2012)
Planned Lending:
DH Efficiency Improvement
5The

56

The World Bank financed investment and TA
projects and the funds leveraged with other
development partners (Sida, EU, etc.), as well as
the enhanced coordination among development
partners, ensure better consistency of policy
advice, and enhance the impact of their activities.

the Energy Efficiency Program and Action
Plan, a milestone for further actions and
investments to reduce energy vulnerability and
improve energy efficiency.
The Government approved the District Heating
(DH) institutional, corporate and financial
restructuring Concept, allowing vertical
integration of Termocom and CHPs and
creation of a New Company (Newco), and
preparation of a debt restructuring plan with
Moldovagaz.
Indicator on energy intensity (2009 - 2011)
TOE per USD1000 of GDP (PPP year 2000)
2009-0.28
2010 -0.25 - 10.4 percent reduction
2011 -0.22 - 11.6 percent reduction
Targets for public heating were exceeded. 217
buildings (compared to target of 80 buildings) including schools, hospitals and residential
buildings) have heat and hot water throughout
the year.
8.
Ten percent increase
in production from renewable
energy sources (RES).

9.

Cost recovery of heat,

Outcome 8 has been achieved.
Indicator on RES. Share of RES in total gross
domestic energy consumption:

Ongoing/Completed AAA:

2009 - 3.7 percent

PPIAF: Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement

2011 - 6 percent -- an increase of 38 percent

Project

EC and Sida (EBRD executed) provided TA
support to Government and ANRE to work on
feed-in tariffs for RES. The feed-in tariffs were
developed and have undergone public
discussion. Currently, the GoM is drafting
amendments to the Law on Renewables to
introduce the outcomes of the feed-in tariffs
TA.

Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA
District Heating Sector Reform TA
Public Utilities Subsidies Study (DFID)

Sida TF on Financing Energy Sector Reform
and Efficiency Improvements

Outcome 9 has been achieved.

Energy Policy Note

Implementation and successful realization of the

gas and electricity tariffs for

Tariffs for DH in Chisinau approved by ANRE

Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova

World Bank-financed projects leads to lowering

all categories of consumers

starting Januar 2010. All tariffs at cost

the risks and increasing attractiveness of further

investments. Besides, good results achieved under

approaches 100 percent, while
cash collection ratios stay
above 95 percent (for gas and
electricity) and 90 percent for

CDCF
Cash collections for gas (96.6 percent) and
electricity (99.2 percent) are on target. Tariffs
for gas, electricity, and heat are set at full cost

-

Moldova Biomass Heating ERPA

CDCF - Energy Conservation and Emissions
Reduction

57

these projects urge the Beneficiaries to undertake
further steps in the same direction, increasing
thereby the projects sustainability.

district heat.

recovery levels for all categories of consumers.
Cash collection for district heat is about 90
percent and complies with the target level.

IFC: Advisory service and investment to
promote PPPs, energy efficiency credit lines to
local banks.

Fiscal sustainability of the sector remains a
concern due to USD 250 million (3.5 percent of
GDP) past gas debt of the Chisinau DH sector.
Recent DH restructuring Concept should be
promptly and fully implemented, including the
institutional, corporate and financial
restructuring, and orderly servicing of
rescheduled debt for imported gas. Efforts to
improve the regulatory environment should
also continue.
Strategic Goal 4: Agricultural competitiveness

Outcome 10 has been achieved.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:

The success of agriculture and agricultural

agricultural enterprises with
internationally recognized
quality certificates increased

A total of 125 agricultural enterprises (which
exceeds the target of 80) received
internationally recognized quality certificates:

Rural Investment Services Project 2 Additional
Financing

producers of a small open economy is highly
determined by the international competitiveness
of the output produced. The challenge for

from 30 in 2007 to 80 at the

90 - IS09000, 22 - HACCP, and 13 -

Competitiveness Enhancement Project 2

Moldovan agriculture is huge since compliance

end of 2011.

GlobalGap.

Additional Financing

with EU SPS provisions is binding for the EU
Association Agreement. Significant efforts and
resources will be required to pursue the vast SPS

10.

Number of

Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation
Project
Agricultural Competitiveness Project
PlannedLack Plannd Lening:policy
Competitiveness DPO

Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Food Security Notes

11.

More efficient use of

countries. To grasp this important opportunity the

Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova

and firmly in addressing the legal, policy and

Agricultural Sector Policy Revision and Budget
TA

institutional gaps in the rural development area in
view of complying with EU principles for
ENPARD allocation.

Agricultural Systems in Moldova TA

and an average 20 percent of village population

(a) Higher output value and

participated in an additional 40 villages. An

agriculture and rural development though

Country Economic Memorandum

Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of

baseline and control cases):

development agenda. Moldova has an opportunity
to benefit from EU ENPARD funds to support
targeted investments in the EU neighboring

11.1. Achieved
An average of 40 percent of village population
participated in land re-parceling implemented
in an initial effort, which comprised 6 villagAs;

instruments represent a serious gap in

shaping the country's growth and sustainable

Agricultural Competitiveness TA

Outcome 11 has been achieved.

market information and
technical knowledge alongo
agricultural value chain
leading to (as measured in 6
pilot villages compared with

implementation agenda.
of rural development strategy and policies

and TFs:

Government of Moldova needs to move quickly

tarln
aerships

Agricultural Competitiveness Project (GEF)
Agricultural Pollution Control Project (GEF)
Sida Support to RISP 2

assessment of the pilot villages was

oimpact

58

lower variability; (b) Fewer
loss making farms; (c) Higher
total factor productivity in
surveyed farms.

carried out in 2011, revealing general
improvements in the efficiency of farm
operations.
1,038 rural businesses have been created (as of

GFRP Moldova Food Security TA

a.
Re-parceling activities
implemented in another 40
villages, in addition to the 6
pilot villages.

end-September, 2012) under RISP 11, with a
first-year survival rate close to 100 percent, and
generation of 2645 jobs.
11.2. Achieved

Competitiveness and structural reform followUP work
Skills Measurement Survey
IFC: Direct financing to companies m

b.
Strengthened farmers'
preparedness to climate risks
through information on
practical techniques for
adaptation, i.e.
grants/demonstration about
adaptation to climate risks, on a
pilot basis: at least 50
investment grants are provided
and introduced at
demonstration plots,

Growth in lending to agricultural and rural
sectors has exceeded targets. It has reached
MDL 4.02 billion as of end-May, 2012
(compared to a 2012 target of MDL 2.85 billion
and a baseline of MDL 2.14 billion),

agribusiness, credit lines to local banks, which
lend to agribusiness sector and to the rural
areas. This will be complemented by JFC
expansion of advisory services in the
agribusiness sector and for small and medium
enterprises.

Planned AAA:
DCFTA P

5

A

l

More than 60 investment grants for adaptation
to climate risks provided. More than 35,000
thousand farmers received training and
participated in on-site demonstration events for
climate resilient agricultural investments.

PILLAR 11. MINIMIZING SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS, BUILDING HUMAN CAPITAL, AND PROMOTING SOCIAL INCLUSION
Strategic Goal 5: Broader inclusion and better socialprotection
benefits byemoretthanS50ppercentAini2012uin
12.
Improved equity and
inclusion: increased coverage

Outcome 12 has been partially achieved with
some milestones still lagging behind,

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Health Services and Social Assistance (HSSA),

and maintained targeting

The coverage of the poorest quintile by Ajutor

including Additional Financing

context of politically-sensitive reforms that

accuracy of the Ajutor Social
program:

Social benefits increased from 14.3 percent to
14.9 percent between 2010 and 2011. The

Social Investment Fund 2

usually take longer than anticipated.
Cooperation with other development partners has

20 percent of population in
the poorest quintile receive
AS benefits.

target of 20 percent coverage was set to be
attained by 2016.
Seventy-seven percent of the Ajutor Social

Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social
Safety Net (SESSN) Project
Partnerships and TFs:

been critical. Joint work with the JMF was
important for consolidating benefits in targeted
programs while preserving budget overall

Targeting accuracy is

went to the poorest population quintile
benefits
G

BC Moldova Regional Development and Social

envelope. Analytical reports contributed by other

maintained such that at least

As such, the Program is one the best
in 2011.
aredreforming

Protection Grant (Social Component)

development partners (e.g. DFJD's report on

Grant for Second Additional Financing for the

helped inform the World Bank's support in the

PlannedTF

DPO in combination with results-based
financing (RBF) operation proved to be effective

0

cthqthe.
f
65anpers
tasra

assaceporm
treed lCAtresiortscan
pjuore
oia Tinhe
poe
ECA reon.uesconsolid

0ppulation quintegricaltgor.

coslainf

vents for
category-based Nominative Compensation
percent. ws
progra
f
ceedin m-1
categorical

by 22
benefits
entmore.reduced

Increased allocative efficiency

The

Thnis epe toredc shn
0peding on categoican

Moldova Social Investment Fund Project (Sida)
Community Participation in Post-conflict

The 2009-13 CPS set too optimistic results in a
relatively short timeframe, particularly in the

Targeted Social Assistance program)

sector.
Exploiting synergies within the World Bank

comparison to 2010, releasing budget resources

lne
F
PHRD D&D grant for integration of children

in designing policy reforms to improve targeting

categorical benefits consolidation

for fiscally sustainable expansion

for further expansion of the Ajutor Social

with disabilities and special education needs

coverage to extremely poor population. RBF also

of Ajutor Social program:

psupported

:providing
eEnhanced

implementation of policy reforms by
customized inputs and expert support
from the World Bank.

-

administrative
efficiency, governance, and

Administrative

efficiency

in

the

social

59

accuracy of Ajutor Social and expanding its

*

assistance

Turnaround time for Ajutor
Social application

average
tur-around
time
for
processing Ajutor Social applications exceeds

and SESSN projects and MSIF 11 and BC grants
proved beneficial both for the World Bank and

processing, including
g
verification

the statutory 30 days. Establishment of a
moder management information system

the client. Building on these successes more can
be done by linking health and social care reforms

decision, is reduced to 25

(S

Moldova citizens is aware
of Ajutor Social (5 percent

will contribute to increased efficiency of
benefits administration at various levels of

Success and sustainability of equity-enhancing
reforms greatly depends on how well programs

increase from the baseline).

government,

Process of Social

Furthermore, benefits administration is

are managed and theft objectives communicated
to the public at large, as well as on how potential

Assistance Automated
Information System
(SAAIS) introduction is
launched.

expected to be strengthened through better
oversight and control exercised by the Social
Inspectorate that was established in 2011.
Awareness of the Ajutor Social program

'winners" and "losers" perceive their outcomes.
Going forward, efforts to build public support and
ensure stakeholders' understanding will be crucial
to the success and political sustainability of these

Social Inspectorate is

increased by 6 percent between 2010 and 2011.

decisio,i. eue o2
das.SAAJS
Increased number of

*

*

*

S)

system

is

a

remains

critical

an

input

issue.

The cooperation and synergies between HSSA

transparency.

to

The

(for instance by turning a share of hospitals into

improve

social care institutions) or by utilizing MSJF
experience of helping raions to plan for efficient
delivery of social care services.

administration of Ajutor Social benefits, The
development however experienced
multiple delays. Its implementation in 2013

established and functional
13.

New initial pensions

Outcome 13 has not been achieved because of

Ongoing/Completed AAA:

The lessons mentioned in the outcome 12 above

calculation fully based on
actual contributions paid

the lack of progress in pension reforms,
In 2011, some progress was made in extending

Count Economic Memorandum

are also true for the pension policies, including
timely and thorough consideration of political

(valorized with wage growth),
and the real value of pensions

the calculation period in the pension benefit
formula. The calculation period was set to

Pension Policy Note
Poverty Update and TA

economy aspects of this yet another redistributive
reform; strengthening the leverage through

preserved (indexed with
inflation rate).

gradually increase from 30 to 35 years, at 6
months a year. However, this is a fairly slow

epartnerships

with IMF and other development
partners to influence the pace and depth of

increase that applies only to male retirees and

Impacts of the International Financial Crisis on

reforms; seeking synergy with other on-going!

sustainable retirement
ae-retirement age
equalized and increased
for both genders at 6
months increments per

as such this measure is likely to have a modest
impact on pension budget. Moreover, the effect
ofthis policy measure is likely to be diluted by
a lack of valorizing (with wage growth) of past
incomes for new retirees. Moreover, the
determination of benefits is still based on

Workers' Remittances, Migration and Poverty
mn Moldova
Planned AAA:
Programmatic HID AAA

calendar year.

declared wages instead of on contributions

upcoming operations (e.g. with PFM 2 for
improved contribution collection).
Moreover, continuous engagement is essential to
keep the World Bank's policy advice relevant and
to prevent the GoM from shifting the focus of
pension reform from the most acute problems in

More actuarially

PAYG pillar.

paid. This weakens the linkage between the

Further pension reform engagement may warrant

paid contributions and the level of pension

the World Bank's pursuing advocacy approach

benefits, and hence the incentives to participate

where there is as yet insufficient ownership and

and contribute to the system.

public support for the necessary reforms and

The indexation rules have not been changed
either.
The retirement age has not been increased,

World Bank efforts would consequently focus on
creating greater consensus and demand for
change.

-

Strategic Goal 6: Increased quality of and access to education in line with MDGs

14.

Increased access to

quality preschool programs

Outcome 14 has been achieved.

Partnerships and TFs:

The EFA FTI Grant was relevant and, along with

Significant increases in gross pre-school

Education for All-Fast Track Initiative (EFA-

other projects supporting infrastructure

60

from 71.1 percent in 2008 to 75
percent in 2011 for children
aged 3-6 and from 77.1
percent in 2008 to 85 percent
in 2011 for children aged 5-6.

enrolment rates, reaching 77.1 percent in 2010
for children aged 3-6, and 97.7 percent in 2010
for children aged 6.
6.4 percent of all pre-schools renovated and
endowed; approximately 34 percent of pre-

FTJ) Preschool Phase 11 (Grant) - closed in
November 2010
Education for All-Fast Track Initiative Phase
III/Global Partnership for Education ( GPE
Grant) - effective March 2012

development, contributed to the achievement of
the envisaged outcome derived from the
Millennium Development Goals stipulated in
Moldova's National Development Strategy.
Under the follow-up GPE grant, while the

school teachers trained and 37.5 percent of preschools provided with teaching and learning
materials.

Ongoing/Completed AAA:

Government continues efforts to expand ECD
coverage and address equity issues, a stronger
focus will also be placed on enhancing the quality

TF-EPDF Moldova -closed August 31, 2012

New policies developed and applied in pre-

of pre-school services. More efforts are made to

schools: child-centered curriculum, early

promote national policies and legislation, a

learning development standards, and
professional standards for teachers, pre-service
and in-service curriculum for teachers, and

system wide professional development program
for pre-school teachers associated with the
provision of modern teaching and learning

materials, a school readiness assessment

associated guides.
Th12)sepetePgato

effectvnce

ar

)instrument,

all expected to contribute towards
better educated individuals, in the long run. This

Trackn Initaties

mentioned achievements further contributing to
GrdeNaioalAsesmet

olonttries.

rfotfFs

Track Initiative

increased access in rural localities with

fore-evc
th
temes
Itndad
2011
aressionalaccess
inadequate
to preschool
services
and to
preschool education quality.

15.

Increased quality of

Outcome 15 has been partially achieved.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:

Moldova Education Reform Project will support

education in rural areas as
measured by increased student
achievement (baseline 9th

Baccalaureate scores have increased by an
ereforms
ste diearence
avege
of
perdcent e rural
curricu
ebasrlye
bet
a lu
or

Quality Education in Rural

Social Investment Fund 2, including Additional

the Government of Moldova in implementing
strengthening the quality of education
through
quality assurance
standardsimplementation
for hub schools;ofupgrade
of teachers'

and Baccalaureate scores
identified by subject:

Baccalaureate Examinations was over hauled,
making it difficult to report any progress in the

Financing
Planned Lending:

and school directors' training and remuneration
programs; improvement in student assessment

achievement will increase by

ipoentof

Education Reform Project

systems and in the quality of data and

test scores due to issues of

eas Project,

comparability. It is envisaged that during the

Ongoing/Completed AAA:

next CPS period, increased quality will be
reported based on revised indicators and
improved measurements of student
outcomes/test scores.

Country Economic Memorandum
Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova
Planned AAA:

Moldova'as performance in PISA is a

substantive illustration of the quality challenges
the system currently faces. The results on PISA

Public Expenditure Review Education
Chapter/Note (stand-alone)

2009 Plus show that the performance of the
counte's 1r5-year-olds in reading, math, and
science is among the lowest in the region.
Around 60 percent of Moldovaos 1f5-year-olds
lack the basic levels of proficiency in reading
and math literacy needed to participate
effectively and productively in the society.
These results show the need to continue,

and extend reforms in curriculum,a

nconsolidate

61

student assessments, teacher training and
textbook design.
16.
Improved efficiency of
spending on education

Outcome 16 has been partially achieved.
With support fr7om the ongoing Project, the

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Quality Education in Rural Areas Project,

Based on strong policy work conducted by the
World Bank, the Government embarked on an

16.1.
Formula funding,
developed in 2008, will be
piloted in 2 raions by 2010.
Increased average class
16.2.
size from 22 students in urban
areas and 18 students in rural
areas in 2007
to 23 students in
aesi207t23suetin
urban areas
rurba
areasbyd
and
19 students in
212.studentsi

Government piloted since 2010 school
optimization and formula funding in two raions
(Causeni, Riscani) and surpassed original
objectives by expanding formula financing to
nine additional rural raions and two urban
Municipalities in January 2012. This brought
about increases
in year
class-size
by the
end aofthird
2011/2012
school
by which
point
of the country regions were implementing the
er
ent i
sce 0 school
brnginat an1cn
icrese in clssiz
nationwide. Class-size increased in the first two
pilot areas of Causeni and Riscani by 2.3
percent and 3.3 percent respectively since
launching the pilots. Still, Moldova has fallen
slightly short of reaching its goals in increase in
class size. The class-size in urban areas has
increased to 22.4 only, while in rural areas it
declined to 17.4.
Legal changes approved in April 2012 created
an enabling environment for nationwide
efficiency reform through the introduction of
per-student financing into the law on public
finances; changes in school ownership from
mayors to raion councils aimed to support the
optimization efforts at regional level. As a
result, per student financing was rolled out
nationwide in January 2013.

including Additional Financing
Finacn

ambitious reform program the key objectives of
which are to increase the quality of education and
Th
commient s strenned furtr

Planned Lending:
Education Reform Project

passing in Parliament of the much needed and
exstngblaws whc wl
amementto

Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Country Economic Memorandum

of efficiency reform measures, creating fiscal
space for increased interventions to improve
education quality. It is envisaged that the impact
of these reform measures will only be seen at the
end of the next CPS period.

Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova
Planned AAA:
Public Expenditure Review Education
Chapter/Note (stand-alone)

62iiu

eomporm h

e betvso

Strategic Goal 7: Improved access to and quality of health, water, and sanitation services and reduced environmental degradatdon and health hazards
17.
Increased efficiency in
resource use in the health

Outcome 17 has been partially achieved.

advanced stage of works.
sectorasmeasuredbyhighr
utilization of primary careprmycaedtos
services.
74 primary care providers directly contracted
by NHJC by end 2012, up from 4 in 2007.
Revised curriculum for primary health care
staff and managers approved and implemented;
62 standardized medical protocols for primary
care produced.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
alt ec
and Social Assistance,
including Additional Financing

The indicator is of dubious validity, because
increased efficiency in resource use cannot be
marre docrs.

Avian Influenza Project
National Water Supply and Sanitation Project)
Social Investment Fund 2, including Additional
Financing

The HSSAP has invested intensely on rural
primary care infrastructure renovation, with
tangible results. Yet, less than one third of the
total number of PHCs has been renovated. More
importantly, there are other key variables, such as
payment systems, incentives, and management
capacity, which are more important than

BOOST analytical work in health sector
WHO TA program in health sector
6World2Bank,

the Governmentsembarked onnan

to 2.8 in 2012 per person per year.

18.

Improved access to

quality health services.

Planned Lending:
New results-based project in health care sector
in FY15

infrastructure as determinants of sector efficiency,
and HSSAP has been actively working on all
these other dimensions, with varying results.

Outcome 18 has been partially achieved.

Ongoing/Completed Lending:

There has been a tangible improvement in the

Hospital Master Plan completed and approved

Health Services and Social Assistance,

quality of specific services, but much more needs

in 2010: Government Decision No. 379 dated
07.05.2010quality

including Additional Financing

to be done, by establishing clinical protocols,
enhancement processes in all hospitals,

07ve05pm20 10rgan Hospta sector12
development Program for 2010-2012.
Grup ysem
NewDianoticRelte
NewInformation
in 7 hospitals.

iloed

Moldova Health PPPs (IFC)
IDF Grant on building Health Management
System strategy

Legislative Framework for PPPs established
and PPP pilots initiated.

WHO TA program in health sector

80.6 percent of resident population is insured in
2012, and discounts are available to get
insurance for self-employed workers.

Planned Lending:
New results-based project in health care sector
in FY 15

and re-qualifying senior doctors. Insurance access
has been increased over the last four years, but
more needs to be done to reduce out-of-pocket

Primary care is free also for non-insured
population.
Number of GP vacancies in rural areas
decreased from 20 percent to 15 percent.
The level of citizen satisfaction with public
health services increased very slightly from

42.7 percent to 44.6 percent.
19.

Increased share of the

Outcome 19 has been partially achieved.

Partnerships and TFs:

The gap between what Government promises and

population with health
insurance,

Health insurance extended to include social
assistance beneficiaries; incentives for other

Health Services and Social Assistance,
including Additional Financing

what it is able to provide is the root cause of
informal payments. The Government has tried to

Baseline: 76.7 percent of
population covered by health
insurance (2007)

vulnerable groups and farmers introduced and
approved. 80.6 percent of resident population is
insured in 2012.

Agricultural Competitiveness Project (GEF)
EC Regional Development Grant (Water and
Sanitation component - Wastewater Treatment

reduce the size of payments by increasing the
medicines reimbursed for those insured, and other
measures, but the fiscal situation, the 2008 crisis,

under 2 years in response to the financial and
economic crisis.

POPS Stockpiles Management and Destruction
(GEF, Dutch, Canada)

gap.

Successffil implementation of the Avian
Influenza project has established the capacity to
monitor and respond to infectious disease
outbreaks in both the animal and human health
sectors.
Outcome 20 has been partially achieved.

Planned Lending:
New results-based project in health care sector
in FY 15

Target: 80.8 percent of
population covered by health

insurance (20 10)

20.

Increased proportion

Additional financing supported distribution of
food packages to 11.6 percent of pregnant and
lactating women and 10 percent of children

Plant in the town of Orhei)
JSDF for Hepatitis B & C
Coordinated Program in the Health Sector (EU)

and government unwillingness to question the
existing financing model and benefit package
have impeded greater progress in bridging the

According to the official Joint Monitoring

of the population with

Sector strategy financing revised (ffinded by

Program report 2012, MDG indicator 29 was

sustainable access to an
improved water source, urban

EC/ADA)

already at a level of 93 percent in 2000 and
reached 96 percent in 2010. A lesson is that for

and rural (MDCs Indicator

The National Water Supply and Sanitation

the new CPS, outcomes need to be more carefully

63

29: by 2010 (FY11) 57 percent
and by 2015 (FY16) 68.5
percent.

Project has undergone major restructuring,
including a revision of project outcomes and
monitoring and evaluation indicators. The
restructuring has been completed in September

defined.
Insufficient project readiness significantly
impeded further achievement of CAS outcomes
during that period.

2012.
definition of realistic, quantifiable baselines

AsThe
with access to improved water source under the
project. Works were to supply an additional
5,970 people were in completion phase.

tiletat
conibu

Agriculture (while a percentage evaluation ofeconomically
the achievement is not possible due to the
h

project
tion to aojcives.

potntial

sub-optimal, and thef enforcement impacts

negatively the magnitude of achievable outcomes
wt iie
iacn eore

inotepossipblict
thenachevemaaent, s
absence of a target, the increase in public
awareness of environmental issues in

In order to ensure sustainability of results, greater

agriculture is significant).

focus has to be given to sector policy reforms tariff policies, and efficiency and cost-recovery of
utility operations.
21.
Enhanced ability of
the State Hydrometeorological Center to
forecast severe weather and

Outcome 21 has been partially achieved.
The State Hydro-Meteorological Service is in
the final stage of installation of a Doppler
Radar, which when operational will allow fort

Ongoing/Completed AAA:
GFDRR: Moldova Post-Disaster (Flood) Needs
Assessment

improve Moldova's capacity to

more accurate and localized forecasting, as well

ARuicultulnsemsbiiny

prepare for and respond to
natural disasters, as measured
by:
More accurate and specific

as expand lead time of warnings for inclement
weather.

2

oCldovat Taneo

Planned AAA:
Agriculture TA
t

forecasting of weather

TA / Dialogue on environment investment

conditions;
Expanded lead-time of
weather warnings to users,

strategies and integration of environmental
considerations in other sectors

particularly Department of
Exceptional Situations

i

(DES);
Strengthened capacity to
coordinate response to
emergencies.

PILLAR 111. IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR GOVERNANCE
Strategic Goal: Building theprofessional civil service
22.
Merit system and
ethics improved for civil
servants. Basic compliance

Outcome 22 has been achieved.
New Law on Civil Service enacted in 2009
introduced merit based rectment and

with the EU civil service

promotion system for civil servants. Merit

assessment requirements

based employment methods (competition and

Partnerships and TFs:

achieved.

promotion) used in 65 percent of cases of filled

Public Administration TA-Multi-Donor Trust

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Economic Recovery DPO (including CRW
allocation)

64

Partnership with the EU is critically important for
the success of support to public administration
and civil service refors.

in civil service vacancies at the central level in
2011.

Fund (DFID, Sida, Dutch)

Increasing trend of competition based
employment at the central government level
observed between 2009 and 2011. (Around 40
percent of the appointments to civil service
positions at the central level made through
competition in 2010-2011, compared to only 16
percent in 2009).

23.
Performance
management system in the
civil service implemented;

Outcome 23 has been partially achieved.
Personnel performance appraisal system
introduced in 2009 and applied since then. 86

annual performance ratings
fall into each category of

percent of civil servants participated in the
annual performance evaluation exercise m

civil servants at the central level received 'good'
(55.7 percent) and 'very good'(38 percent)

ratings

2009-2011.

evaluation ratings in 2011, only 6 percent
received 'satisfactory' rating and there were no
' unsatisfactory' cases).

24.

The structure of the

civil service pay improved by
incorporating supplementary
payments into the base pay
and allowing for less than 20
percent performance bonus,

Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA-Multi-Donor Trust
Fund (DFJD Sida Dutch)

Outcome 24 has been achieved.

Ongoing/Completed AAA:

The Law on Remuneration System in Civil
Service approved in March 2012 and the 86
Regulation on Implementation of the Law on
Remuneration (No. 331) set the stage for
introduction of a new more transparent salary

Country Systems Assessment

More time is needed for all the participants to
fully understand the system and use it correctly to
achieve desirable results (94 percent of evaluated

Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova
Partnerships and TFs:

structure for civil servants as of April 2012.
Public Administration TA-Multi-Donor Trust
The share of base pay in the new pay structure(DFID,
Sida, Dutch)
exceeds 80 percent, and the share of bonuses isfuunn
less than 20 percent.
Planned AAA:
Structural reform follow-up work
Strategic Goal 9: Increased capacity of the(public sector to develop and implementpublicpolicies
25.
The new sector
policies are aligned with NDS,

budgeted, and their impact

Outcome 25 has been partially achieved.
Methodologies for National Development
Law 200
poglicorntonlemnttion todthed

Strategy preparation have been approved and

assessed prior to government
approval. Any issue on policy

applied.

impacts are cleared at a

A system of ex-ante policy impact analysis has

technical level prior to policy
decision-making by the GO
with ministries.

been developed and introduced in selected
policy areas, but is not yet universally applied.

26.

Improvement of

Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA-Multi-Donor Trust

Fund (DFJD, Sida, Dutch)
Planned Lending:

Outcome 26 has been achieved.

Planned AAA:

policy coordination and

Policy coordination improved through

Structural reform follow-up work

responsiveness, as measured

institutional re-structuring; State Chancellery

by increased CPIA indicator
from 3.5 to at least 4.0.

increased the efficiency of the policy

Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA-Multi-Donor Trust

65

coordination efforts at the Central Government
level; Capacity of Policy, Strategic Planning
and Aid Coordination Department
strengthened.

Fund (DFID, Sida, Dutch)

Methodology for the development of
Institutional Development Plan completed,
approved and applied at the level of central
government.
Overall CPIA score increased from 3.7 (2010)

to 3.8 (2011).
Strategic Goal 10: Increased transparency and accountability in the management ofpublic monies

27.
Improvement of
budget classification system, as

Outcome 27 has not been achieved.
The Ministry of Finance approved new

measured by improved PEFA
rating (baseline rating - C9
expected rating - A).

integrated budget classification and chart of
accounts compliant with GFS 2001 in 2011, but
it is not used yet. Implementation will be
through FMIS, on which progress has been
slow, though, if now kept on track, should be
implemented in time for the 2014 budget
preparation process. No improvement in the
respective PEFA indicator rating yet.

28.

Outcome 28 has been achieved.

Partnerships and TFs:

1.

The scope, nature and follow-up of external
audit have improved, as confirmed by an
upgrade of the respective PEFA indicator Pi26

Court of Accounts TA -Multi-Donor Trust
Fund (DFID, Dutch)

leadership on the beneficiary side are key to
success of institutional development projects.

Improved

effectiveness of external audit
(PEFA baseline rating C+,
expected rating - at least B).

Ongoing/Completed Lending:
Public Financial Management Project

Client ownership and strong strategic

Although the quality of leadership is normally

from C+ in 2008 to B+ in 2011.

not under the World Bank's control, it is worth

The relevance of the Court of Account audits
for the managers improved and capacity of
CoA staff strengthened (as indicated by the

investing in the formulation of strategic vision at
the start of the project preparation stage. The
approach that worked well under this particular

results of stakeholder sur-vey). 1

project was recruitment of a reputable
international strategic advisor for CoA
leadership, who was with the CoA throughout the
preparation and implementation period. The
availability of a clearly articulated strategic
vision is also a key factor for efficient
development partner coordination.
2.
Support for development of the external
audit function is a key element of strengthening
the public financial accountability framework
and it is possible for the World Bank to have

1 See ICM for the respective project for more details on the results achieved.

66

impact in this area.
SAls are often viewed as difficult clients and the

World Bank sometimes considers them to be
outside its targeted audience because they are
independent of the government, and lets this

function be supported by other development
partners. Supreme Audit Institutions are indeed
unique, non-executive clients and they require a
special approach when designing high impact

technical assistance for them. Projects supporting
them work well when designed as targeted

assistance directly to an SAL, not part of a bigger
operation implemented by a government
executive entity. This has implications for the
design of World Bank programs supporting
public finance management (PFM) reform.

29.
Increased competition
in public procurement
(increase in percent of value of

Outcome 29 has been achieved.
Public Procurement Law passed. Brought
substantial improvements in the legislative

all awarded contracts awarded

framework and public procurement in line with

through competitive process).

international standards and practices.
AMRPPHA restructured in late 2009 and new
Public Procurement Agency (PPA) established
under the Ministry of Finance.

The use of single source procurement

Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA-Muhi-Donor Trnst
Fund (DFID Sida, Dutch)

Law, completing missing secondary regulations,

CPRi 00including
Ongoing/Completed AAA:
Capacity building
0 Continuous dialogue

0 Public Procurement Fornm in May 2012

decreased. The value of direct contracts

reduced from 6.2 percent in 2009 to 5.6 percent
in 2011, after increasing in 2010 to 11.2
percent due to direct contracting under

emergency procedures following severe floods

There are still deficiencies in the legislative and
institutional framework, which could be
addressed by amending the Public Procurement

in Albania

0 Procurement Capacity Building
0

standard bidding documents and
standard fos of contracts, improving the
existing website of the Public Procurement
Agency to make it fully functional to ensure
greater transparency, developing guidance notes

to and manuals to improve contract
administration, improving existing training

programs, and ensuring independent complaint

Workshop delivered in June 2012
IDF Grant preparation and approval in

handling mechaism.
Continued support in strengthening the public

June 2012

procurement system could be focused on:

and increased training of doctors with only one

Thereare stilveficiencinees nthealegisate

training agency available.

C

Electronic Government Procurement (e-GP)
readiness assessment conducted as part of

*

CPAR. First phase of the e-GP application

*

developed by contracting a private software

o

a

i

s

Third party monitoring
B-Procurement (IDF Grant)

Outreach and capacity building activities
including contract management.

development company. However, lack of
financial resources and no final decision

regarding the e-GP business model delayed the
implementation of the system.

30.

Improved capacity

Outcome 30 has been partially achieved.

Ongoing Lending:

There is a need for top-level government

and management of ICT in the

The Governance e-Transformation Project

Public Financial Management Project

ownership of the ICT agenda and good

pubhic sector,

delivered training to 200 civil servants on ICT

Governance e-Transforation Project

coordination among mistnes.

67

adge

management.

Planned Lending:

for operating cost of systems prior to making

Public Financial Management 2

capital investments.

31.
Improved capacity
and management of ICT in the

Outcome 31 has been partially achieved.
Year 1 activities envisaged under the

Partnerships and TFs:
Public Administration TA-Multi-Donor Trust

public sector:

Governance e-Transformation Project have

Fund (DFID, Sida, Dutch)

Governance center set
up and operational (staff trained;
public support for e-government
increased from 53 to 60 percent;
percentage of cost recovery of
the e-GC increased from 0 to 20
percent).

been delivered, including set-up and
operationalization of the e-Goverance Center.
241 people trained under the Project.

Strategic Development of the Court of
Accounts (DFID, Dutch)
Dutch Grant for Co-financing of the PFM

Six e-services completed.
Data sets available on the Open Government
Data website increased from 50 (2010 baseline)
to 539 (end December 2012) with a target of
600 for 2016.

Project
Training Capacity Building and Training
related to Management of Public Finances
(Sida)
IDF Grant for Capacity Building in Moldova

UpaeoshrdeGvrmninrsrcre
(M-cloud) currently 16 percent - target 25

PbcSctrAouigPojt
e-Trans formation Trust Fund (Dutch)

-

e-transformation
enabling environment present,
including the policy, legal and
-

(100 data
regulatory
setsgvlably frameworks
raeo he kOpen
sets available on the Open
Govemnment Data website; 2
institutions making datasets
available through OGD);

Improved service delivery and
transparency in the public

percent by 2016.

OngoingCompleted AAA:

Public Services Portal launched making
available 299 services online with 57,000 users

Public Expenditure Review 2012
Country Systems Assessment

since launching.

Country Economic Memorandum
Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova

Country Procurement Assessment Report

sector:

Public Expenditure Review 2
Public Expenditure Review 2011
Moldova e-development TA
Citizen Report Card 2010
A&A ROSC Follow-up
Planned AAA:
Catalyzing open data innovations
Public Financial Management TA
Apps for good governance in Moldova (Third
Party Monitoring Window - CSF Demand for
Good Governance)
IDF for Public Procurement
PEFA (led by the EC

Shared e-Government
infrastructure established
(percentage of civil servants
using shared e-government
infrastructure increased to 5
percent; number of Government
databases with central backup
increased to 5).
-

e-services developed
(number of transactions
completed through Government
services portal increased to
100,000 by 2013; average
processing time for public
services (business licenses)
decreased to 3 days by 2013).
-

acivd

68

CPS CR TABLE 2: Moldova - Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FYO9-13)
CPS Plans (as of CPS preparation date)

STATUS (delivered)
USD(m)
IDA

USD(m)
TFs

IDA
Energy 2 Additional Financing (AF)

Energy 2 Additional Financing (AF)

TFs

10

PRSC 3 (plus Dutch and DFID TFs)
MSIF 2 AF

MSIF 2 AF

Health JSDF
2009

Health Services and Social Assistance AF Grant

7.0

JSDF Preventing Hepatitis B&C in Moldova

1.4

RISP 2 Additional Financing

Sub-total

45

5

10

PHRD Community Support Program for Sustainable and Integrated
Forest Management and Carbon Sequestration through Forestation

1.0

JSDF Community Participation in Post-conflict Regions

1.9

Moldova Community Forestry Project

2.6

Sub-total

25

Competitiveness Enhancement AF

24

Economic Recovery DPO (plus Dutch & DFID TFs)

25

13.9

Regional Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation
(moved to FY11)
Competitiveness Enhancement AF
RISP 2 AF (moved to FY09)
PRSC 4 (plus Dutch & DFID TFs) (dropped)
2010

Health and Social Assistance AF (moved to FY11)
Swedish Grant for Second AF for MSIF 2

MSIF 2 AF

Sub-total
Sub-total FYO9-10

2.3

20

Moldova Regional Development and Social Protection Grant (EC)

16.6

Successor Swedish Grant for Public Financial Management Project

2.7

45

Sub-total

69

21.6

90

Sub-total FYO9-10

94

35.5

69

CPS Progress Report Plans (as of PR date)

STATUS (delivered and ongoing)
USD(M)
IDA

USD(M)
TFs

IDA

TFs

Disaster and Climate Risk Management

10

Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project

10

Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net

37

Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net

37

Governance e-Transformation

20

Governance e-Transformation

20

2011

Sida Grant for Rural Investment Services 2 Project

1.7

Biogas Generation from Animal Manure Pilot Project

0.9

Moldova Soil Conservation Project

2.9

Sub-total

67

Competitiveness DPO 1

20

Health Services and Social Assistance AF

10

Health Services and Social Assistance AF

10.2

Agricultural Competitiveness

20

Agricultural Competitiveness

18.0

2012

0.1

Sub-total

Education AF

67

5.6

4.4

1.0

Moldova - Global Partnership For Education Grant

4.4

Moldova Governance e-Transformation TF

1.5

Sub-total

50

Sub-total

29.2

10.3

Competitiveness DPO 2 (dropped)

20

Competitiveness DPO

30

Education Program for Results

30

Education Reform Project (increased to USD 40)

40

Public Financial Management 2 (possibly moved to FY14)

20

Emergency Agriculture Support Project

10

Sub-total

70

Sub-total

80

0.0

Sub-total FY11-13

187

Sub-total FYI 1-13

176.2

15.9

Total FYO9-13

277

Total FYO9-13

270.2

51.4

2013

70

CPS CR TABLE 3: Moldova - Planned Non-Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FYO9-13)
CPS Plans (as of CPS preparation date)

STATUS (delivered)
Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova

Country Economic Memorandum: Moldova Growth Study
Local Government and Communal Services

2009

Moldova Telecom Assistance

Moldova Telecom Sector Assistance

Poverty Update

Poverty Update TA

Pension Policy Note
Public Expenditure Review
Rural Hazard Risk Mitigation Strategy (JSDF)

Pension Policy Note
Public Expenditure Review
Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of Agriculture Systems in Moldova TA

Governance and Health Reform
Financial Sector Reform Grant (Dutch TF)

Moldova Dutch TF - Financial Sector Reform TA

Corporate Financial Reporting TA
Energy Policy Note

District Heating Restructuring Study

Food security

Food Security TA

Financial Sector Monitoring
Financial Sector Reform Grant (Dutch TF)

Financial Sector Reform Grant (Dutch TF)

INF Sector Investment Planning
2010

Climate Change
Corporate Financial Reporting TA

A&A Reforms Implementation

Country Systems Assessment (CPAR, CFAA, PEFA etc.)

Country Procurement Assessment Report
Public Expenditure Review 2
MTDS-Moldova
Moldova e-development TA

2011

Country Economic Memorandum: Growth Study

Country Economic Memorandum: Moldova Growth Study

Accounting &Auditing ROSC follow-up

Accounting &Auditing ROSC follow-up

Agricultural Policy Revision and Budget TA

Agricultural Policy Revision and Budget TA

Public Expenditure Review

Public Expenditure Review

Financial Sector Monitoring TA

Financial Sector Monitoring TA

Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA

Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA
Impacts of the International Financial Crisis on Workers Remittances, Migration, and Poverty in Moldova
Applications for good governance - Civil Society Fund Demand for Good Governance

Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of Agricultural Systems in Moldova
TA
Leadership Development Program for Moldovan Officials on ICT for Improved Governance and Growth

71

CPS Plans (as of CPS preparation date)
Competitiveness and structural reform follow-up work

STATUS (delivered)
Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of Agricultural Systems in Moldova TA
Moldova: #10112 Payment System Modem

Programmatic fiscal work (including BOOST studies)

Health Boost

Financial Sector Monitoring TA

Financial Sector Monitoring

Food Security TA
Agricultural Competitiveness TA
Energy Efficiency TA

Moldova: Sida TF on Energy Reform and EE
Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement Technical Assistance

2012

Moldova ESREI TF Components 2 & 3: DH Investment Study and Energy Supply Optimization Strategy
PPIAF-Moldova: Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement Project
Education Rationalization TA

Measuring Impact of School Optimization Reform in Moldova
PPIAF: MOLDOVA - Preliminary Support for the Privatization of MoldTelecom
Rapid Response Technical Assistance
MOLDOVA: Feasibility Study for Cloud-Based Shared Infrastructure PPP
Catalyzing Open Data Innovations

PEFA (with the EC)
Competitiveness and structural reform follow-up work

Priority issues in Moldova's PS Development

Financial Sector Assessment Program

Financial Sector Monitoring TA

Corporate Financial Reporting Enhancement TA
Public Financial Management TA
Energy Efficiency TA (continuation)
2013

Energy Efficiency TA (continuation)

Social Inclusion and Resilience TA
Strengthening Public Procurement IDF
Trade Facilitation through improved Transport and Logistics Performance
DCFTA Preparation Support in Agriculture
Programmatic HD work

Food Security Notes TA
Municipal Water Sector Review
Land Governance Assessment Framework in Moldova

72

CPS CR Annex 1: Lessons learned from past World Bank Group engagement
The FY14-17 CPS design is anchored on both current CPS CR lessons and those learned from
past World Bank engagement in the country. A desk review of several evaluations' and internal
2
documents suggests the following main conclusions.
The previous CAS CR drew several lessons from relevant experience: (i) Targeted support
(relatively narrow, well-defined objectives) plays an important role in building country systems,
enhancing ministry capacity, and enabling the development and implementation of longer term
policies and strategies; (ii) Capable and committed government ministries are a critical factor in
achieving development objectives; (iii) Cross-sectoral and complementary approaches improve
the effectiveness of interventions; (iv) Resources from the World Bank can be directed
strategically to leverage those of other partners for optimal development impact; (v) The linkages
between economic growth and poverty reduction are not yet sufficiently understood for
Moldova; and (vi) Effective, efficient, and transparent public sector management and governance
continue to be important for achieving development objectives.
An IEG evaluation of the FYO5-08 CAS concurred with these lessons, and added another major
observation - the importance (well-illustrated by the World Bank's experience in Moldova) of
grounding country strategies in a realistic appraisal of the political environment for CAS
implementation. Such an appraisal can inform positively the selection of areas to support
(CASCR lesson (i)), as well strategies for managing CAS implementation risks to maximize the
prospects for successful CAS outcomes.
As requested during the FY14-17 CPS Concept Note Review meeting, the team has reviewed
more specific lessons pertaining to the Bank's past and current engagement in agriculture 3 , aside
from the general conclusions on overall strategic engagement and implementation record. The
conclusions can be summarized as follows: (i) Coping with the high and increasing volatility of
agricultural output requires a focus on development and implementation of weather-related risk
mitigation tools and climate change adaptation measures; (ii) Achieving market competitiveness
and integration requires a focus on food safety and quality, innovation and investment in market
infrastructure, and producer strengthening to ensure improved market access; (iii) Attracting
young people in the sector requires better education for farmers and improved incentives to
remain and perform in the sector; and (iv) Spurring synergies between agriculture and rural
development would help address domestic institutional and policy gaps in the area of rural
development and attracting EU ENPARD 4 funds for rural development.
IEG Evaluations corroborate these sector-level findings, and add several important overarching
conclusions: (i) agricultural projects are less likely to achieve their objectives in countries with
weak governance, and governance tends to be weakest where the public sector is most needed to
support agricultural development; (ii) institutional issues within the World Bank have also
influenced the outcomes of World Bank Group interventions; (iii) only a share of World Bank
interventions included support for agricultural activities focused on improving agricultural
'IEG CAS CR Evaluation (FY05-08 CAS), 2009.
FY05-08 CAS CR Moldova; FY09-13 CPS CR.

2

Note on Moldova's Agricultural Sector and Bank's Involvement in the sector.
4 European Neighborhood Program for Agriculture and Rural Development.

IEG Review of Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness, 2011. World Bank Country-level Engagement on Governance and
Anticorruption.

73

growth and productivity in poor, agriculture-based economies (the focus shifting in the early
1990s from a narrower focus on agriculture to a broader one encompassing poverty and rural
development, which led to a broader definition of objectives in lending to the rural sector and a
less direct focus on food production and agricultural productivity); (iv) sustainability of World
Bank-supported activities remains a concern.
These call for: (i) ensuring sufficient quantity and quality of Bank AAA and IFC advisory
services in agriculture-based economies, linking them closely to lending, and using them to build
counterpart commitment and to address constraints along the production chain; (ii) establishing
mechanisms to confirm ex-ante if project M&E frameworks are adequate - with clear, relevant,
and realistic objectives; thorough cost-benefit analysis; appropriate indicators; and adequate
baseline data; (iii) reviewing the human resource base and skill gaps; (iv) increased focus on
sustainability mechanisms; (v) assisting countries to make tangible and time-bound governance
improvements.
These and the FYO9-13 CPS CR lessons have been considered in preparing the FY14-17 CPS for
Moldova.

74

CPS CR Annex 2: Preliminary Lessons from implementation of Projects with ICT
Components'
ICT plays an important role in the World Bank portfolio in Moldova: in FY13, total actual and
planned procurement of ICT goods and services was USD 34 million in 13 projects (Table A). In
a few cases, the implementation of these programs has resulted in cost or time overruns and in
one case in high risks of not achieving project development goals. In the Annual Meetings in
Tokyo in 2012, the Moldovan Delegation requested the Bank to carry out an assessment to
identify measures that can help enhance the effectiveness of on-going and future projects with
ICT components.
In that context, the World Bank2 organized two workshops on November 28-29, 2012 in
Chisinau to understand the key reasons for the suboptimal performance of some ICT projects in
Moldova from multiple perspectives and to provide recommendations to improve the quality and
timely delivery of current and future projects. The first workshop gathered private IT companies
that had or have contracts under World Bank-funded projects. The second workshop brought
together the Project Implementation Units. About 100 participants joined the two workshops.
Part I. Selected challenges in projects with ICT components in Moldova
The workshops identified a number of issues already highlighted in previous reviews34 5
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*

lack of IT project management capacity in the Government
lack of decision-making among suppliers' counterpart teams in the Government
unclear requirements and specifications leading to many clarification requests and
subsequent extensions of bid submission deadlines
unnecessary change requests during contract implementation
increased cost for suppliers during contract implementation due to delays by Government
in providing necessary information
too much paperwork (large bidding documents and required number of bid copies)
tax issue such as the requirement to export and re-import already imported goods from
Moldovan subcontractors if the supplier is a foreign company
long no-objection procedures, including the time needed to respond to changes of bidding
documents and/or bid evaluation reports requested by the Bank after having reviewed
these documents
the standard contract does not provide for any penalties to be applied for delays due to the
Purchaser.
lack of a business process reengineering effort

Invaluable inputs from Elena Corman, Cem Dener, Knut Leipold, Arthur Riel and Sandra Sargent are gratefully acknowledged. This is a
preliminary draft note to be completed by June 2013.
2 The workshops were organized by the Moldova Procurement Team (Knut Leipold,
Elena Corman, Ana Busuioc)
Independent Evaluation Group, 2011, "An Evaluation of World Bank Group Activities in Information and Communications Technology". IEG
2011 evaluation screened 1300 projects with ICT components.
4 The FMIS Study/Database (April 2011) reviewed about 100 projects with a total of USDI billion ICT investments.
5 Cem Dener et al. FMIS Community of Practice Meeting #17, October 31, 2012, "How to improve the management of complex ICT contracts in
FMIS projects".

75

*

*

ineffective relations between Suppliers and their subcontractors. A recurrent problem is
that the Supplier (often a large foreign company) does not pay or makes delayed
payments to subcontractors (often a local company) for services already performed.
flexibility is needed from the Borrower and Supplier side while implementing large scale
functional requirements. In the Public Financial Management Project, difficulty in
freezing the requirements was one of the key challenges. The Bank tried to help in
finding a middle ground between the Ministry of Finance needs and the software
capability, but the contracting parties have been rigid in their positions. Unfortunately,
the supplier had inadequate quality assurance (QA) mechanisms and this was another
challenge. Bank task teams should be better informed about the contract implementation
process and how to monitor key aspects.

Part II: Recommendations
To a large extent, the recommendations for the Moldova program are in line with those made in
previous Bank-wide reviews6 , endorsed in management's response to the IEG evaluation, and
reflected in the WBG ICT Strategy (2012). Not all these recommendations have been
implemented yet.
Improve Design and Quality at Entry
A prerequisite should be a thorough first phase of requirements/architecture, as evidenced from
the availability of: business process re-engineering plans, functional requirement specifications,
interoperability strategies, information architecture blueprints, and application architecture
blueprints.
Ensure that each Bank project with one or more ICT components has an ICT expert on the team
to provide strategic advice on integration of ICTs into the sector specific domain and examine
the domain for business architecture and business process re-engineering needs. The resultant
requirements need to be planned and executed by a client PIU that possess in-house expertise to
prepare technical bidding documents and ensure appropriate vendor and contract management.
Improve Bidding Documents and Requirements
The World Bank needs to ensure that each project has an ICT expert available for consultation
with the task team and client to ensure the necessary data for solid technical requirements/
specifications is properly collected and reported. In addition, the World Bank should require
additional procurement personnel with expertise in ICT , or an experienced procurement
specialist and an ICT consultant with the required skills.
Software development requirements need to be frozen at one stage during contract
implementation to ensure that the Client can test and accept the software based on the agreed
requirements. Only in cases when the Client is able to manage an agile method of software
development should changes be allowed during software development to avoid more costly
change orders with an unpredictable impact on the schedule and cost of the project.
6

IEG (2011), FMIS Study/Database (2011)
The labor market in Moldova may be too thin though for such profile.

76

Clients have expressed concerns that the Bank procurement and technical review process for the
bidding documents takes too long. However, there is evidence that delays originate from the
lengthy process of modification of bidding documents by the Client in line with the Bank's
comments. Moreover, the problem lies more in the design of an IT system and the resulting
requirements/specifications which are often biased in favor of certain manufacturers, and it is
therefore recommended that a Bank ICT specialist is on board from the very beginning of the
system design. The challenges are compounded by the tendency of Clients across government to
ask on an individual basis for the most sophisticated systems, often resulting in duplication of
effort and cost. Strong central governance and a central e-government platform is critical to
avoid such challenges. Future projects with ICT components in Moldova should consider an
approach that is planned in the next round of ICB for the PFM project in Ukraine: publish the
Requirements and Specifications section of the future bidding documents on a freely accessible
website and/or in UNDB online with the invitation of interested suppliers to submit comments.
Useful unbiased comments will be taken into consideration when finalizing the bidding
documents. This will help avoid many clarification requests during the bidding procedure. In
complex cases, a two-phase approach may be considered.
Strengthen Client Capacity
The World Bank should require the client to acquire appropriate IT/IT Project Management
expertise for the PIU to ensure operational and other problems are detected early when they are
relatively inexpensive and easy to resolve. Such expertise could also be provided by hiring a
consultant. The World Bank should also ensure a Change Management strategy and action plan
is in place. The PIU should set up Quality Assurance arrangements independently from vendors,
as is already the case for the Governance e-Transformation Project for instance.
Develop a supplier managementstrategy and monitoring
The Client should take the option in the bidding documents to consider the qualifications of
subcontractors for substantial parts of the main contract, thus allowing monitoring
subcontractors' performance. It is recommended to revise procurement guidelines to allow
Contracts to have significant penalties for subcontractor related problems to provide the suppliers
with the incentives to properly supervise and coordinate their subcontractors.
The World Bank should strengthen the supervision of contract management to ensure early
detection of complex IT issues. An example of good practice is the weekly monitoring meetings
for the Public Financial Management Project. This would require the project team to have an ICT
expert, a point highlighted in the IEG report and included in the ICT strategy.

77

Table A: Moldova: Actual and Planned ICT Procurement in current portfolio
Amount
(USD m)

Projects8
Health Services and Social Assistance Project

4.5

Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety
Net Project

1.1

Quality Education in Rural Areas of Moldova

1.1

Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project

1.8

Public Financial Management Project
10.9

Governance e-Transformation Project
11.5
Central Public Administration Reform

1.0

Six Other projects with procurement below USD1
million

2.6

Total

Selected Implementation Challenges
Time overruns. Supplier and subcontractors
issue.
No specific challenges with IT
procurement.
No specific challenges with IT
procurement.
No specific challenges with IT
procurement.
Time overruns. Client capacity issue.
Supplier capacity issue. At high risk of
failing development objectives.
Disbursement delays due in part to the time
needed to establish new institution. Good
performance under IT contracts backed up
by a strong IT expertise at the
implementing agency.
Time overruns. Requires Business
reengineering.
No specific challenges with IT
procurement.

34.6

Closed projects with a large ICT component, such as the institutional support to the Court of Account (P106219), have been successfully
implemented and provide a good source of other favorable factors.
8

78

Annex 3: Mapping of Key Development Partner Support to Moldova
Partner

Approximate
Annual
Funding
USD(m)'

Key priorities of the Government Action Plan 2011-14

Cross cutting issues

Economic and Financial Policies

Austria

2.6

China***

9.5

Czech Republic

4.5

Denmark

4.5

EBRD and EIB

EU

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

90.0

x

120.0

x

x

GIZ

n/a

x

x

IFC

30.0

IMF

80.0

Sweden

16.0

Switzerland

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

6.5

x

United Nations

43.0

x

x

x

United States
(USAID and
MCC****)

65.0

x

x

x

World Bank

60.0

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

*Includes Energy
*Includes e-Government
**China signed this grant with the Government of Moldova in 2011, with projects at that time undecided but to be implemented in 2012
**** Annual MCC funding is approximated from the full 5 year grant

'Data from Government of Moldova State Chancellery 2011 Annual Report on External Assistance, and Development Partner presentations to the Donor Coordination Group during 20 12.

79

Annex 4: Gender Assessment
A REVIEW OF DISPARITIES IN ENDOWMENTS
OPPORTUNITIES IN MOLDOVA

AND

ACCESS TO ECONOMIC

1.
Moldova performs well in some areas of gender equality, yet in others disparities remain.
Moldova has taken legal steps towards guaranteeing non-discrimination and promoting gender
equality more broadly. Gender equality is included in the constitution and elaborated on in the
2006 Law on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men. The National Strategy on Gender
Equality for 2008-2015 establishes policy objectives on gender equality and priority actions.
Moreover, Moldova has signed on to a broad range of international conventions that mandate
gender equality, including the Millennium Development Goals and the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. While the policy foundation
for gender equality laid out by the Government of Moldova is laudable, patriarchal norms have
proven resistant to change. Policies and laws aimed at enabling gender equality have not been
sufficiently backed by adequate resources. In addition, public authorities such as courts have
been unwilling or unable to apply gender equality laws (UNDP, 201 1b).
I. Gender Issues in Human Capital
A. Education
2.
Education is important both for how it provides means to success on an individual level
and for how that aggregates to a more capable labor force. Moldova enjoyed nearly universal
primary enrollment rates before 2004, providing equal access to both girls and boys. However,
an alarming trend in recent years has been falling educational achievement, with Moldovan
students attaining average reading scores and below average mathematics scores on the Program
for International Student Assessment (OECD, 2010). Gender inequality is still not widely evident
in Moldova's education indicators, but it is greatest at higher levels of education where gender
disparities in secondary and tertiary education specialization persist.
3.
The gender gap in primary and secondary school is negligible though overall enrollment
rates are somewhat below the ECA average. Disparities in secondary and tertiary specialization
persist such that more boys than girls pursue vocational training (32 percent and 16 percent
respectively). Conversely, girls appear to be undertaking secondary specialized or higher
education and concentrating in "feminized" fields in tertiary education such as education and
healthcare (National Bureau of Statistics, 2010). The reasons behind women's choices of majors
are not well researched, however several factors have been identified: a) whether at the time of
human capital investment a woman perceives that her lifetime labor force involvement will be
long and continuous or intermittent and brief; b) whether women find individuality in their job;
and c) whether women are considered "secondary workers" who optimize their time allocation
by taking their husbands' labor market decisions as given to them (Goldin, 2006). While tertiary
enrollment rates have increased for both men and women since 2000, men lag with a tertiary
enrollment rate of 33 percent behind women's 44 percent. Secondary and tertiary schools appear
to be the beginning of occupational segregation that eventually results in gender segregation in
the labor market.

80

B. Health
4.
The gender differences in mortality rates and life expectancy in Moldova are the most
striking gaps in health indicators. The health status of the entire population declined during the
transition that followed independence, and life expectancy in Moldova is now among the lowest
in Europe, at 73 years for women and 65 years for men in 2010. Moldova's male mortality rate,
which is double that of females, is driven by the lifestyle choices of men. The population of
Moldova, and particularly men, consume the largest quantity of pure alcohol per capita in the
world, and alcohol poses the highest health risk for men (WHO, 2006b). Males are also much
more likely to be smokers and to die of lung cancer than females. In 2001, the smoking rate
among the male population of Moldova (aged over 18 years) was 43 percent, while females had
a smoking rate of only 4 percent.
5.
On the positive side, the adolescent fertility rate is low and continues to decline. At the
same time, Moldova's total fertility rate has steadily decreased during the last decade and is
below the ECA average. Moldova's population is therefore declining while the share of elderly
persons, particularly elderly women, is increasing. This demographic shift to a high proportion of
elderly, and elderly women in particular, could have important fiscal implications for the pension
and social protection systems.
6.
Basic maternity services are widely provided with 98 percent of women receiving
antenatal care and 100 percent of births attended by skilled health staff. Compared to other
countries at the same level of income, the 2010 maternal mortality rate of 45 cases per 100,000
births is low; nevertheless, it represents an increase from earlier in the decade indicating a
deterioration in health services for women. Although about 65 percent of the population uses
contraceptives, abortion is still used to regulate fertility. Yet the frequency of abortions
conducted in unhygienic environments and using unsafe methods is an important risk to maternal
health outcomes for Moldovan women, as a third of pregnancies end in abortion (WHO, 2006a;
USAID DHS, 2005). Notably, unplanned pregnancies that result in the most abortions in
Moldova occur because of unmet need for birth control or using traditional birth control methods
that are not as effective in preventing pregnancy (USAID DHS, 2005).
II. Gender Issues in Agency, Entrepreneurship and the Labor Market
A. Agency
7.
Human trafficking is a critical issue in Moldova. Moldova is a source country, and to a
lesser extent a transit and destination country for both sex trafficking and forced labor (U.S. State
Department, 2012). It is estimated that Moldova has one of the highest rates of human trafficking
among neighboring countries (GfK, 2006). While the Moldovan government does not yet fully
comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking, it has taken important
steps in the past year to address victim protection and prevention of trafficking (US State
Department, 2012). Research links the experience of domestic violence, forced marriage and the
economic situation in a country to trafficking of women (Ministry of Health, 2006). Indeed,
violence against women is one of the most frequent forms of human rights violations in
Moldova. According to the 2010 Human Rights Report on Moldova 40 percent of women have
been victims of at least one violent episode. However, because of extensive underreporting exact
figures on violence against women are expected to be even higher, and continuous monitoring

81

needs to be put in place. The measures taken within the legal and regulatory framework have not
sufficiently addressed domestic violence, and the level of public awareness on the issue remains
low.
8.
Only 20 percent of representatives in Parliament are female, and representation is even
lower in other areas of government (UNDP, 2011 a). According to the latest Life in Transition
Survey, fewer women than men are members of political parties or have participated in political
activities (such as attending lawful demonstrations, participating in a strike or signing petitions).
In addition, there is a significant difference between genders in union membership and
membership in humanitarian or charitable associations. At the same time, the depiction of men
and women in the media continues to be unbalanced.
B. Labor Market and Entrepreneurship
9.
The most prominent gender gaps in Moldova lie in access to economic opportunity.
Labor force participation in Moldova is well below ECA and EU regional averages, although
with a narrower gender gap. The gender gap in Moldova was about 7 percent in 2010 in favor of
men, while that in ECA was 20 percent. Nevertheless, only 37 percent of working age women
have jobs (Moldova LFS, 2011). Labor force non-participation is likely to be the result of
international labor migration, expansion of the number of university students and the ageing of
the population (European Training Foundation 2011). Indeed, the reduction in the share of the
prime age population is threatening economic growth in the long-run. In order to limit a sharp
decline in the labor force and avoid a decline in economic activity, policies to foster women's
labor participation rates could be introduced. A first step could be increasing the retirement age
for women to be equal with that of men, an increase from 57 to 62. In addition, policies could be
implemented to attract inactive women through flexible schemes in the labor force. These
measures could sustain economic growth in the medium to long term, lead to higher female
participation in the labor force and represent higher economic opportunities for inactive or
unemployed women (Sattar, 2011).
10.
Gender segregation permeates the labor market. Women are less likely than men to work
in the private sector. This trend may be driven in part because public sector jobs are relatively
secure and have more flexible working hours allowing women to combine work with family
responsibilities. As a result, women's employment is heavily concentrated in the lower paid
areas of public administration and education (Moldova LFS, 2011). Additionally, although
legislation supports women and men in their parental roles (e.g. maternity benefits of 126
calendar days at full pay), it appears to adversely impact private sector employment of married
women at child bearing age (WEF, 2011). Notably, approximately 70 percent of complaints
received by the Labor Inspection Department were from women complaining of discrimination
in the hiring process, most frequently in the form of being asked about children and being
requested to provide medical certificates on pregnancy (Women Organization's Forum, 2006).
11.
Due in part to this sector segregation women in Moldova earn 73 percent of what men
earn. Women in Moldova are also more likely than men to work less than 40 hours per week
(Moldova LFS, 2011). Additionally, women are less likely to advance to leadership positions,
and only 8 percent of firms have any female ownership, as compared to 34 percent in the entire
transition region (BEEPS, 2009). The exceptionally low representation of women in leadership
positions in the private sector may be explained by a number of different factors including the

82

small share of women among the employed, a large burden of domestic responsibilities, a lack of
established performance evaluation and staff promotion mechanisms in the private sector, a
social bias against women in senior positions, possibly discriminatory practices, and a near
absence of role models. Firms with some female ownership are relatively smaller than firms
predominantly owned by men. Notably, about two thirds of companies with some female
ownership operate in only three sectors - retail, food and construction. Correspondingly, only 23
percent of firms with some female ownership have invested in R&D (compared to 32 percent of
firms solely owned by men) (BEEPS, 2009).
12.
Financial inclusion in Moldova is comparable across gender, with the only difference
being that women are more likely to use informal borrowing sources (World Bank, 2011 a).
Although the propensity of women to engage in entrepreneurial activity is relatively high
(around 20 percent) compared to the average rate of entrepreneurship among females in ECA, it
is still below men's (World Bank, 201 lb). Women's ventures are likely to be smaller and less
likely to export their products than men's (Aculai, 2009).
13.
Further statistics for Moldova broken down by gender are available from the National
Bureau of Statistics: http://www.statistica.md/category.php?l=en&idc=264&.

Bibliography
Aculai, E. 2009. "Conditions for Enterprise Creation and Development: Gender Analysis". UNIFEM,
UNDP and National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova. Chisinau.
EBRD. World Bank. 2009. Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS).
Moldova.
European Training Foundation. 2011. HCD Review, "Relationship between Human Capital Development
and Equity in the Republic of Moldova".
GfK. 2006. Human trafficking survey: Belarus, Bulgaria, Moldova, Romania, and Ukraine. Prepared for
International Organization of Migration in Ukraine.
Goldin, C. 2006. "The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and
Family", American Economic Review, 96(2), pp. 1-2 1.
Ministry of Health of Moldova. 2006. "Moldova: Demographic and Health Survey 2005".
National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova. 2010.
OECD. 2010. PISA 2009 Results: What Makes a School Successful (Volume IV).
Sattar, S. 2011. "Opportunities for Men and Women in Emerging Europe and Central Asia", World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ECAEXT/Resources/2585981322580725430/WB_genderReportFINAL.pdf
Statistical Office of Moldova. 2011. "Labor Force Survey"
UNDP. 201 1a. 2010/2011 "National Human Development Report: Republic of Moldova: From Social
Exclusion Toward Inclusive Human Development".
UNDP. 201 lb. "Moldova Country Analysis."
http://www.un.md/un_res coord sys/docs/Country%20Analysis%20-%20UN%2OMoldova_ENG.pdf
U.S. Agency for International Development DHS. 2005. "Recent Trends in Abortion and Contraception
in 12 Countries."

83

U.S. Department of State. 2010. Human Rights Report on Moldova.

http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/160203.pdf
U.S. Department of State. 2012. Human Trafficking Report.
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/192596.pdf
World Economic Forum. 2011. "The Global Gender Gap Report."
WHO. 2006a. "Country Cooperation Strategy at a Glance: Republic of Moldova", 2006.
WHO. 2006b. "Highlights on Health in the Republic of Moldova: 2005".
WHO. 2011. "Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2011".
Women Organization's Forum from the Republic of Moldova (2006). Alternative Report of Evaluation
Regarding the Implementation of Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women. http://www.iwraw-ap.org/resources/pdf/Moldova_SR.pdf
World Bank. 201 1a. Financial Inclusion Data. http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/
World Bank. 2011 b. "Europe and Central Asia: Opportunities for Men and Women", Washington DC
World Bank WDI, 2011. "World Development Indicators."

84

Annex 5: Progress Towards Achieving the MDGs in Moldova
1.
Progress on achieving the MDGs in Moldova has been uneven over recent years
though those indicators affected by the economic situation are now on track to meet
national MDG 2015 targets. The global economic crisis reversed the trend of poverty reduction
in 2008-2009 and made achievement of the 2010 target for reduction in absolute poverty look
unlikely. A more positive economic environment in 2010 meant that this target was in fact
achieved, with 21.9 percent of the population living below the absolute poverty line 56. This trend
continued in 2011, with a corresponding figure of 17.6 percent. Youth unemployment rates also
reflected the impact of the crisis. Following a steady decline starting in 2004, the youth
unemployment rate rose from 10.1 percent in 2008 to 15.2 percent in 2009. Data for 2010 are not
yet available and whilst it is unlikely that the 2010 target will be met, if the more positive
economic environment continues, there is hope that the rate will reduce in the future.
2.
Other indicators are showing positive trends but fluctuations in recent years give
rise to questions as to whether 2015 targets will be met. Women's representation as mayors
and as members of parliament increased following the 2007 local elections and 2009 general
elections, but the most recent data for women's participation in parliament suggest that,
following further elections, only 19.8 percent of seats are held by women Under-5 mortality
rates have already met the targets for 2015, but in recent years the reduction in the rate has
stalled, with slight increases between 2006 and 2009. Maternal mortality rates (MMR) have
varied widely in recent years and although the table below suggests a positive trend, this was
bucked by much higher MMR in 2008 (38.4) and again in 2012 (41).
3.
There are several indicators that are unlikely to meet the national MDG targets by
2015. In terms of education, the 99.5 percent literacy target has been met consistently, but the
2010 target for enrolment in general compulsory education will be missed as enrolment rates
have declined consistently since 2003.58 The incidence of HIV and the rate of mortality
associated with TB have both risen since 2002, and fluctuations in these indicators over recent
years suggest that neither is clearly on a downward trend yet. The 2010 target for access to
improved water sources is unlikely to be met, and the 2015 target will require significant
investments if it is to be met. Access to improved sanitation improved only marginally between
2002 and 2008, and again, this target is unlikely to be met. An additional indicator of
environmental sustainability (not shown in the summary table below) is to increase the land area
covered by forests. This figure has risen only slightly from 10.5 percent in 2000 to 10.9 percent
in 2008, and neither the 2010 nor the 2015 targets are likely to be met without significant
investment.

56 National

poverty line.
Devlnfo.
5 It is not excluded that the issue is more of a quality of population data because the latest Census (2004) may have introduced upward bias in the
projections of the school-age population. Indeed, preliminary indications from a Multi Indicator Clusters Survey (MICS) - undertaken by
UNICEF in 2013 - show that enrolment rate is almost universal.
5

85

Table A: Selected indicators of progress towards MDG targets
Target
for 2010

Target
for 2015

26.3

25.0

20

Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Proportion of people under the absolute poverty line

30.2 (2006)

Goal 2: Achieve universal access to general secondary education
Enrollment rate in general compulsory education (gross,
%)**9519.

95.1

90.7

95.0
950

98
8

Rate of literacy of population aged 15-24 years (%)

99.5 (2006)

99.6

99.5

99.5

Women's representation as mayors

18 (2007)

17.4

---

25.0

Women's representation as members of Parliament

22 (2005)

24.7

---

30.0

14.0 (2006)

14.3

18.6

15.3

28.0

17.2

15.5

13.3

Incidence of HIV/AIDS (per 100,000 people)

10.0 (2006)

17.1

9.6

8.0

TB associated mortality (per 100,000 people)

16.0

19.0

15.0

10.0

Access to improved water source (% of population)

38.5

55.0

59.0

65.0

Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

41.7

(208

51.3

71.8

15.2

15.4

9.0

5.0

Goal 3: Promote gender equity and empower women

Goal 4. Reduce child mortality
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Goal 5. Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and other diseases

Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability

(2008)

Goal 8. Develop a global partn ership for development
Youth unemployment rate (%)

Sources: The Republic ofMoldova: The Quality ofEconomic Growth and Its Impact on Human Development,
United Nations Development Programme 2006, The Second Millennium Development Goals Report, 2010, Republic
ofMoldova, and DevInfo (www.devinfo.org)
* The baseline year for establishing targets is the same as the initial MDG report (2002), except for cases where the
estimation methodology was recently modified.
** The data and targets refer to gross enrolment rates for compulsory education (Grades I-IX), not solely secondary
education

86

Annex 6: GAC Filter at the Pre-Concept Stage
Description of
proposed
intervention
A. Sectoral
Issues

1. Type (Investment, TA, etc.)
2. PDO
3. Components
1. What are the GAC issues specific to the sector (related to legal, regulatory and policy
framework, enforcement and implementation)?
2. What are the ownership issues in the sector? Is there a reliable reform champion in the
sector/project (institution, organization, individual)?
3. What is the track record of the sector in public procurement and financial management?
4. What is the track record of the leadership in the sector? Are there any alleged or confirmed
corruption or conflict of interest?
5. Who are the actors to be involved in the project and affected by it? Who are the
beneficiaries of the existing system? Who are the winners and losers of the proposed changes?
6. Do vested interests play a major role in policy decisions in the sector? What could be the
vested interests involved?
7. Is there a potential for GAC improvement in the sector, including on demand side?

B. Government
Issues

1. What is the institutional capacity of the government to absorb the proposed reform? How do
we plan to overcome existing capacity challenges?
2. Is there evidence that the government is ready to move with the project? What is
government's track record in implementing similar reforms?
3. What is a track record of the local authorities where the project is to be implemented?
4. What is the implementation track record of the implementing agency (Agency)? What is the
Agency track record in public procurement and financial management? Are there any past
alleged or confirmed abuses? Are there any INT cases with this Agency?
5. Is the Agency fully empowered to implement the project? Who among the counterparts is
responsible/accountable for project deliverables?

C. Demand-Side
Involvement

6. What is the track record of the leadership in the Agency? Are there any alleged or confirmed
corruption or conflict of interest problems with the leadership of the Agency?
1. Who are civil society champions for the reform that the proposed operation supports?
2. How we can use both "policy" and "advocacy" NGOs?
3. Is project going to use CSOs/communities/beneficiaries for monitoring and evaluation, and
for implementation? At what stages of the project will CSOs/communities/beneficiaries be
involved?
4. Is there an appropriate CSOs capacity to follow on GAC?
5. Is there a consultation/communication strategy for the sector/project? Is beneficiary survey
available? How would we know that we have reached the targeted beneficiaries?

D. Partners
Issues

1. What are the complementarities with the existing engagement of the development partners?
2. Is it possible to leverage support for this activity?

Conclusion

1. Top three risks identified
2. Can the Bank help mitigate or manage these risks?
3. Given the governance conditions in the sector or agency, how can the project design be
adjusted to keep the risk at a manageable level?

87

Annex 7: Transnistria: A Development Challenge and an Opportunity
1.
Transnistria is the territory of the Republic of Moldova located on the eastern side
of the Dniester/Nistru River. Following the independence of Moldova from the USSR in 1991,
Transnistria authorities proclaimed an autonomous Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic. In
March 1992 violence erupted and escalated in a five-month civil war. Despite an effective
ceasefire, which has not been broken since July 1992, the status of Transnistria has remained
unresolved. It operates as a de facto state but its independence has not been recognized by any
international party.
2.
Available statistics and anecdotal data suggest that economic and human
development challenges are similar on both sides of the river. Half of Transnistria's small
population of 550,000 is working abroad. It is estimated that 10,000-12,000 persons a year leave
the region on either a temporary or permanent basis in search of work opportunities elsewhere.
From among the human capital remaining in the country, only a quarter of the population is in
formal employment. In a 2007 Transnistria survey', 44.1 percent of respondents noted that their
income is enough only for food and basic needs and 9.8 percent reported that they do not have
enough even for food. These data from a 2010 survey were 27.7 percent and 5.6 percent
respectively. Elderly people, persons with a disability and large families with children were
identified as the most vulnerable groups in Transnistria in a 2007 household survey. The WB
poverty study in Moldova (2009) - excluding Transnistria - concluded that across the life-cycle
poverty is concentrated among the elderly and families with children. On both sides there is
significant disparity in development between the main cities and rural and provincial areas.
3.
Health issues related to drug and alcohol use and HIV are a concern in Transnistria.
The Moldova MDG report of 2007 notes that 25 percent of the increase in persons diagnosed
with HIV between 2002 and 2007, occurred in Transnistria whilst the region represents only a
seventh of the total population. The incidence of HIV in Transnistria is 42.25 cases per 100,000
people, while in the rest of Moldova it is 12.42 per 100,0004. The lack of health centers at the
village level is a concern, particularly for women, given limited transport options.5
4.
Issues of national identity and an uncertain vision for the future are a challenge for
young Transnistrians who have spent their entire life in the current geopolitical
circumstances. Almost 72 percent of Transnistrians today declare themselves citizens of
Transnistria, with almost 22 percent identifying as citizens of the Russian Federation.6 At the
same time, youth attitudes in Transnistria and Moldova as to a preferred political system are
largely aligned. Forty percent of Transnistrian youth consider Western democracy the best
political system, compared to 45 percent on the right-bank, even though these attitudes cannot be
interpreted directly as a preference for geopolitical and economic alignment with EU versus a
Eurasian Customs Union.
5.
Transnistria's unresolved status discourages investment in Moldova and hinders
progress on important international agreements. While the Government of Moldova is unable
ICAR 'New Age' cited in Bobkova (2009), in Moldova-Transnistria:Working Togetherfor a ProsperousFuture
Toal, G. 2012. "Inside ECA's De Facto States: Conflict Dynamics, Attitudes, and Social Development Challenges", unpublished background
report prepared for World Bank
Millennium Development Goals Report "New Challenges - New Objectives" http://www.gov.md/doc.php?l=en&idc=447&id=2767
4 JNDP http://www.undp.md/presscentre/2010/MDG%20Report%2011/6
Combating AIDS Ro 9 septembrie 2010.pdf
5
UNDP/JN Women, JLDP baseline study
6 Bobkova (2009)
2

88

to establish full control over the country's borders, foreign investors are wary. Making progress
on resolving the issue will be a major consideration affecting Moldova's EU integration agenda.
The resumption of dialogue - the so-called 5+2 settlement process - in February 2012, after
being stalled for six years, provides an opportunity for further progress on the settlement process,
although the approval by Transnistrian representatives of the so-called "border law" in June 2013
have heightened tensions between the banks of the Dniestr/Nistru River, and are a major source
of risks.
6.
The current focus of the international community vis-A-vis Transnistria is on the
ongoing 5+2 settlement process. Moldova, Transnistria, Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE are
direct participants in this process, and the United States and the European Union act as external
observers. Official negotiations were re-launched in February 2012 after being stalled for six
years. The process is supported by eleven Working Groups on key sectors where cooperation has
been established and has produced some concrete results such as reopening of railway freight
traffic through Transnistria. The framework for international support to the settlement process is
one of 'confidence-building', which is seen as an avenue to cement the positive developments in
the negotiation process.
Addressing needs within Transnistria now will facilitate its future prosperity, and
7.
diminish the costs of its economic integration in the region regardless of its future status.
Engagement may focus on (i) assistance to the Settlement Working Groups, and (ii)
reconciliation activities that directly benefit communities and vulnerable groups. Development
Partner involvement in analysis and knowledge exchange in the Working Groups, and in
promoting interactions at the grassroots level, can add value to the settlement process, regardless
of the possible outcomes of negotiations. Existing WB options for engagement are consulted
with Moldovan authorities and aim at supporting a comprehensive and integrated approach to
ongoing confidence-building measures and broader development partner efforts to improve
cooperation between the two sides.
8.
Analytical work and technical assistance to the settlement Working Groups can help
Moldovan and Transnistrian authorities, and Development Partners, obtain better
evidence of the development context within the region. Twenty years of closed Transnistrian
leadership and limited access to the region have resulted in a scarcity of data on poverty trends,
vulnerability, citizens' participation in local development, and the institutional environment for
human, social and economic development. There is a recognized need among international
supporters of the settlement process for further knowledge gathering and monitoring of poverty
and social trends within the region. Support with analytical work would be especially effective in
the framework of the Working Groups, which show potential for productive collaboration.
9.
The settlement process can also be supported through youth and community-based
activities that promote mutual understanding and collaboration between populations on
both sides of the river. Such interventions may build on prior successful initiatives such as
summer camps for youth and community-based grants, and/or promote knowledge exchange and
cooperation between small and medium businesses across the border. Expanded interaction
between youth on both sides of the river can create a basis for shared cultural, civic, economic
values or, at the very least, enhance tolerance and openness for communication between
populations on both sides and decrease the possibility for future ethnic hostility.

89

Annex 8: Country Systems and the Fiduciary Environment
1.
Weaknesses in the Moldovan public financial management system are well
understood and a broad PFM reform program is under implementation to address them.
As a result of these efforts, the credibility of the Moldova PFM framework has been enhanced, as
evidenced by improvement of Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) scores
between 2006 and 2011. This analysis measured the performance of Moldova's public financial
management system and provided the basis for discussion regarding further improvements in
public financial management. The PEFA assessment concluded that Moldova has an effectively
functioning fiscal and budget management system, which has enabled the government to finance
and execute a budget delivering public services to the general population.
2.
With support from development partners the Government has launched a number
of reforms to enhance the quality of PFM, processes and institutions. Priority reform areas
include: (i) improving public resource allocation by introducing modern budget preparation
practices; (ii) strengthening financial discipline by modernizing the treasury system and budget
formulation and execution procedures; (iii) improving public debt management to minimize debt
service costs; (iv) improving fiscal administration and increasing the effectiveness of financial
controls; (v) increasing the efficiency of public finance management through introduction of an
integrated financial management information system; (vi) improving public investment
management practices and (vii) harmonizing the budget and fiscal legal framework with
European Union standards. As noted in the 2011 PFM assessment based on the PEFA
methodology, Moldova scores relatively well on budget credibility, comprehensiveness and
classification, treasury operations (including budget, payroll and expenditure controls), in-year
reporting and public access to government budget and financial information. In collaboration
with the World Bank (under the Bank's BOOST initiative) Moldova became one of the few
countries in the world to publish on the internet item level budget execution data for all
institutions in the budget (down to school level). The BOOST database, available on the Ministry
of Finance website, is a useful analytical tool to monitor the efficiency and transparency of the
use of public funds.
3.
While progress has been made in a number of areas, the Government continues to
address remaining weaknesses. Areas for further efforts include: (i) budget preparation and
execution (including harmonization with European Union standards); (ii) accounting and
reporting; (iii) development of the Financial Management Information System (FMIS) and cash
management; and (iv) internal auditing. Consequently, under the Bank's PFM project, the
Government is changing public sector accounting and reporting. A new integrated budget
classification and chart of accounts is being developed on the basis of the GFS2001 standards, to
be launched with a new FMIS. It is expected that in the medium-term the Government will
maintain cash-based accounting for the treasury and modified cash based accounting for the
budget institutions. The new FMIS will enable the Government to produce consolidated
financial statements showing the financial position of the Government, not only budget
execution reports.
4.
Important steps have been made to develop a modern Supreme Audit Institution.
The Court of Accounts (CoA), with the support of development partners, has made significant
progress in implementation of its strategic development plan and is now well advanced in its
transformation into an external audit body using international auditing standards. The CoA has
initiated performance audit work, which continues to develop.

90

Procurement reform is also on-going. Modifications in procurement law brought
5.
Moldovan legislation in line with international good practice, and provided a good basis for the
public procurement system but there is still room for improvement in the legislative framework.
The main challenge is the lack of secondary legislation and inadequate institutional arrangements
for a complaints review mechanism. The public procurement reform agenda has the following
priorities: (i) implementation of e-Procurement; (ii) the harmonization of national legislation to
EU and WTO Agreement requirements in public procurement; (iii) simplification of the public
procurement system, increasing the transparency and efficiency of public procurement
procedures; (iv) increase in accountability of persons involved in carrying out public
procurement procedures. To address these priorities, the World Bank provided a small grant with
the objective of improving transparency and efficiency of the public procurement system,
focusing on design and roll-out of electronic tools for public procurement and procurement
capacity development.
6.
A number of existing instruments have already been mobilized through a concerted
multi-donor effort and continue to support the government's critical PFM agenda.

91

Annex 9: Review of the National Statistical System
1.
The National Statistical System (NSS) of Moldova is formally composed of the National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and its territorial subdivisions, the National Bank of Moldova and the
statistical departments of central and local public agencies'. The NBS which supplies most of the
official statistics has a coordination role over other parts of the NSS.
2.
The capacity of the NSS is generally adequate as evidenced in a number of
independent international assessments. In 2012, Moldova scored 91 on the indicator used by
the World Bank to measure the statistical capacity of developing countries. The indicator2 is
based on a diagnostic framework along three dimensions: statistical methodology; source data;
and data periodicity and timeliness. A composite score for each dimension and an overall score
combining all three dimensions are derived for each country on a scale of 0-100. A higher score
indicates a higher level of capacity. A recent assessment by Eurostat indicates that the Law on
Official Statistics (LOS) is broadly compliant with the Fundamental Principles of Official
Statistics of the United Nations, the European Statistics Code of Practice as well as the Eurostat
Statistical Requirements Compendium. In assessing implementation, Eurostat also concluded
that the principles of professional independence, objectivity and impartiality, and statistical
confidentiality are generally upheld.
3.
The NSS generally allows monitoring of the implementation of the National
Development Strategy and could support results-based management. Forty indicators related
to the Millennium Development Goals have been published for each year since 2000. The
National Bureau of Statistics also makes public (including on its website) a release calendar for a
wider range of economic and social indicators. The 2011 edition of the Statistical Yearbook of
Moldova - available online as for the previous editions since 2002 - includes over 500 tables and
charts. Moldova subscribed to the International Monetary Fund's Special Data Dissemination
Standard (SDDS) in 2006 - at that time only the sixth country to move from participation in the
General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) to SDDS subscription - an expression of the
3
country's commitment to enhanced data collection and dissemination3
4.
The NSS does a good job in reporting on the gender dimensions of socio-economic
developments. The NBS disaggregates most demographic, economic and social statistics by sex.
Furthermore, it recognizes that gender is foremost about socio-demographic groups and the place
and role of women and men in society. Therefore, the NBS strives to ensure that "all statistical
data (both those concerning individuals and those not directly linked to individuals) must be
collected, compiled and analyzed taking into account gender factors affecting women and men
differently".
While the National Statistical System of Moldova has many strengths, there are a
5.
number of areas in which improvements are needed, including the reliability of population
data, compliance with international standards and national coverage. There are major issues
with the population data because of the poor quality of the last population census in 2004 and
lack of reliable migration data. The 2004 census overstated the size of the population by counting
'Article 7 of the Law on Official Statistics (No. 412-XV), December 2004
World Bank, July 2012, Board on Statistical Capacity(BBSC).
3 The SDDS identifies four dimensions of data dissemination-the data: coverage, periodicity, and timeliness; access by the public; the integrity
of the disseminated data; and the quality of the disseminated data.
4 http://www.statistica.md/public/files/publicatii electronice/Gender/Gen_Guide_2008.pdf
2

92

as residents Moldovan citizens who have been living abroad for more than a year, a clear
deviation from international standards. Migration data are also notoriously unreliable, and
estimates of permanent and temporary migrants range from few hundred thousand to close to a
million. Population and migration statistics are just a few areas in which international standards
are not complied with or outdated standards are still in use (National Accounts and Government
Finance Statistics). Lastly, the National Statistical System of Moldova does not cover the
Transnistria region, which - in addition to the comprehensiveness issue - compounds the quality
issue on a wide range of indicators (trade, migration etc.).
Poverty measurement is another area in which the NBS could make further
6.
improvement. The NBS publishes poverty data annually. To estimate poverty the NBS uses
national poverty thresholds with a food line (based on a minimum calorie consumption which
defines extreme poverty) and an absolute poverty line that adds basic non-food items to the food
line. A major issue with poverty estimates is high non response rates (above 40 percent). It is not
clear what explains the large non response rate but issues with the sampling frame due to the
poor quality of population data cannot be excluded. In addition, the NBS has revised - over the
years - the sampling methodology and the questionnaire with resulting challenges in the
comparability of data. The most recent changes in the Households Budget Survey in 2006
resulted in a sharp drop in extreme poverty from 2005 to 2006 (4.5 percent versus 16.1 percent).
In the 2011 Country Economic Memorandum6,6 comparability techniques revealed that the
aggregate poverty rate did not change much from 2005 to 2006, but extreme poverty may have
increased in 2006. On the other hand, it seems there is no comparability issue for the poverty
data from 2006.
The NBS has a broad positive image among users in Moldova, and making more
7.
effective use of the consultation mechanisms set forth by the LOS will help improve the
quality of statistics while enhancing the image of NBS. Two opinion surveys posted on the
NBS website describe a generally positive assessment of the NBS by the public7 . In the context
of the 2006 ROSC, IMF staff conducted a survey of users of macroeconomic data, and found that
74 percent of respondents rate as better (14 percent) or the same (63 percent) the quality of
official statistics in Moldova relative to other CIS countries. The second survey is somewhat
ambivalent as only 35 percent responded that they trust NBS data, and another 16 percent have
trust on selected categories of data. Areas that draw most skepticism are living conditions, labor
and employment, population and external trade. This latter survey suggests that the NBS could
improve the quality of data and raise trust levels by engaging more with users of data. Indeed,
the LOS has set up a Statistical Council9 , a consultative body whose role is to "develop and
promote official statistics, assure an objective, transparent, and scientific character of the
methodologies, indicators and classification". Although nonofficial members are a minority, the
Statistical Council has broad representation 0 . Unfortunately, the Council has not met often since
it was established and was not involved in recent reform plans of NBS.
s The National Accounts are based on the SNA 1993, and the Finance Statistics on the 1986 IMF Manual.
6 Moldova After the Global Crisis: Promoting Competitiveness and Shared Growth, Report No. 55185-MD.
April 4, 2011. The World Bank.
7 http://www.statistica.md/pageview.php?l=en&idc=399&
8 National Association for Rural Development (OIKOS), 2008 "Public Opinion Poll concerning the data users' satisfaction with available
statistical data from the National Bureau of Statistics". Final Report.
Article 12 of the LOS
"oThe Council for Statistics is composed of three representatives of the central statistical body, one representative of the Moldovan Academy of
Science, one representative of the National Bank of Moldova, five representatives of the specialized bodies of the central public authorities, one

93

Moldova is taking a number of steps to address the shortcomings of the National
8.
Statistical System. A population census is planned in 2014, and a pilot survey will be carried out
in April 2013 to test the sampling frame and the questionnaire. The NBS has received technical
assistance from UNFPA so this next census is done in line with international standards. The NBS
has also developed a Strategic Development Plan (2012-14) which has a medium term priority of
harmonization with the EU acquis communautaire in the statistical domain (which will address
the needed alignment with international standards). However, the SDP has not yet been approved
by the Government. While progress in the coverage of the Transnistria region will depend on the
broader reintegration agenda, the NBS could take immediate concrete steps in updating the
Strategic Development Plan (SDP), in close coordination with the Statistical Council which can
be revived, and seeking endorsement and financing of the SDP by Government.
9.
External partners have been providing strong support to NBS and the development
of the NSS. Bilateral partners include France, Norway, Romania, Sweden and Turkey. In
particular, the Government of Sweden financed most of the first post-independence Agricultural
Census in 2010. Besides the World Bank, multilateral partners include the IMF, UN Agencies especially on gender issues but also in covering social indicators from the Transnistria region and Eurostat.
10.
The World Bank will continue support to the NSS during implementation of this
CPS. Ongoing operations in the finance, health, education and social protection sectors aim to
help Moldova set up modern and effective Management Information Systems. With the
Governance and e-Transformation project, the World Bank is also supporting the open data
agenda of Moldova. In the course of CPS implementation, the World Bank will use its planned
activities on poverty assessment and Transnistria issues to help build capacity in the NBS. The
NBS has also requested access to the ECASTAT Trust Fund in support to the implementation of
its development plan, and the World Bank will consider such an application to assist the NBS in
the preparation of the population Census, strengthening capacity on gender statistics, poverty
analytics and strengthening of the institutional framework through the revival of the Statistical
Council.
Bibliography
Jean-Michel Durr, 2011 "In-depth Assessment of Population Statistics of the Republic of Moldova and its
adherence to the EU Statistical Requirements Compendium". Joint UN Project "Strengthening the
National Statistical System of the Republic of Moldova.
Willem de Vries, 2007, "Global Assessment of the National Statistical System". EU
IMF, 2006, "Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes"
V. Herrmann, C. Junker, B. Kaminskiene, G. Kopsch, J. Schachter, 2012, "Adapted Global Assessment of
the National Statistical System of Moldova", EUROSTAT
PARtnerships In Statistics for the 21st Century (PARIS21), 2003 "Improved Statistical Support for
Monitoring Development Goals: Moldova Country Case Study". By Neil Fantom, Senior Statistician,
World Bank (Team Leader); Lynn MacDonald, Adviser, Poverty Group, United Nations Development
representative of the specialized higher education institution, one representative of the trade unions, one representative of mass-media, one
representative of the employers' organizations and, one representative of the business sector.

94

Programme (UNDP); Angela Me, Chief, Social and Demographic Statistics, United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE); Jos6 Cervera-Ferri, Consultant for the European Commission (EC).
National Bureau of Statistics, 2011 "Program of strategic development of National Bureau of Statistics for
2012 - 2014"
National Association for Rural Development (OIKOS), 2008 "Public opinion poll concerning data user's
satisfaction with available statistical data for the National Bureau of Statistics"

95

Annex 10: CPS Stakeholder Consultations and Client Opinion Survey Findings
Rationale and Approach
1.
The World Bank Country Team for Moldova initiated a comprehensive
consultation process as part of the preparation process of the new Country Partnership
Strategy with the Republic of Moldova for FY 14-17. These consultations were to capture the
views and recommendations of key government and non-government stakeholders, and to take
stock of the stakeholders' opinions of World Bank assistance to the country.
2.
A two-phase consultation process was launched in July 2012 and completed in
January 2013. The first phase encompassed the Country Opinion Survey (COS) exercise. The
second phase (mid-November 2012 - early January 2013) included a series of face-to-face
consultations with central and local public authorities, parliamentarians, political parties, the
development partner community, non-government organizations, professional unions, private
sector enterprises, academia, students, think-tanks and a range of key sectorial stakeholder
groups, covering education, social protection, pensions, health, ICT, agriculture, environment
and climate change, private, financial and banking sector and youth. The face-to-face
consultations were complemented by an online consultation effort, which included the creation
of dedicated webpages in English and Romanian, providing information on the proposed CPS
priorities and offering website visitors the opportunity to comment on them.
3.
The CPS consultation process was a team effort, engaging colleagues from all
sectors, national and HQ-based staff in an effort to capture the opinions, expertise and
advice of an extremely broad range of Moldovan stakeholders in the development of the
new CPS. The general consultations provided the opportunity to address and engage a diverse
audience, capturing a wider array of suggestions and opinions regarding the Bank's work across
sectors and ways in which it can deliver its mandate more effectively. Dedicated sectorial
consultations provided a platform to drill into sector-specific issues and, having been moderated
by sector staff, have proven useful in capturing a more focused and targeted set of advice and
recommendations.
Client Opinion Survey
4.
The COS collected opinions on the Bank's role and effectiveness in the country and
its role moving forward. The survey also gathered feedback on the perceptions of stakeholders
in Moldova of the World Bank's results, knowledge agenda and information/communication
efforts. Between July and August 2012, 303 (an 80 percent response rate) stakeholders provided
their opinions on the Bank's assistance to the country. Participants in the survey were drawn
from
among
a range of central
public
institutions;
implementation
agency;
consultants/contractors working on World Bank-supported projects/programs; project
management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a project; local government officials or
staff; bilateral and multilateral agencies; private sector organizations; the financial sector/private
banks; NGOs, including community-based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent
government institutions; trade unions; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the judiciary
branch. Respondents were asked to comment on general issues facing Moldova; their overall
attitudes toward the World Bank; the Bank's effectiveness and results; the Bank's knowledge;
working with the Bank; the Bank's future role in Moldova; and the Bank's communication and
information sharing in Moldova. The main findings are summarized in the text box below.

96

CLIENT OPINION SURVEY MAIN FINDINGS
Stakeholders overwhelmingly identified growth as the most critical development priority in Moldova. At
the same time the respondents indicate clearly, throughout the survey, that governance and anti-corruption
are of great concern and that improvement in this area is critical for sustainable economic growth.
Stakeholders report that it would be of great value for the Bank to engage in the most critical areas of
development including governance and corruption and growth. In addition, a quarter of respondents also
see a key role for the Bank in agriculture. Survey results demonstrate that respondents believe the Bank is
relevant in Moldova and ratings on whether the Bank supports realistic strategies for the country have
improved since FY 08.
The Bank's greatest strength on the ground is the way it works with Government clients, and the
relationships it has fostered. The Bank receives very high ratings in areas such as straightforwardness and
honesty (improved since FY 08), staff accessibility (improved since FY 08), follow through, collaboration
with Government, and even collaboration with groups outside Government. In addition, respondents
provide high ratings for the way the Bank works in terms of the conditions it imposes, how quickly it
disburses funds, its monitoring and evaluation.
The COS results show that perceptions of the Bank's effectiveness are not equal across all sectors.
Perceptions in certain areas (only some are comparable to FY 08 due to question wording or inclusion)
have improved including in agriculture, health, gender, education, public sector reform, climate change.
The Bank's work in governance and corruption, and law and justice, receive the lowest effectiveness
ratings across the board, followed by the Bank's work on job creation and employment.
A majority of respondents believe that the Bank's greatest value in the country is related to its financial
resources. This is followed by technical assistance. Aligned with these findings, respondents report that
the most effective instrument in Moldova is the Bank's investment lending, followed by technical
assistance and capacity building. Views of policy based lending are much less positive. Looking forward,
respondents note that reducing the complexity of its lending and improving the quality of its experts on
the ground would do most to improve the Bank's work in Moldova. Some respondents said that the Bank
should offer more innovative financial products in the country.
Finally, the survey strongly suggests that the closer the stakeholders are to engagement with the Bank (in
contrast to just identifying themselves as observers) the more positive they are about every indicator
measurement in the survey. This supports continued and strategic efforts to engage with key stakeholders
to ensure productive and effective collaboration and partnerships that lead to more effective development
results on the ground. The survey findings demonstrate that the Bank has done an excellent job in
establishing strong relationships in Moldova, but it might be worth further consideration of, and reflection
on, the specific results on the ground.
Face-to-face and online stakeholder consultations
5.
The World Bank Country Office held face-to-face consultations with a representative
pool of stakeholders from mid-November 2012 - early January 2013. The stakeholders included
central and local public authorities, academia, students, think-tanks, non-governmental
organizations, private sector entities, the development partner community, parliamentarians and
political parties. A special focus was placed on reaching out to stakeholders in the regions and a
total of five consultations were held in various parts of Moldova to ensure adequate geographic
coverage (Balti, Cahul, Comrat, Orhei, and Ungheni). In addition, dedicated sectoral
consultations were held on education, social protection, pensions and health, ICT, agriculture,
environment and climate change, private, financial and banking sector and youth to capture to
the greatest extent possible sector-specific recommendations and suggestions.

97

6.
Around 500 people participated in the face-to-face consultations. These included
professionals of all ages, as well as students in three locations (Comrat and Balti Universities and
Moldovan Academy of Economic Sciences in Chisinau). There was representation from local
public authorities, including heads of the local employment offices, city mayors, deputy mayors
and councilors, heads of city/county departments in charge of public services (education, social
protection, health, etc.) and executives. Non-government organizations at local level and national
level, including members of the National Participation Council, attended the consultation events.
Sectoral consultations involved key sector experts and policymakers, implementing agency and
project staff and experts from the non-government sector. The CPS was consulted with all major
political parties and a separate presentation was held in Parliament in front of the members of the
Standing Committee for Economy, Budget and Finances.
7.
The online consultation effort included the creation of dedicated webpages in Romanian
and English on the World Bank Moldova website, containing information about the World Bank,
current and past work and proposed priorities for the new CPS. The pages were accessed by 193
people.
8.
These consultations identified the following main areas of importance: private sector
development, access to finance, and FDI; skills mismatch, labor market reforms and job creation;
education efficiency and relevance; rural development and employment; energy efficiency and
security; environmentally friendly and clean practices; agricultural competitiveness; health,
social protection and associated vulnerabilities; transparent use and monitoring of public money;
country reintegration; and other.
9.
The main suggestions and recommendations for WBG's operating focus can be
summarized, but not limited to, as follows: i) enhance accountability and strengthen monitoring
tools; ii) ensure ownership and public participation in promoting and implementing the reform
agenda; iii) use its analytical strength as a platform for future reforms in above-mentioned
sectors; iv) step up its efforts on the governance front; v) continue to provide support for
institutional and capacity building; and vi) build partnerships with other development actors for
greater impact.

98

Annex 11: Overview of Main Trust Funds in Moldova
1.
Trust Funds are integrated in the WBG strategy and support key institutional
reforms and project implementation. During the CPS period, the TF portfolio has considerably
dropped in size, from USD 84.9 million in January 2009 to around USD 40 million in July 2013,
becoming less fragmented and consolidated, more focused and complementary to the WBG's
lending and AAA program, with a largely satisfactory implementation track record. This is a
result of the WBG's efforts towards a more programmatic approach to mobilizing TF resources
and consolidating them in order to reduce fragmentation and administration costs. According to a
CFPTO review of TF integration in CAS products as of January 2010, the Moldova CPS for
FYO9-12 has done well in linking TF outcomes to the country program, dramatically improving
TF coverage by featuring many quantifiable outcomes and consolidating the overall portfolio.
2.
Trust Funds in the portfolio provide co-financing to IDA operations, finance carbon
operations, and provide other forms of support, including for AAA. The largest TFs in the
current portfolio include: USD 11.4 million Public Administration Reform Multi-Donor TF
(recently extended to December 31, 2013), USD 4.4 million Global Partnership for Education
Grant for pre-primary education, and USD 4.4 million GEF co-financing for the IDA-financed
Agriculture Competitiveness Project. The recently completed USD 16.6 million EC Regional
Development and Social Protection Grant was the largest ever in Moldova's portfolio and was
multidimensional, being complementary to several ongoing IDA-financed operations.
3.
The strong emphasis on partnerships with other development partners has proven
effective in leveraging substantial co-financing for reforms. The Rural Investment and
Services Project and the Moldova Social Investment Fund attracted the support of other partners
(DFID, EC, GEF, KFW, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, UNICEF, and USAID), with
additional financing of USD 24 million and USD 36.4 million, respectively. Development
partners (DFID, the Netherlands, and Sweden) have looked to the World Bank to administer the
Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Central Public Administration Reform and support to the Supreme
Audit Institution. These partners have also provided USD 5.5 million to the ongoing Public
Financial Management Project (USD 8.5 million IDA credit, recently extended to December 31,
2013).
4.
Aside from being complementary to the lending portfolio, TFs have been instrumental
in strengthening the AAA program and building capacity. Technical Assistance and sector
work support have been provided in agriculture, education, e-transformation, financial and
private sectors, and energy. On the latter, a vast array of trust-funded activities have provided
support for district heating restructuring and will pave the way for the future district heating
reform project planned for FY14. In the financial sector, a series of TFs have helped strengthen
the institutional capacity of the National Commission of Financial Market and enhance the
financial sector regulatory regime in accordance with international good practices. TFs have also
provided continued assistance to the private sector in regulatory and business environment
reform, increasing access to finance and implementing targeted activities to help improve
Moldovan companies' competitiveness.

99

Since 1994, the GEF has invested about USD25 million in 15 national projects, nine of which were
implemented by the World Bank. The Moldova GEF Country Portfolio Evaluation' (1994-2009)
concluded that GEF support has been relevant to national priorities, international conventions, and the
GEF mandate. The intervention on persistent organic pollutants was of strategic importance while GEF
support to biodiversity was instrumental in supporting Moldova to meet its obligations. The evaluation
found that the project preparation and approval process in Moldova has been relatively efficient
compared to other countries. However, the evaluation also found that lack of coordination and of a
clear strategy regarding GEF support impaired country ownership. The evaluation recommended that
GEF introduce a Small Grants Program in Moldova and that GEF projects address land degradation
and climate adaption issues.

The detailed list of main active TF products by CPS pillars and themes is provided below.

100

Figures in thousands of USD
Grant
Trust Fund #

Trust Fund Name

Net Grant

Program

Closing

Project Name

Fund Usage

Exec. By

Date
Pillar I. Increasing Competitiveness
TF011492

1,556.0

TF011523

Moldova Investment Climate Reform Project
Moldova: #10151 Improving Access to Credit through
Secured Transactions Reform

IFC

280.7

FIRST

TF012145

Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project

4,435.5

GEFIA

TF014647

Resource Efficency For SMEs

150.0

IFC

TF011810

4,400.0

EFAFTI

49.9

SOUTH

TF012263

Moldova - Global Partnership For Education Grant
SSKE between Moldova and Romania: Sharing Experience
on School Graduation Examinations
IDF Grant for Strategic Planning of Health Information
Management Reform Project

278.0

IDF

TF093407

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN POST-CONFLICT REGIONS

1,950.0

JSDF

TF098414

Moldova Food Security AAA

320.0

GFCRP

12/31/2014

TA & Advisory Services

10/31/2013 Moldova #10151 Improv Access to Credit

Bank

6/30/2017 AGRICULTURE COMPETITIVENESS PRO]. (GEF)
2/29/2016 REF for SMEs

Bank

Recipient
TA & Advisory Services

Bank

Pillar II. Enhancing Human Capital and Minimizing Social Risks

TF014285

10/29/2014 EFA-FTI - 3

Recipient

2/20/2014 EDUCATION REFORM
7/30/2015 IDF-HEALTH MIS
9/17/2013 SIF 2

Bank
TA & Advisory Services
Recipient
Projects w/o any Bank cof
(eg: CDCF)
Recipient

6/30/2014 MD Food Security Notes

Bank

Pillar III. Promoting a Green, Clean and Resilient Moldova

TF093088

COMMUNITY SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINABLE AND
INTEGRATED FOREST MANAGEMENT AND CARBON
SEQUESTRATION THROUGH FORESTATIO N.

975.9

PHRD

TF056111

CDCF - MOLDOVA BIOMASS HEATING ERPA

1,047.1

CARBON

TF056815

BCF - MOLDOVA SOIL CONSERVATION ERPA

2,478.0

CARBON

TF094358

2,612.5

CARBON

100.0

GFDRR

220.1

TF099139

MOLDOVA COMMUNITY FORESTRY PROJECT
GFDRR: Moldova Disaster and Climate Risk management
Capacity Building
MOLDOVA ESREI TF: SUPERVISION OF RECIPIENT
ACTIVITIES
MOLDOVA ESREI TF COMPONENT 2 & 3: DH Investment
Study and Energy Supply Optimization Strategy

TF099493

Moldova Soil Conservation Project

TF099602

Biogas Generation from Animal Manure Pilot Project

TF097543
TF099088

4/2/2014 Moldova Community Forestry Project

TA & Advisory Services

Recipient

Carbon Financing

Recipient

12/31/2015 SOIL CONS. FOLLW UP

Carbon Financing

Recipient

12/31/2018 Moldova Community Forestry Project

Carbon Financing

Recipient

9/30/2014 DISASTER & CLIMATE RISK MGT

TA & Advisory Services

Bank

FS-7SD

6/25/2014 Moldova: Sida TF on Energy Reform and EE

TA & Advisory Services

Bank

2,273.0

FS-75D

12/25/2014 Moldova: Sida TF on Energy Reform and EE

TA & Advisory Services

Recipient

2,961.4

CARBON

12/31/2013 SOIL CONS. FOLLW UP

Carbon Financing

Recipient

980.0

GEFIA

TA & Advisory Services

Recipient

12/31/2013 MDTF FOR PUBLIC ADMIN REFORM

TA & Advisory Services

Recipient

11/30/2013 MOLDOVA eTRANSFORMATION

7/15/2016 BIOMASS HEAT IN RUR COMM (CDCF)

6/30/2014 BIOGAS GENERATION FROM ANIMAL MANURE

Governance as a cross-cutting theme
TF056601
TF011685
TF012004
TF013177
Total

MDTF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE SUPPORT TO PUBLIC
ADMINISTRATION REFORM OF MOLDOVA
MOLDOVA: Feasibility Study for Cloud-Based Shared
Infrastructure PPP
Strengthening Public Procurement
Advice on Strengthening Public Investment Management in
Moldova

11,450.0

FS-7PE

200.0

PPIAF

493.0

IDF

200.0

EPFM

39,411.0

101

TA & Advisory Services

Bank

6/27/2015 IDF-PUBLIC PROCUREMENT

TA & Advisory Services

Recipient

4/30/2014 Advice on Strengthening Public Invt. Mgm

TA & Advisory Services

Bank

Annex 12: Country Financing Parameters Summary Table
Date: January 28, 2005
The country financing parameters for Moldova set out below have been approved by the
Regional Vice President, Europe and Central Asia, and are posted on the Bank's internal website.
Item
Cost sharing: Limit on the
proportion of individual project
costs that the Bank may finance.

Parameter
Up to 100
percent

Remarks/Explanation
Individual projects may be financed up to
100 percent. To assure ownership,
appropriate level of cost sharing will still
be encouraged, especially for projects wit
high TA and policy content, and by
beneficiary communities in CDD projects.

Recurrent cost financing: Any
limits that would apply to the
overall amount of recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance.

No country
level limit on
recurrent cost
financing

Local cost financing: Are the
requirements for Bank financing of
local expenditures met, namely
that: (i) financing requirements for
the country's development program
would exceed the public sector's
own resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii) the
financing of foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing of individual
projects?

Yes

The Bank would continue to monitor the
overall fiscal and debt situation and its
implications for recurrent cost financing.
In determining Bank financing of recurrent
costs in individual projects, the Bank
would take into account sustainability
issues at the sector and project level
particularly the sustainability of project
achievements, and implied future
budgetary outlays.
The requirements for local cost financing
are met. The Bank can finance local costs
in any proportions required by individual
projects.

Taxes and duties: Are there any taxes None
and duties that the Bank would not
finance?

There are no unreasonable taxes and
duties. The Bank may finance all taxes and
duties associated with project
expenditures. At the project- level, the
Bank would consider whether taxes and
duties constitute an excessively high share
of projects costs.

102

Annex 13: Standard CPS Annexes
Annex 1: A2 - Moldova at a Glance

Moldova at a glance
Europe &
POVERTY and SOCIAL

Lower-

Central

middie-

Asia

income

Moldova

-3
O~op~tdiom

t011
Population,mid-year(ilhons)

3.6
1,980

GN:percapita(Atlasmethod,US$)
GN

(Atlas moto,d, US$

biho ns)

7.1

408
7,734

2,533
1,772

3,157

4,488

Lfeexpectancy

Average annual growth, 2005-11
Population (%)

-02
-24

Labarrarce ()

04
1.1

16
13

GNI
per

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2005-11}
Poverty (%otpopulation be)ow natonapovertyi;ne)
Urban popuation (%0 totalpopufation)
Lifeexpectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality (pertlOOGvebiths)

Chidnmanutrtion (%ofchidrenunder5)
Access to an improved watersource (%ofpopu)ato)
Literacy(%ofpopulatenage 5+)
Gross primaryenraliment (%ofschoo-agepopufation)
M ale
Female
KEY ECONOM

IC RATIOS and LONG-TERM

22

.

.

48

65

39

69

71

66

14

18

46

3
96
99
94

1
96
98
100
100
100

24
87
71
104

94

93

enromnent

Accessto npromvedwater source

.e

106

102

TRENDS

191
GDP (US$ bekons)

oss
prnnary

-

capia

2001

3.1

201

r

2011

1.5

5.8

7.0

Gross capitaifarmatothnGDP
andservices/GDP
Exparts ogods

29.0
324

20.0
49.9

23.5
39.2

24.5
45.0

Gross damesticsavngsIGDP

27.4

-37

-15.8

-167

EconomficraoC

Thade

Gross natonal savIngs/GDP

18.3

13.4

114

Current accoutb aiance/GIDP
Interest paymentsI/GDP

-1.7
48

-104
14

-12.3
13

Domestic

120.6

82.9

77.9

samrinf

Totaldebt/GDP
Totaldebtservice/exports

157

13.1

Capital

,

foiaffbn

12.0

PresentivaleordebIt/GDP

66.3

Presentvatueordebilexports

1188
Indelntedness
1991-01

2001-11

2010 r

2011

2011-15

GDP

-69

4.8

64

33

GDP per capita

-67

51

72

6.5

42

9.8

28.6

43

77

1991

2001

2010

(averageannluagowth)

Expirts ofgoods andservices

STRUCTURE

1.5

7.1

of the ECONOM Y

(%roGDP)

r

42.7

26.0

14.5

14.8

Industry

333

24.1

13.2

13.9

12.7

13.5

Manuractuering

181

Sev,ces

23.9

499

724

713

HoUoseehid rinal consumptioneXipenditure
Generalgiv't final c onsum piti
onexpenditure
tmports ogoods andservices

575
15.1
34.0

88.6
15.1
735

93.6
22.2
78.5

96.2

1991-01

2001-11

2010

Agricuture

-9.5

-0.9

73

tndustry

-115

-2.3

-34

-0.1
99

GromtofcapllimIGW(%)

2011

Agrtcutture

0

s

r

*o

20.5
86.2

riv

2011
<%

M anuractulring

07

Sev,ces

56

40

10.7

93

2

10.7
47

9.2
53

i>

0

-

-1o

HoUosehoid rinal consumptineXipendtture
GeneragGv'tfinalconsumptionexpenditure

9.1
-10.4

6.5
3.0

Grosscapitalformatotn

-13.9

58

Note: 20ldataareprelminaryestmates.
ThistablewasproducedfromtheDevelopmentEconomics
*Thedamondsshowfrurkeytndtcators

11

ch

(averageannultagrowtth)Orvt.oex.sadino

Impirtsorgoodsandservioes

I

-

tnthe country(in

47
-1.1

2.9
-13

68

18.1

12.5

9

19.3

2.5

07o

00

10

-go
F_xvis

-5-Inewss

LDB database

botd)campared

with ts tncome-group

beincomplete

103

average lfdata

are mtssIng,thedamondwEtt

11

Moldova
PRICES and GOVERNM ENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator

r

1990

2000

2009 r

2010

Inflation(%
20

135

312
273

0O
22

74
112

Is
10

5

Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

o=
319

383

375

-2-8
26

-2-0
-63

1A
-25

2000

2009

oe

o.

oa

.7

uPdeAdF

to

-....

C.I.

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Live animals and animal products
Vegetable products
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy

r

1990

Capital goods

r

2010

477
23
66
06
793
26
92

1329
133
254
3,273
290
718

97

770

1,590
29
387
398
3,80
455
791
805

100
O
10

135
173
07

20
93
09

Exportandi-prtleveh(US$mil.)
6A0O
sl
3A00
2,)0

1,0D0

o
04

Export price index (2000=1D0)
Import price index (2000=VO)
Terms oftrade (2000=0)

05

06

fElpXrk

07

00

09

10

kipmk

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(UtS$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports ofgoods and services
Resource balance

r

1990

Net income
Net current transfers

2000
641
912
331
22
211

Current account balance

-

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ mions)
Conversion rate (DEC, 1ocal/US$)

358E-3

CurrentaccmintbicelG041(74

2009 r
1996
398D
-1993

2010
2,280
4,580
2,300

303
1,151

471
1,98

10

0
-S

-98

-539

-631

-1-

146
-47

338
201

925
-294

-20

218
124

2348
111

2,754
124

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(0S$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

F

1990

Vb rld Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Netflows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0

0

2009

r

2010

3,557
110
332

4,615
93
386

150
16
1

386
21
6

387
9
7

37
25
82
128
3

132
-6
-25
128
2

241
42
10
94
6

10
36
5
31

49
21
21
0

55
64
22
42

11
19

6
-6

4
38

1,690
191
103

Total debt service
lBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Officialgrants
Official creditors
Privatecreditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity(net inflows)

2000

Conposilionol201debt(US$mil)

esz2

GD1

7
E 2B

F: 11,909
-

Note Thistablewas produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

104

A-HEIRD
BIDA
C-AMF

D-COatinuNdmd

E-EMlal
F-Fiwml
G - Shut-rrn

3/29/12

Annex 2: B2 - Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 7/8/2013

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
A\erage Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
A\erage Supervision (US$/project)

2010

2011

2012

2013

13
3.9
15.4
7.3
15.4
7.3
28.6

11
4.1
9.1
16.6
9.1
16.6
40.5

11
4.4
18.2
8.7
18.2
8.7
38.3

9
4.4
22.2
11.3
22.2
11.3
24.0

no
1320.2
101.6

no
1242.6
88.8

yes
1189.6
99.1

no
960.2
68.6

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
27
3
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
492.6
34.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
15.4
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
16.3
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
A\erage age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on de\elopment objecti\es (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Impro\ement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Inestment projects only.
All indicators are for projects actie in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all actie projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

105

Annex 3: B3 - Summary of Indicative Lending Program
CPS FY14-17: World Bank Lending Scenarios
Project Name

IDA
USD (m)

IBRD
USD (m)

Total
USD (m)

-

30.0

FY14
P143283

Development Policy Operation (DPO)

30.0

P132443

Moldova DH Efficiency Improvement

20.0

P143870

Moldova DH Efficiency Improvement Guarantee

P144892

Health Transformation

30.0

-

30.0

Subtotal FY14

80.0

80.0

160.0

FY15
tbd

DPO

30.0

-

30.0

tbd

Private Sector Development Project

15.0

30.0

45.0

Public Administration Reforms Project

20.0

P127734

Strengthening PFM and Tax Administration

20.0

80.0

-

80.0

20.0
20.0

Subtotal FY15

85.0

30.0

115.0

FY16
tbd

DPO

30.0

-

30.0

tbd
tbd

Lifeline Roads
Forest and Sustainable Land Management

20.0

30.0
-

30.0
20.0

tbd

AF GeT/Competitiveness
Subtotal FY16

FY17
tbd

DPO

tbd

Adaptation and Resilience to Climate change

tbd

AF Agriculture Competitiveness

P127388

AF Moldova Education Reform Project
Subtotal FY17

Total FY14-17
FY14
FY15-17

USD25 million depending on IDA availability, macroeconomic
environment and estimated impact of the reforms being implemented.

20.0

-

tbd

Comment

-

10.0

50.0

40.0

10.0
90.0

-

30.0

30.0

20.0

-

20.0
20.0

-

20.0

15.0

-

15.0

35.0
250.0
80.0
170.0

50.0
200.0
80.0
120.0

85.0
450.0
160.0
290.0

106

USD25 million depending on IDA availability.

USD25 million depending on macroeconomic environment and the
estimated impact of the reforms being implemented.
Efforts will be made to meet the Government's preference for a TF, but
would still maintain at least a small IDA component, e.g. for advisory
support and capacity building.
Provided issues under the current PFM project are resolved and timely
delivery of the FMIS.

USD25 million depending on macroeconomic environment and the
estimated impact of the reforms being implemented.
Additional funding to be sought with GEF, the Climate Investment Fund
and the Green Climate Fund.

USD25 million depending on macroeconomic environment and the
estimated impact of the reforms being implemented.
Additional funding to be sought with GEF, the Climate Investment Fund
and the Green Climate Fund.

Annex 4: B4 - Summary of Proposed AAA
CPS FY14-17: Analytical and Advisory Activities (New or Programmatic)
FY14
P143613
P132229
tbd
tbd
P146628
tbd
FY15
P143613
P132229
tbd
tbd
P146476
tbd
tbd
P146628
FY16
P143613
P132229
tbd
tbd
tbd
P146628
FY17
P143613
P132229
tbd
tbd
tbd
P146628
P131020
P129112
P132485
P145214
tbd
P133467
P130304
tbd
tbd
tbd

Programmatic HD TA
Financial Sector Monitoring
Programmatic SD AAA
Trade Study (programmatic)
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review
Transnistria Economic and Social Notes
Programmatic HD TA
Financial Sector Monitoring
Poverty Assessment
Programmatic SD AAA
Forest Policy Sector Note
Energy Sector Note
Broadband Access Policy Notes
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review
Programmatic HD TA
Financial Sector Monitoring/PSD
Programmatic SD AAA
Assessment of Climate Change Adaptive Capacity
Economic Geography
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review
Programmatic HD TA
Financial Sector Monitoring/PSD
Programmatic SD AAA
Aging Study
Jobs
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review
AAA: Ongoing (as of July 1, 2013)
IDF Health (TF012263)
IDF Public Procurement
Land Governance Assessment Framework TF Supervision
Social Accountability in Forestry
Forest Law Enforcement and Governance Phase II (Regional)
Strengthening Audit and Reporting in Eastern Partnership Countries
Strengthening Public Investment Management (TF013177)
District Heating Reforms (TF099088)
Statistical Capacity Building (TF)
Open Data Readiness (TF)

107

Annex 5: B5 - Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2005-11

Europe &
Central
Asia

3.6
1.0
44.2
2.6

3.7
-0.1
46.3
1.9

3.6
-0.2
47.7
1.5

408.1
0.4
64.7
1.8

2,532.7
1.5
38.7
2.9

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..

..

..

..

..

..

21.9
10.4
30.3

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)

..

470
23

1,980
165

7,734

1,772

..

34.3
6.9
41.4

33.0
7.8
41.2

..

5.8

..

..

5.2
8.6

3.9
4.5

1.7
4.4

..
..
..

..
..
..

88
88
87

93
94
93

87
88
86

..

93
98
88

96
99
93

96
99
91

87
93
84

..

91
96

..

..

91
93
3

94
92
1

78
73
24

66
63
69

67
63
71

69
66
73

71
67
75

66
64
68

34
42

24
29

14
16

18
21

46
62

289
173

269
146
60
100

300
145
41
100

269
114
32
98

240
170
260
57

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per w oman)

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles

DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

..

..
..

..
..

..

..
..

Lowermiddleincome

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2013.

108

Annex 6: B6- Key Economic Indicators
Actual

Indicator

2008

2009 2010

Estimated

2011

2012

Projected

2013

2014

2015

2016

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100
11
14
75

100
10
13
77

100
14
13
72

100
15
17
68

100
13
17
70

100
16
17
68

100
16
17
68

100
16
17
67

100
16
17
67

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

114
34
2
32

113
23
4
19

116
23
1
22

115
23
1
22

117
23
2
21

117
24
2
21

117
24
2
21

117
23
3
21

117
23
3
20

41
94

37
73

39
79

45
86

44
84

44
84

42
83

42
83

42
82

-14
22

-13
13

-16
13

-15
15

-17
16

-17
17

-17
16

-17
15

-17
15

Gross domestic product

6055

5438

5813

7016

7253

7763

8352

9083 10007

(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

1500

1570

1820

1980

2070

2260

2458

2655

2894

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 96 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
7.8
-6.0
prices
Gross Domestic Income
2.9
-4.9

7.1

6.4

-0.8

4.5

4.0

4.0

4.5

6.1

1.6

-2.0

4.0

2.9

3.6

4.3

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc
Memorandum items

Real annual per capita growth rates (%,
calculated from 96 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors &
ommissions)
Change in reservesd

7.9

-5.9

13.8

6.5

-0.8

4.6

4.1

4.1

4.6

5.7
5.9

-6.9
-8.1

7.3
9.2

7.3
9.4

0.9
1.0

4.8
4.6

4.9
4.9

4.3
4.3

4.8
4.8

2483
1646
5708
4869
-3225
1577
-1049

2000
1327
3989
3276
-1989
1151
-534

2292
1590
4580
3810
-2288
1198
-620

3146
2277
6041
5147
-2896
1521
-806

3164
2228
6110
5152
-2946
1605
-511

3387
2413
6535
5519
-3148
1690
-544

3544
2495
6971
5891
-3427
1776
-662

697
388
8
380
417

139
-31
-7
-25
227

194
287
168
119

253
194
35
160

139
238
95
143

163
298
113
185

204
422
210
212

228
240
326
-86

285
406
333
72

433

636

631

237

316

323

339

-452

201

-294

-278

-498

-154

-281

-65

-214

-53.3

-36.6

-39.4

-41.3

-40.6

-40.5

-41.0

-40.8

-40.4

-1.6
-3.5
22.6
20.3

-3.2
21.0
-54.9
-32.3

5.2
-2.5
55.5
4.6

17.0
9.8
69.8
30.3

2.1
-3.9
7.8
-1.8

8.0
11.4
0.9
6.9

4.7
6.2
1.2
5.7

4.6
5.9
1.5
4.8

4.8
5.9
2.2
5.0

3818 4154
2680 2916
7524 8197
6361 6931
-3706 -4043
1855 1935
-726
-816

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR96 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

109

Moldova - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Actual

Indicator
Indicator

2008

Projected

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

40.0
34.5

38.3
40.3

37.5
36.1

35.8
33.9

37.3
34.1

37.7
34.0

37.6
33.9

37.6
33.3

37.7
32.8

5.5
7.1
0.1

-2.0
4.9
3.7

1.3
4.6
2.9

1.9
5.1
0.7

3.2
6.2
2.2

3.7
6.2
2.3

3.7
5.9
3.4

4.2
6.2
4.4

4.9
6.4
4.0

50.4
15.9
119.3

34.7
-33.9
-364

34.5
18.3
140.0

34.3
14.1
68.3

39.7
23.5
145.0

45.1
25.0
63.2

49.5
20.0
80.0

51.0
12.7
78.4

52.0
11.9
73.4

Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

150.5
362.4
41.5

129.4
357.5
36.2

147.1
397.8
37.0

180.5
416.1
43.4

167.5
425.7
39.3

173.2
421.6
41.1

171.0
425.8
40.2

175.7
438.6
40.0

182.3
455.2
40.1

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

146.5

122.8

129.3

127.8

126.2

126.1

127.7

131.0

135.4

12.7
9.3

0.0
2.2

7.4
11.1

7.6
7.7

4.6
7.5

4.7
5.3

5.1
5.3

4.8
5.1

4.7
5.0

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit
(-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2(%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR96 =100)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

110

Annex 7: B7 - Key Exposure Indicators
Actual
Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

2008

2009

Actual
2012

2011

2010

Projected
2013

2014

2015

2016

3787

3457

4030

5240

6004

6295

6727

6965

7375

399
481

-46
387

377
346

771
456

820
601

503
693

739
779

543
754

712
541

85.4
62.5
10.8
8.2

107.2
63.6
12.0
9.6

109.9
69.3
9.4
9.6

109.7
74.7
9.6
8.3

120.6
82.8
12.1
8.5

117.7
81.1
13.0
0.0

118.6
80.6
13.7
0.0

113.6
76.7
12.3
0.0

110.9
73.7
8.1
0.0

28.2
70.5

23.7
53.1

28.9
56.8

23.1
45.8

24.6
60.6

27.1
66.3

38.2
72.4

14.9
89.1

4.0
91.1

0.5
129
0

0.7
110
0

0.5
93
0

0.4
75
0

0.4
55
0

0.3
45
0

0.2
94
66.5

0.2
84
67.8

0.2
87
69.3

0.5
312

0.7
332

0.5
386

0.4
433

0.4
508

0.4
628

0.3
742

0.2
834

0.1
911

18.2
6.6

11.4
4.1

13.6
3.0

30.2
3.00

73.0
2.5

95.2
2.5

110.0
4.0

120.0
5.0

130.0
6.0

61

69

75

70

73

16

15

15

10

(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m) '
Loans
Equity and quasi-equitye
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
f. FYO8-FY13 Actual, FY14-FY16 Projected

111

Annex 6: B8 - IFC Statement of Committed and Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 6/30/2013
In USD Millions

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2008/13
2011
0
2011
2012
2010
1999/00/01
2009
2013
2010

Bosta\n
Chisinau
Energo continent
Eximbank moldo\t
Gc prim
Maib
Orange moldo\t
Pc bank moldo\t
Transoil
Ufmoldo\t
Total Portfolio:

*
**

Loan

Equity

0
9.3
0
17.3
3
8.6
0
1.7
30
12.2

1.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

82.1

1.1

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

0
0
3
0
7
0
1.6
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
0

0
6.0
0
17.3
3
8.6
0
1.7
30
12.2

0.9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
7
0
1.6
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
0

11.6

0

20

78.8

0.9

8.6

0

20

Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

112

Annex 7: B8 - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 7/8/2013
Closed Projects

39

IBRD/IDA*
TotalDsbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
TotalDsbursed (Cosed)
of which has been repaid
TotalDsbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

71.0
0.0
347.7
192.8
418.7
192.8

TotalUndisbursed (Active)

119.8

TotalUndisbursed (Closed)

0.3

TotalUndisbursed (Active + Cosed)

120.1

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P118518
P127125
P115634
P127388
P143202
P095250
P121231
P107612
P082916
P090340
P120913
Oerall Result

AG COMP
AGRICULTURE COMPETIT1VENESS PROJ. (GEF)
DISASTER & CLIMATE RISK MGT
EDUCATION REFORM
EMERGENCY AG SUPPORT
HEALTH SERVICES AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
MOLDOVA eTRANSFORMATION
NATIONAL WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION
PUB FIN MGMT TA
QUAL EDUC IN RUR AREAS OF MD
Strengthen SSN - Results

Development
Objectives
S
S
MS
S
#
MS
S
MS
U
MU
MS

Original Amount in US$Millions

Implementation
Progress
S
S
MS
S
#
S
MS
MS
U
S
MS

113

Fiscal Year
'

'
'
'
'
'

'
'
'
'
'

2012
2012
2011
2013
2013
2007
2011
2008
2005
2006
2011

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Disbursements "

Cancel.

18
4.4
10
40
10
27.2
20
14
8.5
11
37
195.7

0.6

4.4

0.6

Undisb.
17.4
4.3
5.1
40.0
9.7
5.6
15.0
2.4
6.7
0.4
17.5
124.1

Orig. Frm Rev'd
0.8
0.9
2.3
0.0
-4.9
6.3
3.1
7.3
-1.8
1.2
15.1

5.1
3.1
7.3
0.1
15.7

IBRD 33448R
28E

27TE

29E

30E

UKRAINE7

ToVn~
ToChernvtsi

.

i

j

_

/Ocnita

ToV\innytsya

*MoghiliavPdolski

MOLDOVA

Bri cen
T Dondueni

Chernivtsi
EeSoroca(
'rochia,

48N

Camnka

48N

FloretiN
Cfosest

*

Soldne5ti
.Ribni

6Bali

@Glodeni

ORezin

Balatina

Singere

ToVoznesens'k

Faletio
0

Chiperceni

STeleneti

ROrhei

0

Mt..Baianesti Cislrasi

10

40 Kilometers

30

20

30Me

TRANSN ISTl/A

Dubsar
ToPascani

20

10

Criule

Ungheni)Ciln
Nisporeni

T. zhmeryka

SrmnoOioi

47N

CHI1INAU
Lpusna
Leuseni

~~~te~ n

The

~

rnto

~

~

Hnceti

laloveni

Ann

~oosdnmntosodoy
~ ~

~C SELEC
~

~

terriwoy,

A

46N9

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
AUTONOMOUS TERRITORIAL UNIT
CAPITALS



tefan-Vod ,

GGUZIA
T

y

L ga6N
.Cahul

Taraclia
GGUI

RA1ONS OR MUNICIPALITIES
CAPITALS*

*

ToOdesa

nei

Ceadr-

0

1:

Sioesh

Basa rabeasca

rom rat

~cetonce ofwsch boundaries.

27E

o

Bn (bnoin

c

lrsdeoinations

MO LDOVA

-

Leova

This=,roducethetMapDesign Unit of TheWorld Bank,
and cny other information~'
Thebna.e,
show on #his map do not imply,on the partoFThe Wd Bank
ToBirlad
or.an
egalsaus-F-ay
the
Grop, anyjudgmnent-o
endorsemnentor

Tiraflspol

da

Cimnilia
ToBirlad

47N

9
Vulcane t

NATIONAL CAPITAL
ARIVERS
MAIN ROADS

B4ack

RAILROADS
-

-

-

AUTONOMOUS TERRITORIAL UNIT

BOUNDARIES

a

ToB

RAIONS OR MUNICIPALITIES
BOUNDARIES
-

--

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

*Namesof the raions or municipalities
are identical to their capitals.

28E

29E

30E
MAY 2007

