Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank

Report No. 21957-BEN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

March 22, 2001

Country Department for Benin
AFC13
Africa Region

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of December 14, 2000)

Currency Unit

=

CFA Franc (CFAF)

739.2 CFAF

US$1.00
CFA franc 1 million

=

US$1352.81

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR OF BORROWER
January I - December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
BCEAO
BOAD
CBO
CET
CFAA
CFAF
CPAR
ECOWAS
ECVR
ELAM
ESAF
EU
HIPC
IBRD
IDA
IDB
IFC
MAP
MIGA
MTEF
NGO
NPV
OHADA
PAC
PERAC
PLWHA
PRSC
PRGF
PRSP
SAC
SDD
SONAPRA
SSPR
UJNDP
WAEMU

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (Central Bank of West African States)
Banque Ouest-Africaine de Developpement (Development Bank of West African States)
Community Based Organizations
Common External Tariff
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Franc de la Communaute Financiere de l'Afrique (African Financial Community Franc)
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Economic Community of West African States
Enquete Legere aupres des Menages (Household survey in urban areas)
Enqute sur les Conditions de Vie en Milieu Rural (Household survey in rural areas)
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
European Union
Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
Islamic Development Bank
International Finance Corporation
Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium-term Expenditure Framework
Nongovernmental Organization
Net Present Value
Organisation pour l'Harmnonisationdu Droit des Affaires en Afrique (Organization for the
Harmonization of Commercial Laws in Africa)
Port Autonome de Cotonou (Port of Cotonou)
Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit
People Living with HIV/AIDS
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Structural Adjustment Credit
Social Dimension of Development Program
Societe Nationale de Promotion Agricole (National Company for Agricultural Promotion,
Cotton marketing parastatal)
Social and Structural Policy Review
United Nations Development Program
West African Economic and Monetary Union
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team leader

Callisto Madavo
Antoinette M. Sayeh
Claude Leroy-Themeze

MEMORANDUM AND RECOMMENDATON OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON AN INTERIM
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVESUMMARY ..................................................

i

INTRODUCTION....................................................

I

BACKGROUNDAND PROSPECTS....................................................1

I.

Background.................................................................
Political Developments................................................................
Economic Developments...............................................................
Social Developments...............................................................
Medium-TermMacroeconomicFramework................................................................

2
3
5
6
8

DEVELOPMENTCHALLENGES...................................................

II.

Poverty........................................................................
HIV/AIDS................................................................
Gender Inequities................................................................
Population Growth................................................................
..............................................
Weak Institutionsand Weak Administrative Capacity .................
Governance........................................
Competitiveness.....................................
Diversificationand Vulnerabilities .....................................
Regional Integration: Opportunitiesand Challenges.....................................
111. THE GOVERNMENT'S INTERIM POVERTYREDUCTIONSTRATEGY .............................

IV. THE WORLDBANK'S INTERIM ASSISTANCE STRATEGY .............................

16
17
18
19

The Bank's Long-Term Assistance Strategy .....................................
Transition......................................
Triggers for Moving to ConsolidatedProgram Support .....................................

20

COLLABORATIONWITH PARTNERS.....................................

20
20

Relationswith IMF ...................
Donor Coordination...................

22

VI. INTERIM ASSISTANCE PROGRAM .....................................
Analytical and Advisory Activities.....................................
Size and Composition of Lending.....................................
Portfolio Management.....................................
Enhanced HIPC Debt Relief ......................................
IFC and MIGA Activities .....................................
Preparing a full CAS.....................................
VII.

RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION.....................................

External Environment.....................................
Domestic Risks .....................................
CONCLUSION......................................

15
15
16

Key Elements......................................
Assessment......................................

V.

8
8
11
11
11
13
13
14
14

;

24
24
25
25
26
26
26
26
27
28

TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont.)
Tables
Table I Economic Trends................................................

2

Table 2 Social Indicators, Benin & SSA ................................................

5

Table 3 Medium-TermMacro-EconomicFramework................................................

7

Table 4 Bank Group Portfolio - FY01................................................

16

Table 5 Triggersfor ConsolidatedProgram Support................................................

21

Table 6 Components of the Bank Assistance Program, FY 2001-02 .................................
Table 7 Key Economic and Sector Work ................................................

............... 23
24

Boxes
Box 1. CAS Consultationsin Benin: Key Findings .........

4.......................................

Box 2. Poverty ................................................

9

Box 3. The Need to Scale Up the Fight Against HIV/AIDS................................................

10

Box 4. Anti-corruption................................................

12

Box 5. The External Partnership................................................

22

ANNEXES
Al

Medium-TermEconomic Framework

A2

Benin at a Glance

B2

Selected Indicatorsof Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

B3

Bank Group Program Summary

B6

Key Economic Indicators

B7

Key Exposure Indicators

B8

OperationsPortfolio

B8

Statementof IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

MEMORANDUMAND RECOMMENDATONOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORSON AN INTERIM
COUNTRY ASSISTANCESTRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Benin's development strategy has been broadly successful over the past decade, but
nonetheless it faces significant challenges in reducing poverty. Benin's economic performance during
the 1990s represents a striking turnaround after nearly two decades of stagnation. Growth (an average of
4.5 percent per year) generally exceeded other economies in the region and productivity gains allowed per
capita incomes to rise (by about 1.7 percent on average). Except for the immediate aftermath of the CFA
franc devaluation (1994), consumer price inflation remained under 4 percent per annum. The
Government's structural adjustment program has been successful in establishing fiscal discipline, opening
up the economy, privatizing most public enterprises, and strengthening private sector incentives. Most
significantly, most social indicators improved steadily throughout the 1990s, particularly for education
and health. In addition, Benin's debt sustainability has markedly improved over last decade, as a result of
strong international financial support, as well as strengthened economic management and a strong
recovery in commodity exports, especially cotton. The country has received a high level of concessional
financial assistance for investment projects and its adjustment program, and the debt relief granted under
the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in July 2000 has secured its medium-termdebt sustainability.
2.
Notwithstandingthese impressive results, with about 33 percent of the population remaining below
the poverty line,' poverty remains a major issue. To make greater progress in reducing poverty, Benin
must now address the more difficult longer-term challenges of diversifying the economy, building
effective public institutions, and promoting gender equality. Weak public institutions remain the
biggest constraint to development and poverty reduction. This is manifest in widespread dissatisfaction
with the availability and quality of public services, including health and education, a poorly performing
judicial system, and the perception of widespread corruption. Significant irregularities characterized the
most recent major privatization, while key reforms in the cotton sector are being threatened by vested
parties. Important cross-cutting reforms, to build capacity and improve service delivery, such as
decentralization and civil service reform, have proven difficult to implement. Gender inequality remains
pervasive in many dimensions of life in Benin, and gender gaps are widespread in access to and control of
resources, in economicopportunities, as well as in power and political voice.
3.
Past assistance strategy. The previous CAS for Benin was presented to the Board in 1994.2 At the
time, Benin faced the challenge of deepening structural reforms to maximize the boost in external
competitiveness triggered by the 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc so as to accelerate growth and
poverty reduction. The Bank's assistance strategy supported Benin in meeting this challenge through
both lending as well as analytical and advisory activities. In particular, a third structural adjustment
program supported further improvements in the environmentfor private sector development and increases
in budgetaryallocations for the social sectors.
IDA's long-term strategy. The Bank's long-term strategy, to be developed in a full CAS in the
4.
second half of FY02, will seek to support the Government in addressing the longer-term challenges that
remain. It will draw on the forthcoming PRSP and the letter of development policy for the proposed
' See Box2 on the qualityof the officialdata.
IDA/R94-81,discussedon June 7, 1994.

2

- ii-

Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit. In particular, it will help the Government build the
capacity to manage its own resources effectively and to implement policies that will attract private
investment. While work will continue at the macroeconomic level to help raise economic growth and
maintain macro-financial stability, the emphasis in assistance will shift to the sector level and crosscutting public sector management issues. This will entail strengthening analytical and advisory activities
as input into the formulation and monitoring of the Government's poverty reduction strategy and a shift in
the Bank's lending modalities. Specifically, the CAS would envisage moving away from adjustment
operations combined with discrete investment projects, to supporting a comprehensive poverty reduction
strategy through consolidated program support. Traditional self-standing operations would continue only
where the benefits of separate implementation and financial arrangements appear to outweigh the
advantages of a more integrated approach to public financial resource transfers.
5.
The interim assistance strategy. This interim CAS sets out a transitional phase towards this
vision. It will be followed by a full CAS once the PRSP is in place and medium-term objectives, policies,
and monitoring indicators have been firmed up. The key components of the 12-18 month interim
assistance strategy are support to Benin for: (i) addressing the weaknesses of the interim PRSP so as to
help it complete a strong PRSP; (ii) building the foundations for a progressive shift to consolidated
program support, based on a number of specific criteria; (iii) preparing 3 investment projects (cotton
sector reform program, HIV/AIDS, and power); and (iv) strengtheningcurrent portfolio management.
6.
Risks. There are several risks that could affect Benin's ability to achieve the desired progress on
poverty reduction and which, therefore, constitute risks to the assistance strategy. First, the country
remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks, especially cotton price changes, which could affect rural
incomes and export earnings. The cotton sector reform is designed to increase the sector's flexibility and
its capacity to absorb international price shocks, although its timely implementation is currently being
jeopardized. Second, economic developments in Nigeria represent both a big opportunity and a big risk
for development and poverty reduction. Liberalization of Nigeria's trade policies and other structural
reforms there could reduce Benin's regional competitiveness. Benin's current efforts to become a more
efficient trade platform should help it benefit from the positive developments in Nigeria. The third major
risk is weak institutional capacity compounded by fragmented aid. Increased support for ownership and
responsibility by both government and beneficiaries through intensive analytical and advisory activities
(as proposed in the interim assistance program) should help strengthen national capacity. But there is
clearly a risk that improvements in capacity will be slower than desired. The final risk is that the
presidential election scheduled for March 2001 could distract attention from the content and objectives of
the poverty reduction strategy, and delay the implementation of the reforms described in the interim
PRSP. This is most likely a short-term risk in that virtually the entire political establishment has endorsed
the reform agenda. However, the presidential election could delay finalization of the full PRSPto the end
of 2001.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The last CAS for Benin was presented to the Board in 1994. At the time, Benin faced the challenge
of deepening structural reforms to maximize the boost in external competitiveness made possible by the
1994 devaluation of the CFA franc so as to accelerate growth and poverty reduction. The Bank's
assistance strategy supported Benin in meeting this challenge through both lending as well as analytical
and advisory activities. Having achieved relative success in stabilization and in implementing firstgeneration structural and sectoral reforms, Benin must now address the more difficult longer-term
challenges of reforming and building public institutions to make greater progress in reducing poverty. The
Bank's assistance strategy for Benin is adapting accordingly.
The Government's current strategy was described in an interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Pape?
2.
discussed by the Board in July 2000 in the context of the HIPC Decision Point4 . As noted in the joint
World Bank-IMF Staff Assessment of the interim PRSP, more work is needed to complete a full poverty
reduction strategy. The Government's strategy is therefore evolving. Notwithstanding the plan to produce
a full PRSP by April 2001, it may likely not be completed before late-2001 (see paragraph 44). Pending
its finalization,the Bank has prepared an interim CAS to be followed by a full CAS in the second half of
FY02 once the full PRSP is in place and medium-term objectives, policies, and monitoring indicators
have been firmed up. The key objectives of the interim assistance strategy are to: (i) support Benin in
addressing the weaknesses of the interim PRSP so as to help it complete a strong PRSP; (ii) spell out the
Bank's vision of a progressive shift to consolidated program support; and (iii) present a focused program
of assistance for the transitional 12-18 month period.
1.

BACKGROUND AND PROSPECTS

Background

Benin is a small low income country, with a population of 6.1 million and a per capita income of
3.
$380 in 1999. The bulk of the population is dependent on agriculture, which accounts for close to 38
percent of GDP, nearly two thirds of employment and four fifths of merchandise exports. Exports are
highly concentrated in cotton, which represents on average 80 percent of total exports. The industrial
sector contributes less than 10 percent of output, consisting largely of cotton ginning and small
enterprises producing basic consumer goods for the local market. The large share of services reflects
Benin's role as a transportation and trading hub, especially for Nigeria, Benin's neighbor to the east, and
the landlocked countries to the north, Burkina Faso and Niger.
4.
Overall performance since the last CAS in 1994 has been satisfactory. Real per capita income has
steadily increased and most social indicators have improved (see Table 1). The primary fiscal deficit has
been considerably reduced, and the overall balance of payments has recorded significant surpluses.
Notwithstanding these achievements, the economic and financial situation remains vulnerable to external
shocks and poverty a serious problem. The pace of reform has slowed in some areas, and improvement in
social services is uneven.
5.
Benin's debt sustainability has markedly improved since the mid-1990s. This reflects strong
international financial support, as well as strengthened economic management and a strong recovery in
commodity exports, especially cotton. The country has received a high level of concessional financial
assistance for investment projects and its adjustment program, and was granted debt relief by Paris Club
creditors and other bilateral donors. Benin's improved external position has allowed the Govenment

3
4

IDA/SecM2000-357.
IDA/R2000-129.

-2 Table 1. EconomicTrends
1985-89 1990-95 1996-99
Population(million)
Populationgrowth (%)
GDP (US$,billion)
Real GNP per capita (Atlasmethod;US$)
Real GDP growth (%)
Real GNP per capita growth(%)
Inflation (CPI,average,%)

4.3
3.2
1.4
325
1.5
-3.0
3.4

5.1
3.0
2.0
360
4.1
1.1
14.9

5.7
2.8
2.2
370
5.2
2.7
3.7

1998

1999

6.0
2.8
2.3
380
4.5
2.5
5.8

6.1
2.8
2.4
380
5.0
1.9
0.3

Fiscal balance (primary balance, % of GDP)

-13.5

-1.3

-1.7

0.0

-0.7

Overall balance of payments (% of GDP)
Gross international reserves (monthsof imports)
Export growth (volume,%)
Share of cotton exports (% of exports)
Debt service to GDP ratio (%)
Debt service to export ratio(%)

-3.3
0.0
-15.9
49
7.1
46.7

0.7
3.7
1.5
75
5.0
32.7

2.2
4.0
0.6
83
2.9
16.8

-0.1
6.4
11.5
84
2.6
16.1

7.6
6.5
21.1
82
2.9
17.1

to remain current on external debt-service payments, and has contributed to the net foreign assets of the
Central Bank of West African States. The debt relief granted under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in July
2000 has secured Benin's medium-term debt sustainability.
Political Developments
6. Since the 1990 National Conference which ended 17 years of centralized Marxist-Leninist policies,
Benin has been a multi-party democracy. In both the 1991 and 1996 presidential elections, the incumbent
lost and power was peacefully transferred to the elected president. The development of an independent
National Assembly, the emergence of a free press, greater scrutiny of political leaders' behavior, and
more vocal civil society groupings, have all reinforced the country's democratic institutions.
7.
The relative political maturity demonstrated by the 1996 presidential hand-over which returned
Mathieu Kerekou to power, has strengthened economic reforms by providing continuity to a marketoriented, private-sector led growth strategy. PresidentKerekou's Administration has since continued the
program of economic reforms, maintained sound macroeconomic policies, and made progress towards a
comprehensive poverty reduction strategy.
8.
Nonetheless, Benin's political environment remains complex. Opposition parties gained a slight
parliamentary majority in the last legislative elections (March 1999) and relations between the Assembly
and the Government became very contentious. A new coalition Government was formed in June 1999
with the support of nine political parties. The responsibilities of the Ministry of Planning were increased
to include the coordination of the Government, and the Minister of Finance was re-appointed and
assumed the responsibility for economic policy. The administration has continued sound fiscal
management and implementation of the reform agenda. However, with presidential elections scheduled
for March 2001, the economic debate has become increasingly politicized. Most observers agree,
however, that the outcome of the elections is unlikely to change the direction of economic policy (see
paragraph 81).

-3 Economic Developments
9.
The restoration of macroeconomic stability and the reduction of the role of the state have been
essential elements in Benin's growth performance over the past decade. The forthcoming Social and
Structural Policy Review estimates that around half the increase in growth is due to policies that directly
helped raise investment and exports, a third to fiscal reform, and the rest to improvements in health and
human capital. Benin started the decade in severe economic crisis with rapidly increasing external and
internal arrears, including 6 months of civil service salaries. Now it has a strong macro position and
public finances, as illustrated by its high external reserves (6.5 months of imports in 1999) and creditor
position vis-a-vis the regional Central Bank, the BCEAO. Although this is a positive outcome of
successive structural adjustment programs focused on strengtheningmacro-financial management, it also
reflects difficulties in carrying out a larger volume of developmentexpenditure.
10. Microeconomic reforms, particularly trade liberalization and privatization, have changed the
incentives for private sector-led growth. At the end of the 1980's trade and most formal commercial
activity were dominated by the state, and the banking system, wholly state-owned, had collapsed. At the
end of the 1990s Benin had a sound privately-owned banking sector with efficient supervision by the
regional banking commission.5 The state had withdrawn from virtually all commercial activities, had
initiated the privatization of key energy and telecommunications infrastructure and is implementing a
broad liberalization program in the cotton sector!6Benin's trade regime was the most open and its tariffs
the lowest in West Africa (largely adopted by other WAEMU members in the common external tariff
effective January 2000).
11. The assessment of Benin's performance in the 1990s nonetheless reveals a basic paradox: the
implementation of the broad development strategy has been broadly successful, both in terms of
economic growth and improved social indicators-yet there is a widely shared perception of unrealized
potential and unmet expectations due in part to the insufficient depth of some of the reforms, especially
those linked to sectoral policies and institutional reforms (see Box 1). Moving beyond stabilization and
adjustment to address the country's remaining development constraints and make major progress in
poverty reduction will require a long-term and holistic vision of development and institutional
transformation. Such a vision will need to be reflected in the PRSP.

the financialsituationof the bankingsystemweakenedoverthe past 18months. An auditof two banks
(accountingfor 22 percentof total bank assets)conductedby the regionalbankingcommissionrevealeda sharp
deteriorationin theirfinancialhealth,seriousmanagementshortcomings,as wellas violationsof bankingrulesand
exchangeregulationsin the financingof SONACOP's
(thepetroleumproductsdistributionparastatal)privatization.
6 Althoughthe Governmentlifted SONAPRA's(cotton marketingparastatal)monopsonyof purchasesof seed
cotton andinitiatedfollow-upreforms,recentdevelopments
givecausefor concernthat the reformscouldbe stalled
or evenreversed.
5However,

NGOs,lclcmmnt
In

e

na

enzs

e

naora,tohepo.I

vilag elder and raiton rlers Thebe
S nt
s reaton wt
e

=

to mrprvte=eooi

lnt%

s

to

detosgiIayreuepv

=~e~a ~niia

a io

gerpiiy

Gra

tiveohs discussions
wasto00
ti)0
; (h
fa
n

A prvt.weik

tmy

hudbgietoralaaswi

andmangdbring

etis

oeaing\

assistance
to Bearal
log4r

viio for the coutr

Pfwt etr
by

wol

Prcevesdprvt scor cnsrit

pubic
9lias,

ndcot iha etIen

nurmha
ei

ul

*tcld nX atbt1r
lw
andeid

ims~rbt

itsk
t r#ioa eomic
suc asrp
rvt e b_us

o

aivjed
advan0tages
and0

oks andrent4eekitnealctiBvclCities
rtiipi

beliee
iithat

uiie
a ryil

lack f loger0ni fudngfrdeeomeny
i naeut a ttentionm
to intiuionlefom
weresustaoining
wiespread;000
corruption. oution amonggovernmet rcablthe oticiztio
f iilsrvc
apin&t0
t menzt, an
the
lack of
co_tnewr
iwda
ao eeomot~i

-5 Social Developments
12. Rising per capita incomes have been a key indicator of Benin's success in the 1990's. After falling
steadily in the 1980s, per capita income growth has been positive every year since 1990 and exceeded 2
percent per annum since 1994. In the aggregate, income growth averaged 4 percent in the early 1990s
and accelerated to 5 percent after the devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994. Benin's economic growth in
the 1990's was thus one of the highest in West Africa and exceeded the average for low-income countries
world wide, as well as that of sub-Saharan Africa. Continent-wide, only a few countries (Uganda,
Botswana, and Mozambique)experienced higher growth.
13. Most social indicators improved steadily throughout the 1990s, particularly for education and
health, indicating broad success of the strategy with regard to both access to social services and
improvement of well being (see Table 2). Benin's score on the Human Development Index calculated by
UNDP rose by 12 percent between 1992 and 1998. However, because a substantial part of this
improvement was catching-up for the severe deterioration experienced in the 1980s, the trend should be
interpreted with some caution. Also, in a recent review of social developments,the authorities point to a
relative stagnation since the mid-1990s. And despite the improvement in social indicators, the extent of
poverty is sobering (see paragraph 22).
Table 2. Social Indicators, Benin & SSA
1990

GNP per capita (Atlasmethod,US$)
Urban population (% of total population)
Gross primary school enrollment (% of school-age

1999 1/

Benin

SSA

Benin

SSA

360
34
58

540
28
76

380
42
78

500
34
78

78
39
26
38
15
104
52
35

83
68
50
60
41
100
50
38

85
71
61
66
50
92
51
32
8.0
43
74
32

population)

Male
Female
Literacy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Male
Female
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live birth)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
HIV prevalence (% ofpopulation)
Access to safe water (% ofpopulation)
Urban
Rural

..

..

50
79
35

..

98
57
39
48
21
87
53
29
4.0
56

..

71
46

1/ 1999or the latestavailablestatistic.
14. Primary school enrollment also rose by more than a quarter in the 1990s, and, as a result, 4 out 5
school age children now attend primary school. The increase was large enough to compensate for the
deterioration of the previous decade. Thus, Benin's primary school enrollment rate moved from
considerably below to average for sub-Saharan Africa. With reference to the international development
goals, the gains for boys since 1990 are such that a continuation of the rate of enrollment growth would
lead to attaining universal primary enrollment well ahead of the 2015 target. But the gap between girls
and boys is such that at the current pace, universal primary enrollment for girls would not be attained
before 2014.
7Rapport

Social 1997-98, Ministry of Planning,Republique du Benin,2000.

- 615. Infant mortalityfell by almost a quarter over the last ten years, again the largest improvement of
any country in West Africa. This moved Benin from about 5 percent worse than the sub-Saharan Africa
average in the late 1980s to about 5 percent better at the end of the 1990s. With these achievements,
Benin has laid a strong foundation for sustainable improvements in the living standards and well-being of
its population.
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework
16. Current macroeconomic projections were prepared in the context of the HIPC decision point and
cover the interim PRSP period (2000-03). The Government's macroeconomic framework and the
structural reform agenda are consistent with achieving high private sector-led growth and reducing
poverty, and mostly reflect a continuation of current trends (see Table 3).
17. The economy is expected to increase slightly its growth performance from 5.2 percent on average
over the 1996-99 period to 5.4 percent in 2000-03. Growth of the primary sector is expected to slow from
6.0 percent on average in 1996-99 to 4.8 percent in 2000-03, mainly as a result of a drop in cotton
production in 2001. This would be compensated by an acceleration of growth in the secondary and
tertiary sectors, in particular trade and services.
18. To sustain this growth rate, the investment-to-GDPratio is expected to increase from 17.6 percent
in 1999 to more than 20.4 percent in 2003, as government finances are strengthened and domestic
investmentopportunities improve, with the private sector and the public sector contributing equally to the
increase. Public investment in the infrastructure and social sectors will increase, with private investment
rising as sectors become privatized, such as energy, telecommunications, and transportation. Higher
investment will also depend on implementing policies leading to higher domestic savings, which are
expected to rise from 6.4 percent of GDP in 1999to 9.6 percent in 2003.
19. The external current account deficit would widen by 1.3 percent of GDP to just over 7 percent in
2000 before narrowing slightly to 6.5 percent by 2003. Benin is expected to continue to receive
substantial concessional financing. The objective is to achieve a small surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP by
2001-03 in the overall balance of payments. As a result gross international reserves would slowly
decrease from 6.5 months of imports in 1999to 4.9 in 2003.
20. The Governmentwill keep the overall fiscal deficit including grants below I percent of GDP, while
increasing budgetary allocations for health, education, and public investment in the context of a
comprehensive poverty strategy. Excluding interest payments and grants, the primary deficit will be kept
below 3 percent of GDP up to 2003 and the overall deficit below 4 percent over the same time horizon.
More details are provided in Annex 1.

-7-

Table 3. Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework
1990-95

1996-99

2000-03

Projections
Growth,Investment,and Savings
Real GDPgrowth (%)
Real GNPper capitagrowth (lo)
Real GNPper capita (Atlasmethod, USS)

4.1
1.0
360

5.2
2.5
370

5.4
2.9
400

Gross investment (% of GDP)

15.5

17.6

19.9

Domesticsavings(% of GDP)
Nationalsavings (% of GDP)

7.0
11.6

7.5
11.5

8.4
13.5

CottonSector
Production(thousandtons)
Exportprice (CFA/lb)
Exports(US$million)

189
280
116

349
313
192

346
425
215

Importprice(S/BBL)
Importto GDP ratio (°/)
Oil dependency(real terms,1990=100)

15.7
1.9
119

16.2
2.5
181

26.6
3.1
226

PublicFinance
Governmentrevenue (% of GDP)
Governmentexpenditure(% of GDP)
Primarybalance (% of GDP)
Overallbalance (% of GDP)

12.1
19.9
-1.3
-7.9

15.3
18.1
-1.7
-3.1

16.2
19.5
-2.5
-3.7

1.5
6.6
0.6

0.6
4.5
-7.1

-1.3
5.5
4.3

-8.8
15.6
-4.9
3.7

-8.9
17.4
-5.8
4.0

-9.1
15.7
-6.8
5.4

Oil

Balanceof Payments
Exportsgrowth (lo)
Importsgrowth (%)
Termsof trade(%)
Resourcegap (% of GDP)
Exports(GNFS;% of GDP)
Currentaccountdeficit (% of GDP)
GrossInternationalreserves(monthsof imports)
Externaldebt
Debt serviceto GDP ratio (°/)

5.0

2.9

2.0

Debt service to export ratio (%)

32.7

16.8

11.3

- 8II.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

21. Having achieved relative success in stabilization and in implementing most first-generation
structural and sectoral reforms, Benin must now address more difficult longer-term challenges if it is to
make greater progress in reducing poverty. The most pressing of these are described below. More work is
needed to assess related development constraints and propose sound remedial policies. This work is
expected to be carried out in preparation of the PRSP and will, on that basis, be reflected in the full CAS.
Poverty
22. According to official data, poverty affected about one-third of the population in the mid-1990s.
The poor in Benin are concentrated in rural (80 percent of the poor) and sub-urban areas. Poverty also
affects more women than men. In rural areas, the poor are mostly subsistence farmers with limited
revenue opportunities,either as a result of inadequate means of production (laborers, small-scale farmers),
low-productivity soil (high pressure on land, environmental degradation), natural conditions (fertile soil
but inaccessible during rainy season), inadequate rural infrastructure, and labor shortages (due to high
dependency rates). In the south, lagoon fishermen are among the poorest owing to decreasing fish stock,
in turn mostly due to over-fishing. In the sub-urban zones, the poor are the under- or unemployed, who
cannot rely on traditional safety-nets. The main sources of vulnerability (affecting 23 percent of the
population in mid-I 990s according to official data) are the lack of employment or income opportunities,
compounded by poor rural infrastructure, inadequate water supply and sanitation, insufficient access to
health services and education, as well as high dependency rates. When poverty is defined as the inability
to satisfy basic needs, the situation was worse in 1995, with the incidence of human poverty being
significantly higher than monetary poverty (47 % versus 33 %). More details are provided in Box 2.
23. Poverty monitoring. Neither the Government nor the donor community have devoted sufficient
attention and resources to monitoring poverty outcomes. As a result, despite a number of surveys (see
Box 2), no consistent data series is available to indicate whether the number of poor or depth of poverty,
as defined by income or consumption, has actually increased or decreased (see paragraph 66 on plans to
improve poverty monitoring and analysis).
HI VIAIDS
24. With an official prevalence rate of around 4 percent, Benin could be on the verge of an exponential
increase which would have disastrous consequencesfor its development and poverty reduction objectives.
To prevent a generalized epidemic (i.e. prevalence rate of 7 % or greater), the Government needs to step
up the fight against HIV/AIDS, in particular in the following areas: (i) raise national authorities'
awareness with the view to increasing domestic budget resources allocated to HIV/AIDS related
interventions; (ii) develop a multi-sectoral approach and a comprehensive strategic framework; (iii)
organize and finance assistance and support to civil society organizations to reduce stigma, fear and
denial among the population, improve access to prevention and care, and to limit the social impact of the
epidemic; and (iv) support health services to improve prevention and treatment (see Box 3).

But see concems about the quality of official data in Box2.
B

-9 -

BOX 2. POVERTY
teerf moaw ung.
Benin has conducted a series of official houscholdsurveys since the mid-1980s.The budget consumptionsurvey of 1986-87was
followedin the mid-1990s bv a series of rurat household surveys (ECVR).conducted by the Ministry of Rural Developmentand
supportedby UNDP(1994-95),and urbanhouseholdsurveys (ELAM),undertakenby the NationalStatisticalInstitute(1995-96).While
these studies provide key informationon povety in Benin, more research is neede to produce a reliable and robust picture of the
incidenceand dynamicsof poverty.In particular.the methodologyused in these surveys raises concems with regardto the treatmentof
the nonfood expenditureshare in the calculationof the poverty line, the division of Benin into 12 agro-ecologicalzones. and the
comparabilityof povertystatisticsacross urbanand ruralareas and acrosstime. Althoughthe NationalStatisticalInstitutehas conducted
used in surveys.the
a senshivity anlysis showing that the estimatesof poverty incidence vary significantlywith the methodology
Govenmentbas not revisedits methodologyfor the most recent householdsurveysconductedin 1999and 2000.

Pa)

dynanmk

As no consistent data series is available to indicate whether the number of poor or depth of poverty, as defined by income or
has actuallyincreasedor decreased,the followingassessmentis bad on social andeconomicindicators.
consumption,
Canggesinpoveny boween nid-Us to mn&90s.On the basis of 1986-7 daa. it was estimated that 28 percentof the populationfell
below the povertyline. Theaverage expenditureshortfallof the poor relativeto the poverty line was 29 percent.Whilethesefigures
they do not adequatelyreflect the genral trend in livingstandards
suggestthat poverty increasedbetween 1986-87and the mid-1990s&
over this periodfor two reasons.Both data points were affected by specialecononiiccircumstances:agriculturalrevenuewasunusually
high in 1986-87,whereasinflationin the aftenmathof theCFA franc devaluationof 1994had a detrimentalimpacton the revenueof the
poor in 1994. In addition,the study conductedin the mid-1990sused a higher thresholdto define the poverty line. Indeed,sustained
of the main social indicators(life expeccacy. aduk litacy rate,primary school enrollment,
economicgrowth and the imnprovements
wateraccess,and healthservicesaccess)point to a reductionof the incidenceof povertysince the late 1980s- at least as far as human
povery is concered.
Changei povew si,we ,nid-9f Social and economicindicators point to a reductionin poverty since 1994, however,prelimainary
surveysindicate that povertyincidece wouldhave increasedfrom 33 pecnt in rural areas to 38 since 1994-95and
results of 1999-2000
from33 percent to 37 pent in urban areas since 1995-96.Given methodologyshortcomings.these results shouldbe consideredwith
a boost to above5 pcnt after the CFA franc
caution.Annual real GDP growth,whichrose to 4 percent in the early 1990s,received
realignmentin 1994,leadingto higher per capitaincome.Educationand healthindicatorsalso improvedoverthis period.Between 1994
and 1999,thegrossprimaryenrollient ratio rose frm 64 percent to 78 percnt due to theimpactof ecornoic growth,urbanization.and
the priority given by the governmnt to basic education.Intint mortalitydeclined from 94 to 87 deaths per thousand live births,
reflecting increasedaccess to clean water,immunizationcoverage,utilizationof public helth fiilities for matemalcare, and,more
generally,governmentpolicies that favor primaryhealth care,and child and matrnal health care, and improvethe availabilityof lowcost drugs.

Vhni*
The mainsources of vulnwrabiiityare the lack of employrent or revenue opportunities,compoundedby poor rural infrastructure.
inadequatewater supply and sanitation, insufficientaccess to health servicesand educatior, and high dependencyrates. In Februawy
1999, a workshoporganized by the governmentwith representativesof the civil societyidentified as the four mostvulnerablegroups
abanoned elderly people,childrenwho are victims of child trafficking(includingdomestic servants and children smuggledabroad),
women livingin poor ruralareas,
HIV/AIDSvictimsand their families-and womenwith low revenues(e.g.. womenheads of household,
and illiteratewomen).
8wA-=Wpoftd pogronm andpaevty
HIPC initiative,the Bank has linkeddebt reliefafter the competiowpoint in Beninto anti poverty
* Debt reIef. Underthe Enhanced
Theseincludeamong others,the implementationof a povertymonitoringand evaluatingsysten, the adoptionof mediummeasures.
term expenditureprogramsand perfirinnce indicators,the adoptionof an anti-coruptionstrategy,the adoptionof a privatization
strategyfor paistat cottoncompanySONAPRA.the eliminationof schoolfees in ruralareas,and the meetng of quantitativetargets
for immunizationcoverage.
sociaeservices.Increasingownershipthroughgreatercommunityinvolvementin their developmentis thoughtto
* Commrnunty-based
be best at buildingsocialcapital and achievingpovertyreductionobjectives.The Govemmentand donors areactivelyinvolvedin
this regard.The Bank is currentlyfinancingfive projectsor componentsof projects that provideassistancedirectlyto communities
(Rural Water. Food Security.Borgou Pilot, Social Fund and DecentralizedCity management)amounting to USS94.1millionor
about50 percent of the total portfolio.These projets undertakenon a pilot-scale basis were seen as a way to test different
approachesto direct assisace to communities.
andbudgetreform.The wide-spreadpoverty incidenceis related to the lack of pro-poorpublic spending.
expenditure
Government
*
The proposed PERAC would support Benin's far-reaching budget reforms to enhance the poverty impact of government
expenditures.1he ministries will reorient their spending on the basis of sectoral strategies focussed on reducing povertv.
Performance-basedbudgetingwould link budgetaryspendingto quantifiedpovertyreductionobjectives.
and the
CottonSectorReforms are designedto increasecompetitionwithinthecotton setor withthe view to raiseits competitiveness
*
producers'shareof sectorrevenuetherby reducingpovertyin cottongrowingruralareas.

a~

*
~~~~

f~~~~t

Iij~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:11~~~~
w

hhlII
uK~~~~io

I~~~~~

Gender Inequities
25. Despite a vibrant debate in urban civil society, only limited progress has been made on gender
issues. For example, although girls' primary school enrollment has grown almost twice as fast as that of
boys, there remains a 41 percentage point gap between them (see Table 2). At current trends it would
take more than a decade to erase this gap. From a gender perspective, health indicators present a mixed
picture. Contraceptive prevalence is significantly lower in Benin than elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa,
resulting in higher birth rates and fertility rates. There remains unmet demand for family planning
services, particularly in rural areas. And prevalence rates of HIV/AIDS are significantly higher among
women than among men, especially for young women. Although a family law -- which among other
things would clarify women's rights regarding property and family issues -- has been prepared, it has
languished in Parliament for years. Men continue to represent the overwhelming majority of extension
workers and teachers, despite the stated intention of focusing more on assistance to women and girls.
Population Growth
26. If Benin's population continues to grow at the current rate of 2.8 percent per annum, it will double
in less than 25 years. The high rate of demographic increase will limit the potential for improving the
welfare of the population, put pressure on the growth and availability of productive resources, and
threaten the conservation of the environment, especially in the coastal zone. The challenge is to expand
the coverage of ad hoc programs amidst strong opposition that has been voiced recently by some religious
and conservative groups. The Government has recognized the importance of addressing the issue of
population and reproductive health, and adopted a National Population Policy in 1996. However, the
implementation of the population policy has been much slower than desirable because of lack of a sound
implementation strategy. In addition, new strategies and broader approaches are needed to maximize the
synergies between reproductive health services on one hand and other sectors such as education and rural
developmenton the other, as well as with the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Weak Institutions and Weak Administrative Capacity
27. The extensive consultations undertaken over the last three years indicate clearly that weak public
institutions remain the biggest constraint on development and poverty reduction in Benin and that
relatively little progress has been made in this regard. This is manifest in widespread dissatisfactionwith
the availability and quality of public services, including health and education, a poorly performing
judicial system, and the perception of widespread corruption (see Box 4). It is also reflected in low
absorptive capacity and weak implementation capacity. The Government, the Bank and much of the
larger development community recognize that traditional aid approaches have failed to make
adequate progress, despite underutilized national technical capacity and the advantages of a very
open society and a dynamic civil society.
28. Important cross-cutting reforms to build capacity and improve service delivery have proven
difficult to implement.Over the last five years,devolution has been discussed and recommended by most
consultative forums, repeatedly supported by donors and has prompted studies, laws, decrees and
regulations. However, little of the envisaged reform is yet observable on the ground. Moreover, two sets
of crucial issues appear to be still largely unresolved. First, although devolution has been pursued in order
to give people a greater say in public service provision and ensure that differences between communities
are fully taken into account, the most recent legislative and regulatory texts are tilted toward control by
the state bureaucracy of most aspects of the actions that local elected governments might undertake.
Second, the revenue schemes still under discussion focus essentially on transferring the responsibilityfor
managing expenditures through transfers rather than fostering local autonomy and accountability by
creating a viable revenue base at the local level.

-

12

-

Extentandd6oumnwodo
Corruptionin Benin relating t finanil fraud,public procut,

scholtic frudap

ic

corruptioninte police the s
the re-eme
ree of copetiti

abe

cr

inthei

serviceshas b

i
te mia

oinvoicing,

tax and customs evasion,

19

Sincethelate1070s
fretly.
Fromthe early i990s,with
r
ively to reot on corruption

involvingpolitic leade andpar
h
ic ad vai g
e
p
such0asheath, edca
0on
and agiutu6re (
l c ).
Severaademicsfand
sup ic ofcl
s tein tor of Judicial
eices or N(O leas havewriitt or spken in pubicabtcorpt
ie
althogthir mees
havenot
b widelydfd.n
veh lastd
e
t
e ben
ssionseof
enquiry it uptnpractices

thatdocumentteexein

inivi

with:crut pt.T

rne

i

0corruption
No!tW~ in l3nin
Nor hs teeyt

Thus there is n stist-ica ovriwtaold
eabe neto decib
benpbihd
oilo
anhrploile
nqiiiry int crrpton
uh

touches
onthieg
mmorality
of corruptpractice
and theneed

facilitateorpasticipatein crp

aties

we

and I

ed authriatvely.00
f hepulic discors

governance. stal:lish

1996,however,th rd

Mo,'alsatiSondeto ie ulaique, ;iasmall anti-corptiong bura
it a mnate to addressseveralimportant
elemensSof corrup00tio.I 98the Prsdn
reided overjth irn
tional de lutt Xcnte Ia corup ,a;

TbeApprovee
re Cous o

ap

teigwt

r

io s n

o

be
Cwidrin

or asertiveao

oniidbyA

AThesurenti
lea
framXiie
work
i n S ersnaivso
and
th uthe
iciry
cii ERvAntC
reeu
privtiioit,
corruptipon survey
th wouldbreeatd
iat

coletion, financial
admin
etradaami

¢1 i ; pb
nistain,
icrc hm n
atcptdi

romtietotitme toportrnayred i crupXkTVt
practice.

and is;th
B'
fX

dThecretiterton of the statg
and
atio psn waspreae in closecoensultto with;theBank.0It remainsto.
be approvedby8Government fleshed o
nd integated with on-ginad
ftur
rgams and p0Brojects
Ban
aciiisad
rjcsta
relte losl y o nt-crrptoninclude aongoin goennc
n corp
ionurey,0'h
the
0PERAC, thpraation;of Lega and udcal Refor an folowuptothe CP andthetCFA. Followu toth
Ban-suporedGovenaceandCrrpionS
urvey, inkedtothraalyicalworkad
atiite,
ilrovide a
tparticularyopportuneoaio
for all pariesto collbrte andfoustheir anti-orption intrventions. Someof
fleins proposedant-corutionfiniterntion9s tha relate to poiiclpocse
andthe stegteing of the Natioal t
:Assebl,
would
bes
be
suprted
by
ther
dfonors
withtheir
partiular
omarative
advantae.
BOAR00
m post0;0000000'00000:00;0000000
00l00 aS0Q000000004-00000000iyV
000:0:000
000;00 00 000i0 00;l
Asem"V_l.::u
lLL

X 0

E f;O

t0

f:.aSSf

iLf

00

LL-LL

- 13 29. Civil service reform has long been discussed, but structural changes in this area have been much
less than in most others. Personnel management issues have proven difficult to resolve. In particular,
settling the gridlock over pay and classification inherited from the structural adjustment period,9is an
absolute priority. A comprehensive strategy for civil service reform was prepared in 1997, including a
shift to a performance-based promotion and remuneration system, but has been stalled due to strong
opposition from the main civil service trade unions (who demand salaries corresponding to current grade
positions). Amendments to the 1998 law on the compensation system were adopted by the Government in
July 2000, but effective implementation is still pending approval of the National Assembly. If well
implemented, the new compensation system would permit more flexibility in wage management and
would resolve conflict resulting from the disconnect between the wage index and grade positions. To be
effective, it should be combined with a broader public sector staff management strategy addressing
pressing issues such as staffing, status, mobility, and performance. In particular, it should incorporate a
tangible and explicit counterpart to the accountability demands the new compensation system makes on
the civil service, including job enrichment, capacity for initiative, and easier mobility during career.
Governance

30. Government has initiated a number of anti-corruption measures over the last five years, but the
actual measures that have been taken to combat corruption have been neither wide-ranging nor assertive
(see Box 4). Furthermore, anti-corruption efforts have been managed autonomously by the different
branches of the Government. There is therefore a need for closer coordination. The various oversight
and auditing institutions lack the means to operate and the authority to ensure that action is taken on their
recommendations or findings, especially if this entails the sanctioning of individuals for wrongful acts.
The Government respects the constitutional provision for an independent judiciary, but the executive
retains important powers in relation to the judiciary'. The latter is inefficient and reported to be
susceptible to corruption at some levels. This reduces the quality of the rule of law and tarnishes the
legitimacy of government itself. Government, aware of these concerns, has established a Committee to
develop a national anti-corruption strategy to be finalized as part of the measures to reach the HPC
completion point. The strategy has the potential to be effective but implementation, especially the
avoidance of impunity and the application of sanctions, including the recovery of misappropriated funds,
will be key. A major area for improvement is the legal and institutional framework for privatization.
Also, divestiture must be used to put pro-competitive policies in place, so as to avoid the creation of
private monopolies." Furthermore, as underscoredby the regional banking commission in a recent report,
irregularities with respect to the financing of the purchase of SONACOP raise concerns about the
propriety of the process. There is a need to ensure that the privatization of remaining public enterprises is
conducted with maximum transparency and fairness.
Competitiveness

31. Notwithstanding the achievements of the 1990s, limited competitiveness still hampers private
sector development. The levels of private investment and financial intermediation remain low.
Inadequate infrastructure increases transaction costs, and the supply of skilled workers is insufficient to
meet private sector demand generated by the market-friendly environment. Beyond completing the
9 Actualsalariesare about one-fourthless than the amountindicatedby the wage scale,becausesalaries-but not

advancementwereblockedfrom 1986to 1991.
'OBeninis currentlypreparinga comprehensive
reformof thejudicialsystemwiththe assistanceof the Bank.
" TheGovernmentinitiallyenvisageda strategyto privatizeSONAPRAthat would:(i) maintainstronginfluenceof
the state over the privatizedcompanyas the main shareholder;and (ii) sell 26% percentof its sharesto a national
consortiumthat wouldincludeexistingprivateginners. Thiswouldde factocreatea conglomeratebetweenexisting
privateginningcompaniesand SONAPRA.Insteadof improvingcompetitionin the sector,thiswouldconstitutea
deterioration compared to the present situation. Moreover, if this strategy were implemented,producers would be
much worse off, facing a unified block of ginning companies. The consequences for future growth, as well as for
the contributionof cotton to poverty reduction, would be adverse.

-

14

-

privatization program described in the I-PRSP, the remaining reform agenda includes: (i) further
streamlining business regulations to reduce red tape and transaction costs; (ii) overhauling the judiciary
system to reduce the costs of dispute resolution and contract enforcement; (iii) developing new vocational
and technical training programs with the active participation of the private sector to improve labor force
skills; and (iv) developing new sources of growth in which Benin has a comparative advantage.
Diversification and Vulnerabilities
32. Limited diversification of the economy leaves living standards exposed to the fortunes of a few
activities. Agriculture is dependent on cotton cultivation, which is also a major source of employment,
foreign exchange earnings, government revenue, and banking activity for the economy as a whole. The
challenge for rural development is to accelerate productivity growth in both the cotton and non-cotton
sectors through technology generation and diffusion, liberalization of input supply, effective exploitation
of the demand potential, and promotion of productive off-farm activities in rural areas.
33. Broad-based growth is also important for other sectors. The secondary sector contributes only 14
percent of GDP and its total share in the economy has remained stable over the last decade. It comprises a
limited number of companies, mainly cement factories and cotton ginneries. With only 3 percent of
produced cotton transformed in Benin, the textile industry has the potential to become a more substantial
source of growth. Trade and financial services are provided almost exclusively to Nigeria and the
landlocked countries to the North. In order to develop the industrial sector, Benin must improve the
efficiency of transport and port facilities, the soundness and adaptability of its private financial sector, and
reduce the cost of operating in Benin (wages, power, telecommunications).
Regional Integration: Opportunities and Challenges.
34. Benin is actively pursuing regional integration within the West African Economic and Monetary
Union (WAEMU), as well as within the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
Regional integration at the WAEMU level is well underway in a large number of areas (monetary policy,
banking registration and supervision, exchange rate policy, a regional capital market, convergence criteria
for fiscal policies, Common External Tariff (CET), and harmonization of indirect taxation, budget
classifications, and budget organic laws). Benin's strong economic and financial ties with both WAEMU
and non-WAEMUcountries create special opportunities and challenges.
35. The bulk of intra-regional trade is with Nigeria. Benin is a key port of entry for trade with
landlocked Sahelian countries but is also a transit country between Nigeria and the two other major West
African economies - Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire. Benin is well-placed to benefit from renewed growth in
Nigeria. However, as policies improve in Nigeria, the challenge will be for Beninese traders to adjust to a
more open and competitive environment and for the Government to define appropriate commercial
policies compatible with the constraints of the WAEMU's CET.
36. Benin competes with Ghana and Togo as a key port of entry for trade with landlocked Sahelian
countries and the efficiency of its port and transport systems are therefore key. As a transit country
between Nigeria, and Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire, it will be a key player in policies to further integrate these
economies closer. In particular, it will be a member of any electricity power pool, a participant in the
proposed coastal gas pipeline, and a player in any efforts to improve sub-regional road infrastructure.

- 15 -

III.

THE GOVERNMENT'S INTERIMPOVERTY REDUCTIONSTRATEGY

Key Elements
37. The interim PRSP reiterates the Government's commitment to address poverty issues and makes
explicit reference to poverty reduction goals over the next fifteen years. It underscores rightly that
maintaining macroeconomic stability is a necessary condition for achieving high economic growth, and
that high growth itself is a key requirement for poverty reduction. It outlines a sound medium-term
macroeconomic framework and provides a policy matrix of structural reforms and sector policies
consistent with achieving higher growth and poverty reduction.
38. The structural reform agenda, as outlined in the interim PRSP policy matrix, reflects the present
objective of liberalizing the economy and draws on existing sector policies to promote private sector-led
growth. Policies to promote private sector activities will be aimed at fostering the overall competitiveness
of the economy and supporting new sources of growth especially in the agriculture sector. They will
include the fostering of a competitive environment in the cotton sector; the completion of the divestiture
program in the utility and infrastructure sector; further streamlining the business regulatory framework;
and removal of remaining price controls.
39. Cotton must play a key role in the poverty strategy. As outlined in the interim PRSP, the
Government has already taken significant steps to liberalize the cotton sector, with a view to increasing
farmers' income. It has lifted SONAPRA's monopoly on purchase of seed cotton and, together with
cotton ginners and farmers associations, is designing a new mechanism to secure credit repaymentsto be
put in place for the coming harvest. These two actions were pre-requisites to the privatization of
SONAPRA,for which the Governmenthas appointed financial advisers to devise a strategy to ensure that
the privatization effectively increases competition in the sector.'2 Recent developments confirm that the
Govemment is under pressure to delay them.
40. The Government has adopted a divestiture strategy, including a revised regulatory framework for
the electricity and water sector that will be implemented over the next two years. In the
telecommunicationsector a revised law has been drafted and submitted to the Parliament; adoption of the
implementing decrees and the divestiture of the company should be completed by end 2001. With respect
to the port, the Government is currently reviewing alternative management and ownership options, with
the view to implementingthem before end 2002.
41. In the social sectors, low human capital is a key constraint to economic growth, while limited
access to basic social services is a major aspect of poverty. The interim PRSP outlines the key objectives
and related policies that need to be achieved in the education and health sectors. The focus is on
increasing access, reducing inequalities and improving efficiency. In addition to gradually increasing
budget allocations for these sectors, the Government is focusing on improving sector outcomes.
42. The Government confirms its commitment to improving governance, combating corruption, and
pursuing budget reform, all of which are needed for greater progress in reducing poverty.Recognizing the
key role of public expenditure as an instrument to achieve poverty reduction objectives, the authorities
have initiated a far-reaching budget management reform designed to improve the effectiveness of public
spending. Shifting from an input-based budgeting system to performance-based budgeting with an
explicit relationship between the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and intermediate and
final objectives for poverty reduction would provide a means to ensure effectiveness of public spending
and a basis for monitoring budget performance and the impact on poverty. To ensure the effectiveness of
the MTEF, the Government is also reforming procurement, accounting, reporting and auditing systems
with the view to make them timely, credible and transparent.

12

Seefootnote11.

- 16 Assessment
43. As noted in the World Bank-IMF Joint Staff Assessment of the interim PRSP, more work is needed
to complete a full poverty reduction strategy, in particular to strengthen the database; develop coherent
anti-poverty sector strategies; understand the roots of poverty; define priorities; further analyze poverty
implications and costs of various policy options; and build consensus among elected officials and the
public for the strategy. The JSA outlines the work program priorities to develop a high quality
participatory PRSP.
44. Although the PRSP process was formally launched a year ago, the road map is still vague. The
institutional framework has been revised and simplified, but is not yet fully in place. In late November
2000, the Govemment named a coordinator for the PRSP process, but the technical work has not yet been
initiated and the work program is still embryonic. The Govemment's plans are still vague on how the
participatory process will be organized and what the mechanisms for ensuring feedback will be. It is
therefore unlikely that a strong, credible PRSP could be finalized by the end of April 2001 as envisaged in
the interim PRSP. The Govemment, nonetheless,still holds to this timetable.
IV.

THE WORLD BANK'S INTERIM ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

45. Following the devaluation of the CFA franc, a
new country assistance strategy was prepared and Table4. BankGroupPortfolio- FY01
discussed by the Executive Directors in June 1994.
191
Its main objectives were to encourage and support IDAcommitments(US$ m)
12
the private sector supply response, and to ensure Numberof projects
adequate provision of basic social and infrastructural
Sectoralcomposition(%)
services (see current IDA portfolio in Table 4). A
Agriculture/Environment
(
13
Education
third structural adjustment operation (SAC III) was
Health/SocialFunds
23
designed as a key element in the lending program
Transport/Urban
34
proposed in the CAS. SAC III was expected to
5
Power/Water
consolidate the progress made under the first two
16
PrivateSector
adjustment credits, and encourage the supply
response of the private sector to the increase in
119
Undisbursed(USSm)
competitiveness generated by the devaluation of the
CFA franc. After approval in June 1995, program GEFcommitments(US$m)
6.8
Numberof projects
I
implementation was delayed due to lack of political
6.2
support for the reform measures, and regained
Undisbursed(US$m)
momentum only in May 1998. The credit was closed
Undisbursed_(US$_m)_
6.2
in January 1999, more than two y ears behind schedule and after two waivers were granted to take into
account changing circumstances.'
46. SAC III's accomplishments were decidedly mixed and implementation of ongoing projects in
education, health, and transport in support of the 1994 CAS objectives is far behind schedule. Most tax
and trade reforms were implemented and the regulatory framework improved. While budgetary
procedures were partially reformed and allocations to social sectors increased, actual expenditure
improved only marginally and the quality of the Public Investment Program remained unsatisfactory.
Procurement procedures were still inefficient, slow, and left open too many opportunities for corruption
despite a new procurement code. There was virtually no progress in public administration and civil
service reform.
47. The divestiture program took longer than planned. Over 1994-97, the Govemment took further
steps to liberalize the cotton sector by authorizing input distribution and cotton ginning by private
13

Moredetailsare providedin the implementation
completionreportfor SACIII (No. 19483).

- 17 -

companies. This limited liberalization of the cotton sector, carried out within a still highly administrative
environment, led to mixed results. SONAPRA continued to rely on an administrative allocation of seed
cotton among private ginning companies, while cotton producers received a low share of international
prices. Poorly implemented changes in the sector have compromisedcrop years since 1998-99. In the case
of SONACOP, and despite efforts by the Bank, important issues such as petroleum product pricing
policies were not addressed and the Government was slow to authorize new entrants. As a result,
SONACOP has remained the main distributor and Benin continues to have one of the lowest density of
petroleum stations.
48. The Bank was successful in implementing a basic strategy of helping to restore a viable macrofinancial situation and to lay the foundations for accelerated private sector development and provision of
basic services. But progress in addressing institutional weaknesses has been much less than expected, in
particular in public resource management and market institutions (especially in cotton sector and
distribution of petroleum products). One lesson from this experience is that strengthening institutions
involves a broader constituency than that required for the macro-economicstabilization program managed
mostly by the Ministry of Finance. Over the last three years, the Bank also held a series of consultative
meetings with the Beninese population. The view that priority should be given to the needs of rural
population and women was largely shared. Participants also agreed on the need to give more attention to
institutional reforms to eradicate corruption, overcome the politicization of civil service and strengthen
the capacity of public institutions (see Box 1). The proposed interim assistance therefore focuses on
strengthening budget management, supporting further liberalization of the cotton sector, and supporting
the Government in the preparation of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. All of these require
bringing on board a larger group of stakeholders, in and outside government.
49. To strengthen the Government's capacity to carry out its own development and poverty reduction
programs, the interim CAS lays the ground for moving gradually away from traditional adjustment
lending coupled with project lending toward consolidated programmatic lending. This section outlines
key elements of the Bank's assistance strategy to be developed in the full CAS and describes the strategy
for the transition. It also indicates how progress on specific criteria will determine the pace of the
transition to the new strategy.
The Bank's Long-Term Assistance Strategy
50. The Bank's long-term assistance strategy will support the country's overall vision for poverty
reduction to be set out in the full PRSP. This would be best achieved if Bank's assistance, both financial
and intellectual, is embedded in national processes for dialogue and resource management.Our assistance
would therefore seek to underpin and enhance national ownership and programs, consistent with the
philosophyof the PRSP.
51.

The Bank's strategywould be articulated around two related pillars:
* increasing analytical and advisory activities as input into the formulation and monitoring of the
Government's poverty reduction strategy; and
* consolidated programmaticlending as the most efficient way to finance that strategy.

52. The first pillar focuses on helping government define, refine, and implement growth and antipoverty strategies in key sectors, as well as on cross-cutting issues. Based on the gaps identified in the
interim PRSP, analytical and advisory activities (AAA) would focus on: (i) poverty diagnosis, poverty
monitoring and evaluation, and costing poverty programs; (ii) designing, refining and implementing
growth promoting strategies in key sectors; and (iii) preparing and implementing cross-cutting
institutional reforms (public resource management, devolution, decentralization, civil service, anticorruption, and judicial system). This work would support the Government's preparation of its own
sector-wide strategies and related programs. All these areas involve reforms that are at the heart of efforts
to improve public resource management, and would thus have an immediate operational impact.

- 1853. The second pillar of the vision consists of consolidated programmatic lending to support growth
and poverty reducing policies, in the context of well designed, multiyear program budgets. Such
financial support would be channeled through Benin's own budget management system and cycle,
consistent with the country's efforts to develop medium-term expenditure frameworks and to unify the
dual budget (recurrent and investment expenditures) developed largely to deal with the plethora of
discrete donor-led projects. This support could eventually take the form of annual singletranche poverty
reduction support credits (PRSCs), providing quick-disbursing financing to support the Government
budget. A consolidated financing instrument that supports government's own programs, relies on
government's own procedures, and which helps government design and carry out its own programs,
would enhance ownership, the hallmark of the PRSP process. A corollary advantage is that it would
necessarilyfacilitate donor coordination, to the extent that other donorsjoin this approach, as the EU, the
AfDB, the Swiss and the Danes are all already prepared to do in Benin. Finally, this shift to consolidated
programmaticlending would free up resources to strengthen the Bank's AAA.
54. The Bank would continue traditional self-standing operations where the benefits of separate
implementation and financial arrangements appear to outweigh the advantages of a more integrated
approach to public financial resource transfers. Separate operations may be justified by special
circumstances, including:
*

*
*

to support government projects that involve a substantial level of international competitive bidding, as
a way of the Bank providing external certification that government procurement will be handled
transparently and fairly;
to offset the specific fiscal costs related to policy reforms or negative transitory fiscal shocks (revenue
or expenditure) which could not be foreseen at the time of the budget formulation; and
to support highly visible, special activities, such as HIV/AIDS, where government has established an
autonomous implementationmechanism.

Such self-standingoperations would, however, become the exception.
Transition
55. The transition period covered by this interim CAS will be used to ensure that key preconditions for
successful consolidated program support are met and to develop the strong ownership required to weather
shifts in personnel or political power. These pre-conditions include:
*

strong and effective leadership at the Ministry of Finance of all budgetary management issues,
including those formally assured by the Ministry of Planning as evidenced by appropriate changes in
procedures and institutional arrangements;
* full commitment to the process elsewhere in the government and at senior political levels;
* a broad consensus between government and donors on key policy and management issues; and
* a reasonable degree of macroeconomic and political stability to ensure a relatively high level of
budget predictability.
56. As moving from stand-alone projects to programmatic budget support requires intensive and timeconsuming capacity building, we propose a gradual approach at both government-wide and sectoral
levels. At the government-wide level, a Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit (PERAC, being
presented to the Board in parallel with this interim CAS) is designed to support government's public
expenditure management reforms necessary to improve its management of all public resources. In
particular, the Bank is working with the government to reform procedures and institutions and to build
capacity in the following seven areas:

- 19*

institutional issues including clarifying the roles of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of
Planning; improving civil service management; and developing a clear vision of the roles of the state,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, and civil society in service delivery;

*

improving budget preparation to help ensure that the process of formulating and arbitrating budget
requests is as transparent, open and contestable as possible, with the expectation that this will lead to
budgets that are more focused on poverty and development.

*

setting-up a MTEF including well articulated, rolling 3-year unified program budgets in key
ministries;

*

improving the budget reporting system to produce the financial information needed for monitoring,
evaluation, and audits;

*

improving procurement procedures and practice;

*

developing monitoring and evaluating capacity, in particular the ability to produce information
needed to assess budgetary outcomes and impact, and to track expenditures; and

*

buildingeffective internal and external auditing capacity, especially of the supreme audit authority, to
enhance its ability to carry out both financial and performance audits.

The Bank would devote substantial administrative resources to help strengthen government actions in
these areas and to monitor improvement.
57. For sectors already engaged in the budget reform process (health, education, rural development,
roads, and environment) and those which would be gradually integrated,the Bank proposes to use current
IDA projects or initiate focused AAA to help the Government strengthen its sector-wide expenditure
programs as a basis for consolidated program support. The objective is to develop a single policy and
expenditure program for the sector under government leadership, moving eventually to a system in which
government procedures account for all funds and their disbursement. In particular, this would involve:
* building and developing sector knowledge;
*

firming-up sector strategy, policy framework,priorities, and addressing sector related poverty issues;

*

building management capacity in policy analysis, programming, costing, accounting, performance
and impact monitoring, and arrangements to ensure that evaluation results inform policy design;

*

strengtheningimplementation capacity including mechanisms to guarantee the quality and timeliness
of program delivery, as well as responsivenessto the end user; and

*

making progress toward national procedures and bringing all donor funding within the national
budget process.

Triggersfor Moving to Consolidated Program Support
58. The pace of reform and institutional change will depend in part on progress in building capacity.
The transition to the use of government procedures for disbursing all aid would thus be gradual, as
capacity and confidence built and as other donors are able to adhere to this approach. Developing sectorwide programs as a first step would give the flexibility to integrate sectors gradually as they become
ready. For instance,transport sector strategy and implementationcapacity are more advanced than others,
in part because a sector-wide investment program, in place for some years, has helped build the
foundationsfor budget support. The proposed gradual transition strategy also increases incentives for line
ministries, as it will help justify larger and more predictable budgets in their sector. It should also
facilitate both other donors' enrollment in the consolidated program support approach, as is occurring in
the social sectors. In the health sector, external financing is mainly assured by only two donors- EU and
the Bank- who both support the approach. In education, the Bank is providing on average 17 percent of
external aid and AfDB 25 percent. Given the Bank's administrativebudget and the Government's capacity

- 20 constraints, focused preparation of these sectors is expectedto be gradual and extend beyond the period of
this interim CAS.
59. The decision to move to consolidated program support will essentially be a matter of judgement on
progress in areas listed in paragraphs 56 and 57, as evaluated in the full CAS. Specific triggers would fall
4 (see Table 5):
in the following five categories1
*

Completionof a strong participatory PRSP. This includes satisfactory sectoral strategies and policies
supported by a medium-term expenditure frameworkwith a strong poverty focus in key sectors (food
security and nutrition, water, sanitation, health, education, literacy, and feeder roads);

*

Sound macro-financial management supportive of high sustainable economic growth, in particular
non accumulationof arrears and inflation kept below three percent;

*

Sound policies for private sector development, in particular key policies for growth, as outlined in the
policy matrix of the I-PRSP. This includes satisfactoryprogress in implementingthe proposed Cotton
Sector Reform Program (see paragraph 69), tangible progress in the privatization program, and
setting-up appropriate regulatory frameworks in privatized sectors;

*

Progress in financial management (implementation of procurement code, government accounting and
reporting), budget preparation, monitoring of budget implementation, and strengthening of internal
and external auditing functions, as described in the PERAC;

*

Satisfactory budget implementation, in particular improvement of absorptive capacity as measured by
a higher executionrate for development expenditure.

At the same time, for projects remaining in the portfolio, the Bank would expect to see a disbursement
rate of at least 25 percent.
V.

COLLABORATION WITH PARTNERS

Relations with IMF
60. The IMF has supported Benin's economic reforn program with two Structural Adjustment Facility
arrangements and two three-year Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility arrangements. In July 2000,
the IMF Board approved a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility arrangement. It supports the
Government's medium-term program aimed at achieving high and sustainable economic growth,
maintaining financial stability, and implementing a broad based poverty reduction strategy. The first
review took place in October 2000, and IMF Board discussion is expected in January 2001. Bank and
IMF staff have collaborated very closely from the beginning of Benin's reform efforts, and will continue
to do so, notably in supporting preparation of the PRSP.
Donor Coordination
61. The Bank works closely with the principal extemal partners in Benin (see Box 5). Donor
coordination in the 1990s was centered on sectoral round tables'5 which helped mobilize increasing
external financing but remained a weak coordinating instrument, according to a 1998 review of the
process. This review underscores the following shortcomings: (i) the lack of an overall development
strategy with a clear perpective on Benin's economic prospects; (ii) the need for a more frank assessment
and dialogue; (iii) the lack of coordination between the sectoral strategies; (iv) little prioritization in
public actions; and (v) the weaknesses and sometimes considerable delays in implementing the
recommended measures. In 2000, the authorities launched a third round of sectoral consultations with a
Specifictriggersalsoincludethe measuresto reachthe HIPCfloatingcompletionpoint (seeIDA/R2000-129).
5 In the contextof the discussionsinitiatedduringthe 1992Conferencewith it developmentspartners,six sectoral
roundtableshave been organizedin Benin(Transport(1993),SocialDimensionof Development(1994),Private
SectorDevelopment(1994),Health(1995),RuralDevelopment(1995),andEducation(1997).
"4

- 21 round table on community development and employment.Other prospective areas include administrative
reforn, and local development in relation to devolution and decentralization.
Table 5: Triggers for ConsolidatedProgram Support
Means of monitoring

Triggers
Povertyfocus

*
*

*
Finalizea strongparticipatoryPRSP
Satisfactorysectoral strategies and policies *
supported by medium-termprogram budgets
with a strongpovertyfocusin key sectors

PRSPpreparationmonitoring
monitoring
PRSPimplementation

Sound macro-financialmanagement

* Non accumulationof arrears
* Maintaininginflationbelow3 percent

*
*

JointIMF-WBmacroeconomicmissions
JointIMF-WBmacroeconomicmissions

Sound policiesfor private sector development

*
*
*

Satisfactoryprogress in implementingcotton *
sectorreformprogram
Designand implementregulatoryframeworks *
in liberalizedsectors
*
Implementprivatizationprogram

Cotton sector reform project preparationand
supervision
Privatesectordevelopmentprojectsupervision
Projectsupervision

Sound managementofpublic resources

*
*
*

*

Substantialprogress on Budget preparation *
process
Significantimprovementin the planning and *
capacityof line ministries
implementation
Progressin governmentfinancialmanagement *
(implementation of procurement code,
governmentaccounting;monitoringof budget
implementation;strengtheningof internal and
externalauditingfunctions)
Improvement of absorptive capacity as *
measured by higher execution rate for
developmentexpenditure.

progressreports
PERACimplementation
progressreports
PERACimplementation
CPAR, CFAA, PERAC implementation
progressreports

Annual Budgetimplementationreview in the
contextof PRSP/PERAC

Improvedportfolio management

*

rate to at least25 percent *
Increasedisbursement

AnnualCPPR

-

22 -

=fi

>X%A'Wit!.!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Wt
Dnvestment.of te, Bank' Dnenma nJapsane strgthewiththe
f pubdica.
get
relativelancnfoed
pte rs. The
eamcongsaou
te
or, opucaginvst,ent isf
So
srt.
adBustmentin
parotneising
Bdavel beent

aot1%ofragmeinted99
sshaeto
coriatidowa mequialnt
62nj iThevwakdnepsesnfdono.Etra

principnes:icuaU

of
62.bceb(7 ak

re
ainldin,db

it
liete

) Band (7ould
(t4 dono oerdintiny
ins00) kDA
particexternlyPRSancedinvtest vement
(16on

dono (4trk
(n6 ,ssiDen

tiyragcentedaid, ieframctreda(
paorfoios heav
andina(4ii) Thetirms

advantage is necessary for most development partners. Second, as indicated in paragraph 53, most major
donors support the shift to consolidated program support. This is seen as a major donor coordinating
instrument which would require and build both partnership and govemment ownership. In the interim,
several donors have indicated their willingness to support the Govearment in preparing a PRSP, including
in poverti diagnosis and monitoring, participationof civil society, and policy analysis.

VI.

INTERIM ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

63. Selectivity in the Bank's interim assistance program has been enhanced both by administrative
budget constraints and donor consensus on assistance priorities. Given other donors' interest and work in
a number of the areas in which it is active, IDA must cultivate strong partnerships with others in its
assistance to the Govenment, and the PRSP process should help us do so. The following assistance
program is centered on supporting the preparation of a high quality PRSP and the shift to consolidated
program support.A summaryof Bank assistanceprogram by fiscal year is presented in Table 6.
64. The Bank is planning several analyticalactivities designed to support the Goveament in preparing
and implementingits PRSP. The full CAS, to be presented in the second half of FY02, will take stock of
progress, and lay out a full, multiyear program of analyticaland advisory work and lending.The CAS will
be prepared in a participatory fashion, building on the Government's PRSP.

- 23 -

Table 6: Components of the Bank Assistance Program, FY 2001-02
FY01

FY02
I
AnalyticalandAdvisoryActivities

Advisory activities
* Support to PRSP
* Support to poverty analysis within the PRSP
* Support on poverty monitoring
* Sector strategies
* Public resource management
* Governance and corruption survey

Advisory activities
* Support to PRSP
* Support to poverty analysis within the PRSP
* Gender strategy
* Sector strategies
* Sources of growth and competitivenessstudy
* Public resource management
* Public service delivery assessment
* Incidenceanalysis of public spending

Formal ESW
* Social and Structural Policy Review
* Country Financial AccountabilityAssessment

Formal ESW
* Gender analysis note
* Governance and institutional assessment
* Country Procurement Assessment Report

LENDINGOPERATIONS
EUS(AL)

USS(M)
* PERAC

10

* PRSC

60

* Cotton Sector Reform Program

15

* Power VII

30

* HIV/AIDS

15

PORTFOLIO
Clos.Date

Clos.Date
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*

Food Security
Rural Credit II
Rural Water Supply
EnvironmentManagement
Education Development
Populationand Health
Transport Sector
Borgou Pilot
I" Decentral. City Mgmt
Social Fund
Distance Learning
Labor Force Development
Private Sector
t.b.d.:to be determined

09/00
12/00
12/00
12/00
02/01
06/01
12/01
12/01
06/03
12/03
04/04
06/04
12/04

12/01
12/01
It Decentral. City Mgmt
06/03
Social Fund
12/03
04/04
Distance Learning
Labor Force Development 06/04
Private SectorDevelopment 12/04
12/01
PERAC
Cotton Sect. Ref. Program t.b.d.
t.b.d.
HIV/AIDS

* Transport Sector
* Borgou Pilot

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

- 24 Analytical and Advisory Activities
65. Given the clear complementarities between the work needed to prepare the PRSP and the work
planned under the PERAC, and taking into account the relevant activities of the other donors, the Bank
proposes to focus its support for the preparation of the PRSP in public expenditure management areas, as
described in Table 6. AAA can be organized within four main areas: (a) analytical work on poverty issues
to support PRSP preparation; (b) the design and execution of government programs to promote growth
and to reduce poverty; (c) due diligence work on the management of public resources to build the
foundations for consolidated program support from external partners; and (d) the preparation of a broad
strategy to promote gender equality. As noted above, the Bank would seek to contribute to on-going
national efforts rather than replace them. The proposed AAA program, therefore, separates advisory
activities from formal economic and sector work to be delivered by the Bank. The country team will also
ensure that key ("due diligence") economic and sector work is brought up-to-date (see Table 7).
Table 7: Key Economic and SectorWork
Product

Povertynote
CEM/SSPR
PER
CFAA
CPAR

Lastcompleted
(FY)

Planned
(FY)

1994
1995
1996-97
...
1999

2002
2001
ongoing
2001
2002

66. The Bank's support for poverty analysis will be provided in the framework of the PRSP
preparation. It will include: (i) advisory activities in poverty analysis, and specifically the links between
poverty analysis findings and the design of the poverty reduction strategy and programs; (ii) the
production of a poverty note as an input for the PRSP, focusing on poverty dynamics and diagnosis as
well as specific analysis of rural poverty and gender; and (iii) incidence analysis of public spending in the
PERAC framework. The Bank will also support the definition and the establishment of a poverty
monitoring system in collaboration with the donors already involved.
Size and Composition of Lending
67. Consistent with the IMF's PRGF program, the Bank's lending scenario assumes that: (i) a sound
macro-economic framework will be maintained; (ii) the reform and institutional strengthening program
described in the interim PRSP will be sustained; and (iii) high levels of external support will continue.
IDA's FYO1-02lending program would amount to US$ 130 million.
68. The PERAC is being presented to the Board along with this interim CAS. As noted above, the
measures the Government plans to put in place are critical underpinnings for the progressive shift toward
increased resource transfers via annual poverty reduction support credits. In that context, special attention
is given to strengthening financial management, including fiduciary safeguards. The supervision of
PERAC will necessarily be intensive in that it will seek to reinforce and monitor actions all along the
chain of expenditure planning and management, including an early start to the preparation of 2002
budget.
69. The Bank also plan to prepare and present three other operations in FY01-02: (i) an HIV/AIDS
project (as part of the multi-country Aids Program) which will help refine and consolidate the various

- 25 AIDS initiatives that key ministries have included in the their 2001 program budgets (see Box 3); (ii) a
project to help strengthen producer institutions as part of the liberalization of cotton marketing
arrangements; and (iii) an electricity projec'6 (Power VII). While the first two programs could ultimately
have been incorporated into the Government's program budgets, separate arrangements would facilitate
their implementation since they are tightly focused on critical issues (see paragraph 54). The electricity
project involves a substantial level of international competitive bidding, and as argued above, therefore
needs a specific arrangement. Finally, preparation is underway for lending in judiciary reform, agriculture
services, and forestry management. These operations could be folded in the PRSC envisaged for FY02,
depending on progress made in preparation. The proposed PRSC would be preceded or accompanied by
the full CAS: it would require satisfactoryprogress on all of the triggers in Table 5, as well as fulfillment
of HIPC completion point measures. Proceeding with the Power VII operation would require satisfactory
progress on policies for private sector development, including the privatization program.
Portfolio Management
70. The FYOI portfolio consists of 13 projects (of which one is a GEF), with a net commitment of
US$191 million and an undisbursed balance of US$119 million (see Annex B8). Quality and
implementation performance of the portfolio has improved as evidenced by the increased disbursement
ratio (from 13% in FY98, to 21% in FY99, and to 24% in FY00). Country Portfolio Performance
Reviews are held every year and close monitoring of disbursement and procurement procedures are
enforced to further improve project implementation. Realism and pro-activity indices are fully
satisfactory at 100% in FY00. Out of the FYOI portfolio, four projects have closed or will close within 6
months. For the remaining 9 projects, the objective is to maintain a satisfactory status for all, and to
ensure that aggregate disbursements exceed 25 percent a year. In terms of formal output, the Bank
expects to produce 5 implementationcompletion reports in FYOI, and 3 in FY02.
Enhanced HIPC Debt Relief
71. In July 2000, the Board agreed that Benin had reached the Decision Point under the Enhanced
HIPC initiative. Total HIPC assistance was estimated at US$265 million in NPV terms, of whichIDA's
share would amount to US$84.4 million. Total debt relief expected under the enhanced HIPC initiative is
estimated to US$ 20 million per year in nominal terms. Following approval of Benin's decision point by
other donors, interim assistance will be provided as reduction or cancellation of debt service. IDA began
to provide interim assistance to Benin as a 50 percent reduction of debt service to IDA, and will continue
providing debt-service relief in the same manner after Benin reaches its completion point under the
initiative. Between 2000-14, the reduction of Benin's debt service to IDA would average about US$ 8.3
million per year. Resources made available under the I-PC Initiative will finance programs included in
the medium-term expenditure framework under preparation for social sectors, and specifically identified
in annual budgets.
72. The completion point is subject to Benin satisfying the agreed conditions and receiving adequate
assurancesfrom Benin's other creditors of their participation in the proposed debt relief. The Government
estimates that it will be able to fulfill the completion conditions by mid-2001, but given the delays in
preparing a full PRSP, this now appears unlikely.

This projectcomprises:(i) the interconnectionbetweenNEPA(Nigeria)and CEB (Beninand Togo);(ii) the
interconnection
of North Togo- NorthBeninto supplyelectricityto the cottonproducingareas in the northernpart
of the countryandto villagesandruralcommunities;(iii)a rehabilitationandextensionof the distributionnetwork
in Cotonouand other towns; and (iv) a capacitybuildingcomponentto improveregulationand environmental
monitoring.
16

- 26 IFC and MIGA Activities
73. IFC's portfolio is concentrated in the financial sector with three projects for US$500,000 in leasing,
insurance and banking. Two projects are pending commitment: a micro-finance institution, FINADEV,
and an insurance group, SOBAC. IFC priorities in Benin are to pursue investment in the banking sector
and in small and medium enterprises. IFC is also examining possible support to the West Africa Gas
Pipeline, in which Benin will participate.
74. MIGA has registered low investor interest in Benin and has no exposure in the country. In the past
year, however, a few investors have approached MIGA with a preliminary intent to obtain political risk
insurance coverage for projects in the telecommunications and real estate sectors, and MIGA will follow
up on these leads.
75. The full CAS will propose a joint strategy for the entire Bank Group that better exploits the
complementarities of IDA, IFC, and MIGA in supporting poverty-reducingprivate sector development.
Preparing afull CAS
76. In formulating the full CAS, the Bank will draw more systematically from the lessons learned in
implementing the 1994 CAS:
*

The Bank (and wider donor community) needs to be more strategic and selective. Efforts to date
remain spread over a large number of sectors and issues, tying-up scarce government capacity, and
resulting in only modest tangible results. The proliferation of donor-supported projects (the public
investment program is donor-driven and unwieldy, with as many as 400 projects still listed), which
compete for scarce management capacity, is not the best use of external resources and tends to
undermine local initiatives.

*

Within areas of its focus, the Bank's objectives need to be more modest, supporting reforms which
are owned by a broad constituency and within the Government's capacity to implement.

*

The Bank must do more to ensure broad ownership of reforms before proceeding. This involves a
better understanding of how to assess ownership, as well as of the political and social factors that
influence it.

*

Strong Bank support for further capacity building is critical and is best promoted on the basis of
strong government ownership.
VII. RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION

77. The five significant risks that could slow progress on poverty reduction in Benin are described in
paragraphs 78-82.
External Environment
78. The first risk is the economy's vulnerability to a further drop in cotton prices and/or in cotton
production. With exports of cotton and cotton products accounting for more than 80 percent of total
exports, significant drop in international cotton prices or disruption of the cotton sector would affect
growth and living standards. Benin's strong creditor position with the banking system and its sound public
finances provide some margin to absorb the fiscal consequences of a continued negative trend in the
external terms of trade. An addition, cotton sector reforms underway are designed to increase the sector's
flexibility and its capacity to absorb international price shocks. But recent developments indicate that
strong vested interests may yet delay or jeopardize them. Thus, although the Government has formally
lifted SONAPRA's monopsony on primary purchases of seed cotton reforms and initiated follow-up,
developments over the last few weeks give cause for concern that reforms might be stalled or even

- 27 -

reversed. Exceptional quick-disbursing assistance from donors may be required if negative shocks are
acute.
79. Second, economic developments in Nigeria represent both a big opportunity and a big risk for
development and poverty reduction in Benin. Thus far, Benin has benefited from policy distortions in
Nigeria, but recent stabilization there, accompanied by liberalization of its trade policies and other
fundamental structural reforms could reduce Benin's regional competitiveness. Successful structural
adjustment in Nigeria is expected to generate broad-based economic growth that could provide decisive
growth impulses for the region as a whole. Benin, with its long-standing trade ties to Nigeria, is wellplaced to benefit from an acceleration of growth there. To benefit from positive developments in Nigeria,
Benin should aim to become a more efficient trade platform by ensuring that its customs system operates
fairly and efficiently; by leading the WAEMU to adopt even more liberal and open trading policies; and
by ensuring that its infrastructure services are delivered at least cost (especially port and transport
operations).
Domestic Risks
80. The third major risk is that of weak institutional capacity, which could undermine planning and
implementation of government and donor programs. Past disbursement problems, difficulties in
organizing the PRSP process, and delays in preparing the PERAC reflect this weakness. Increased
support for ownership and responsibility by both government and beneficiaries through intensive
analytical and advisory activities (as proposed in this interim assistance program) should provide greater
incentives for strengthening national capacity. In addition, the assistance program includes an evaluation
of institutionalcapacity and governanceissues to identify and prepare needed reforms. Nonetheless, there
is clearly a risk that improvementsin capacity will be slower than desired.
81. Fourth, the presidential election scheduled for March 2001 could distract the authorities and other
participants from the content and the objectives of the poverty reduction strategy, and delay the
implementationof crucial reforms described in the interim PRSP. This is most likely a short-term risk in
that virtually the entire political establishment has endorsed the broad economic reform agenda. Clearly
however, the presidential election will delay the preparation of the PRSP (see paragraph44).
82. Finally, Benin's inoperative PRSP institutional framework and the vaguely defined consultative
mechanisms may lengthen the decision-making process and delay the preparation of a coherent and
realistic strategy. And given the country's administrative and technical capacity constraints, timely
implementationof the PRSP work program is a significant challenge.

- 28 CONCLUSION
83. Benin remains a very poor country. To achieve its poverty reduction objectives in the medium- to
long-term, the Government must remain committed to implementing a sound, well-prioritized reform
program to tackle second-generation structural and institutional constraints. In the short-term, it is crucial
that the Government clarify its work-program for preparing a participatory poverty reduction strategy
consistent with its implementation and financial capacities. The Bank has played an important role in
supporting Benin's progress in the past. This interim CAS proposes to continue this strong support, in
particular to the PRSP, and to lay the basis for a more effective and poverty-focused management of all
public resources.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By: Shengman Zhang

Washington,D.C.
March 22, 2001

- 29 -

BENIN
INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCESTRATEGY
Standard Annexes

Annexes:
Al
A2
B2
B3
B6
B7
B8
B8

Medium-TermMacroeconomicFramework
Benin at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performanceand Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

-30 -

ME)jP!M-T:E

Annex 1

MCROECONOMIC IFRAWMWO

I AAeri
a strongexportp
mnin 99oing to a reducionin cottonstocks,merchandise
export
growth spjeed tolow t iat
ls tan rea G go
becuse of the constraintsin the
cotton
sector.~~~~~~f
t
Driveln
by higherinvestent needs,thevolumeof imporsis
t
ogr slightlyfasterthan real

expected

DP(respectively percentad S'pecent.)
Iexpected toide by 1.30
pSercent
of GD?to justdover7 perent in
2000 befre rowngslighlyto 6.50t.:fAkfStX0ft
percent btt00
y:2003.:::
*4 AsanU
oil impoter Beminisl0
affectedby theoil priceincreasecouled witha stog dollar,but
tl~ inpacontheb.Jneeof
aymntsard rtai prcesis ikey t bemodrae. The impactof the oil
000*Theex erpa1ctirt'enfiXit(X

xoicrese
ofD?om2&
o 34
prcet
pecen ofD?,accontig
Batarnte
~ qfPaymen*r
~
~

~

~

~

~

fr abut ne hirdof he ideing

~

~

~

~

~

t pp

* projected
Projectogrants
remain
areconstantin rwallterms

paymnts
ros~inernti~at
Mareslt eseveswoud slwlydeceas frm 6 moths~
,200.02t103'G,aSt:l
>GP tofimporftshi
thissuppt is projectedto decreasefrom prc Im
ent (~e)Pinh
l
ThASA
ective i stoa4ileama surplus
:fl
of0.3Spercentof G

*

to 7.percent64
in 2003
y2
d00103
in the overallbalanoft

andtheo*r'tbe
overaldeficit
sae time
4 perent
porizty
Piscalpolicyiee40' towardmaintainingaX
balancedoverall*fXIscal
position,incldinggraihs,whilethe
B~eninowil
stegte
taxadcutomo
ps adm bastton.bodnthe tax4base thruough
the redu
1 ctin stax

ex; enditr wilincrese

fro1i.7esret

fWiabntdata a1999mto
0p

of 01)? i 0

mly

on

Annex A2
- 31 -

Benin at a glance

12/19100

SubPOVERTYandSOCIAL

Population,mid-year(millions)
GNPpercapita(Atlasme#iod USS)
GNP(Alasmethod USSbillons)

Saharan

Low-

Benin

Africa

tncome

6.1
380
2.3

642
500
321

2,417
410
988

2.8
28

2.6
2.6

1.9
2.3

Developmentdiamond'
Lifeexpectancy

|

Averageannual growth, 1993.99
Populfton (%)
Laborforce(%)

GNP
per

33
42
53
87
29
56
61
78
98
57

34
50
92
32
43
39
78
85
71

31
60
77
43
64
39
90
102
86

1979

1989

1998

1999

1.2
14.7
12,8
0.4

1.5
11.8
12.8
3.4
7.1

2.3
17.1
17.3
8.6
11.3

2.4
17.6
16.7
6.4
11.7

-4.7
0.8
82.7
7.1

-5.8
0.8
56.1
16.1

-5.9
0.8
58.6
17.1

Gross
primary
enrollment

9

I capta

Mostrecent estImate latest year available, 1993-99)
Poverty(% ofpopulaton
belownatonalpoverye)
Urbanpopulation(% of totalpopulaton)
Lifeexpectancyatbkth (years)
Infantmortality erO
1000 live birfhs)
Childmalnutrition(% of childrenunder5)
Accessto improvedwatersource(% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy(%ofpopulationage 15+)
Grossprimaryenrollment(% ofschool-agepopulation)
Male
Female

A

Accessto satewater

Benin -

-

Low-incomegroup

KEYECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
GDP(US$billions)
GrossdomesticinvestmnenVGDP
Exportsofgoodsand services/GDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Grossnatlonalsavtngs/GDP

..

-11.4
0.3
34.0
2.5

accountbalance/GOP
Cumrent
Interestpayments/GDP
TotaldebtGDP
Totaldebt servioetexports
Present value of debtVGDP
Presentvalue of debexports

..
..

1979-49 19894-9
(averageannuag,owth)
GOP
GNPpercapita
Exportsofgoodsand services

3.1
-0.5
-2.9

..
..

35.0
218 3

IEconomicrattos
E
Trade
T
Domestic
Investment

ISavings

/

36.3
221.0

-

Indebtedness

1998

1999

19993

4.6
0.9
0.8

4.5
2.5
12.9

5.0
1.9
16.0

5.3
2.7
4.6

--

Gro

-Bnn

Benin

Lo4omgu

---

Low-incomegroup

STRUCTURE
of the ECONOMY
1979

1989

1998

1999

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

35.0
133
8.9
51.7

37.9
12.8
7.8
494

38 6
13.5
8.2
47.9

37.9
13.8
8.3
48.3

I

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Imponsofgoodsand services

91.6
80
27.1

85.5
11.1
22 2

83.8
9.7
27.8

83.5
10.1
28.0

!401

197949 1989-9
46
5.2
4.1
4.2
5.8
5.1
19
4.2

1998
6.7
0.9
3.0
3.8

1999
4.7
3.2
6.5
5.8

52
-4.6
3.3
7.0
5.3

1.7
11 6
67
4.0
48

groth)
(average
annual
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Grossnationalproduct

1.3
20
-8.4
-7 5
2.6

48
3.2
69
3.4
4.7

ithof
nve-tmentandGDP(%)

1NA

6201f',
1O
1-20°

9+

!

9s

-GDI
G

97

90

99

-0-GDP

!Growthof exportsandImports(%)

T09

1

so

s

1-4
-

Exports

-Imports

Note: 1999dataare preliminaryestimates.
average.If data aremissing,the diamondwill
* The diamondsshowfourkey indicatorsin the country(Inbold)comparedwith its income-group
be incomplete.

Annex A2
- 32 Benin
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prtces
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implcit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes curent grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1979

1989

1998

1999

10.9
13.0

4.8
2.2

5.8
4.2

0.3
2.1

Inflation (%)
5T
2 T
s0
0

13.0
-9.0
-2.4

8.0
-6.6
-12.0

15 5
4.8
-1.1

16.1
5.1
-1.2

94
1

95

95

97

98

99

e
deflator -. *CpI

IGDP

TRADE
1979

1989

1998

1999

(USS millions)
Total exports (fob)
Cotton
Crude Oil
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy

45
29
1
6
320
80
34

92
66
21
29
223
58
23

239
202
2
35
451
138
64

236
194
0
42
461
141
59

Capitalgoods

206

123

253

258

62
65
96

102
106
96

94
107
88

Export price index (1995=1C10)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=1000)

,
,,
..

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
50T
I
400
*

l*
2

109
9

'

4

9i

*rxports

9

7

9b

9

sImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$millions)

(USi millions)1979
1989

1998

1999

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

176
384
-208

302
428
-126

399
642
-243

397
665
-267

1
71

-38
93

-13
123

-18
145

Current account balance

-135

-71

-133

-141

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

132
3

174
-103

142
-9

148
-7

14
212.7

3
319.0

296
590.0

319
614.8

1979

1989

1998

1999

403
0
40

1,242
0
253

1,360
0
547

1,350
0
515

7

26

37

67

0
0

0
3

0
9

0
10

36
48
106
4
0

116
126
0
1
0

79
16
0
11
0

96
16
0
19
0

0
6
0
6
0
5

77
48
1
47
2
45

21
18
5
13
4
9

26
18
6
12
4
8

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

|Current account balance to GDP (%)
*

o-S0

12
j4E

T1

i l

l

4

I

I
I121

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$miMlions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service

lBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Composittonof 1998debt (USSmill.)

E: 380

:4

'A- IBRD
| B- IDA
| C - IMF

E- Bilateral
D - Othermultilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

12/18/00

Annex B2
- 33 Benin - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
a
Numberof ProjectsUnderImplementation
AverageImplementation
Period(years)b
Percentof ProblemProjectsby Numbera,c
Percentof ProblemProjectsby AmountI c
Percentof Projectsat Risk by Numbera,d
Percentof Projectsat Risk by Amount d
Disbursement
Ratio(%) e
PortfolioManagement
CPPRduringtheyear (yes/no)
Resources(totalUS$)
Supervision
AverageSupervision(US$/project)

1998

1999

2000

2001

14
3.8
14.3
19.1
14.3
19.1
13.1

13
4.3
0
0
0
0
21.1

14
3.3
7.1
1.8
7.1
1.8
23

13
3.5
15.4
4.5
15.4
4.5
6.9

Yes
$1,955
$140

Yes
$1,280
$98

Yes
$895
$67

Yes
$875
$74

Memorandum
Item
SinceFY80 LastFiveFYs
ProjEvalby OEDby Number
32
7
ProjEvalby OEDby Amt(US$millions)
480.8
121.1
% of OEDProjectsRatedU or HUby Number
12.5
14.3
% of OEDProjectsRatedU or HU by Amt
6.5
9.9
a. As shownin the AnnualReporton PortfolioPerformance
(exceptfor currentFY).
b. Averageageof projectsin the Bank'scountryportfolio.
c. Percentof projectsratedU or HUon development
objectives(DO) and/orimplementation
progress(IP).
d. As definedunderthe PortfolioImprovement
Program.
balanceof the Bank'sportfolioat the
e. Ratioof disbursements
duringthe yearto the undisbursed
beginningof the year:Investmentprojectsonly.
* All indicators
are for projectsactiveinthe Portfolio,withthe exceptionof Disbursement
Ratio,
whichincludesall activeprojectsas well as projectswhichexitedduringthefiscalyear.

Annex B6
-

34 -

Benin - Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Strategic Rewards b
(IHIMIL)

Implementationb
Risks (HIM/L)

15.0

H
H

M
M

H

M

H
M

M
M

Fiscal year

Proj ID

USS(M)

2001

Cotton Sector ReformProgram

15.0

HIV/AJDSMULTI SECTOR

2002

PERAC

10.0

Total

40.0

PRSC

60.0

POWER VII

30.0

Total

90.0

Grand Total

130.0

Annex B6
- 35 Benin - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)

1996

Actual
1998
1997

1999

Estimate
2000

2001

Proiected
2002
2003

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Agriculture

37.7

38.4

38.6

37.9

37.1

36.7

36.5

Industry

13.7

13.9

13.5

13.8

13.8

13.9

14.1

14.2
49.7

Gross domestic product'

100.0
36.1

48.6

47.7

47.9

48.3

49.1

49.4

49.4

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

92.0
16.6
6.4
10.3

94.4
18.5
6.7
11.8

93.4
17.1
5.7
11.4

93.6
17.6
6.0
11.6

93.7
19.0
6.9
12.0

92.2
19.8
7.5
12.3

91.0
20.2
7.4
12.8

90.4
20.4
7.5
12.9

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

19.1
28.7

16.2
29.1

17.3
27.8

16.7
28.0

15.6
28.2

15.7
27.7

15.7
30.3

15.8
29.5

Services

Gross domestic savings

8.0

5.6

6.6

6.4

6.3

7.8

9.0

9.6

Gross national savingsC

9.1

10.9

11.3

11.8

11.5

12.9

13.7

13.9

2207.9

2141.1

2306.1

2372.6

2302.9

2459.2

2692.8

2943.7

2161.8

2111.3

2292.8

2354.5

2287.8

2442.9

2678.3

2928.7

5.7
6.1

4.5
5.4

5.0
2.6

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.1

5.6
6.1

5.6
6.6

1.5
1.1
2.2

1.9
-0.3
-1.3

1.9
1.7
0.0

2.0
0.4
-0.7

2.6
5.3
5.8

2.6
2.2
2.0

346.8
191.2
622.8
425.7
-276.0
143.4
-162.4

399.0
239.3
641.9
450.5
-242.9
123.2
-133.1

397.2
235.8
664.6
460.8
-267.4
144.6
-140.9

360.1
209.5
650.5
458.3
-290.4
135.9
-171.6

386.4
227.5
682.0
480.8
-295.6
142.4
-169.4

423.6
250.7
725.6
510.7
-302.0
141.3
-175.2

464.4
278.6
781.3
550.7
-316.9
141.7
-190.3

18.8
75.9
52.6
23.3
82.1

18.1
72.2
58.9
13.3
51.9

31.2
103.0
49.1
53.9
13.7

23.7
117.2
82.2
35.0
23.3

33.0
102.0
68.0
34.0
70.3
-30.1

37.1
111.2
73.9
37.3
98.9
-56.8

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
($US Million)
Gross national product

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1991 prices)
5.5
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
2.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1991 prices)
2.6
2.7
Gross domestic product at market prices
1.3
5.3
Total consumption
1.6
5.8
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

423.8
262.5
633.6
444.4
-209.8
71.0
-184.9

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Othercapital(netinCl.errors&ommissions)

-6.3
110.0
83.0
27.0
139.2

Change in reservesd

-58.1

-14.4

-9.1

-7.1

7.4

28.3
123.6
62.4
61.2
46.4
-28.8

-9.5

-12.9

-10.5

-11.3

-12.6

-12.0

-11.2

-10.8

14.5
3.7

-16.9
9.4

26.5
7.0

2.7
6.6

1.0
13.1

9.9
6.2

8.9
5.0

10.1
6.8

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Annual growth rates
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

Annex B6
- 36 Benin - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator

1996

Actual
1997
1998

Estimate
2000

1999

Projected
2002
2003

2001

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
15.2
13.1
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-)
2.1
Capital expenditure
6.4
Foreign financing
9.8

14.6
12.1
2.4
6.6
8.4

15.5
10.7
4.8
5.8
9.6

16.1
11.0
5.1
6.3
8.8

15.9
12.3
3.6
7.1
6.5

16.0
13.0
3.0
7.4
6.8

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
GrowthofM2(%)

25.0
11.3

26.4
17.1

23.6
-2.7

29.7
35.0

29.3
8.7

29.6
9.3

442.2
245.0
180.5

502.1
270.5
185.6

420.9
286.7
146.8

389.0
288.4
134.9

422.8
307.3
137.6

469.1
311.3
150.7

Real exchange rate (US$/LCUf

79.5

78.0

83.9

81.0

..

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

16.8
4.9
6.7

15.0
3.8
4.7

..

..

..

..

5.8
4.2

0.3
2.1

3.5
5.1

3.0
2.9

Price indices(
Merchandise
Merchandise
Merchandise

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f

YR91 =100)
export price index
import price index
terms of trade index

GDP at market prices
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

16.3
12.8
3.5
7.4
6.8

16.4
12.7
3.7
7.5
6.9

480.6
308.4
155.8

490.5
307.5
159.5

2.5
2.5

2.0
2.5

..

Annex B7
- 37 Benin - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual
1997
1998

1996

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
Y
disbursed (TDO)(US$m)'

1375.6

1335.0

Net disbursements(US$m)a

111.6

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)'

Estimate
2000

1999

Projected
2005
2010

2001

2015

1360.1

1349.6

1346 3

1352.9

1418 4

1538 6

16149

526

61.4

67.4

50.2

54.1

70.4

75.7

81.6

45.7

41.4

37.8

66.9

62.5

45.7

36.9

43 9

72 8

253.8

383.2

340.9

345.8

364.2

325.0

240.0

180.8

126.6

72.2
7.3
34.0

75.9
13.0
35.1

56 1
16.1
36.0

58.6
17.1
37.6

56.2
16.9
37.5

51.8
11.0
37.4

38.8
6.2
36.5

28.7
5.2
34 0

20.4
57
33 0

69.5

70 6

405

311.0

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferredcreditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRDTDO (US$m)
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

..

.

..

..

..

65.3

65.9

56.4

63.3

70.4

70.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

.

..

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

..

62.7

..

..

.

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

520

510

547

541

535

526

480

..

..

.

..

..

.

..

..

..
..

..

..

..

..

..

.

..

..

.

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed,use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferredcreditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateraldevelopment banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees
e. Includesequity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
- 38 -

Benin - Statusof BankGroupOpemtions(Operatiorns
Portfolio)
ClosedProjects

38

DlferenceBetween
ExpectedandActual

ActiveProets
LastFSR
SupervisionPating
ProjectID

Prjec Namee

P000120
P000103
P000121
P0'0112
Pi000118
P000117
P057345
P035645
P035648
P067329
P070204
P037580
P039882

RURALCFRDITII
EDUCATiON
DEVELOPMEN
RURAL
WATERSUPPLY&
EiWV.
MANAEMENTPROJ
POPULATIONAND
HEALT
TRANSPORT
SECTOR
BORGOU
PILOTRSP
SOCLAL
FUiND
1STDECEN.CITYMGMrT.
Distai LeauingPmjed- UL
LaborFoce Developent Project
NATPARKSCONS.&
MGT
PRIVATESECTOR

D

U
S
S
iiS
S
S
iHiS
S
S
S
S
S
S

OridinalAmountInUSSMillioris

Imlemenintion

FiscalYear

IDA

U
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S
ilS
S
U
S
S

1993
1994
1994
1995
1995
1997
1998
1998
1999
2000
2000
20D0
2000

3.8
18
9.8
8
28
40
4
17
28
1.8
5
0
30

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.8
0

Total

191

6.8

GRANT Cancel.

Disbursements

Undisb.

Orig.

Fmfn
RiWd

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.5
6.8
2.3
3.7
13.5
15.3
2.6
10.7
23.4
1.7
5
6.2
27.4

0.5
7.2
2.5
31
17
13.2
1.8
-0.4
8.7
13.9
0.2
0
-1.3

0.5
7.1
2.5
3
17
0
0
-2.8
0
0
0
0
0

0

119.1

66.3

27.4

Annex B8
- 39 Benin - Statementof IFC's

Heldand DisbursedPortfolio
As of 9/30/00
(In US DollarsMillions)
Held

Disbursed

FY Approval Com2anv
Loan Eguitv Ouasi Partic Loan Equity Ouasi Partic
1991/93/95 AEF BOAB
0
0 0.02
0
0
0 0.02
0
1995 AEF Union Benin
0
0.08
0
0
0
0.08
0
0
1994 Equipbail-Benin
0
0.1
0
0
0
0.1
0
0
Total Portfolio:

0

0.18

0.02

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
1999 SOBAC
2000 FfNADEV
Total Pending Commitment:

Loan Equitv Ouasi Partic
0 79.22
0
0
0 352.98
0
0
0

432.2

0

0

0

0.18

0.02

0

Annex B I I
- 40 -

Benin - InterimCAS Budget
4-Dec-00

COUNTRY CAS COSTED ON:

- FY2003
TOTALFY2001
ADMINBUDGET($,000) AS% OF
GROSS
FY2003 TOTAL TOTAL
FY2001FY2002

CASOBJECTIVE
INTERIM
1 SUPPTTOPRSP

669
32
927

EUTO

2 POET

R
3 E
O
CAPITAL
4 HUMAN

164
586
77

5GOVERNANCFX

~6

956
588
1,000
229
766
\i:

-

1,625
1,119

25%/
17%

-

1926
392

-

0 1,352
0l 2

30%
6%
210
IE%

-

0%

--

6,480

2,877 3,603

TOTAL

100%

TOTAL AS % OF

ADMINBUDGETAND OUTPUTS)
COMPARISON_(GROSS

PROCESS FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 FY01-03TOTALBB
BUSINESS
LENDING($,000)

1,056

1,059

1,120

413

410

PORTFOLIO ($,000)

1,954

1,279

894

960

1,160

272
463

653
479

531
505

651
85

AAA (non lending)($,000
WOTHER
($,000)
($,000)

CTRY PROG.SUP.

TOTALADMINBUDGET

-

-

-

3,469

3,744

3,050

33%

1,596
405

25%
6%

768

768

1,536

2,877

3,603

2

1

3

3

-

-

-

-i

VOLUME (S m) - IDA
PORTFOLIO SIZE (no.)

21
14

26
13

37
14

($ m)

VOLUME

UNDISBURSED

BAL. ($

ICRs (no.)
AAA (NON-LEND)

(no.)

TOAL(B.CF4F

$UECS0"$,OOP0

lot]~~~~~~~Vu

-

-

40
17

90
11

8

1

-.

3

1

2

2

2

-

-

-

-

-

I

-

-

3,46

130

-

2

3,744"(

100%

6

3

-

-

24%

6,480

3

OTHER (no.)

13%

945
320

- IBRD

LENDING (no.)

823
2,120

3,05

C:f0AL,d A$

2,B'77

3,803

2
-

6,480300%

-

NTERIUst 0%

>A

P

P

