Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 55863-UY

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
FOR THE PERIOD 2010-2015

August 18, 2010

Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay
Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply
a presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the
updated document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank's Policy on
Access to Information.

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Uruguay was discussed by the Executive
Directors on June 9, 2005, (Report No. 31804-UY), and a Progress Report on the
implementation of that Country Strategy was noted by the Executive Directors on April 1,
2008, (Report No. 42789-UY).

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS
(As of June 30, 2010)
Currency Unit = Uruguay Peso
US$1 = 21.12 Uruguay Pesos

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR:
January 1 – December 31

IBRD
RegionalVice President
Country Director
Country Representative
Task Team Leader

Pamela Cox
Penelope Brook
Peter Siegenthaler
Andrew Follmer

IFC
Regional Vice President
Regional Director
Country Manager
Task Manager

Thierry Tanoh
Vincent Gouarne
Salem Rohana
John Barham

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
APL
CAF
CAS
CASCR
CBU
CC
CEM
CFAA
CPAR
CPI
CPS
DINAMA
DPL
EMBI
ESW
FBS
FDI
FA
FMD
FX
GAC
GCR
GDP
GEF
GHG
GoU
IADB
IBRD
IBTAL
ICR
IDF
IFC
IFIs
IFRS
IMF
LCR
MDGs
MEF
MERCOSUR
MGAP
MIC
MSP
M&E
NCD
NGOs
NLTA
OECD
OPP
OSE
PEFA
PFM
PIU

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Adaptable Program Loan
Andean Development Corporation (Corporación Andina de Fomento)
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Central Bank of Uruguay (Banco Central de Uruguay)
Climate Change
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente
Development Policy Loan
Emerging Markets Bond Index
Economic and Sector Work
Fee-Based Service
Foreign Direct Investment
Frente Amplio
Foot & Mouth Disease
Foreign Exchange
Government and Anticorruption
Global Competitiveness Report
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Greenhouse Gas
Government of Uruguay
Inter-American Development Bank
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan
Implementation Completion and Results Report
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
International Financial Reporting Standards
International Monetary Fund
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Mercado Común del Sur
Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries
Middle-Income Countries
Ministry of Public Health
Monitoring and Evaluation
Non-Communicable Diseases
Non-Governmental Organizations
Non-Lending Technical Assistance
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
Office of Planning and Budget
Obras Sanitarias del Estado
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Financial Management
Project Implementation Unit

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
PPIAF
PPP
PRIDPL
R&D
SINARE
SMEs
SWAp
UNDAF
UNDP
UNICEF
UTE
WBG
WHO

Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Public-Private Partnership
Programmatic Reform Implementation Development Policy Loan
Research and Development
National System for Registering Companies
Small and Medium Enterprises
Sector-Wide Approach
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
National Administration of Power Plants and Electric Transmissions
World Bank Group
World Health Organization

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the
Government of Uruguay in the preparation of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).
The leadership of President José Mujica during the policy notes discussions provided
invaluable direction, and key participants included Mr. Danilo Astori, Vice President;
Mr. Fernando Lorenzo, Minister of Economy and Finance; Mr. Ricardo Ehrlich, Minister
of Education and Culture; Mr. Tabaré Aguerre, Minister of Livestock, Agriculture and
Fishery; Mr. Roberto Kreimerman, Minister of Industry, Energy and Mining; Mr. Daniel
Olesker, Minister of Public Health; Mr. Eduardo Brenta, Minister of Labour and Social
Security; Mr. Enrique Pintado, Minister of Transport and Public Works; Ms. Liliam
Kechichián, Vice Minister of Tourism and Sports; Ms. Graciela Muslera, Minister of de
Housing, Territorial Order and the Environment; and Ms. Ana Olivera, designated
Minister of Social Development.
In particular, the World Bank Group thanks Mr. Fernando Lorenzo, Minister of Economy
and Finance, and Mr. Michael Borchardt, Head of Budget Unit, Ministry of Economy and
Finance (MEF). In addition, we thank the following government officials for their
contributions to the CPS: Pedro Buonomo, Vice Minister of Economy and Finance;
Pedro Apezteguía, General Director; Andrés Masoller, Head, Macroeconomic and
Financial Advisory Department, and Martín Vallcorba; Azucena Arbeleche, Public Debt
Management Unit; Mariella Maglia and Santiago Moldes, Relations with International
Organizations; Adriana Rodríguez, Advisor (MEF); Gabriel Frugoni, Director, and Diana
Marcos, Coordinator of Public Budgets, Office of Planning and Budget (Presidency of
the Republic). Further, the World Bank Group extends a special thanks to representatives
of Government, private sector, the NGO community, and other stakeholders who
participated in CPS consultations in July and August, 2010.
Other contributors to the preparation of this CPS include Messes./Mmes: Marcelo
Acerbi, Pedro Alba, Sylvia Albela Russo, Keisgner Alfaro, Diego Ambasz, Amparo
Ballivian, John Barham, Valeria Bolla, Paloma Años Casero, Carla Cútolo, Luis de la
Plaza, Franz Drees-Gross, Norbert Fiess, Geraldine García, Ana Lariau, José Roberto
López-Cálix, Maria Luisa Masutti, Milagros Mosteirin, Javier Pereira, Susana Pérez,
Rafael Rofman, Felipe Saez, Eduardo Urdapilleta, and Eduardo Wallentin, who, together
with the Country Director, Country Representative and CPS TTL, comprised the Core
Team. In addition, Yanina Budkin, Francisco Carneiro, Michael Carroll, Diego Cerdeiro,
Bruce Courtney, Ivanna Echegoyen, Hermann von Gersdorff, B. Koshie Michel, Barbara
Mierau-Klein, Juan Martin Moreno, Reynaldo Pastor, Luis Pérez, Andrés Pizarro,
Tatiana Proskuryakova, Ana Carolina Saizar Renart, Verónica Salatino, Alejandro
Solanot, and David Yuravlivker provided valuable inputs.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... i
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 1
II. Country Context ..................................................................................................................... 3
A. Political Developments ........................................................................................................3
B. Economic Performance ........................................................................................................3
C. Poverty .................................................................................................................................4
III. Development Challenges & Government’s Vision .............................................................. 5
A. Strengthening the Business Climate and Competitiveness ...................................................6
B. Improving Social Inclusion & Equity ..................................................................................8
C. Consolidating Agricultural Sector Growth and Bringing its Benefits to Family Farms ....11
D. Protecting the Environment and Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change .....................12
E. Reforming the Public Sector ..............................................................................................13
IV. Uruguay – World Bank Partnership .................................................................................. 13
A. Performance under the 2005-2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and Evolution
of the Partnership ...............................................................................................................13
B. The Ongoing Portfolio .......................................................................................................16
C. The WBG’s Indicative Program (2010-2015) ....................................................................17
Strategic Approach & CPS Pillars .................................................................................... 17
Fiduciary Products ............................................................................................................ 25
IFC Activities .................................................................................................................... 25
D. Development Partners ........................................................................................................26
V. Risks ....................................................................................................................................... 27
TABLES
Table 1: Access to Public Services ................................................................................................. 7
Table 2: Indicative lending program for 2010-2015 ..................................................................... 18
Table 3: AAA program for FY11 and FY12 ................................................................................ 19
Table 4: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities ............................................................. 24
BOXES
Box 1: Uruguay’s PLAN CEIBAL – One Laptop per Child ........................................................ 10
Box 2: CPS Consultations............................................................................................................. 14
Box 3: The First Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion
Development Policy Loan (DPL) ..................................................................................... 20
FIGURES
Figure 1: Long Term Poverty Trends ............................................................................................ 5
Figure 2: Uruguay Investment Portfolio Diversification .............................................................. 16

ANNEXES
Annex A: CPS Results Framework
Annex B: CAS Completion Report
Annex C: Macroeconomic Framework
Annex D: Debt Sustainability Analysis
Annex E: Banking Sector Update
Annex F: IBRD and GEF Program Summary
Annex G: IFC Program Summary
Annex H: Proposed GEF Program
Annex I: CPS Consultations
Standard CPS Annexes:
Annex A2: Uruguay at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: IBRD Program Summary
IFC Investment Portfolio Operations Program
Annex B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B5: Key Social Indicators
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
IFC Committed & Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Uruguay has a strong history of broad-based social welfare and solid democratic
institutions building on a deeply ingrained preference for equality and political consensus.
The country enjoyed the highest human development standards in the region during the last
century, and Uruguay’s society is still among the most equitable in the region in terms of income
distribution and social indicators. Like many of its neighbors, recent decades were marked by
successive domestic economic crises, the most recent accompanying the Argentina crisis of
2001-2002. In 2004, in the aftermath of the crisis, the Uruguayan electorate brought forth an
important shift in the political landscape by voting into power a center left coalition (the Frente
Amplio -FA).
Efforts to decrease the economy’s vulnerability after the 2001-2002 crisis resulted in it
proving more resilient to the recent global recession than many other emerging market
economies. This was due to a generally solid macroeconomic framework, greater exchange rate
flexibility, rising international reserves, and improvements in the banking system.
The first FA administration led by former President Vázquez successfully consolidated the
restoration of macroeconomic stability, increased integration into international markets,
and improved the investment climate. These efforts paid off with an unprecedented economic
growth rate (6.6 percent on average from 2004 to 2008). The focus on promoting economic
growth was accompanied by a desire to ensure that all Uruguayans shared in the country’s
success. Thus, expanding social protection programs, as well as health and education services,
was central to the policies of the Vasquez Administration. These combined efforts resulted in
poverty declining by nearly 35 percent; and extreme poverty by 50 percent, between 2003 and
2008, with unemployment falling from 16.9 to 7.9 percent.
The second FA Government took power in March 2010, and the new President, José
Mujica, declared that he would consolidate the positive economic and social outcomes
achieved by his predecessor. The new Government recognizes the importance for Uruguay to
look beyond the region when setting its reform agenda for the next years. The country indeed
has a unique opportunity to reach, in the medium term, living standards and quality of
institutions that are comparable to those enjoyed by advanced economies.
The implementation of the 2005-2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was largely
successful, and Bank-financed activities contributed significantly to the Government’s
development objectives, with Bank support structured in three pillars: (i) reducing
vulnerability; (ii) sustaining growth; and (iii) improving living standards. This period witnessed
a marked strengthening of the Bank’s partnership with the Government of Uruguay (GoU). The
Bank opened an office in Montevideo in 2005, which strengthened relations with the
Government and facilitated successful CAS implementation. Further, the Bank was able to
customize its financing innovatively in order to disburse a Development Policy Loan (DPL) in
local currency. Finally, the Bank demonstrated an ability to shift the focus of its collaboration to
areas in which the Government was prioritizing critical reforms and initiatives which required
important knowledge transfer to move forward with innovative approaches.

i

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) aims to help Uruguay take the next steps in
consolidating economic reforms, and enhancing social outcomes. It will build on the positive
experience of the previous CAS period, when the Bank’s financial assistance was significantly
increased and the policy dialogue extended to a wide array of critical components of the
country’s development strategy. This positive experience entailed a flexible and responsive
stance by the Bank characterized by nimble and effective responses to evolving needs. This
enabled the Bank to expand its support to the Government into new areas – like promotion of
innovation, public sector reform and health reform – and thus support emerging key government
priorities.
The proposed CPS includes a Bank lending program of approximately US$700 million,
together with an active International Finance Corporation (IFC) program and a strategic
joint Government-Bank program of Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA), structured
around the following four pillars: (i) Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability &
Strengthening Public Sector Administration; (ii) Competitiveness & Infrastructure; (iii)
Agriculture, Climate Change, and Environment; and (iv) Increasing Social Inclusion &
Equity. Reflecting the lessons of the CAS Completion Report, the strategy will be flexible to
accommodate the Government’s potential need to adjust course in the event of unforeseen
domestic or external developments, and it will buttress the administration’s efforts to achieve
consensus on its ambitious reform agenda. Indicative support for this strategy is proposed to
include a series of two DPLs totaling US$200 million (late 2010 and late 2011), investment
lending totaling approximately US$500 million, and a well-focused and demand-driven AAA
program. The proposed strategy places a heightened emphasis on supporting Uruguay in
accessing international expertise and best practices, as well as sharing its own experiences with
other countries through South-South exchanges.
The proposed IFC activities in Uruguay for the CPS period complement the Bank’s
strategy by focusing on the following four main areas: (i) financial services, (ii)
agribusiness, (iii) competiveness, and (iv) education. In the financial sector, IFC aims to
support banks and non-banks that focus on the mid-market corporate and low-income retail
banking segments. In agribusiness, the focus is likely to remain on export-oriented enterprises
with deep linkages to small- and medium-sized farms. All three of IFC’s active investment
projects in Uruguay are in export-oriented agribusiness companies. The Corporation also aims to
reinforce the country’s competitiveness by financing infrastructure projects, especially those in
the renewable energy, logistics, and water sectors once appropriate regulations are in place.
Finally, IFC hopes to support private sector education institutions, particularly those that offer
technical and vocational courses for low income students.
While Uruguay’s resilience in the face of the recent global economic crisis demonstrates
that it is much more strongly positioned than it was 10 years ago, significant risks remain.
Despite declining as a source of risk since 2005, debt sustainability remains the main economic
risk, followed dollarization and exposure to global and regional shocks. Political risk is low,
though significant social risk arises from the tensions between pressure to expand government
programs and the need for a prudent fiscal stance in order to further reduce macroeconomic
vulnerabilities. Finally, natural disasters and climate change have already had a major impact on
rural income, as well as important fiscal implications, in recent years.

ii

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Uruguay has a strong history of broad-based social welfare and solid democratic
institutions building on a deeply ingrained preference for equality and political consensus,
which is still very present today. The country enjoyed the highest human development
standards in the region during the last century. While the country has faced adverse
developments in recent decades, these standards remain high, and Uruguay’s society is still
among the most equitable in the region in terms of income distribution and social indicators.
2.
This country of 3.3 million people has set its own distinct development path in a
context of a deep economic inter-connection with its large neighbors, Brazil and Argentina.
In Uruguay, the state is widely recognized as trustworthy and effective in the delivery of public
goods, and the society has explicitly voiced its preference for having the state play an active and
expanded role in most public service sectors. This trust is a reflection of the country’s tradition
for consensus-based policies and of the strong performance of the public sector in ensuring
nearly universal coverage and adequate quality and transparency in the provision of services.
3.
Uruguay’s traditional development model combines a dynamic primary export base
and a welfare state responsible for the distribution of economic benefits. This model came
under serious pressure in the latter part of the twentieth century, due to unfavorable commodity
price developments and a weaker performance in public sector management. This triggered a
gradual social and economic decline, leading to high unemployment rates and chronic fiscal and
balance of payments imbalances, and compromised opportunities for economic expansion.
4.
In the early nineties, the country embarked on an economic turnaround based on
economic opportunities offered by expanding links with regional partners, facilitated by
economic integration through the Mercado Común del Sur (Mercosur) – and with all the
benefits and vulnerabilities thus implied. This strategy produced encouraging early results,
with high growth rates, progress on economic diversification, and substantial poverty reduction.
However, the increased reliance on regional economic relations made Uruguay’s economy
highly vulnerable to the performance of its neighbors, as was dramatically demonstrated when
Argentina’s severe political and economic crisis broke out in 2001. This had a devastating effect
on all dimensions of Uruguay’s economy and society. Unemployment and poverty rates rapidly
increased to 20 percent and over 30 percent, respectively. Real wages plummeted as the Peso
was devalued and the economy went into a deep recession. The Government faced a mounting
fiscal deficit and an exploding external debt, placing the country on the verge of insolvency.
5.
Uruguay managed the crisis very well, without defaulting on its debt. The
Government rapidly put together a comprehensive recovery program based on respecting
contracts and commitments, while mitigating the adverse social consequences of the crisis. In
particular, the authorities refused to default on the debt, and worked hard to reach agreement
with creditors on a debt restructuring plan consistent both with the repayment capability of the
country and with the rules of the game. This recovery program enjoyed broad political and
social consensus, and the authorities managed to mobilize the international community to help
safeguard fiscal solvency and address structural issues that were critical for return to high growth
levels. Eventually, as the economy recovered much faster than expected, Uruguay was able to
repay the multilaterals' emergency loans well ahead of schedule.
1

6.
In 2004, in the aftermath of the crisis, the Uruguayan electorate brought forth an
important shift in the political landscape by voting into power a center-left coalition (the
Frente Amplio -FA). In a reflection of the stability of Uruguay’s consensus-oriented
democracy, the loss of the executive branch by the two parties that had dominated the political
scene for 170 years did not generate significant disruptions in the post-crisis recovery agenda.
The FA ensured remarkable institutional continuity while gradually consolidating a reform
agenda around which it shaped an unprecedented political consensus.
7.
The first FA administration, led by former President Vázquez, successfully
consolidated the restoration of macroeconomic stability and undertook determined efforts
to increase Uruguay’s integration into international markets and improve the investment
climate. These efforts paid off with unprecedented economic growth (6.6 percent on average
from 2004 to 2008). Based on its conviction that sustained and broad-based economic growth
require policies that go beyond stable macroeconomic conditions, the Vázquez administration
took a proactive stance on promoting innovation, infrastructure development and institutional
reforms for increased competition and conducive conditions for private sector development.
8.
Pairing these efforts in promoting economic growth with expanding social
protection programs, as well as health and education services was central to the policies of
the Vázquez Administration. The Government focused on promoting universal access to key
benefits and services by vulnerable groups. This included the expansion of the family allowance
program, the introduction of a pioneering program to provide every primary school student a
personal computer (Plan Ceibal), and the launch of a major health reform aimed at gradually
increasing coverage to ultimately reach the totality of the population. These combined efforts in
the economic and social fronts generated positive outcomes that went beyond recovering ground
lost in the 2002 crisis. Between 2003 and 2008, poverty declined by nearly 35 percent; and
extreme poverty, by 50 percent. Unemployment fell from 16.9 to 7.9 percent.
9.
The second FA Government took office in March 2010, with President José Mujica
promising to continue the sound policies implemented in recent years, with a view toward
consolidating the positive economic and social outcomes. He committed his administration to
further increase the effectiveness of public policies – such as further expanding social sector
programs with an increased emphasis on enhancing their impact. The new Government has
committed itself to studying global best practices in setting its reform agenda for the coming
years. In the medium-term, the country has a unique opportunity to achieve living standards and
quality of institutions comparable to those enjoyed by advanced economies.
10.
This proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covers the years 2010-15 and is
aligned with the country’s development vision. It proposes a Bank lending program of
approximately US$700 million, together with an active International Finance Corporation (IFC)
program and a strategic joint Government-Bank program of Analytical and Advisory Services
(AAA). The CPS will provide for flexibility to enable the program to respond to emerging needs.
Rather than providing a detailed blueprint of the terms and scope of the partnership between the
Government and Bank, the CPS aims at laying out the guiding principles for shaping this
partnership. While it specifies the programs identified for the initial years of the partnership,
sufficient flexibility is built into the CPS to allow for responding to evolving government
priorities and needs.
2

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political Developments
11.
With the election of Mr. José Mujica by an ample margin and the FA’s concurrent
achievement of a majority in both houses of Parliament, the Uruguayan electorate has
endorsed the policy framework inaugurated in 2005. There seems to be a growing consensus
in the country that, after overcoming the challenges resulting from the 2002-03 crisis, the country
now needs to develop a broad national consensus on a development agenda that will put the
country on a path of sustained growth and high standards of human development.
12.
President Mujica has consistently expressed the need to articulate “state policies”
that will stand above the day-to-day political debate. From his first days in office he has
reached out to opposition parties in seeking consensus in critical areas such as education,
infrastructure, environment, security and public sector reform. In successful intra-party
negotiations, Mr. Mujica approved having non-members of the ruling coalition invited to the
board of directors of some of the government-controlled institutions and corporations, a strong
departure from past political practices. He is currently benefitting from strong approval ratings,
leaving him well-positioned to pursue his political initiatives and legislative agenda.
Maintaining this support will depend on his capacity to translate the populace’s strong
expectations into a concrete development agenda that will effectively improve living conditions.
13.
In its first months, the Government announced a number of important new reform
initiatives, most notably a renewed commitment to customs reform, the introduction of a publicprivate partnership framework for investment in the infrastructure sector and, further
consolidation of social protection transfer programs. It also managed to complete some reform
efforts initiated under its predecessor government, such as the May 2010, launch of the Empresa
en el Día initiative, a one-stop-shop for firm creation which constitutes a significant
improvement in Uruguay’s business environment. The Government also changed the
presentation of its budget from an administrative to a program-based format, which will enable
preparing the new 5-year budget in way that better reflects policy objectives.
B. Economic Performance
14.
Efforts to decrease the Uruguayan economy’s vulnerability after its 2001-2002 crisis
resulted in it proving more resilient to the recent global recession than most other emerging
market economies. This reflects a generally solid macroeconomic framework, greater exchange
rate flexibility, rising international reserves, improvements in the banking system, and an
improved investment climate that lessened the impact of the crisis and positioned the country
well to benefit from a recovery.
15.
Prior to the global recession, Uruguay had enjoyed several years of impressive
economic performance. Real GDP growth averaged 6.6 percent from 2004 through 2008 and
largely resulted from a rebound in both domestic demand and exports. Growth reached 8.5
percent in 2008, the highest level in the last 20 years, despite a slowdown in the last quarter of
the year due to the crisis. International trade expanded significantly, though Uruguay’s trade
structure remains highly concentrated, both by product and geography. Export growth averaged
3

13 percent per year in 2004-2008. Unemployment declined to its lowest level in over a decade,
falling from 13.1 percent in 2004 to 7.3 percent in 2009. Although economic activity slowed
with the crisis and the economy contracted in the first quarter of 2009 (-2.9 percent), growth
resumed in the second quarter and reached 2.9 percent for the year. Current projections
anticipate an increase to 5.5 percent in 2010, and -- in subsequent years -- revert back to long-run
growth of 4 percent. Annexes C and D contain more detail on the economic context and debt
sustainability, respectively.
16.
Public debt management has achieved considerable success in terms of reducing
debt and improving its composition. Gross public debt declined from 79.3 percent of GDP in
2005 to 60 percent in 2009. With the increase in foreign reserves, net public debt declined about
20 percentage points of GDP over the same period.1 In terms of debt composition, 78.9 percent
of total public debt is held by private creditors, compared to 55.7 percent by end-2004, reflecting
restored access to market financing. The foreign currency share of total public non-financial
sector debt fell from 76.6 percent in 2004 to 56.7 percent by December 31, 2009. Debt
sustainability continues to pose a risk, albeit one that has been greatly reduced. Medium-term
government borrowing requirements are manageable, despite a concentration of maturities in
20112. A conservative estimate of the gross borrowing requirements for 2011 amounts to
US$2.9 billion or 6.5 percent of GDP. With less than a third of this amount expected from
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) (see Section IV), Uruguay will likely need to seek
substantial additional funding from capital markets.
17.
The banking system consolidation process that occurred in the aftermath of the
2002 crisis and proactive Central Bank intervention and supervision have contributed to
greater financial system stability. Since the outbreak of the international financial crisis, the
financial system has managed to navigate the storm without major difficulties. Prudential
requirements have been improved and banking regulation and supervision has been strengthened.
The accumulation of foreign reserves by the central bank contributed further to the confidence in
Uruguay’s currency, which has been floating since mid-2002.
18.
Despite a significant decrease over recent years, the degree of dollarization remains
high. Since the 2002 crisis the level of dollarization in the financial system has fallen from 83
percent to 55 percent for credits, and from 92 percent to 77 percent for deposits. However, it
remains high, implying a substantial exposure of the banking sector to foreign currency risk from
corporate balance sheet mismatches.
C. Poverty
19.
Uruguay’s long-standing focus on social equity makes advances in the reduction of
poverty and inequality a central policy priority. However, successive economic crises at the
end of the last century weakened the social model, and today poverty, extreme poverty and
inequality levels remain relatively high despite recent improvements. Exacerbated by the 20012002 crisis, both poverty and extreme poverty began a downward trend in 2004, and in 2008
both neared the lows of the previous decade (20.9 percent for poverty, 1.5 percent for extreme
1
2

Public debt-to-GPD ratio is calculated using end-of-the-period exchange rate
A large share of the maturities are owed to local markets and are denominated in indexed local currency units

4

poverty). Uruguay has not suffered the degree of impact experienced by some of its neighbors –
that of having a longer-term trend of increasing poverty as a result of successive crises.
20.
Improvements in equality were more modest. The Gini coefficient declined from its
highest level of 0.44 in 2004 to 0.42 in 2008, a slight improvement from its pre-crisis level (0.43
in 2000). Uruguay ranks high among Latin American and Caribbean Region (LCR) countries in
the provision of basic opportunities for children according to an equality of opportunity principle
across five very basic goods and services for which there were comparable data across countries
circa 1998 and 2008 (access to water, sanitation, electricity, completing sixth grade on time, and
school attendance for children 10-14). As detailed later, implementation of the National Plan for
Social Equity, as well as health and education reforms, is hoped to further improve equity in
these areas.
Figure 1: Long Term Poverty Trends in Uruguay

III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES & GOVERNMENT’S VISION
21.
In its first months in office, the Government has conducted intensive internal and
external consultations for defining its longer-term government program. This consultative
process centered on the preparation of a new five-year budget, which will cover the period up to
the end of the Government’s mandate (2010-2015), and is expected to be presented to parliament
at the end of August 2010. In parallel, the authorities are preparing partnership programs with
their main development partners, most of which coincide with the five-year budget period.
22.
While no formal Government program has been issued, the authorities have laid out
at different occasions their policy priorities. These priorities, which are still in process of
being fine tuned and translated into concrete legal and policy initiatives, are as follows:


The authorities have committed to adhere to the prudent fiscal and economic policies of the
last administration and continue expanding coverage of social program and basic services.



They have identified the following key priorities to deepen reform achievements: (i)
strengthening competitiveness through increased coverage and better quality of infrastructure
and a more conducive business environment; (ii) expanding and improving the impact of
social service delivery, with an emphasis on education; iii) enhancing productivity and
5

income and job generation in the agriculture and food sector; (iv) protecting the environment
and mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change; and v) improving security of
citizens.


They expressed a keen interest in getting more value for money in public programs; and the
Government has launched a number of important cross-cutting reform initiatives. Most
notable in this regard are the introduction of a policy framework for public-private
partnerships in infrastructure investments, and a renewed effort on public sector reform.

23.
The proposed CPS has been designed to support implementation of this agenda. In
intensive consultations with authorities, strong expectations emerged towards Bank support in
facilitating transfer of knowledge and experience in specific reform areas. As the country enters
this new development phase, there will be a need for flexibility and innovation in the definition
of the specific lending and non-lending support from the Bank.
A. Strengthening the Business Climate and Competitiveness
24.
As Uruguay’s macroeconomic growth recovered, the authorities recognized the
importance of improving the environment for private sector development for embarking
on a sustained path of high growth. In particular, they have stressed the need to upgrade
infrastructure services -- critical for both enhancing economic productivity and meeting social
policy objectives. The authorities have also stated their intent to improve other aspects of the
business environment and investment climate, such as regulation, tax policy, licensing and other
procedures.3 The Government hopes to build on substantial progress already made, including the
effective implementation of a new Bankruptcy Law in 2008 which eases the process and reduces
the costs of closing a business, and the introduction of a one-stop-shop for firm creation in May
2010 that simplified procedures for starting a business. In this context, the new Administration
has made enhancing the facilitation of logistics one of the top priorities of its reform agenda.
Finally, there is a strong emphasis on supporting the deepening and extension of capital markets,
so as to enhance access to finance by private sector firms.
25.
Coverage and quality of infrastructure services in Uruguay is high compared to the
region and other middle income countries (MICs); however, to maintain these standards,
further improve efficiency and quality, and extend coverage, there is a need for more
investment, better regulation and enhanced corporate governance. Uruguay has achieved an
impressive degree of access to basic infrastructure (Table 1), and good overall quality and
coverage of its infrastructure. However, one weak link is the railway system, with nearly half of
the 3,000 km national rail network abandoned and cargo volumes on the remainder that are a
fraction of regional standards. The railway system, as in many other countries, has suffered over
the last thirty years due to competition from road freight transport and lack of investment, as well
as several flawed reform attempts which further delayed key investments. The non-functioning
rail system threatens to lead to rapid degradation of the road network (especially given increasing
transport of heavy forestry products) and hence high maintenance and rehabilitation costs.

3

According to the Global Competitiveness Report 2009-2010, the five most problematic factors for doing business
are 1) restrictive labor regulations, 2) inefficient government bureaucracy, 3) tax rates, 4) access to financing, and 5)
inadequate supply of infrastructure.

6

26.
Growing energy challenges are also unfolding as domestic demand is expanding
rapidly. The Government’s energy sector strategy includes: (i) diversifying energy sources to
reduce costs and emissions, as well as increase energy security; (ii) increasing private
participation in new renewable power generation; (iii) increasing regional energy trade; and (vi)
facilitating availability and acquisition of energy efficient goods and services, including efforts
to raise public awareness regarding demand side management interventions. Despite efforts to
increase energy efficiency, demand has increased by over 4 percent per year since 2002. In
addition, there have been repeated instances of drought (2006 and 2008 in particular),
insufficient thermal back-up capacity, and difficulties in importing electricity from neighboring
countries. This has led to high supply costs and fiscal pressure as the Government sought to
avoid passing on cost increases to end users. Supply challenges are compounded by weaknesses
in several sections of the transmission and distribution network. The Government recognizes
these challenges and has reaffirmed its commitment to (i) establishing a new 500 MW
interconnection with Brazil and upgrading the existing transmission and distribution systems; (ii)
increasing energy efficiency; and (iii) creating a larger role for non-traditional renewable
energies (wind, biomass and small-scale hydro in particular) in Uruguay’s energy matrix.
Table 1: Access to Public Services4
Country

Percent of
population
with sewerage
service (2006)

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Uruguay

44
45
78
74
64
53

Percent of
population with
in-house access
to potable water
(2006)
79
79
91
86
90
98

Electricity
(percent of
population
with access
in 2009)
95
97
99
87
97
100

Fixed
telephone
lines per 100
people (2008)
24
21
21
15
19
29

Mobile
telephone
subscribers
per 100
people (2008)
117
78
88
89
70
105

Internet
users per
100 people
(2008)
28
35
33
37
22
40

Road
density (km
per 100
km2 in
2009)
15
21
11
n/a
18
34

GDP per
capita, PPP,
in 2008
14,333
10,296
14,465
8,885
14,495
12,734

27.
The Government of Uruguay (GoU) has set a target of combined public and private
investment of 3-5 percent of GDP for the infrastructure sector, up from less than 2 percent
for public investment over the past years. It was thereby clearly stated that given the limited
fiscal space available, this would require mobilizing significant levels of additional resources for
infrastructure investments outside the budget. In particular, there is a need to promote private
sector investment in infrastructure, which is currently very low in regional comparison. The
Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2009-2010 for Latin America and the Caribbean
identified Uruguay as the most dynamic country during 2009, with significant progress achieved
in infrastructure, macroeconomic stability, higher education and training and technological
readiness.
28.
Given the need for increased private investment, the Government is exploring new
forms of public-private partnerships (PPP) and is preparing a new PPP framework law.
PPP opportunities are being explored in areas such as freight rail transport, additional port
terminals and access channel dredging, as well as in social sector infrastructure provision.
29.
The new Government has shown a strong commitment to complete the business
environment reform agenda initiated by its predecessor. This far-reaching reform program
4

Data from World Development Report (2009), WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program 2006 and International
Telecommunication Union data, 2008.

7

(National System for Registering Companies, SINARE) was initiated several months ago to
streamline and centralize all public procedures related to the life cycle of a private company and
create a single registry for businesses. The official launch in May 2010 of the initiative,
Empresa en el Día, a key dimension of this reform program, was one of the first reform
breakthroughs accomplished by the new Government. It established a web-based, one-stop-shop
for firm creation that significantly reduces the number of steps, time and costs to start a
business.5
30.
The Government has recognized the logistics sector as a promising source of growth
in itself as well as an important dimension of the country’s competitiveness. Over the last
two decades, due to its central location, efficient port services and modern financial system,
Uruguay has emerged as a regional hub for services and logistics. In 2008, exports of services in
this sector have reached US$1 billion. To further exploit this potential, the new Government has
highlighted the importance of reviving the comprehensive customs reform, which has made only
limited progress during the last administration, and indicated a shift in emphasis of the reform to
enhancing the trade facilitation function of customs and moving to a risk-based control system.
31.
Access to financing by Uruguayan firms is also a key constraint to private sector
development, and increasing the sophistication, transparency and stability of the Uruguayan
financial market is a key Government objective.6 Pension funds have accumulated sizeable
assets, yet these are largely channeled to investments in government securities. The authorities
have taken important steps in recent years to strengthen local financial and capital markets, such
as the adoption of a new capital market legal and regulatory framework in 2009, the 2008
bankruptcy law, the 2009 law on payments system and securities settlement, and the 2008
establishment of a deposit insurance institution. The challenge ahead now is to build capacity
and promote market development to facilitate access to financing for the private sector.
B. Improving Social Inclusion & Equity
32.
The Government is committed to consolidating the progress achieved on social
protection and to further improving public health care and education outcomes, with a
special emphasis on providing for the basic needs those living in extreme poverty and
further enhancing social inclusion. In 2000, the Government introduced family allowances for
poor families and has modified the program in the years since to expand coverage, increase
benefits and provide an incentive structure for secondary school students. By 2009, over
500,000 children were receiving benefits from the expanded program. These efforts effectively
included the poorest households into the social protection system—the percentage of households
in the poorest quintile not receiving any income transfer declined from 50 percent in 2003 to
about 20 percent three years later, and more than 85 percent of children living in poverty reside
in households that received family transfers in 2008.

5

Uruguay ranks 114 of 183 countries in the 2010 Doing Business Report, and 132 in the “starting a business”
category.
6
The World Bank Investment Climate Survey (2008) indicates that, on average, enterprises’ retained earnings
account for 82% of fixed assets and 73% of working capital financing, respectively. The report highlights the low
use of bank credit by Uruguayan firms -- it accounts for only 6% of working capital and even less of asset financing.

8

33.
The GoU has committed to continue social protection initiatives while seeking to
increase their impact, placing special emphasis on non-contributive schemes. The authorities
have declared their intention to reach the remaining non-covered families and enhancing the
effectiveness of the family allowances system. They consider the following to be the principal
challenges in this regard: (i) to better identify and incorporate potential beneficiaries not yet
covered; (ii) to more effectively use the transfer programs to advance social policy objectives,
such as by identifying adolescents at risk and providing incentives for them to complete
secondary education; and (iii) to improving the capacity for monitoring and evaluation of
transfer programs, such as by institutionalizing and broadening the scope the centralized
beneficiaries registry (Sistema de Informacion Integrada para el Area Social).
34.
President Mujica has also highlighted the limited decent housing opportunities for
low-income families as a critical social challenge. In response the Government has launched a
housing initiative (Plan Juntos) to expand such opportunities by facilitating access to housing
finance and promoting self-help initiatives for housing construction and rehabilitation.
35.
Education is a strategic priority as part of the GoU’s objectives of raising living
standards and better integrating into the world economy. Uruguay has been implementing
reforms in recent years to improve the equity and quality of the education system. Uruguay has
achieved universal access to early education for 5-year olds, universal primary education (grades
1-6) and early secondary. However, these enrollment rates hide important differences in the
quality of education among students of different socio-economic backgrounds. At the secondary
level, there remain challenges in terms of coverage --net enrollment rates for the lowest quintile
of the student population is 37 percentage points below that for the highest quintile. In addition
to the gaps in coverage at the secondary level, a key challenge for Uruguay is to address the
learning deficits of its students, particularly in terms of cognitive abilities.7 Bank support to the
sector has been focused on the expansion of the full-time school program, the main initiative of
the Government for improving the quality of education for lower-income primary students.
Thus, they propose to continue expanding early childhood education and full time schools, and
enhancing the educational impact of Plan Ceibal (Box 1) at the pre-school and primary school
levels. With regard to education quality at the secondary level, the Government will focus on
strengthening technical education and its linkage to labor market demands, and expanding the
Plan Ceibal to secondary school students.
36.
A comprehensive health sector reform program was approved by Parliament in
2007 – the completion and implementation of these reforms is an important legacy of the
previous administration. While it remains among the top-ranked LCR countries on health
indicators, Uruguay’s relative position has slipped in recent years.8 Fifty-two percent of urban
Uruguayans report having contributory health insurance, and 97 percent report having either
some type of insurance or a regular source of care. The prevalence of infectious diseases is low;
importantly, Uruguay has experienced a transition in its demographic structure over the last
decades, and its epidemiological profile has changed to one of a high prevalence of NonCommunicable Diseases (NCD). The ambitious reform program aims to provide universal
7

In the 2006 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) in language, mathematics and science for 15
year-old students, Uruguay outperformed other LCR countries (excl. Chile), but was below the OECD countries
8
In Uruguay today, life expectancy at birth is 75 years, the infant mortality rate is 10.5 per 1,000 live births, and 99
percent of births are delivered in a hospital or clinic.

9

health insurance coverage and to shift the prevailing heath care model from high cost treatment
of acute illnesses to preventive care for NCDs. As nine percent of GDP is devoted to the health
sector, a key concern for the new administration is to contain the increasing cost of the health
system while putting available resources to more efficient use.
37.
These reforms enjoy a high level of positive social acceptance, and to date insurance
coverage has been expanded to reach an additional 300,000 inhabitants, mainly children of
poor households. The reforms range from regulation and policy stewardship to health
promotion and the improvement of health care, and from effective prevention policies to
epidemiological surveillance and monitoring.
Box 1: Uruguay’s PLAN CEIBAL – One Laptop per Child
Created by Presidential decree in April 2007, Plan Ceibal provides all students and teachers in public
primary schools with a laptop computer and internet connectivity through the schools free of charge. The
main objective was to reduce the digital gap, not only with respect to other countries but also within the
Uruguayan society to foster equitable access to education, information and culture. The Plan is based in
three pillars: (i) equity of access to computers, (ii) learning, and (iii) connectivity. The combination of
these elements is intended to promote equal opportunities; enhance the development of new tools for
learning and teaching; and encourage new relationships in an interconnected society. Policies and
strategy for the program are decided, in close collaboration with the Education Committee, by a dedicated
committee comprised of representatives of relevant government agencies. The Technological Laboratory
of Uruguay (LATU) is in charge of the implementation of the program.
This Plan was accompanied with connectivity infrastructure to primary schools (80 percent of schools
now have at least one access point, covering 95 percent of public primary school students). Equally
impressive is the focus on the non-equipment aspects of the program. These are covered in detail on the
Plan’s webpage (www.ceibal.edu.uy), which includes educational materials for teachers and students and
the Ceibal Channel, which connects classrooms to a TV studio that showcases student-teacher interaction
across the country to facilitate peer learning for teachers. There is also a virtual Campus Ceibal where
teachers can access training on didactic topics and take virtual classes. Finally, the Plan includes an
online formative evaluation mechanism that enables simultaneous evaluations with immediate feedback
on student results.
By 2009 all 380,000 students and teachers in public primary schools had received their computers. The
Plan initially faced resistance from teachers. However, there are recent indicators that this resistance has
been reduced and that the Plan is now widely accepted. The teachers received training and machines
before the deployment to students. Students bring the laptops to class and use the machine during classes;
parents are requesting to be e-trained; and in many localities the schools have become the center of the
community activities. The Plan generated an interesting interaction between teachers, children and parents
with plenty of potential for student learning; however, there has not yet been an evaluation of the Plan’s
impact on student learning or household welfare. Such studies are now underway, and the Bank has been
asked to support the development of an evaluation of the preliminary educational and other social welfare
impacts.
GoU aims to expand the Plan as follows: (i) complement connectivity with digital training for education
personnel; (ii) gradual expansion to public secondary schools; and (iii) using connectivity to increase the
scope and quality of other social services (e.g. remote medical consultations and nutrition checks).

38.
Uruguay’s societal orientation toward inclusion and equity is reflected in a largely
positive picture on gender issues. Education standards are among the highest in the region.
10

Female participation in labor markets is high: the ratio of female to male labor force participation
(0.75) is higher than the average for upper middle income countries (0.69) and the LCR countries
(0.66) for year 2008. In Uruguay 82.5 percent of women are employed by the services sector,
exceeding the norm for upper MICs (71.7 percent) and for the LCR region (74.6 percent).
Women occupy 12.1 percent of seats in the parliament (2008), below the average for both upper
middle income countries (19 percent) and the region (22 percent). In the context of an otherwise
positive reproductive health context – with 99.3 percent of all births being attended by skilled
health staff and a contraceptive rate above the norm for upper MICs – Uruguay’s adolescent
fertility rate is an outlier. While it has shown a steady decline from 66.9 births per 1,000 women
ages 15-19 in 1998, it is still higher (at 60.9 in 2008) than the average for upper middle income
countries (51.5), but lower than the average for LCR countries (72.2).
39.
The Government has recently focused even more attention on gender equity. In its
economic dimension, this would mean to increase female labor force participation in nontraditional sectors, reduce the high concentration of women in informal and domestic jobs, and
decrease gender wage gaps. In its social dimension, key challenges are recognized as the
reduction of gender-based violence and prevention of adolescent pregnancies.
C. Consolidating Agricultural Sector Growth and Bringing its Benefits to Family Farms
40.
The new Administration has stressed the important potential of the agricultural and
food sector, as a source for growth, in general, and for increasing income and job opportunities
in rural areas. This sector continues to be an important and dynamic part of the national
economy, having grown at almost twice the rate of the overall national economy since 2001 and
now representing almost 10 percent of total GDP9.
41.
The Government has recognized as a particular challenge the fact that family farms
are lagging behind the productivity and prosperity gains associated with large-scale
farming. These family farms are much more limited in exploiting opportunities offered by
markets and remain strongly exposed to external price or climate shocks10. For President
Mujica, reversing this trend is critical to retaining more of Uruguay’s younger population in rural
areas, as there has been a trend of young people moving away from family farming.
42.
There is a keen interest in developing a modern and well targeted agricultural and
rural development policy. President Mujica used the term agro-inteligencia to describe his
vision on this. Such a policy aims at consolidating the integrated approach practiced in recent
years, which promoted sustainable use of natural resources while fostering comparative
advantages of the agricultural and food sector. For example, Uruguay distinguished itself as a
reliable exporter of beef to standard-sensitive markets and as the only country in the region to
achieve 100% traceability of cattle. Such policies are critical for remaining highly responsive to
increasingly rigorous international food safety and quality standards and thereby maintaining

9

Agriculture and forestry account for 12% of national employment, given the prevalence of labor-intensive SMEs.
There are about 19,400 larger and medium-sized farmers (~715 ha in size on average) that farm about 85 percent
of Uruguay’s land. Production in these farms is strong linked to export markets and has proven relatively resilient to
shocks (i.e. drought, input prices, market fluctuations). The about 32,700 family farms (~77 ha in size on average)
have been less capable of seizing market opportunities and have been more strongly exposed to these shocks.

10

11

competitiveness. In this context, the Government is interested in expanding the innovative
tracking system, which now enables tracking all cattle in the country, to other livestock.
D. Protecting the Environment and Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change
43.
The new Administration has expressed its commitment to further strengthening
natural resource management and sustainable use of soil and water at the farm level, as
well as mainstreaming biodiversity conservation in production. This is in response to rising
concerns on environmental degradation caused by expansion of agriculture and intensification of
livestock production. More sustainable production is also necessary to protect the country’s
reputation as a “green” producer (Uruguay Natural), a feature valued highly by trading partners.
44.
In addition, Uruguay has recently set clear targets on Climate Change and Pollution
Management issues. Uruguay has been seriously affected by climate change, most notably
through a higher climate variability observed in recent years.11 Repeated and severe inundations
and droughts have had a strong negative impact on rural livelihoods and production. Thus, in
2010, GoU prepared and launched a National Response to Climate Change Plan that includes
strategic guidelines on climate change adaptation and mitigation. Regarding cleaner production
in the industry sector, the GoU has also presented a National Action Plan on Production and
Sustainable Consumption. This plan seeks to identify, coordinate, integrate and potentiate a set
of actions, programs and projects targeted to prevent and minimize environmental impacts from
production and consumption. Both plans offer partnership opportunities to identify and prepare
projects not only with IBRD resources but also with trust funds.
45.
The Government is keen to reduce Uruguay’s net emissions of green house gases
(GHGs), which to a large extent is the result of emissions caused by agriculture and
livestock production. Through the new strategy, the Government intends to put in place an
integrated approach to mitigation and adaptation.
46.
There is also a great need to improve environmental compliance in Uruguay’s
industrial sector. The GoU recently launched a Sustainable Industrial Development program to
help small and medium enterprises improve compliance with environmental regulations through
investments in cleaner production processes. As in many other countries, Small and Micro
Enterprises (SMEs) in Uruguay are typically more polluting than larger companies as they lack
resources, knowledge or incentives to adopt newer, cleaner technologies.
47.
Water resources management in the context of a changing climate is a clear
challenge in Uruguay. This is a key issue in that this resource is affected by climate variability
and change, and it relates to hydropower generation (hence impact on energy for industrial and
other activities). The country has a new water law which promotes the creation of a water
council (in the Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente - DINAMA) and promotes integrated
water resources management and basin planning. Since the end of the last century, rainfall in
Uruguay has shown an increase, together with temperature and sea level. Current projections
confirm this increasing tendency. Finally, the occurrence and severity of floods has been
increasing, with large events occurring annually.
11

Climate change models for Uruguay point to a moderate increase in temperatures combined with greater volumes,
intensity and variability of rainfall over the next several decades.

12

E. Reforming the Public Sector
48.
In his inauguration speech, President Mujica announced that his Government would
undertake a far-reaching public sector reform (Reforma del Estado). Compared to other LAC
countries, Uruguay ranks reasonably well in governance and transparency indicators. 12 However,
there are several aspects in which its public sector management system still lags behind standards
of practice in countries in similar stages of development. The new Government has advanced
swiftly on several ongoing reform processes in the public sector, such as deepening the egovernment agenda, strengthening tax administration, and improving targeting and effectiveness
of social protection programs. At the same time, consultations are beginning on how best to tackle
those reform aspects that have not yet progressed, such as enhancing customs administration,
modernizing public procurement to improve quality and reduce costs while strengthening
transparency and competition13; and improving the national statistical system.
49.
The exact scope, content, focus and sequence of public sector reform under the new
administration is yet to be laid out in detail. There was an initial announcement that this
reform will contain four pillars: human resource management, administrative restructuring,
improved management of public resources and enhanced use of technology in public sector
management. Two key objectives have clearly emerged:


As improving quality and impact of public spending is at the heart of the Government’s
priorities, there is a strong emphasis on enhancing capacity on budget formulation and
evaluation of results of public programs and budgetary spending. For the new 5-year budget,
the Government has moved from an administrative to a program-based budget presentation,
which sets the basis for linking output indicators to budgetary allocations. This should
facilitate evaluation of public programs and allow for better informed budget decisions.



The Government recently tabled for discussion sweeping changes to the civil service
legislation designed to professionalize and streamline the civil service by harmonizing civil
service careers across different government units, simplifying and unifying the process of
attaining positions, clarifying labor relations between civil servants and the State, and
modifying the legal status of public servants and political appointees.14 Preliminary reactions
indicate that the political opposition is in favor of the announced changes, but the public
sector unions are strongly opposed.
IV. URUGUAY – WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP

A. Performance under the 2005-2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, Report No.
31804-UY) and Evolution of the Partnership

12

Chile and Uruguay tied as top-ranking Latin-American countries in Transparency International’s 2009 Corruption
Perceptions Index (25th out of 180 countries).
13
Uruguay is unique in the Latin American and Caribbean region for its absence of an agency responsible for public
sector procurement that can issue executive norms, promote automation, monitor efficiency, train public officials in
charge of procurement, oversee compliance, handle disputes and, in general, act as the lead government agency.
14
Proposals are detailed in Los Ejes e Instrumentos de Fortalecimiento Institucional del Estado discussed and
approved at the Consejo de Ministros on July 16, 2010.

13

50.
The Vázquez Administration ended up forming a close and productive partnership
with the Bank in a number of key areas. The preparation of 2005-2010 CAS through
extensive consultations and in response to demands from the authorities laid the ground for this
partnership. There were several other key factors that helped strengthen relations between the
Bank and the Government and facilitated successful CAS implementation. First, the opening of
a Bank office in Montevideo in 2005 enabled a more swift and effective response to local needs
and a more effective engagement with the main segments of Uruguay’s society. Second, the
Bank was able to customize its financing to specific needs of the Government—the disbursement
of a Development Policy Loan (DPL) in local currency stood out in this regard, as described
below. Third, the Bank showed flexibility in adapting its lending and non-lending program to
align it with the Government’s emerging prioritization of critical reforms and initiatives, and
provided timely and effective knowledge transfer in this regard.
51.
This positive evolution of the relationship in recent years provides a great
opportunity for the World Bank Group (WBG) to contribute to Uruguay’s ambition to
take the country to the next level of development. It will thereby be critical to continue to
respond timely and effectively to the country’s needs. The new Government’s keen interest in
further enhancing its partnership with the Bank has emerged consistently during CPS
consultation process (Box 2).
Box 2: Country Partnership Strategy Consultations
The consultations on the CPS (as summarized in Annex I) commenced in February 2010, before the
inauguration of the new administration, when discussions were held on a set of Policy Notes between the
Bank and the newly elected authorities. These discussions were followed by presentations to the main
opposition parties. These discussions were attended throughout by the President-elect, Mr. José Mujica,
the elected Vice-president, Mr. Danilo Astori, and future cabinet members. These interactions were
appreciated both by the Government and the opposition, and enabled the Bank to gauge the relatively
high degree of consensus that exists today in Uruguay on the policy agenda and development challenges.
A consultation on the CPS with broad stakeholder participation was held in August, and the Government
is leveraging the opportunity provided by CPS preparation to plan an extended series of stakeholder
consultations that will not end with the finalization of the CPS but rather continue into implementation.
In April 2010, the dialog on the main priorities for the collaboration between the Bank and Uruguay over
the next five years was deepened. The Bank Vice President met with President Mujica, Vice-president
Astori, the economic and social cabinet, as well as with representatives from the legislative branches,
private sector and civil society. These discussions generally confirmed as valid the proposed orientations
of the DPL and, more generally, the forthcoming Country Partnership Strategy. In May 2010,
consultations on the DPL, specifically, and the framework of the strategy, more generally, were held.
Another round of more detailed discussions on the results matrix and the program under the CPS was held
July 1, 2010.
Finally, systematic stakeholder consultations were kicked off in early August, 2010, and will continue
through the first year of CPS implementation. Given the multi-sectoral objectives of both the CPS and
the Government’s own development strategy, this series of consultations is generally organized around
the following themes rather than individual ministries or sectors: (i) Modernization of the Public Sector;
(ii) Strengthening Competitiveness and the Business Climate; (iii) Strengthening the Infrastructure Sector;
(iv) Environmental Protection and Climate Change Adaptation; and (v) Social Protection and Equity. The
outcome of the consultations is summarized in Annex I.

14

52.
The 2005-2010 CAS was structured around the following pillars: (i) reducing
vulnerability; (ii) sustaining growth; and (iii) improving living standards. The March 2007
CAS Progress Report (Report No. 42789-UY) confirmed the general thrust of the 2005 CAS and
concluded that the Bank program had achieved substantial success over the previous two years.
A central focus of the assistance was provided through a programmatic series of DPLs
supporting the consolidation of macroeconomic reforms and the advancement of critical
structural reforms. This was complemented by a comprehensive renovation of the investment
project portfolio from 2005-2007. This resulted in gradual yet marked shift in the investment
lending portfolio towards the support of more complex and reform-oriented operations, in areas
like tax reform, financial sector and capital market development, health and education,
innovation, infrastructure and public services, natural resources management and state
modernization.
53.
The attached CAS Completion Report (CASCR) concludes that the 2005 CAS was
broadly successful in meeting its targets. For example, the following achievements illustrate
how the Bank was able to respond in timely fashion to specific demands from the country:


The First Programmatic Reform Implementation Development Policy Loan, approved in
May 2007 and disbursed in local currency, marked the first time the World Bank issued a
local currency bond for the purpose of a back-to-back disbursement of a specific loan. It was
also innovative in that the Bank became the first foreign issuer to launch a public bond in
Uruguayan pesos, lowering the cost of financing and increasing diversification of public debt
and pension funds’ portfolios.



In agriculture, the Bank was instrumental in supporting GoU efforts to eradicate foot-andmouth disease and to introduce individual traceability of cattle. This led to a major
breakthrough in the prevention of animal diseases, and significantly enhanced Uruguay’s
image as a regional leader and reliable exporter of beef products to standard-sensitive
markets. Uruguay is the only country in the region to achieve 100% traceability of cattle.

54.
The CASCR finds that the flexible design of the CAS and the programmatic nature
of development policy lending allowed the Bank to react quickly during the global financial
crisis and to adjust its support to provide Uruguay the needed contingent financing.
Moreover, the 2008 CAS Progress Report envisaged a plan for dealing with global financial
turbulence. By contrast, the 2000 CAS proposed a more rigid program, strictly linked to country
performance and, when the Argentine crisis arose in 2002, the Bank had to resort to Special
SALs to provide short-term relief, at the expense of creating medium-term payment problems.
55.
Another important lesson learned was that the consensual nature of Uruguay’s
policy making environment affects the pace of implementation of key reforms. In Uruguay
reforms can take a long time to mature, but they tend to be sustained once implemented. The
programmatic structure of the program under the 2005 CAS, providing support for key reforms
through the DPL series, was in retrospect the right one, allowing time for reforms to come to
fruition, while focusing largely on implementation of measures for which the Government had
already obtained approval. The CASCR also highlights the need for the Bank to mobilize staff
with the requisite skills. In the Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan (IBTAL)

15

customs component, which was not implemented for broader political reasons, the Bank’s lack
of in-house expertise slowed implementation.
B. The Ongoing Portfolio
Figure 2
56.
The Bank is supporting a
diversified portfolio of nine
investment projects in Uruguay,
including
two
Global
Environmental Facility (GEF)
grants totaling US$257.2 million.
Institutional strengthening is a cross
cutting dimension of the investment
portfolio, accounting for an average
of 30 percent of each loan. The
portfolio is supports a number of
critical
government
reform
initiatives, such as the following:






Uruguay Investment Portfolio Diversification
Health
U$S 25.3M
9%

Insitutional
Strengthening U$S
28.1M (*)
9%

Energy
US$ 6.87M
2%
Education
U$S 71.9M
24%

Water
U$S 34M
11%

Innovation
U$S 26M
9%

Agriculture &
Environment
U$S 37M
12%

Transport
U$S 70M
24%

(*) Includes stated modernization under the Institutional Strengthening TAL (USD12.1M) and modernization of

Strengthening the national
the water company under the OSE System Modernization and Rehabilitation Project (US$16 M)
innovation system (Promoting
Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness Project),
Expanding the full time school model to increase equity in the provision of preschool and
primary education (Third Basic Education Quality Improvement Project),
Strengthening health delivery services and health policy framework for non communicable
diseases (NCD), including implementation of a pilot program (Previniendo) to enhance
NCDs control and risk factor prevention, (Non Communicable Diseases Prevention Project),
Promoting the adoption of economically and environmentally viable, integrated agriculture
and livestock production systems (Integrated Natural Resource and Biodiversity
Management Project),
Facilitating investments in improving energy use by creating an enabling policy and
regulatory environment (Energy Efficiency Project),

57.
In general, portfolio performance remains positive, both in terms of achievement of
development objectives as well as implementation progress. There are currently no projects
at risk in the portfolio. The disbursement ratio for Uruguay in FY10 was a solid 30.2 percent.
However, the most recent portfolio review reveals that there is some lag in disbursements which
can be attributed to the type of operations that the portfolio is supporting (institutional
strengthening, technical assistance) and the fact that Uruguay has not yet explored faster
disbursement instruments and modalities in support of these types of projects such as SectorWide Approaches (SWAPs), results-based disbursements components. It is expected that under
the Government and the Bank will explore using such instruments under the new CPS.

16

C. The WBG’s Indicative Program (2010-2015)
Strategic Approach & CPS Pillars
58.
The overall objective of the WBG’s lending and non-lending program for the new
CPS period is to help Uruguay consolidate economic reforms, and enhance social outcomes.
First of all, this means to build on the positive experience of collaboration between the country
and the Bank during the previous CAS period. But the new CPS will be even more tailored to the
specific needs of this advanced middle-income country, in order to contribute effectively to
implementing Uruguay’s reform agenda.
59.
In this sense, the new Government has shown a keen interest in using the Bank’s
support in a strategic way, shifting to a partnership that adds important value to the
Government’s own program and that stresses the role of knowledge and know-how
transfers. In line with this, the government counterparts expressed a desire to engage in a new
programmatic DPL series and move to investment operations that have expanded institutional
reform content and focus increasingly on results. It has also sought a more demand-based
system for identifying and delivering of analytical and technical assistance.
60.
The main strategic orientation of the CPS is aligned with the Government’s
priorities, as presented in the previous chapter. The 2010-2015 CPS focuses on the following
four pillars: (i) Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & Strengthening Public Sector
Administration; (ii) Competitiveness & Infrastructure; (iii) Agriculture, Climate Change, and
Environment; and (iv) Increasing Social Inclusion & Equity.
61.
Reflecting the lessons of the CASCR, the strategy will be flexible to accommodate
the Government’s need to adjust course in the event of unforeseen domestic or external
developments. Indicative support for this strategy is proposed to include a series of two DPLs
totaling US$200 million (late 2010 and late 2011), investment lending totaling approximately
US$500 million subject to IBRD’s overall lending capacity, and a well-focused and demanddriven AAA program. This lending mix might be adjusted to prepare for or respond to domestic
or external shocks. This being said, in the likely event of a further strengthening of Uruguay’s
economy and position in international financial markets, and if the Government maintains its
keen interest in a more strategic and systematic orientation on knowledge services, there might
be a gradually declining emphasis on lending in the medium-term.
62.
Beyond the need for continuity in existing areas of support to maintain momentum
of reforms, the Government’s guiding principles for selecting new lending activities is
“innovation” and focus on results. The Government intends to use Bank resources for adding
important value to interventions with strong expected development impact, contributing best
practice technical know-how in the respective areas and helping build strong institutional
capacity, in particular in reform program design and managing for results. As a consequence, the
Government is interested in introducing results-based and sector-wide lending instruments for
new operations like the planned transport loan and possibly for a new loan in the social sectors.
This is expected to consolidate the Bank’s role in most areas where it is already active, such as
education, health or innovation, and at the same to lead to a more in-depth involvement in new
areas like public-private partnerships in infrastructure development, public sector reforms and
17

climate change mitigation and adaption. Another important criterion for selecting new lending
operations is to realize synergies and avoid duplication with other externally-supported
interventions by closely coordinating with other partners, most notably the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB). Table 2 provides the agreed lending program for the first two years
of the CPS, while providing indicative allocations for the reminder of the CPS period.
Table 2: Indicative lending program for 2010-2015
Lending (US$ millions) by Calendar Year
2012-2015
2010
2011
Loan amts TBD
100
100
120
380
40

Loans
Development Policy Lending (DPL)
Investment Lending
Improvement of Primary Education
Integrated Agricultural Devt. & Natural
Resources Management
Transport Infrastructure Modernization
Innovation and Competitiveness
Drinking Water Systems (OSE)
Health Sector Support
IBTAL (additional financing)
Output-based Loan for Social Sectors and
Human Opportunities
Sustainable Industrial Development
Energy Sector Strengthening
Energy Efficiency
TOTAL

40

40

100

220

380

63.
The proposed strategy places a heightened emphasis on supporting Uruguay in
accessing international expertise and best practices, as well as sharing its own experiences
with other countries through South-South exchanges. Toward this end, the Government and
the Bank agreed to introduce an innovative modality for analytical services, knowledge transfers
and technical assistance based on the successful approach implemented as part of the Bank’s
partnership strategy with Chile. This modality – a joint analytical and technical assistance
program – aims at enabling the Bank to tailor its non-lending program to the needs expressed by
the Government and to respond swiftly and flexibly to demands. This joint program will be
based on a framework agreement that clarifies the objectives, governance structure, and shared
financing of the program. Rooted fully in demand from the Government, an annual work
program would be agreed between the Government and the Bank and define the main knowledge
products and services to be elaborated in the following year, including a detailed timetable and
cost estimates. An indicative menu of AAA for the first two years of the CPS is included in
Table 3.

18

Pillar 1:
Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & Strengthening Public Sector
Administration
64.
While Uruguay’s resilience in the face of the global financial crisis demonstrates the
progress made in mitigating macroeconomic vulnerabilities, this remains a key priority for
the Government and an area in which continued Bank collaboration is desired. The
Government and Bank concur that collaboration under the first two pillars of the previous CAS –
reducing vulnerability and sustaining growth – provide a successful basis on which to build. The
CPS would have a particular focus on supporting Government efforts to return to the positive
trend on improving fiscal results from before to the 2009 crisis, and to reduce the weight of
external debt as well as their share denominated in foreign currency.
Table 3: AAA program for FY11 and FY12
Activity
Reform of housing policies
Strengthening of Plan Ceibal by
means of international best practices
Social Policy Assessment
Review of public expenditures on
the social sectors
Monitoring social policy results
with the Human Opportunity Index
Health reform
Mitigation and adaptation to climate
change effects in the rural sector
Further strengthening business and
investment climate
South-South exchanges

Description
Consider policy options to increase the supply of social housing
(focused on creating incentives for self-initiative)
Support exchange of experiences with similar programs in other
countries, and study pending challenges.
Analyze the impact of social policies, in particular family transfer
programs on social indicators.
Evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditure,
particularly in the social sectors and key social programs.
Develop an internal mechanism to monitor and evaluate the impact
of social policies on human opportunities (NLTA)
Complete analytic work and technical assistance (NLTA)
Diagnosis of challenges and identification of adaptation and
mitigation of climate change effects in the rural sector
Assessment of reform priorities for further strengthening the legal,
regulatory and administrative framework for business and
investment activities.
Exchange of experiences and knowledge with other developing
countries, with initial focus on strengthening institutional capacity
on economic, debt and public finance management.

Note: The exact content of the AAA and details like method of cooperation—study, knowledge transfer or technical
assistance—will be defined jointly in a formal agreement to be signed on this new joint AAA program modality.

65.
These outcomes are reflected in a series of two DPLs, the first of which will be
presented to the Board at the same time as the CPS. (Box 3) The World Bank remains
committed to providing the GoU with competitive and flexible local currency financing, subject
to market conditions and consistent with the GoU’s own financial objectives. In addition, as part
of its dialogue with Bank's authorities, the Ministry of Economy and Finance has expressed
demand for Bank support to enhance international cooperation and knowledge transfer with other
countries’ Ministries of Finance, including those from the region.

19

66.
Uruguay has been a leading country in LCR in utilizing the IBRD Treasury
Department’s banking products and services in order to manage some of its balance sheet
risks, particularly interest rate and currency risks. This partnership will likely strengthen
over the next CPS period as further financing in Uruguayan Pesos is expected to be executed and
as ongoing discussions on broader hedging strategies and instruments (energy, weather, etc) are
completed.
67.
Reform of the public sector with a view toward better value for public expenditures
is a strong theme of President Mujica’s agenda and an area of key Bank support. The Bank
has been helping the Uruguay Government with its state modernization agenda through the
IBTAL including by financing technical exchanges between the New Zealand and Uruguay
authorities in various aspects of public sector management. Through the ongoing IBTAL loan
and a potential Additional Financing for the same, the Bank will continue to provide support for
the adoption and implementation of a program-based budget, as well as for the monitoring and
evaluation efforts to continually strengthen the budget process. In addition, the Bank program
will likely support the adoption of a new computerized system of budget management and
improvements in the statistical system. Since the public sector reform agenda is still to be
defined in detail and the IADB is also involved in several reforms, other areas for Bank support
will be defined later, but these may include: strengthening of controls in tax collection agencies,
support for an agency responsible for regulating public sector procurement and the reforms to the
civil service.
Box 3: The First Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion
Development Policy Loan (DPL)
The proposed DPL supports the implementation of reforms which have been identified by the new
Government as priorities for obtaining Bank support. The DPL series supports implementation of the
Government’s agenda in three main areas: (i) public sector management, (ii) competitiveness, and (iii)
social inclusion. In particular, the main development objectives of the new loan are to strengthen the
efficiency of the public administration while promoting macroeconomic stability, improve
competitiveness through measures such as, facilitating trade, strengthening the business environment and
development of financial markets. It also seeks to improve social inclusion through measures targeted at
enhancing the equity and efficiency of health, education and social protection systems.
The program is expected to consist of a series of two loans, each amounting to US$100 million. The
approach taken by this loan series reflects the flexibility requested by the Government to best address
evolving challenges. The proposed loan also targets the consolidation of reforms supported by the
Programmatic Reform Implementation Development Policy Loan (PRIDPL) series (approved May 2007),
and bolsters Government efforts in other areas were not supported by the PRIDPL series. Specifically,
the loan recognizes recent achievements in public sector management, business climate and social service
delivery (prior actions for DPL-I). The indicative triggers for DPL-II reflect broad policy areas of support,
anchoring the new Government’s reform agenda through 2011.

Pillar 2: Improving Competitiveness & Infrastructure
68.
The Government seeks to strengthen competitiveness through increased coverage
and better quality of infrastructure and establishment of a more conducive business
environment. Beyond the strong demand for Bank expertise in the area of public-private
partnerships, with PPIAF-financed activities already launched, sector dialogue has shaped a
20

proposed infrastructure program under the CPS to achieve: (i) improvement of the condition of
key land transport infrastructure; (ii) efficiency improvements in Obras Sanitarias del Estado
(OSE) to free up resources for additional investment; (iii) improvements in the quality of the
electricity supply by expanding, upgrading and rehabilitating the transmission and distribution
networks; (iv) energy efficiency improvements to slow the growth of electricity demand; and (v)
improved international trade logistics support. Among the means of support are an ongoing
Energy Efficiency GEF Grant, an ongoing OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation
project, a proposed Transport Infrastructure Modernization Loan, and possibly an Energy Sector
Strengthening Project (see Table 2). Infrastructure and SME financing are prime candidates not
only for local currency financing, but also for customized financial solutions conducive to
reducing financial vulnerabilities and providing access to competitively priced, flexible products
with long maturities. IBRD and IFC have a lengthy track record in such types of operations
globally, which could be applied to the specific case and needs of Uruguay.
69.
The WBG’s considerable experience in providing assistance on financial markets
and business climate-related challenges throughout the region could prove very helpful in
further strengthening the business climate in Uruguay. The Bank has already deployed a
series of lending and non-lending instruments in Uruguay to tackle these fronts and preliminary
feedback from these activities is promising. Thus, a range of WBG support is proposed to
further strengthen the business climate in the following ways: (i) promotion of the new one-stop
shop for firm creation; (ii) support GoU actions to facilitate increased availability of credit to the
private sector; (iii) support GoU efforts to increase market capitalization, and (iv) strengthen
GoU actions to improve infrastructure. In addition to the DPLs, the achievement of these
outcomes will be supported through AAA on competitiveness and capital markets, an investment
climate assessment, and support from the IFC. Dialogue with the Government includes the
potential for IFC to provide longer-term dollar financing to the private sector through onlending
facilities channeled through local commercial bank partners.
Pillar 3: Protecting the Environment, Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change, and
Strengthening Family Agriculture
70.
The WBG is well positioned -- in terms of the financing options, knowledge and
expertise at its disposal – to support the implementation of the National Response to
Climate Change Plan and the National Action Plan on Production and Sustainable
Consumption. Uruguay's profile of carbon emissions is unique as a net greenhouse gas emitter
where 80 percent of emissions come from the agriculture sector. The National Response, which
frames climate change adaptation and mitigation as an integrated agenda, seeks to integrate rural
producers into integrated water management as an adaptation measure, and improved
management of water resources at the farm level would be achieved as part of the proposed
Integrated Agricultural Development and Natural Resources Management Project. Trust fund
resources, such as the WBI Carbon Finance Assist program, could also address potential future
demand in the sector. In this context, a Low-Carbon Growth Study for Uruguay could also target
other key sectors determined in partnership with the Government and in consultation with other
stakeholders.
71.
In addition, the recently-completed fifth GEF replenishment offers a platform to
identify and prepare new GEF blended operations with IBRD projects in the focal area of
21

climate change as well as in others (biodiversity, international waters, land degradation and
persistent organic pollutants). Finally, IFC is well suited to support the Government’s
commitment to renewably energies, given its experience in developing renewable energy sources
in the region, especially in wind, hydro, and bio-fuels. IFC is also actively promoting energy
efficiency financing packages to current and existing clients.
72.
Bank assistance (complemented by GEF and Climate Change (CC)-related financial
instruments) would also support a comprehensive strategy to address climate change
adaptation and mitigation in the agricultural sector. In addition to broadly supporting efforts
to achieve growth in the agriculture sector, the planned integrated and inclusive agricultural
development project – informed by the Family Agricultural Development AAA (Report No.
55550-UY) prepared in FY10 –is expected to support the adoption of new technologies and
sustainable agro-environmental production practices. With regard to agricultural risk insurance,
the GoU has expressed interest in a risk financing instrument to reduce the vulnerability of
farmers to shocks. In this sense, the “Insurance to the Poor” would allow the country to transfer
the risk of natural disasters affecting agriculture production to the insurance markets. This
would contribute greatly to the efforts to achieve stable growth and improved competitiveness in
the Uruguayan agricultural sector.
73.
The Bank is also prepared to support Uruguay in addressing its water resource
management challenges. Through the DPL, Water resources management is supported at the
farm level in rural areas. In addition, there is an opportunity of partnership with the Government
in the development of a National Water Resources Management Plan that would provide a
strategic context to address some of the key issues in the sector – perhaps through a NonLending Technical Assistance (NLTA). This plan would address the institutional set up and
strengthening for water resources management, and Bank expertise could provide substantial
support to the implementation of the new Water Law given that the law incorporates concepts
new to the country. The resources management plan could also address impact mitigation from
flooding and disaster exposure.
74.
Forestry is a primary subsector for development in Uruguay, thus presenting the
challenge of ensuring sustainability biodiversity-friendly practices. The development of a
“landscape approach” to the management of expanding plantation forests could offer multiple
benefits, including encouragement to mainstream biodiversity-friendly practices. In line with
this option, the GEF offers grant resources to finance projects focused on the conservation of
biodiversity and environmental services in productive landscapes. In addition to this, Trust Fund
resources could be mobilized to finance a “Strategic Environmental Assessments” at
departmental and national level to support the landscape approach.
75.
The Bank will help finance the conversion of firms (especially SMEs) in different
industrial sectors to cleaner production processes. This support will be provided through an
IBRD Sustainable Industrial Development Project. This operation would also strengthen the
institutional capacity to enforce existing regulations both at national and sector levels. In terms
of the current institutional capacity to enforce compliance, the GoU has implemented some
measures, including the control of regulations compliance. However, these efforts have been
isolated. In this context, DINAMA, together with other ministries in relevant sectors, has agreed
to coordinate efforts and to work together in the design of new and comprehensive instruments to
22

facilitate supervision and control of cleaner production processes which would be part of the new
IBRD operation.
Pillar 4: Increasing Inclusion & Social Equity
76.
The experience of the World Bank in Uruguay and other countries in the region
positions it well to respond to the Government’s demand for technical assistance in the
implementation of the National Plan for Social Equity. Several interventions are proposed to
support the aforementioned government objectives in the social sectors. The proposed CPS will
support government efforts to increase access and impact of social protection policies by
expanding coverage of social protection programs to provide income protection for all vulnerable
populations and linking income protection with human capital promotion effectively.
Instruments for influencing these outcomes will include the DPL I, the proposed Social Sector
investment loan, the additional financing for IBTAL, a public expenditure review for the social
sectors, and a social policy assessment.
77.
The Bank will support the Government’s efforts to increase equity, quality and
efficiency in the provision of preschool and primary education, as well as activities under
the Family Allowances program to increase secondary school enrollment among that
program’s beneficiaries. Support will be provided through the Third Basic Education Quality
Improvement project, the Promoting Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness Project, a proposed
new Social Sector operation, and AAA on the One-Laptop-Per-Child initiative. In addition, IFC
hopes to finance private sector not-for-profit and for-profit tertiary education institutions in
Uruguay that offer technical training and vocational courses aimed at low-income groups.
78.
The Bank is already strongly engaged in supporting the Government’s health sector
reforms and will continue to support these efforts to extend health insurance universally to
the population and strengthen preventive treatment for NCDs. Instruments of support
include the Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention Project, the proposed new Social Sector
operation, and the ongoing NLTA on supporting reform implementation.
79.
The Bank recently approved an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant to
Promote Equitable Access of Society to the Legal System, the first Bank grant to be
executed by the Uruguayan Parliament, to raise awareness among vulnerable groups of the
benefits and rights established in select social legislation. It will allow Parliamentarians to
monitor the social impacts of selected laws, develop tools to incorporate a social analysis when
reviewing draft legislation, and, in cooperation with agencies of the Executive, develop
institutional capacity to better implement such laws.
80.
The Bank embraces the Government’s increased emphasis on further enhancing
gender equity in the country. The Government has recently given more attention to the issue
of gender based violence, supported by an IDF grant by the Bank, and the newly approved IDF
grant to Promote Equitable Access to the Legal System includes vulnerable women as significant
target beneficiaries. Efforts to reduce the adolescent fertility rate will be strengthened by support
through the Bank’s portfolio of health activities, including a newly-launched regional study. .

23

Energy Efficiency GEF (on-going)

Energy Sector Strengthening project
(LEN)

OSE Modernization and Systems
Rehabilitation project (LEN)

Transport Infrastructure
Modernization Loan (LEN)

IFC - Financial Support

AAA: Study on Competitiveness;
Capital Markets Policy Note;

IBTAL Project (ongoing)

CFAA/PEFA (AAA)

Conversion of industrial firms to
cleaner production processes.

Reduced loss of productivity due to
droughts

Implementation of the National Plan
for Response to Climate Change in
the agricultural sector

Continued
improvements
in
veterinary and food safety standards,
sustainable production practices,
adoption of new technologies and
capacity building

IFC Support

Carbon Finance, Carbon Partnership
Facility (potential)

24

IDF grant to Promote Equitable
Access of Society to the Legal System

Non Communicable Diseases
Prevention Project (ongoing)

Health Reform Assessment (AAA)

Social Sectors PER (AAA)

AAA on Social Housing Policy

HOI Index Monitoring

DPL I (2010) and DPL II (2011)

Conditionality of Family Allowances
on continued secondary education
successful re-integrates significant
number of youth into secondary
education system

Improved access, equity, and quality
in education attainment

Increased share of NCDs diagnosed
and under follow-up primary care

Expanded access to quality health
protection.

Increased access and impact of social
protection policies

Pillar IV:
Social Inclusion & Equity

OSE project (LEN)

Sustainable Industrial Devt (LEN)

AAA on Climate Change and
Agriculture

Integrated Agr, Devt. (LEN)

GEF Biodiversity Conservation

Integrated Agricultural Development
and Natural Resources Management
Proj.

Selected Activities in support of these objectives

Efficiency improvements in OSE.

Improvement of the condition of key
land transport infrastructure,

Depositario Central de Valores
operational

Higher market capitalization

Substantial increase in credit to the
private sector

One-stop shop for most business
related-procedures in operation.

DPL I (2010) and DPL II (2011)

IBTAL (AF) (LEN)

Pillar III:
Agriculture, Climate Change &
Environment

Outcomes the Bank Program expects to influence

Pillar II:
Competitiveness & Infrastructure

DPL I (2010) and DPL II (2011)

Public procurement is made more
efficient and transparent.

Enhanced Integrated Financial
Information System (SIIF) in place.

Strengthened institutional capacity in
evaluating budgetary results.

Further reduce the share of foreign
currency-denominated debt.

Bring public debt ratios down to more
sustainable levels.

Control expenditure growth to ensure
no further deterioration of fiscal
balances.

Pillar I:
Reducing Macroeconomic
Vulnerability & Strengthening
Public Sector Administration

Table 4: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities

Fiduciary Products
81.
Uruguay’s strong capacity and positive track record on governance provides a
sound fiduciary environment for implementing the proposed Bank program. As part of the
continuing dialogue with the authorities and to update our own knowledge as a basis for
technical assistance, the Bank proposes to include core fiduciary work in the CPSDuring the
first half of the CPS period, an update of the Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA) could be carried out using the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
(PEFA) methodology. The last CFAA was published in June 2005 (Report No.32851-UY).
Given the priority the administration places on its public sector reform program, this exercise
presents an opportunity for the Bank to provide technical advice and support on Public Financial
Management (PFM) reforms that are part of the government agenda. The PEFA study will
assess the status of country's Public Financial Management systems/ reforms against 28 highlevel of PFM indicators. This study could serve as an objective baseline for the impact of the
PFM reforms that the Government is initiating and also serve to measure their progress.
82.
It is also proposed to launch a new Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR) within the first year of the CPS period. The last CPAR was conducted by the Bank
in 1999 and the report delivered to the Government in 2000. At that time, IADB, UNDP and
relevant government agencies provided valuable input on the local procurement environment,
and the Bank will actively seek collaboration with other partners in the execution of the updated
CPAR as well. A primary objective of the dialogue will focus on the attainment of consensus for
the conducting of an assessment of the public procurement system using the indicators-based
OECD/DAC tool.
IFC Activities
83.
Summarizing the initiatives mentioned above, IFC expects to focus on four main
areas during the CAS period: (i) financial services, (ii) agribusiness, (iii) competiveness,
and (iv) education. In the financial sector, IFC aims to support banks and non-banks that focus
on the mid-market corporate and low-income retail banking segments. IFC is looking at
opportunities to support local banks with onlending facilities for agribusiness SMEs and with
trade finance lines for exporters. IFC has financed microfinance ventures elsewhere in Latin
America and thereby managed to reach groups that had previously been unable to obtain credit
on acceptable terms. IFC is in talks with a potential client in this sector. It intends to help
develop Uruguay’s small microfinance sector through investments with microfinance
institutions, on a selective basis. The Corporation also aims to support housing finance projects
that can help expand this incipient market. IFC has also gathered considerable experience in
supporting the development of capital markets in other Latin American economies.
84.
Agribusiness is an important market for the IFC given its significance to the
Uruguayan economy. Here the focus is likely to remain on export-oriented enterprises with
deep linkages to farms. IFC will continue supporting projects that integrate SMEs into corporate
supply chains. IFC may also finance more projects in Uruguay’s expanding forestry industry,
especially where they provide for participation of small businesses in their supply chains. All
three of IFC’s active investment projects in Uruguay are in export-oriented agribusiness
25

companies. These include a citrus producer (Milagro), a dairy cooperative (Conaprole), and a
large paper pulp producer (UPM, formerly Botnia15).
85.
IFC also aims to reinforce the county’s competitiveness by financing infrastructure
projects, especially those in the renewable energy, logistics, and water sectors once
appropriate regulations are in place. The ongoing legal and regulatory reforms related to
promotion of public-private partnerships and expanded scope of investments by institutional
investors in the local capital market could open further opportunities for IFC involvement in this
area. The IFC also hopes to support private sector education institutions, particularly those that
offer technical and vocational courses for low income students to improve their employability,
raise incomes, and improve productivity.
D. Development Partners
86.
As during the 2005-2010 CAS period, the Bank will collaborate closely with the
Government and other development partners to ensure a synergistic complementarity with
their programs. Contributions of key development partners are detailed below.
87.
The IADB played an important role helping Uruguay to solidify its recovery after
the 2002 crisis. The IADB’s Country Paper (2005-2009) defined a target scenario of US$ 1.2
billion in approvals over the five-year period, with actual credits for the period exceeding US$
1.6 billion to support a portfolio concentrated on Reform/Modernization of the State (38.4%),
Sanitation (22.6%) and Transportation (19.4%). The new Country Strategy with Uruguay
(2010-2014) is currently under preparation and will be presented to the Board of Directors by
October 2010. Lending under the new program is expected to approximate US$ 1.8 billion, of
which US$ 1.4 billion would be allocated for investment loans. The program may also include
additional financing for knowledge products. A reorientation in terms of sectors is not
anticipated, and there will be a continued emphasis on infrastructure, particularly transportation.
Under the new strategy, the IADB will continue providing support to secondary education and
social programs such as Infamilia, a program aimed at improving living conditions for and social
inclusion of disadvantaged children, adolescents and their families.
88.
The Andean Development Corporation’s (CAF) engagement in Uruguay has
deepened over the past five years, with total approvals increasing from US$ 70 million in 2005
to U$S 590 million in 2009. The majority of 2009 approvals (67.8%) corresponded to a noncommitted contingent credit line to be granted in case Uruguay were to lose access to
international capital markets. During 2009 CAF also approved US$ 150 million for development
of road and electricity infrastructure. CAF also approved a US$ 40 million loan to improve the
environmental and sanitary conditions of the department of Maldonado. Cooperation funds of
USD 300,000 were also provided through the different programs developed by CAF.

15

This project was the subject of an international waterways dispute with Argentina. In April 2010, the
International Court of Justice delivered its judgment finding that Uruguay had breached its procedural obligations
under the Estatuto del Río Uruguay, but not its substantive obligations under Articles 35, 36 and 41 thereunder,
namely: (i) to ensure that the management of the soil and woodland does not impair the regime or quality of the
river; (ii) to coordinate measures to avoid changes in the ecological balance; and (iii) to prevent pollution and
preserve the aquatic environment.

26

89.
In 2006, the country team of the United Nations in Uruguay developed the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for the period 2007-2010. The main
assistance areas defined in the UNDAF were: (i) achieve sustained and sustainable growth, (ii)
eradicate indigence and reduce poverty and (iii) promote the exercise of all Human Rights and
strengthen the quality of democracy. Financing for these activities totaled approximately
US$32.8 million. After Uruguay became one of the eight pilot countries for the “Delivering as
One” initiative in 2007, the UN System and the Government signed the “One Programme” which
defines more specific results to achieve the outcomes set in the UNDAF 2007-2010 and
promotes joint initiatives to strengthen the coherence and added value of the UN system’s
cooperation in the country. The UNDAF for the period 2011-2015 is currently under preparation.
90.
As of April, 2010, 412 non-refundable cooperation projects financed by bilateral
and other partners active in Uruguay, amounting to over US$ 215 million. The main areas of
cooperation were Environment (US$ 90 million), Decentralization and Local Development (US$
45.7 million) and Industry, SMEs and Microcredit (US$ 31 million). The European Union and
Spain were among the main contributors, with US$ 39.2 million and US$ 39 million in active
projects, respectively. During the period 2004-2008, support from Spain was mainly oriented to
Infrastructure and Social Services (65%). The strategy for joint cooperation between Uruguay
and Spain for the next four years will be defined in 2010. The European Commission, in its
2007-2013 Country Strategy Paper for Uruguay, establishes grant aid of EUR 31 million (US$
44.5 million) for that period, of which almost 60% would be spent in Social and Territorial
Cohesion projects and the remaining 40% in Research and Development and Innovation projects.
V. RISKS
91.
Economic Risk. Despite declining as a source of risk since 2005, debt sustainability
remains the main economic risk, followed by dollarization and exposure to global and regional
shocks. Public debt is still sizeable and largely denominated in foreign currency (57 percent).
The financing requirements for debt service are significant, with a concentration of maturities in
2011. The highly dollarized economy implies substantial exposure to foreign currency risks for
the banking sector due to corporate balance sheet mismatches. Uruguay is vulnerable to a severe
deterioration in global and regional economic conditions. While there has been diversification in
the destination of Uruguay’s exports, they are still highly concentrated in agricultural primaries.
Regional conditions remain important and a crisis in neighboring countries would still have a
strong impact on Uruguay, although less severe than in 2002. The Bank aims to help mitigate
this risk through its DPL financing, and ongoing dialog on macroeconomic and fiscal policies, as
well as technical assistance on various aspects of economic management.
92.
Political and Social Risk. Political risk was assessed as low throughout the 2005-2010
CAS period and continues to be so. The 2009 Presidential and Parliamentary elections
proceeded smoothly with no indication of increased political risk. As has already featured
prominently in statements from the President, a significant risk arises from the tensions between
pressure to expand government programs and the need for a prudent fiscal stance in order to
further reduce macroeconomic vulnerabilities. The consensus orientation of Uruguayan society
and President Mujica’s inclusive approach to reforms suggests minimal risk that political
changes would adversely affect prospects for the implementation of reforms. The CPS, in
27

particular the proposed joint AAA program, which aims at providing a menu of viable reform
options well founded in joint analytical work, is expected to contribute positively to this
consensus-based political processes.
93.
Risk related to Civil Service Reform. The sweeping changes to the civil service
legislation proposed by the administration, while apparently favored by the political opposition,
are strongly opposed by the public sector unions. This is a highly contentious and difficult issue
that is central to public sector reform, and the outcome could have implications for the
Government’s ability to achieve its broader public sector reform agenda. While the Bank has not
been involved to date, it has considerable experience with such reforms in other Latin American
countries and is prepared to provide technical assistance and/or facilitate some south-south
knowledge exchange on the topic.
94.
Climate Change and Natural Disasters Risk: Droughts have had a major impact on
rural income, as well as important fiscal implications, in recent years, and there is evidence that
climate change is worsening the magnitude and intensity of droughts. Two significant
consequences include decreased hydro-power – and thus increased energy costs – and a loss of
agricultural output due to a lack of drinking water for livestock. Therefore, support under the
Natural Resources management pillar is expected to include adaptation measures currently under
discussion with Government.

28

16

Public procurement is made more
efficient and transparent through a
properly functioning regulatory agency
and the introduction of e-procurement.

Enhanced Integrated Financial
Information System (SIIF) (or entirely
new system) in place that conforms to
programmatic budget classification
and allows accrual accounting.

Lack of public agency responsible
for regulating public sector
procurement and promoting
modernization and cost-saving
improvements in public sector
procurement.

The foreign currency-denominated
public debt share decline to less than
its 2009 baseline of 56.7 % of the total
outstanding debt.16

The gross public debt ratio decreases
from its 2009 baseline of 60% of
GDP.16

The fiscal balance of the consolidated
public sector remains above the 2009
baseline of -1.7% of GDP.16

Rise in number of GoU processes
started and completed electronically to
25 (2009 baseline: 20)

Contract for software upgrading is
underway (2011) and user training has
begun (2012).

Increase in the number of expenditure
programs for which output and
outcome indicators have been
identified (2009 baseline: zero).

5-year budget for 2010-2015 is
prepared with a programmatic
classification (early 2011).

Public Sector Modernization

Computerized System of Budget
Management needs to be
modernized

2

Further reduce the share of foreign
currency-denominated debt.

Bring public debt ratios down to more
sustainable levels.

Strengthened institutional capacity in
evaluating the results of budgetary
spending program and using the results
of these evaluations in the preparation
of annual budgets.

Fiscal policy is subject to
debt sustainability
considerations, with high
debt exposed to exchange
rate fluctuations.
Monetary policy is limited
by inflationary pressures
Limited role of the exchange
rate as shock-absorber due to
high levels of dollarization.

Control expenditure growth to ensure
no further deterioration of fiscal
balances.

Current budget presentation not
conducive to strategic,
programmatic planning and
evaluation of results of public
programs







Scope for countercyclical policies
remains limited as:

CFAA/PEFA

IBTAL (including AF) (ongoing)

IBTAL (and IBTAL AF) (ongoing)

Fiscal and/or Social Expenditure Reviews.

Periodic Macro-Monitoring and Financial Notes.

DPL I (FY11) and DPL II (FY12)

These milestones are set in reference to a baseline which does not take into account the scenario of a substantial deterioration of the external environment.

Efficient and equitable
management of public
resources

Consolidating gains on
macroeconomic stability by
reducing remaining
vulnerabilities

PILLAR 1 - REDUCING MACROECONOMIC VULNERABILITY & STRENGTHENING PUBLIC SECTOR ADMINISTRATION
Country Strategic
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Bank Program Instruments
Goals and Indicators
Expects to Influence
1 Reduce Macroeconomic Vulnerabilities

Annex A: Uruguay CPS Results Framework 2010-2015

Annex A
Page 1 of 6

After approving a new capital
markets law in 2009, the
challenge now is to implement the
new legislation in a way that
promotes higher market
participation.

Promote financial market
development

IFC - Financial and Advisory Services support

Increase in the number of irregularities
detected by the risk management
system relative to the number of
inspections (2009 baseline: 0)

Issuance by BCU of secondary
legislation for the surveillance of the
system, the functioning of clearing
houses, and the use of guarantees

The Depositario Central de Valores is
in operation and handles an electronic
management of securities

Increased market capitalization

Stock exchange activity rises for both
the primary and secondary markets
from their baseline 2009 level of
US$6,200 millions.

The total number of new private sector
issuances (stocks, corporate bonds,
financial trusts, etc) increases from its
2009 baseline of 8.

The Registro del Mercado de Valores
is computerized and about 70 percent
of all public securities are in electronic
format

There is a positive trend towards
higher market capitalization from its
(2009 baseline of US$139 million.

IFC Support

Capital Markets Policy Note (2009 - 2010)

DPL I (Fy11) and DPL II (Fy12)

Investment/Business Climate Assessment
(planned)

The ratio of Credit to GDP increases
(2009 baseline: 22.9% of GDP).

Substantial increase in credit to the
private sector.

2. Enhancing the Regulatory Environment

Study on Competitiveness (ongoing)

Reduction in the number of days to
create a firm (Baseline: 65 days
according to 2010 Doing Business).17

All firms are centrally registered, and
one-stop shop for most business
related-procedures in operation.

DPL I (FY11) and DPL II (FY12)

Bank Program Instruments

17
The Doing Business might not be the best measure for actual number of days (risk of over-estimation) as it is built following the official procedure for firm registration; thus the measure does not
reflect the fact that as a common practice new Uruguayan firms usually rely on the purchase of existing licenses for registration. Such a practice avoids the standard procedure which is otherwise
lengthy.

Increase depth and
efficiency of the financial
sector through
implementation of the
regulatory reform program

Need to overcome major
remaining obstacles to doing
business and investing in
Uruguay:
 Competition from the
informal economy,
 Tax rates,
 Labor regulations and
 Access to finance
 Regulations for opening a
business
 Customs

Improve the country’s
business climate and create
opportunities for
investments

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

PILLAR 2 –COMPETITIVENESS & INFRASTRUCTURE
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Fostering Competitiveness

Annex A
Page 2 of 6

Improve quality and
coverage of Uruguay’s
infrastructure to
strengthen the country’s
emerging role as a logistics
center, and underpin
medium-term growth and
poverty alleviation
objectives

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

High levels of dependence on
domestic hydropower and weak
transmission capacity lead to high
generation costs in dry years and
vulnerability to system failures.

Poor rail infrastructure limits
Uruguay’s ability to transport
increasing volumes of forestry
products, risking a rapid
dilapidation of road network.

Large increases in investments in
infrastructure needed to maintain
current quality and coverage;
more to close coverage gaps

Key sections of UTE’s transmission
lines and highly loaded transformer
sub-stations are rehabilitated.

Access to sewerage services increased;
water losses reduced; and baseline of
the impact study on public health of
access to sewerage services completed.

IFC financing for potential renewable energy and
energy efficiency projects

IFC financing for PPP projects pending approval
of appropriate regulations

Road Safety Trust Fund

Energy Efficiency GEF (on-going)

Energy Sector Strengthening project (Timing
TBD)

Sewerage Access in Uruguay Study (TF)

Integration of Public Policies on Risk Mgmt. for
threats of water origin Trust Fund

OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation
project (FY12)

Improvement of institutional capacity
in the MTOP to carry-out multi-modal
transport planning

Efficiency improvements in OSE freeup resources for additional investment
from retained earnings.
Energy efficiency improvements
reduce “natural” growth of electricity
demand.

Transport Infrastructure Modernization Loan
(FY12)

Implementation of railway sector
reform

Bank Program Instruments

Improvement of the condition of key
land transport infrastructure,

PILLAR 2 –COMPETITIVENESS & INFRASTRUCTURE
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
3. Infrastructure Strengthening

Annex A
Page 3 of 6

Develop cleaner and more
sustainable production
models for industry in
order to improve
environmental compliance,
and improve access to
standard sensitive export
markets

Widen successful
agricultural export model
to an increasing number of
farmers in support of
environmentally
sustainable, integrated and
inclusive rural
development

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

Many tanneries, slaughterhouses
and other industrial enterprises
operate using inefficient and
polluting technology because of
poor technical and financial
capacity, and low awareness.

The agricultural sector is both a
major contributor to Greenhouse
Gas Emissions, and highly
vulnerable to climatic variability
which pose significant
adaptation and mitigation
challenges for a natural resource
based economy

The agricultural sector, in
particular family farmers remain
vulnerable to internal and
external shocks, and have
limited ability to access
standard-sensitive export
markets

Development of renewable energy
(biogas and cogeneration) facilities at
the farm and agro-industrial level

Reduced GHG emissions and water
contamination in the agricultural
sector, mainly livestock, dairy, and rice
(baseline: TBD)

Consolidation of different rural
development programs

Expanded information and tracking
systems, covering other livestock
species as well as value chain
integration

Conversion of groups of firms
(especially small and medium-size
enterprises) in different industrial
sectors to cleaner production
processes.

Increased technical and financial
capacity among SMEs to undertake
cleaner production investments and
improve environmental compliance.

2. Other Environmental Issues

Reduced loss of productivity due to
droughts

Implementation of the National Plan
for Response to Climate Change in the
agricultural sector

Continued improvements in veterinary
and food safety standards, sustainable
production practices, adoption of new
technologies and capacity building

PILLAR 3 – AGRICULTURE, CLIMATE CHANGE, AND ENVIRONMENT
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Agriculture and Climate Change

Carbon Finance, Carbon Partnership Facility
(potential)

OSE project (sanitation aspect) (FY12)

Promoting Cleaner Production & Improving
Environmental Compliance in the Industrial
Sector (TF)

Sustainable Industrial Development project
(FY12)

IFC financing for export-oriented agribusiness
projects, and support for small- and mediumsized farms.

Grid-Connected Wind Farm at Caracoles Hill
Trust Fund (ongoing)

Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery Trust Fund
(ongoing)

AAA on Climate Change and Agriculture
(Planned)

Integrated agricultural development loan (FY12)

GEF Biodiversity Conservation (ongoing)

AAA on Family Agriculture (ongoing)

Natural Resources Mgmt. Project (ongoing)

Bank Program Instruments

Annex A
Page 4 of 6

Implement health
insurance reform to
achieve universal coverage
Adapt health system to
changing epidemiological
profile of country

Implement ongoing
reforms in the social
protection system, with a
view to addressing the still
high poverty levels (above
20 percent) and in
particular to reach
Uruguayans that still live
in extreme poverty

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

55% of the population remains
without insurance coverage.

Link income protection policies with
human capital promotion effectively

Data on beneficiaries of social
programs is dispersed across
different administrative units
The Integrated System of Information
of the Social Areas (SIIAS) is fully
operational

Family allowances cover increased
share of targeted beneficiaries. (2009
baseline: 80% of households in
poorest quintile

Reduction in extreme poverty rate.
(2008 baseline: 1.5 percent)

Increased share of cases diagnosed and
under follow up by primary care
teams for Hypertension, Diabetes and
Obesity/overweight

Expand access to quality health care by
expanding health insurance coverage
to population not covered directly
through labor markets (spouses, retired
workers).

Significant increase in the proportion
of population at NCDs risk being
screened in at least three departments
(Baseline 2006: 0%)

Significant increase in the proportion
of newborns with disabilities being
monitored by early detection and
treatment units. (Baseline 2006: 0%)

Substantially increased share of
women between 50 and 69 years of age
have had a mammogram by 2012.
(Baseline 2006: 25%)

2. Support Health Sector Reforms

Establishment of a single database of
beneficiaries of all major social
protection and programs (SIIAS)

Expand effective coverage of SP
programs to all targeted beneficiaries,
lifting a large number of remaining
people out of extreme poverty.

Existing targeting and
conditionality of existing
programs fails to reach certain
groups of society.

Issues and Obstacles

PILLAR 4 – Inclusion & Equity
Outcomes the Bank Program
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Support National Plan for Social Equity

Non Communicable Diseases Prevention Project
(ongoing)

Social Sector Results-based Investment Loan
(Timing TBD)

Health Reform Assessment (AAA)
(Ongoing)

IFC support for projects enhancing access to
finance for low-income groups

IDF grant to Promote Equitable Access of
Society to the Legal System (ongoing)

Public Expenditure Review on Social Spending
(Planned)

IBTAL (ongoing)

Human Opportunity Index Monitoring (Planned)

AAA on Social Housing Policy (Planned)

Social Policy Assessment (Planned)

Social Sector Results-based Investment Loan
(Timing TBD)

DPL I (FY11) and DPL II (FY12)

Bank Program Instruments

Annex A
Page 5 of 6

Reduce the high drop-out
rates in secondary
education among poorer
groups of society

Enhance access to and
quality of education,
especially for
disadvantaged groups

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

Difficulties in transforming
available resources in the
education system into satisfactory
results in student learning, which
has fallen behind compared to
countries at similar levels of
development and presents a high
inequity in results.

High drop-out rates and important
differences in enrolment amongst
students from different
socioeconomic backgrounds in
secondary education, leading to
the serious problem of 24 percent
of Uruguayan adolescents being
out of school and work in 2008.

Issues and Obstacles

Fully implementing pre-school
education for four year-olds and
expand it to three year-olds.
Continued expansion of FTS for
students from disadvantaged
backgrounds

Conditionality of the Family
Allowances program on continued
secondary education is successfully
used to identify youth who could
qualify for the benefit and thereby has
lead to re-entering of a significant
number of such youth into the
education system.





Increases in equity, quality and
efficiency in the provision of preschool
and primary education by:

Improved academic achievement in
language and mathematics in 6th grade
from 52 percent and 32 percent of
questions answered correctly in
language and math respectively in
2006.

Decrease in repetition rate in 1st grade
of primary from 22 percent in 2006
and decrease in repetition rate in 2nd
grade from 15 percent in 2006.

Reaching an enrolment of 47,000
student places in Full Time Schools
(FTS) (2009 Baseline: 37,600)

PILLAR 4 – Inclusion & Equity
Outcomes the Bank Program
Milestones
Expects to Influence
3. Education

Potential IFC financing for technical and
vocational education institutions with a focus on
low-income students

Promoting Innovation to Enhance
Competitiveness Project (ongoing)

UY/AR One Laptop per Child AAA
(Planned)

Social Sector SWAP
(Timing TBD)

Third Basic Education Quality Improvement
Project+ Additional Financing (ongoing)

Bank Program Instruments

Annex A
Page 6 of 6

Annex B
Page 1 of 27

June 25, 2010

URUGUAY: CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Date of CAS:
Date of Progress Report:

May 10, 2005
March 3, 2008

Report No. 31804-UY
Report No. 42789-UY

Summary
This document evaluates country developments in Uruguay and the respective contributions of the Government and the
Bank during the period of the FY05-FY10 CAS, approved on June 1, 2005.
When the 2005 CAS was prepared, Uruguay was in the midst of a dual transition. On the one hand, Uruguay was still
recovering from the economic and social consequences of the 2002 crisis and the Government had shifted its priorities from
crisis response towards equitable and sustainable development. On the other hand, Uruguay was facing a political transition,
as the victory of the Frente Amplio coalition in October 2004 ended 170 years of dominance by the two traditional parties the Partido Colorado and the Partido Nacional- in Uruguayan politics.
The CAS was aimed at supporting the Government in addressing its main challenges of:




Reducing Vulnerability
Sustaining Growth
Improving Living Standards.

The Bank program was broadly organized around these main challenges and anchored around a series of programmatic
development policy loans (DPLs) supporting reforms in the key areas of public sector management, financial sector reform
and reform of social programs.
Over the two years following the approval of the 2005 CAS, there were important and positive economic developments. Not
only had Uruguay recovered from the 2002 crisis, but economic growth and fiscal outcomes had largely outperformed those
projected in the 2005 CAS. In addition, the policies pursued by the new administration had a positive impact on social
indicators, and, as of mid-2006, unemployment and poverty exhibited a declining trend. On the political front, the Frente
Amplio coalition had largely delivered on its economic program and enjoyed a relatively high level of support.
Against this positive background, the CAS Progress Report prepared in March 2007, more than half-way through the CAS
period, confirmed the general thrust of the 2005 CAS and concluded that the Bank program had achieved substantial success
over the past two years. During the period from 2005-2007, the Bank portfolio had also undergone a comprehensive
renovation, with projects approved in the mid-1990s gradually exiting the portfolio and being replaced by more diversified
operations. The Bank had also increased its presence on the ground with the opening of an office in Montevideo, which
facilitated CAS implementation.
About half of the original CAS envelope of $800 million (or $395 million), had been committed at the time of the CAS
Progress Report, which included the possibility of increasing the CAS envelope by an additional $60 million to enable the
Bank to incorporate into the program a possible DPL with a DDO feature of $300 million (to replace the PRI DPL II and
PRIDPL III envisaged in the 2005 CAS). This amount was later increased to $400 million at the request of the Government
and the PRI DPLII was approved (in January 2009) as precautionary financing in the midst of the global financial crisis that
started in early 2008. Despite the increase, lending remained within the CAS envelope, as planned investment lending for an
equivalent amount was postponed to accommodate the increase in the PRI DPLII amount.
This CAS Completion Report concludes that the Bank strategy as outlined in the 2005 CAS was appropriate and successful
in assisting the Government achieve a strong recovery from the 2002 crisis and in making important strides in the
implementation of key reforms. The Bank decision in the 2007 CAS Progress Report to slightly increase the CAS envelope
and postpone selected investment lending in order to provide contingent financing was also timely and appropriate, and the
PRIDPL II provided Uruguay with a risk management tool in the event of a public sector financing shortfall and interrupted
market borrowing. This bolstered the Government’s confidence in times of crisis. Finally, the substantial renovation of the
portfolio and increased Bank presence on the ground during the CAS period resulted in greater relevance and enhanced
impact of the Bank’s work, including both lending and analytical services. In turn, the renewed and increased Bank
engagement helped the Government to keep sight of its long-term development goals despite its preoccupation with
mitigating the impact of the global financial crisis.

Annex B
Page 2 of 27

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The 2005 CAS was prepared at a time when Uruguay was undergoing a political and
economic transition. On the political front, the victory of the Frente Amplio (FA) Coalition in the
October 2004 presidential election ended 170 years of dominance by the two traditional parties –
the Partido Colorado and the Partido Nacional- in Uruguayan politics. Moreover, the sharp
recession that hit Uruguay in 1998-1999 and the crisis that followed in 2001-2002, coupled with
rising poverty levels and limited scope for renewal within the ruling party, were determining
factors behind the FA victory in the 2004 elections.
2.
On the economic front, Uruguay was undergoing a transition, away from the crisis
management practices that characterized the period FY03-FY04, when the economic situation
deteriorated rapidly following Argentina’s default on its public debt and the Bank deemed
appropriate, through the 2002 CAS Progress Report, to propose adjustment lending as the
preferred instrument to support Uruguay during the crisis period. At the time the 2005 CAS was
prepared, Uruguay had already bounced back from the crisis and, starting in mid-2003, was
enjoying a strong recovery, which resulted in GDP growth rates of 12.3 percent in 2004 and in a
primary surplus to the public sector of 3.8 percent of GDP in 2004 (a major turnaround, given a
primary fiscal deficit of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2001). The 2005 CAS was therefore developed
with the objective of assisting the Government in sustaining the economic recovery process and
placing the new authorities on a path of equitable and sustainable development while
implementing an agenda of post-crisis structural reforms.
II.

LONG-TERM STRATEGIC GOALS

The Government’s Program
3.
President Vázquez began his presidency on March 1, 2005 enjoying broad support both
domestically and internationally. The economic environment was benign, Uruguay’s recovery
from the crisis had been robust and the outlook for the future was favorable, despite the existence
of important risks. The political transition was smooth, given the consensual nature of Uruguay’s
political system and the openness of its society. Upon assuming office, the FA administration
reached agreement with the two traditional parties and the independents on an overall framework
for the conduct of economic and foreign policy. An “Inter-Party Agreement” was signed shortly
before the new administration took office, committing all political parties to honor the outcome
of the 2003 debt renegotiations, which successfully brought the country’s debt servicing
obligations in line with its post-crisis payment capacity through a sovereign debt exchange. The
fact that a multi-party agreement could be reached so early in the new administration was a good
omen for future stability and political continuity.
4.
While the FA embraced an agenda for change, Tabaré Vázquez’s electoral document “El
Gobierno de Cambio- La Transición Responsable”, which enunciated the new Government’s
program, suggested broad continuity in the economic policies of the past. It also confirmed the
central role of the state in certain strategic economic sectors (i.e. water, petroleum and
telecommunications) and aimed to improve the climate for private sector investment. The
document proposed a new national strategy articulated along six key complementary themes:
enhancing productivity (Uruguay Productivo), fostering social development (Uruguay Social),

Annex B
Page 3 of 27

promoting innovation (Uruguay Innovador), strengthening democracy (Uruguay Democrático),
enhancing regional and global integration (Uruguay Integrado), and promoting policies which
consolidate and promote Uruguayan culture (Uruguay Cultural).
5.
Attaining high, equitable and sustainable economic growth was a top priority of the
Government’s agenda. Under Uruguay Productivo, growth was to be attained trough the
implementation of both structural changes and short-term economic policies. Structural changes
included transforming the financial sector, developing the capital markets and de-dollarizing the
economy. Reforms also called for improving professionalism in the civil service, enhancing
transparency in the conduct of state functions, and decentralizing management.
6.
Fostering social participation and increasing inclusion was the most distinct and
overarching goal of the new Government’s program. As such, one of the first actions of the new
administration was the creation of a new social emergency program called PANES (Plan de
Asistencia Nacional a la Emergencia Social), which aimed at attending to the needs of those
below the extreme poverty line, or at high risk of falling below it, through a set of eight
coordinated programs in the following areas: basic food, health emergency, minimum income,
education for critical areas, workfare, two housing programs, and homelessness. While several of
these programs had been tried before without much success, the PANES attempted to overcome
obstacles in the effective delivery of these programs using the structure of existing institutions
and volunteers. The new administration also placed education high on its agenda, including a
promise to increase funding to improve system equity and relevance to the needs of the labor
market. In health, the objective of the new administration was to create a more harmonized
system through the introduction of a national health insurance providing a more equitable access
to services and improved quality of care.
7.
In the innovation area (Uruguay Innovador), the new administration sought to promote
scientific and technological progress to overcome what was perceived to be a period of creative
stagnation. This was to be achieved, among others, through the creation of a National System of
Innovation, the drafting of a strategic innovation plan and by reorienting the education system
towards scientific and technological applied research with strong links to the productive sector.
Uruguay Democrático emphasized the need to introduce greater transparency and efficiency in
Government, while Uruguay Integrado called for strengthening relations with Mercosur and for
a better integration of Uruguay with the rest of the world economy. Finally, Uruguay Cultural
emphasized the need to instill a culture promoting diversity as the basis for social inclusion and
the creation of a cultural identity.
8.
When the new administration took office, there appeared to be a broad consensus within
the Frente Amplio on the above strategy and the economic team enjoyed a high degree of respect
and broad support. The new administration had also proactively sought dialogue with the
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and elicited their active support in implementing its
development agenda.
The Bank’s Program of Support
9.
The Bank’s program for FY05-FY10 proposed a menu of lending and non-lending
services in support of the Government’s program “El Gobierno de Cambio- La Transición

Annex B
Page 4 of 27

Responsable”. In particular, the Bank aimed at assisting the Government in achieving the
underlying objective of its program, namely the attainment of equitable and sustainable
economic development. The Bank’s assessment was that, in order to meet this overarching
objective, the Government needed to face important challenges in three areas: i) reducing
vulnerabilities; ii) sustaining growth and iii) improving living standards. The Bank’s program
was therefore organized around these three key challenges. Moreover, an overarching goal of the
Bank’s program was to support the Government’s objective of reducing inequality and
increasing social inclusion.
10.
The program included a number of interventions in areas were support was requested by
the authorities. These areas included tax reform, financial sector and capital market development,
health and education, innovation, infrastructure and public services, natural resources
management and state modernization. The proposed areas of support were carefully selected on
the basis of the outcome of an extensive CAS consultation process, the findings of core
analytical work undertaken in the previous years and a review of past successes and failures, as
identified by the Completion Report of the FY00-FY05 CAS. The Bank program included
support in each of these areas through a combination of investment lending, technical assistance
and development policy lending.
11.
The Program was anchored around several development policy loans (DPLs) supporting
reforms in the key areas of public sector management, financial sector reforms, and reform of
social programs. These included a first DPL in the social sectors that was presented to the Board
together with the CAS, and three additional programmatic development policy loans in FY06-08.
These new DPLs replaced the policy lending operations prepared during the 2002 crisis, when
the Bank had to resort to emergency lending instruments to satisfy Uruguay’s urgent financial
needs. Indeed, a combination of SALs and Special SALs (SSALs) were approved during the
crisis to enable the Bank to contribute its share of a US$3.8 billion package of support from the
IADB, the IMF and the Bank. However, the compressed repayment schedule of the SSALs
contributed to a hump in debt service repayments in 2006 and 2007. Hence, at the time of the
FY05-FY10 CAS, and in order to correct and smooth the debt service profile, the Government
agreed with the Bank to disburse the second and third tranche of SAL II after modification of
two outstanding conditions and to cancel the outstanding second and third tranche of SSAL II,
which paved the way to the new DPL series.
III.

COUNTRY AND CAS OUTCOMES

12.
The 2005 CAS was results based. The CAS Program Matrix specified country
development objectives and outcomes as well as specific CAS outcomes and milestones. The
2007 CAS Progress Report also included a CAS Results Matrix which evaluated progress in
relation to specific CAS Outcomes. The CAS Results Matrix provided in Attachment 1 to this
Completion Report reproduces the country and CAS specific goals identified in the CAS and
CAS Progress Report with additional data on outcomes. A conclusion emerges that the 2005
CAS was generally successful in meeting its targets.
PILLAR 1: REDUCING VULNERABILITY
13.
There has been good progress over the CAS period in reducing vulnerabilities thanks to
considerable progress in macroeconomic stability, the success of the Government’s debt and

Annex B
Page 5 of 27

fiscal management policies, greater exchange rate flexibility, rising international reserves, and
improvements in the banking system. All of the above has contributed to making Uruguay less
vulnerable to shocks than in 2002. Despite this progress, vulnerabilities remain, particularly
linked to the high dollarization of the economy, a high concentration of exports in agricultural
primary products, and the impact that regional conditions have on Uruguay’s small and open
economy.
Country Outcomes
14.
Country development goals identified in the 2006 CAS were largely attained. The
Government’s debt management policies have achieved considerable success, as the Government
has managed to re-profile its debt and refinance expensive emergency financing. The public debt
burden, one of the major economic vulnerabilities, has fallen as a share of GDP since the crisis in
2002. Total gross public debt fell from 101.0 percent of GDP in 2003 to 57.0 percent by mid2009. The net public sector debt also declined from US$9,662 million (40.3 percent of GDP) to
US$8,254 million in 2008 (26.5 percent of GDP), a level similar to the one prior to the 20012002 financial crisis. As a consequence of the large multilateral disbursements that occurred in
the context of the international crisis, total gross public debt grew to 69 percent of GDP and net
public sector debt went up to 35.3 percent of GDP in 2009.
15.
The Government has also gradually increased the peso share of debt by issuing US dollar
and inflation indexed peso-denominated debt in domestic and international markets.
Nevertheless, dollarization remains as a source of vulnerability as the share of foreign currencydenominated debt is still substantially high (65.1 percent in 2009).
16.
In January 2009, Moody’s increased the rating of Uruguayan government bonds from B1
to Ba3, to reflect the improvements made by the country in terms of its debt profile. Sovereign
debt is now rated three steps below investment grade (Uruguay lost investment grade rating in
2002, largely because of the high level of indebtedness resulting from the crisis).
17.
The primary fiscal balance improved from a position of a large deficit of -2.2 percent of
GDP in 2004 to a peak primary fiscal surplus of 1.4 percent of GDP in 2008. The exchange rate
is not misaligned and remains close to its real equilibrium value. A flexible exchange rate regime
was adopted in mid-2002. Initially, the peso depreciated substantially, but then followed an
appreciating trend through 2008. In late 2008, the peso depreciated by over 25 percent vis-à-vis
the U.S. dollar, but after the economy started to recover, it appreciated by roughly the same
amount. Interestingly, those fluctuations of the exchange rate had almost no impact on the
economy, showing that it performed its shock-absorber function as expected.
18.
The position of international reserves has also strengthened. International reserves
increased sharply during 2007-2008 with booming commodity prices and favorable international
conditions. Reserves, which by end-2009 were US$8.1 billion, are expected to keep growing in
the future, albeit at a declining pace due to the slowdown in international capital flows.
19.
The banking sector has also recovered from the severe crisis of 2002, and noticeable
improvements have been made from the prudential and profitability standpoints. The financial
sector law adopted in 2008 includes a substantially improved bank resolution framework. The

Annex B
Page 6 of 27

new deposit insurance agency foreseen in the law was formally established recently and a law on
capital market reform aimed at improving the legal framework in the areas of security
registration was passed by the Lower House. Further, the restructuring of the BHU has
progressed and its recapitalization is about to be completed.
CAS Outcomes
20.
CAS outcomes outlined both in the 2005 CAS and in the 2008 CAS Progress Report
were also broadly achieved. Dialogue between the Bank and the authorities on debt policy was
intense and of high quality. The Bank assisted the Government in meeting its debt service
obligations, particularly in 2006-2007, when amortizations were heavy, through development
policy lending supporting the Government in key policy areas. The first DPL (SPDPL) for
US$75 million was approved by the Board together with the CAS on June 9, 2005. It supported
reforms in social policies as well as important measures taken by the Government with respect to
health, education and social protection. A subsequent DPL, the First Programmatic Reform
Implementation Development Policy Loan (PRIDPL 1) in the amount of US$100 million, was
approved in May 2007. This operation supported the Government’s reform program in taxation,
business environment, and capital markets development, and aimed at improving the social
protection system. The loan was disbursed in local currency in May 2008, as the World Bank
became the first foreign issuer to launch a public bond in (inflation indexed) Uruguayan pesos.
This was the first time ever that the World Bank issued a local currency bond for the purpose of
a back-to-back disbursement of a specific loan. A second PRIDPL in the amount of $400 million
was approved on 3 February 2009 and was fully disbursed. This operation continued the support
provided under PRIDPL1 for the implementation of key reforms and built on the achievements
of the SPDPL. The tax reform supported by PRIDPLI and II became the cornerstone of the
Government’s tax administration and tax policy reform. Moreover, the measures identified in
these two operations to improve the business climate and promote the capital market were
aligned with the financial sector and capital market reform goals set out in the CAS. In the
financial sector, the Bank also provided support to the authorities through PRIDPLII in
modernizing the legal framework for bankruptcy to provide for efficient and timely resolution of
problem enterprises, thereby contributing to the CAS outcome in this area.
PILLAR 2: SUSTAINING GROWTH
21.
During the CAS period, the Government focused on improving the business climate,
promoting competitiveness, improving infrastructure and developing the capital markets as a
means to spur and sustain economic growth. The Vázquez administration also focused on
achieving greater integration of Uruguay into the world economy through trade expansion
beyond Mercosur and trade diversification. Enhancing competitiveness was another important
aspect of the Government’s strategy to sustain growth.
Country Outcomes
22.
Country goals in terms of trade policies were successfully achieved. Supported by a
sound macroeconomic framework, one of Uruguay’s most notable achievements has been the
increase in investment levels, which have continued to recover since the 2002 crisis. Total gross
capital formation increased by almost 10 percentage points, from 13.1 percent of GDP in 2002 to
22.1 percent of GDP in 2008. During 2009, faced with a contraction in global demand due to the

Annex B
Page 7 of 27

global financial crisis, Uruguay’ s new fiscal policy included raising public investment from 3.2
percent in 2008 to 3.4 percent of GDP in 2009. Besides the increase in investment, and to cope
with the negative impact of the international crisis, the government also implemented a series of
measures to help exporters and facilitate access to credit, particularly for those industries hit by
the global slowdown, such as textiles and dairy. The country’s strong export performance has
contributed substantially to economic growth during the CAS period. Annual export growth was
on average 13.5 percent over 2004-2008. Export markets also became more diversified, as the
share of exports going to Argentina and Brazil, the two traditional and largest partners, have
halved, giving way to substantial growth in exports to non-traditional markets, such as the
European Union, Russia and China. The trade and investment framework agreement signed in
2007 with the United States provides the setting for discussion of trade issues of mutual interest.
Further, FDI increased considerably over the period, with FDI inflows reaching 5.7 percent of
GDP in 2008, up from 2.4 percent of GDP in 2004. Pulp mills comprised a major source of FDI
in recent years and the completion of the Botnia plant gave a further boost to exports in 2008.
23.
In the infrastructure sector, results were mixed in terms of meeting country goals. In the
water sector, good results were achieved in terms of improving the efficiency and effectiveness
of OSE and increasing treated water pumping capacity in Montevideo. Further, the creation of
DINASA (a policy setting directorate with the Ministry of Housing) in 2006 strengthened
capacity to define policy in the water sector. On the negative side, progress in terms of reducing
unaccounted for water was slower than expected. In the electricity sector, conditions in the
regional electricity markets and supply security concerns have made it less urgent to unbundle
UTE (the public electricity monopoly) and introduce greater private investment in generation.
Similarly, efforts to open the water sector to greater competition suffered a reverse following a
2004 constitutional referendum which banned private participation in the sector. In transport,
Bank support has contributed to improvements in road maintenance to the point where Uruguay
today has a far higher percentage of national paved roads in good condition than other countries
of comparable income in Latin America. In agriculture and natural resource management,
Uruguay has played a key role in enhancing regional collaboration to address food safety and
quality. Implementation of the state modernization agenda has proceeded satisfactorily, with the
exception of reforms in the customs area, where progress has stalled. Country goals in the
innovation area were largely achieved, with the newly created (2007) National Innovation
Agency already playing a key role in stimulating innovation for competitiveness and
employment creation.
CAS Outcomes
24.
The Bank has long had an active involvement in the infrastructure sector, particularly in
the water supply and sanitation area. A major CAS outcome in this area was institutional
improvements in OSE (the public water monopoly), where progress initially lagged behind
expectations, mainly because of lack of support by OSE leadership for sector modernization.
However, substantial progress has been made on the institutional side under the Frente Amplio
administration, in the context of the implementation of APL2. Improvements in corporate
governance of OSE were also particularly noteworthy, with the appointment of a new and
capable OSE director and a substantial de-politicization of OSE’s Board. Another key milestone
in the water and electricity sectors was the introduction of yardstick competition. This milestone
has been achieved as a program to monitor and reduce losses for unaccounted water is underway,

Annex B
Page 8 of 27

with the creation of a well functioning UFW (Unaccounted – for – Water) unit within OSE. The
Bank continues to assist OSE in improving UFW under APL2.
25.
In agriculture, the Bank has been instrumental in assisting the Government in its fight
against foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) (Bank assistance was provided in the form of a loan and a
complementary grant for regional animal health issues) and overall, major strides were made in
the prevention of animal disease, thereby enhancing Uruguay’s image as an exporter of beef
products to standard-sensitive markets. The signing of a regional agreement on FMD, a key CAS
outcome in the agriculture area, has been achieved. Another important milestone, the
introduction of a structured rural extension service for small farmers, however, has not been met,
as most support for small farmers is being provided under individual projects (including the
Bank’s Natural Resource Management Project, which aims at supporting the adoption of sound
environmental practices in the rural areas). The Bank is providing support to the authorities in
meeting this CAS outcome and is currently providing support to the Ministry of Agriculture (in
the form of a AAA) to develop a strategy to improve provision of services, including extension
services for family farmers.
26.
In the innovation area, the main CAS outcome of establishing a national innovation
policy has been achieved. Similarly, other important milestones such as an increase in the
number of researchers in industry and an increase in the number of patents have been met.
However, available data related to other milestones points to a deterioration of indicators in
recent years. In the case of the milestone measuring increases in private sector R&D investments,
available data shows that while in 2000 39% of total investments came from the private sector,
the private sector’s share of investments in R&D shrank to 24.6% in 2008. Similarly, available
data for the milestone related to the establishment of new business lines indicates that, while in
2000-2003 36% of firms in the manufacturing sector carried out innovative activities, in 20042006 this percentage had dropped to 28%. Despite these preliminary findings, available data is
insufficient to determine with certainty the lack of achievement of the CAS outcomes.
PILLAR 3: IMPROVING LIVING STANDARDS
27.
Improving living standards was the third pillar of the CAS and an area where the
Government is likely to face challenges over the coming years. Further, reducing inequality and
social inclusion was an overarching goal in the Government’s program. While social indicators
have recovered considerably since the 2002 crisis, progress has been slow and much more needs
to be done in the future.
Country Outcomes
28.
The Government has been partially successful in meeting country goals in poverty
alleviation and social protection. Uruguay managed to reverse the increasing trend in poverty
observed up to 2004. Since 2005, the poverty figures began to decrease mainly due to two
factors: high GDP growth and public policies oriented to poverty alleviation (Plan de Atención
Nacional a la Emergencia Social -PANES; Ingreso Ciudadano; Plan de Equidad). The share of
people living in moderate poverty decreased by 10 percentage points (using the 2002
methodology) between 2005 and 2008 (from 30% to 20%), accounting for about 400,000

Annex B
Page 9 of 27

Uruguayans moving out of poverty. It must be emphasized that child poverty fell substantially in
the period, especially in the group 0-5 years, from 56% in 2005 to 38% in 2008.
29.
In regard to health, the only specific country development goal identified in the 2005
CAS results matrix is the creation of an integrated and fiscally sustainable health system that
would safeguard the health outcomes already achieved. Given that the goal was very broadly
defined and has a long-term horizon, reasonable progress towards this long-term goal would
indicate a positive outcome where data is available. In education, progress in being made
towards the overarching goals of improving quality and equity in primary schools, improving
quality at the secondary level and improving equity at the tertiary level. While the Government
has been partially successful in meeting country goals in education as identified in the 2005
CAS, improving students’ learning and reducing inequity in results still are challenges for the
country, especially in comparison to OECD countries. The educational system still faces
difficulties in transforming available resources at the school, teacher, students and educational
system levels into student learning. Country goals in terms of social inclusion, gender and civil
society were equally broad and far-reaching, which makes it difficult to evaluate progress over
the short time span of CAS implementation, especially in the absence of quantifiable outcomes.
CAS Outcomes
30.
The successful implementation of the PANES Social Emergency Program and its phasing
out and replacement by the newer Family Allowance scheme suggest that this CAS milestone
has been overachieved. However, there is a lack of available data in other social protection
targets, such as the increased financial sustainability of the pension system for which only BPS
(Banco de Previsión Social) data is available. In education, overall, students’ achievement has
improved over the CAS period and the achievement gap between students in the lowest and
highest income levels has been reduced (these overall trends continue even though the results for
the 2005 assessment - and the 2009 not yet released results - cannot be compared with the earlier
results because of important methodological changes to the assessment). Even though in PISA
2006 Uruguay outperformed most of the other Latin American countries, Uruguayan students’
performance was below that of students from OECD countries (with the exception of Mexico)
and presented one of the highest variances in the results (even above what could be expected
given the country’s income inequality). National repetition rates remain high in grade 1 and,
despite some improvements, have not been reduced to the target 10 percent. The Bank has had a
long-standing involvement in the education sector, and supported the Government in its goal of
improving educational quality through the introduction of the full-time school model. Overall,
Bank performance in the sector has been satisfactory, as indicated in a 2006 Project Performance
Assessment Report PPAR for three education projects (Vocational Training and Technological
Development, MECAEP I and II).
31.
While reforms in the health sector are complex and have important fiscal impacts, the
CAS milestone of completing and implementing the national health insurance regulation has
been met. In addition, fiscal transfers to BPS have been reduced. Progress against the additional
CAS milestone of reducing the share of health sector expenditure directed at primary and large
fiscal subsidies cannot be estimated due to lack of data. The ongoing Non-Communicable
Disease Prevention Project continues to support the Government’s efforts to strengthen its health
delivery services and the current health policy framework for non- communicable diseases. CAS

Annex B
Page 10 of 27

Milestones for social inclusion, gender and civil society were broadly defined. In some cases, the
Bank has made a limited but concrete contribution to the achievement of the CAS Milestone. For
example, the Bank provided technical assistance on PANES evaluation and helped establish
participatory M&E systems. This contributed to the achievement of the broad CAS Milestone of
strengthening social impact evaluation frameworks across all Bank supported reforms. In other
cases, CAS Milestones were not linked to Bank support (i.e. maintaining consensus on the
economic program) or the CAS Milestone was so broadly defined that the extent of progress
made towards the given milestone could not be assessed or was not quantifiable.
IV.

OVERALL BANK PERFORMANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED

32.
Bank performance over the CAS period has been strong. The planned lending
program was largely delivered. A stronger partnership with the Government was formed and the
quality of the dialogue improved substantially over the CAS period. The opening of the country
office and a constant Bank presence on the ground facilitated these achievements.
33.
The quality of Bank lending has been high. The renovation of the portfolio which
occurred over the CAS period was driven by a frank and open dialogue with the authorities at
both the central and sectoral level. Moreover, project identification was completely demand
driven, resulting in a portfolio which is more diversified than in the past. The generally high
quality of Bank lending during the period is evidenced by a generally good progress in portfolio
implementation and by the achievement of the projects’ development objectives.
34.
The additional financing instrument was used selectively. In the case of the education
project, it was used to cover financing gaps which arose because of price escalations in civil
works which could have otherwise negatively impacted the achievement of the project’s physical
objectives. Other planned additional financing operations (transport project and natural resources
management project) did not materialize as funds were still available under the respective
operations.
35.
The Bank was proactive in restructuring operations with components where
implementation was lagging. In the case of the Institution Building Technical Assistance
Project (IBTAL), the Bank took a proactive stance in amending the operation by deleting the
customs component, which was plagued by issues that could not be foreseen by either the
authorities or the Bank at the time the operation was designed (i.e. corruption scandals in a
highly politicized setting).
36.
Experiences indicate that AAA was generally well prepared and relevant. It was also
well received and extensively debated, which is partly due to Uruguay’s participative culture and
to the institutional setting. In some cases, as for the work on PANES and on capital markets,
policy advice under the Bank AAA translated into legislation and actual policy. In other cases, it
is still too early to determine whether the Bank’s advice will materialize into policy actions. As
the challenge for the Bank in the future is that of adding value in an increasingly sophisticated
setting, a formal evaluation of the impact and relevance of AAA completed during the CAS
period (see Annex 3 for a complete list) would be very useful in terms of taking stock of the
Bank’s analytical work to date and guide its future direction.

Annex B
Page 11 of 27

Lessons Learned
37.

A number of important lessons can be derived from the Bank’s experience in Uruguay.

38.
The consensual nature of Uruguay’s policy making environment affects the pace of
implementation of reforms. Hence, in Uruguay reforms take a long time to mature, but
they tend to be sustained once implemented. A case in point is the approval of the bankruptcy
law, and, more generally, reforms in the financial sector. Although at a slow pace, not only were
reforms successfully implemented, but Uruguay is now up to international best practice in areas
such as prudential regulation for banks. As country ownership of reforms is critical, the
programmatic structure of the program under the 2005 CAS, providing support for key reforms
through the DPL series, was in retrospect the right one, allowing time for reforms to come to
fruition, while focusing largely on implementation of measures for which the GoU had already
obtained approval or for which legislation had been submitted to Parliament.
39.
The flexible design of the 2005 CAS and the programmatic nature of development
policy lending allowed the Bank to react quickly during the global financial crisis and to
adjust its support so as to provide Uruguay with the needed contingent financing. Further,
the 2008 CAS Progress Report envisaged a plan for dealing with the global financial turbulence,
including the possibility of an increase in the CAS envelope. By contrast, the 2000 CAS
proposed a more rigid program, strictly linked to country performance and, when the Argentine
crisis arose in 2002, the Bank had to resort to Special SALs to provide short-term relief, at the
expense of creating medium-term payment problems.
40.
Long-term Bank engagement in a sector is essential as it builds trust and enables a
more fluid policy dialogue. In the water sector, considerable advances were made, particularly
in terms of improving efficiency, transparency and effectiveness. In retrospect, the Bank’s longterm engagement through a series of APLs was the right instrument as it enabled the Bank and
the authorities to not only design a road map for reforms, but also to periodically revise the
objectives and priorities that were originally set out for the sector. In addition, the experience
with APL1 and ALP2 underscores the importance of continuity in Bank involvement in the
sector without gaps.
41.
Bank presence in a sector needs to continue despite setbacks, as persistency will
eventually pay off. Again, the experience in the water sector in Uruguay is illustrative, as the
Bank decided to remain engaged despite the 2003 reversal in policy on private sector
participation in the sector. The Bank was able to differentiate between the overall objective of its
involvement in the sector, which was to create a modern and efficient water sector, and the tools
to achieve this objective. Private sector participation was simply a tool, and in the postreferendum period the Bank focused on achieving the same results with different tools, such as
benchmarking and improvements in corporate governance of OSE, which in turn greatly
improved transparency. In this regard, the Bank’s experience in an advanced MIC such as
Uruguay would provide a useful example to other developing countries.
42.
Uruguay is an increasingly sophisticated borrower, which is fully aware of its needs,
and the Bank should respect its priorities. As the economic situation continues to recover, the
relationship between the Bank and the Government is likely to evolve towards the kind of

Annex B
Page 12 of 27

relationship the Bank has with advanced MICs such as Chile and Mexico. Uruguay has a fairly
well developed procurement system, and the level of corruption is relatively low, which should
be taken into account by the Bank in the preparation of future operations. In this sophisticated
setting, the Bank should mobilize staff with state of the art expertise. In the case of the IBTAL
customs component, which failed to implement for broader political issues, the Bank’s lack of
in-house expertise in the customs area slowed down implementation.
43.
The design of operations entailing a high degree of coordination with other donors
should be carefully evaluated. Again, in the case of the IBTAL, the Bank decided to support
only one component (human resources) in a broad customs reform program of fourteen
components, with the IDB supporting the remaining thirteen. While coordination with the IADB
was largely successful, in the future greater care should be exercised at the time of project design
in selecting areas to be supported out of a larger program, and in ensuring that the areas selected
are closely interrelated.
44.
In the sophisticated environment described above, the Bank will have to sharpen its
focus and concentrate on areas where it can add value. While it is becoming increasingly
difficult for the Bank to effectively contribute to the policy debate, the Bank should explore new
areas where its international experience could add value. One possible area of future Bank
involvement is the impact evaluation agenda, where the Bank could add value by providing its
view as an independent evaluator. In addition, a closer collaboration with local institutions and
think tanks leading to joint analytical work would add value through knowledge sharing and
capacity building.

Achieve a sustained primary surplus
commensurate with the targeted reduction in
debt/GDP ratio.

2. Fiscal Management

Achieve improved sovereign credit ratings.

Reduce debt burden to a level commensurate
with sustained macroeconomic stability.

Development Objectives and
Outcomes
1. Debt Sustainability

The tax reform of 2007 introduced a Dual Personal Income tax on all
domestic sources of income (IRPF).

In 2005 and 2006, tax revenues were 17.9 and 18.8 percent of GDP,
respectively. A comprehensive tax reform was enacted on July 1, 2007, that
was expected to be at least revenue neutral. Due to the negative effect of the
financial crisis as well as of the draught, revenues as a share of GDP
dropped to 18.0 percent of GDP in 2007 and to 17.7 percent of GDP in
2008. This trend reverted in 2009, with revenues slightly increasing to 18.0
percent of GDP, and the recovery is expected to continue in subsequent
years.

Tax revenues as a share of GDP are maintained
at levels required to meet primary surplus target
while protecting essential social expenditure.

Personal income tax is introduced.

The primary fiscal balance moved from a position of large deficits during
1998-2001 to surpluses of 3-4 percent of GDP in 2004-2007. The surplus
was reduced to 1.3 percent of GDP in 2008, falling short of the
Government’s target of 3 percent of GDP; this was mainly due to the sharp
decline in the surplus of the state-owned electricity company (UTE) as a
consequence of the severe draught in 2008. The fiscal position deteriorated
further in 2009 (1.1 percent of GDP), due to the effect of both the draught
and the financial crisis.

Spreads increased slowly throughout 2008, from a minimum of 141 in May
2007, but the situation worsened in October, rising to a maximum of 834
basis points. Since then, the spreads have fallen to 263 basis points in
November 2009.

Sovereign credit ratings have improved (for government bonds Moody's
rating increased from B1 in 2006 to Ba3 in January 2009). The outlook of
rating agencies was revised to positive from stable given Uruguay’s
resilience to external shocks and its prudent macroeconomic management.

Public debt declined from 101.0 percent of GDP at the end of 2003 to an
estimated 57.0 percent of GDP by mid 2009. The share of foreign-currency
denominated debt has fallen from 90.2 percent of total debt in 2004 to 65.1
percent in 2009.

Debt Management Unit in the MEF has made great progress in improving
the debt profile. Dialogue with Debt Office established under PRIDPL1.

Progress to date

Primary surplus is sustained at the level of 2004
or somewhat higher.

Quality dialogue on debt sustainability supports
government decision making on debt policy.

PART I – REDUCING VULNERABILITY
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 13 of 27

Develop capital markets and de-dollarize the
economy

Reduce financial sector vulnerability and
improve the efficiency of financial
intermediation.

3. Financial Sector

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Deposit insurance program is funded.

The financial sector recovered markedly from the general run on deposits
during the 2002 crisis and the system currently benefits from the reforms
introduced over the last years in of regulation and supervision. Currently,
Uruguayan banks are characterized by a liquid balance sheet, primarily
funded with deposits and liquid assets. Risk management and internal
control systems have been strengthened across financial institutions. There
is increasing disclosure of financial information to the market by the
Superintendency of Financial Institutions. Authorities have taken various
measures to internalize credit risks from dollarization and cross border
activities. The largest state bank, BROU, has made improvements in
information availability, risk management and internal controls. Finally,
after several years on hiatus, the proposed reform of the BCU charter was
approved by Parliament in October 2008 and has been implemented during
2009. The reorganization plan is aimed at enhancing BCU´s independence,
and at strengthening its supervisory functions as well as the banking
resolution framework. In particular, the law created the Financial Services
Superintendency within the BCU, which unifies the three divisions
responsible for bank, insurance, and securities supervision. Also, the reform
includes the creation of an independent entity named Corporación de
Protección del Ahorro Bancario in charge of managing deposits insurance.

Framework for bank regulation and supervision
is strengthened.

The Deposits Insurance fund has been constituted and is fully operational.
The law to reform the BCU charter included the creation of a unit
independent from the BCU called Corporación de Protección del Ahorro
Bancario that would perform the tasks of the Superintendencia de
Protección del Ahorro Bancario. The newly-created institution has

The state housing bank , BHU, has undergone an in-depth restructuring
process that has precluded it from offering new loans or taking new
deposits until very recently. Nevertheless, on December 8, 2008, the central
bank (BCU) announced its authorization to BHU to begin lending again.
Mortgage lending has started on a small scale, limited to the Montevideo
areas and to clients with two years worth of savings.

The tax reform eliminated 10 low-yield taxes that in 2006 represented 6.4
percent of total tax collection of the tax administration. (see Improving
Living Standards below).

Progress to date

Restructuring program for BHU is completed.

Number of taxes is reduced.
Social expenditure reforms are introduced

PART I – REDUCING VULNERABILITY
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 14 of 27

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Measures introduced to promote capital markets
and development of peso-based financial
services

Progress to date

In terms of information transparency and disclosure, a draft law establishing
a new entity in charge of accounting standards, Ente Emisor de Normas
Contables Adecuadas, was submitted to Parliament and is under review. A
recently-signed decree puts in place a sustainable and effective process for
the adoption of the most recent IFRS standards.

Finally, progress is being made on securities clearance and settlement
systems. The Financial Services Superintendency within the BCU has
designed a plan for the oversight of the settlement activities of the two stock
exchanges. In addition, the BCU has decided to implement a new large
value payments system that will include a securities depository for both
public and private securities.

The BCU is currently reorganizing in order to address capital market issues
and facilitate the implementation of the new Law. Regarding improvements
in corporate governance, BCU developed regulations for the presentation of
consolidated audited financial statements and information to be included in
the annual reports of issuers, pension funds administrators, and trust
administrators. The BCU is also working on the implementation of riskbased supervision of securities markets’ participants. Additional measures
include the certification and professionalization of key market players.

The new capital markets bill was approved by Parliament on November 24,
2009 and promulgated by the President on December 2, 2009. The drafting
process has included consultations with private sector participants and the
request of experts´ opinion. More important, the new law has been built on
the shortcomings of the 1996 Law and contains several provisions designed
to enhance investors’ confidence in capital markets such as, corporate
governance requirements, wider scope of supervision, controls on market
abuse, and stronger disciplinary sanctions.

responsibility for the resolution process for troubled banks as it can
immediately dispose of a troubled bank’s assets and make timely payments
to the depositors. The COPAB is in charge of running the deposit insurance
scheme. At this point, the Superintendency is still operational until the
Senate approves the board of the new entity.

PART I – REDUCING VULNERABILITY
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 15 of 27

Government seeks new trade opportunities both
within Mercosur and bilaterally.

Exports expand in line with the medium-term
macro framework and the structure of exports
continues to diversify.

Ensure sustainable and efficient use of
natural resources including ecosystems and
native species.

Promote regional coordination to address
food safety and quality.

Increase production, value added and exports
of agricultural products.

Progress to date

Regional collaboration has improved substantially, with Uruguay playing a
key role. As a result, Agriculture Ministers and Veterinary Departments of
the “expanded “ Mercosur (including Chile and Bolivia) have made
progress towards a common approach. Bank assistance was provided in the
form of a TA and a complementary grant (ongoing) for regional animal
health issues. Overall, major strides have been made in the prevention of
animal disease, improved food safety and the enhancement of Uruguay’s
image as an exporter of beef products.
Presently, Uruguay does not have a structured rural extension service, and
most support for small farmers is provided through specific projects. It is
therefore difficult to report any significant change in the country’s public
extension system. On ongoing Bank AAA is assisting the Ministry of
Agriculture to develop a strategy to improve provision of services,
including extension, for family farmers. The Bank’s Natural Resources
Management project is supporting the adoption of sound agroenvironmental practices in the rural areas including biodiversity
conservation.

Regional agreement signed on Foot & Mouth
disease control.

Reformed extension services for small farmers.

In January 2007, a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA)
with the USA was signed.

Uruguay has diversified its trade away from its Mercosur partners: in 1999,
45 percent of exports were destined to Mercosur; by 2008 the share of
Mercosur exports had fallen to 27 percent, giving way to a substantial
growth in exports to non-traditional markets, particularly to the European
Union, Russia and China. Noteworthy is the fall in the share of its exports
to Argentina from 18 percent in 1999 down to 9 percent in 2008.

Real export growth was on average 13.5 percent over 2004-2008. Despite
the recent financial turmoil and a worsening of the terms of trade, exports
also performed well in 2008, with a real growth of 10.1 percent. The
negative effect of the crisis on exports was felt in 2009, when exports only
grew by 2.5 percent. Exports are expected to slowly recover in 2010,
though well below previous years’ rates.

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

2. Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environmental Management

Promote exports and diversify export
markets.

1. Trade Policies

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 16 of 27

Better alignment of water, energy and
telecom performance indicators and prices
with international benchmarks.

Reduce by half the poor without access to
basic water services.

Ensure universal access to infrastructure and
public services at sustainable cost.

3. Infrastructure

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Carbon Finance operations: Preparation of a 10MW Wind- Farm Power
Project has been completed (UTE). The project seeks to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by grid-connected electricity generation from wind power.
The emissions reduction will arise from the displacement of fossil-fuelbased electricity generation on the national grid. The project activity
should generate 178,878 CERs during the first crediting period. Total
estimated reductions
(tons of CO2e) are 178,878.

Attainment of national targets on carbon
finance.

No data available on mobility of the poor in urban centers. Due to
improvements in the quality of the overall road network and despite
increases in gasoline prices, operating costs for cars and light vehicles have
remained steady while operating costs for large vehicles have decreased
very slightly.
Regulatory accounting implemented in the WSS and electricity sectors with
both state owned utilities following specific procedures; performance
indicators for the WSS, electricity and telecommunication sectors disclosed
and published periodically; and service quality regulations for WSS, postal

Improved mobility of the poor in urban centers
and lower cost of transport.

Introduce yardstick competition in water and
energy.

World Bank Institute Carbon Finance Assist Program: Uruguay has
improved its capacity to fully participate in the flexible mechanisms of the
Kyoto Protocol to the United Nation’s Framework Convention on Climate
Change. The portfolio of CDM projects comprises 33 activities, By May
2009, the DNA had approved 7 projects, reducing almost 300,000 tons of
CO2e per year. There were 3 registered activities and 2 of them had issued
CERs. Furthermore, there were 6 projects under validation and/or
requesting national approval, with estimated reductions of almost 200,000
ton CO2e per year.

A Drought Prevention Program in rural areas of the northern and eastern
departments co-finances the construction of small reservoirs and water
distribution equipment for livestock. Efforts are underway to develop a
Rural Water Strategy (with assistance provided by the Bank under the
Natural Resources Project)
No information available on targets.

Progress to date

Implementation of an integrated water resources
management framework.

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 17 of 27

Policy definition, regulation and operation
functions better delimited and policy making
capacity within ministries and regulators
strengthened.

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Progress to date

Underway. Well functioning UFW unit created in OSE which is tackling
UFW more holistically by testing and rolling out new initiatives, including
new financial incentive systems. In 2008, OSE met target UFW indicators
for the year for country as a whole, Artigas and Metro; however, it did not
meet target indicators in four departments. OSE continues to work on
improving UFW under the APL2 project.
Paysandu: Engineering design completed. Process to obtain environmental
license by DINAMA for the construction of the plant in being finalized.
Salto: OSE began the engineering design and obtained the environmental
viability for the location of the plant.
In the power sector, progress has been made in the separation of policy
making (MIEM), regulation (URSEA) and operation (ADME, UTE and
private generators). So far, four private generators have been authorized to
be part of the National Interconnected System. In the WSS sector the
creation of a regulator URSEA (2003) and policy-maker DINASA (2006)
has provided the separation of functions. However, further consolidation is
required, including a better definition of roles and responsibilities.
In June 2007, the GOU created a National Commission for Energy Policy,
including all political parties represented in Congress. In 2006, the GOU
approved and URSEA started to enforce service quality standards for
electricity distribution and commercialization services. A recent WB report
found URSEA with a good degree of autonomy compared with other
regional regulatory agencies. In the WSS sector, the creation of DINASA
(2006) has strengthened capacity to define policy in the water sector. A
Water Law driven by DINASA was approved by Parliament in September
2009. DINASA has strengthened its water resources and urban drainage
technical and policy capacities.
Current conditions of the regional electricity markets and security supply
concerns have made it less urgent to disintegrate UTE (power company) in

Programs implemented for reducing losses and
unaccounted-for water.

Construction of sewage treatment plants in Salto
and Pasyandu.

Separate functions for policy definition,
regulation and operations.

Strengthened policy-making capacity within line
ministries and autonomy of regulators.

Vertical disintegration of public monopolies.

and electricity distribution in place and operational. OSE continues
collecting and reporting to the public performance indicators from its
benchmarking system. .

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 18 of 27

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Progress to date

Performance indicators for the WSS, electricity and telecommunications
sectors disclosed and published periodically by URSEA and URSEC.
Parliament has approved and the Executive has promulgated laws
authorizing URSEA and URSEC to request information from the public and
private operators of electricity, natural gas, WSS and telecommunications
services

Little quantifiable progress at this time.

No progress to report at this time.

URSEA performs efficiently its regulatory tasks
(as per monitoring methodology and targets to
be established).

Further de-politicization of Board of Directors.
Petroleum prices are maintained at import parity
levels and electricity prices are maintained to
reflect cost of service.

UTE has made progress towards reducing electricity distribution losses,
which reached 17.1% in 2006. Unfortunately, they increased again after
2006 and currently stand at around 17,9 %.

Regulatory accounting implemented in the WSS and electricity sectors with
both state owned utilities following specific procedures. URSEA completed
the technical work in the natural gas sector. URSEC has completed the
technical work needed for the implementation of regulatory accounting in
the telecommunication sector.

Introduction of regulatory accounting.

UTE distribution losses decrease from 22% in
2004 to 15% in 2009.

URSEA is becoming a key player in the power market as regulator,
enforcer of service quality regulations and approver of safety standards for
electric equipment.

Strengthened competition authority of URSEA
and URSEC.

the short term. Current strategy of the GOU is to diversify power generation
sources allowing UTE to become the main buyer in the wholesale market to
provide incentives for private participation, particularly on renewable
energy investment. . Efforts to break up public monopolies in the WSS
sector (including the successful Maldonado concession) were reversed
following the 2004 Constitutional Amendment. OSE and IMM (Intendencia
Municipal de Montevideo) retain the monopoly in the sector.

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 19 of 27

GPU is advancing plans for ADME to contract UTE to provide dispatching
services under ADME rules. Eleven private firms have already been
authorized to generate electricity and connect their facilities to the National
Interconnected System. Most of them generate from renewable sources.
Study on the regulation of the natural gas sector is concluded. Audit on
performance of natural gas operators concluded. URSEA continues to
regulate by contracts.

Further deepening of wholesale market by 2009.

Natural gas law is enacted.

Stimulating innovation for competitiveness
and employment creation.

Increase protection for contract and property
rights.

Improve framework for participation in
public services and infrastructure.

The bankruptcy law (Law18.387) and its regulations were approved in
October 2008 and became effective in April 2009. Judges have been
trained and courts assigned to bankruptcy cases have been equipped.. The
IBTAL project provided support for these activities. Information on
number of cases resolved under the new law is not available.
The National Innovation Agency has been established, a. Board was
appointed in mid-2007 and the General Manager was appointed in October
2007. A number of innovation related programs that were previously
dispersed under other ministries or public agencies are in the process of
being transferred to the Agency. In the first two years of operation, ANII
established 30 funding modalities, or instruments, in order to promote
innovation in Uruguay. 78 innovation projects have already been selected
for funding.

National Innovation Policy established.

No progress reported at this time.

Enactment of new bankruptcy legislation and
50% of cases resolved under new law.

15% reduction in administrative and judicial
appeals of contract cases.

Approval by ADME of a first set of PPAs
(Power Purchase Agreements) and request
proposals for three ongoing energy contracts to
be replaced by PPAs.

The GOU has approved seven private firms to become generators and be
connected to the National Interconnected System. In the short run,
additional firms producing renewable energy will also become generators.
These generators sell their production to the spot market or to UTE through
short and medium term Power Purchase Contracts.

UTE has already called for bids for the supply of a converter station that
will be part of a 500 MW interconnection with Brazil.

Progress to date

At least 200 MW of additional interconnection
capacity is under construction by 2009 and longterm contracts are passed with Argentina and
Brazil for supply of electricity and gas.

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

4. Enabling Environment for the Private Sector

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 20 of 27

Enhance de-centralization and improve local
service delivery.

Foster citizen participation in collaboration
with civil society.

Reorganize public sector functions to
enhance efficiency, transparency and
accountability.

5. Modernization of the State

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

100% use by executive units in the central
administration of SICE (Sistema Integrado de
Compras Estatales) within the public
administration.
Adoption of TOCAF (Texto Ordenado de
Contabilidad y Administración Financiera).

New business lines established.

TOCAF was first adopted in 1991, and there were several amendments to
the law, including a last amendment in 2001. However, the TOCAF has
been adopted in a general way, and lacks harmonized procedures and
documentation. No progress has been made in this regard during the 20052010 CAS period. The Bank-funded Institution Building TA Loan (IBTAL)
does not include support for the implementation of either SICE or TOCAF.

SICE used by all executive units in the central administration, except for
ASSE (health services) and the Presidency.

In 2001-2003 only 36% of firms in the manufacturing sector carried out
innovative activities. In 2003, total investment in innovative activities for
the sector was equal to 6.2% of the aggregate manufacturing value. In
2004-2006 only 28% of firms in the manufacturing sector carried out
innovative activities. In 2006, total investment in innovative activities for
the sector was equal to 9.3% of the aggregate manufacturing value. (The
fall in the percentage of innovative firms in 2004-2006 with respect to the
2001-2003 period is inversely proportional to the increase in the size of the
industrial sector, which was due to the favorable macroeconomic context).

The total number of patents awarded increased from 27 in 2005 to 72 in
2008.

28% of researchers employed in industry in 2006, as compared to 15% of
researchers employed in industry in 2004. Later data is not yet available.

More researchers in industry and agribusiness.

Increased number of patents.

Available data indicates that in 2000 39% of total investment in R&D came
from the private sector. In 2008, the Government’s share of investment in
R&D increased to 60.2% (from 20.3% in 2000) and the private sector’s
share shrank to 24.6%. In absolute terms, public investment in science and
technology almost tripled between 2005 and 2008, from US$36.6 million to
US$102.8.

Progress to date

Increased private sector R&D investments.

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 21 of 27

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

25% cost reduction for central administration
from purchase of goods as a result of
competitive bids.
Increased percentage of users satisfied by
government performance and public service
delivery as evidenced by the regular survey
data.

Expanded and more effective use of resultsbased budgeting and performance audits.

Progress to date

No progress reported at this time. Percentage of user satisfied by
government performance not an IBTAL-measured result.

Costs of medicines purchased by UCA are 35% lower than costs in retail
market. No information for food purchases.

Expanded use of results-based budgeting has been achieved. The next
five-year budget is being prepared under a programmatic format, which will
further strengthen the link between budget allocations and results.
Performance audits are not supported by the Bank and no information is
available.

PART II-SUSTAINING GROWTH
CAS
Outcomes1 and Milestones

CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex B
Page 22 of 27

Create integrated and fiscally sustainable
health system that safeguards the health
outcomes already achieved.

2. Health

Increase pension coverage of people in old
age from 87% to al least 90% by 2009 while
spending on pensions declines from 18.3% of
GDP (avg. 2000-2003) to below 17% by
2009.

Reduce urban poverty from 31% (2003/04)
to 20 % (2009). Albeit baseline missing,
reduce rural poverty in tandem with urban
poverty reduction till 2009.

The health reform process prescribed by law has been implemented. Now,
the insurance premium is the same for all citizens and it is collected through
the BPS (Banco de Previsión Social- Previsional Social Bank) by the
FONASA (-Fondo Nacional de Salud- National Health Fund ). The
JUNASA (Junta Nacional de Salud -National Health Board) buys health
services from private and public Integrated Health Insurances enterprises,
and pays the services by capitation adjusted by risk (sex and age) and
according to sanitary goals (6% of the total capitation payment is adjusted
according to sanitary goals). As a consequence of the ongoing process, the
coverage rate for the population between 0 and 18 years has increased.

A participatory M&E system of social policy was established in MIDES
and it is up and running.

More regular poverty monitoring in place.
National Health insurance regulation completed
and implemented.

Proportion of the elderly covered by social security remained unchanged
since 2006 (it was 85.3 % in 2006 and 85% in 2008). In 2008, the poorest
quintile coverage was over 70%.

Pension expenditures reached around 15% of GDP in 2006, and have been
declining as a percentage of GDP since 2006. Although data for 2007 and
2008 is unavailable, data from a BPS survey indicates a decline in
expenditures by 0.8% of GDP between 2006 and 2008. Since BPS is the
largest public pension scheme, we can reasonably conclude that overall
pension expenditure as a percentage of GDP have been declining since
2006.

87% of the first quintile children and 76% of second quintile children were
receiving family allowances in 2008.

Pension coverage of people in old age increases
to at least 90%.

Pension system becomes more sustainable
financially with more flexibility to include
workers. Pension spending not to exceed 17% of
GDP by 2009.

Family allowance program has at least 60
percent of take-up among the poor by 2009.

Social emergency program (PANES)
implemented, reaches 200,000 beneficiaries by
2006, and is largely phased out by 2009.

Progress to date

PANES reached a maximum of 85,000 households (nearly 350,000 people)
before being closed and replaced by the new Family Allowances scheme.
As of August 2009, 375,000 children were receiving the new benefit.

PART III-IMPROVING LIVING STANDARDS
CAS
Outcomes and Milestones

1. Social Protection and Poverty Alleviation

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Annex B
Page 23 of 27

Improved quality and equity in primary
school: full-time primary school model
reaches 20% of all primary students,
representing 40% of all poor students by
2009.
Improved quality in secondary school:
dropout rates decrease to 35-40% by 2009.

3. Education

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Performance of 15 year old students in PISA
2006 is higher than in PISA 2003.

Achievement gap between students from low
and high income backgrounds is reduced.

Percentage of students achieving proficiency
levels in math and language increases by 15
percentage points by June 2010.

First grade repetition rates fall to less than 10%
by June 2010.

School enrollment rate of 4 year olds reaches at
least 95% by June 2010.

Full time primary school model reaches 20% of
all students, representing 40% of poor students.

Fiscal transfers to BPS reduced in line with
medium-term macro framework.

Share of health sector expenditure directed
towards primary and large fiscal subsidies for
BPS health preventative care increases from 0.4
% in 2003 to 4% in 2009.

Progress to date

Uruguayan students’ average performance in PISA varied by subject.

The achievement gap between students from the lowest and highest income
background in national assessments of primary education quality steadily
declined in the 1996-2005 period. The 2009 is undergoing and results will
be available in April 2010.

The 2005 national assessment methodology is different from that employed
in the previous national assessments (1996, 1999 and 2002), and thus this
comparison cannot be made.

Repetition rate in urban schools have gone down from 20.2% in 2002 to
13.7% in 2008. Repetition rate in Full Time Schools was 14.4% in Full
Time Schools and it was 10.1% in 2008.

By 2008 school enrollment of 5 years old is almost universal, and school
enrollment rate of 4 years old is 75% in 2008.

10% of students in public primary schools are attending full time schools in
2009. These schools are targeted to poor students. and 75% of them come
from disadvantaged or very disadvantaged backgrounds.

The Government budget law established a gradual reduction in the credit
assigned to transfers to the Banco de Previsión Social (BPS) for the period
2005-2009, from 2.2 % of GDP in 2005 to 1.2% of GDP in 2009.. Actual
transfers to BPS decreased from 1.8% of GDP in 2005 to less than 1% of
GDP in 2009.

No data available for comparison. The allocation of the Ministry of
Health’s Budget in “Planning, surveillance and control of quality of
healthcare and health promotion activities” was 0.18% in 2006 and 3.6% in
2009.

ASSE (Administración de los Servicios de Salud del Estado- -State Health
Services Administration) ) decentralization had been completed, but the
internal reform processes to adapt its organization to the regulation are
slowly ongoing.

PART III-IMPROVING LIVING STANDARDS
CAS
Outcomes and Milestones

Annex B
Page 24 of 27

Improved equity in higher education; share of
enrollments in higher education for students
from bottom two income quintiles has increased
from 17% in 2003 to about 25% in 2009.

Secondary school dropout rates decrease to 25%
by June 2010.

Full implementation of national plan against
domestic violence at central and regional
levels.

Gender mainstreaming in Government
policies and launching anti-discriminatory
initiatives.

Implementation of the Equality of
Opportunities and Rights Plan through
strengthening IWA, and partnership with
relevant sectors.

Empower civil society-- including youth,
women, and afro-descendants--to access
increased social and economic opportunities.

Reduced levels of domestic violence.

Decreased unemployment and poverty rates
among socially excluded groups.

Social consensus on economic program is
maintained.

Framework for social impact evaluation is
strengthened across all Bank-supported reforms.

Civil society outreach efforts increase.

Progress to date

As per national plan, first-ever cadre of multidisciplinary teams to handle
violence cases created country-wide and specialized research regarding
causes of domestic violence conducted. National unified violence against
women registry designed in order to provide accurate number of incidents.
Dissemination of information brochures with PANES package provided
greater awareness of this issue and increased number of cases reported.
As an additional result on gender mainstreaming, the capacity of the
capacity of the Women's Institute within MIDES has been strengthened.

Unemployment (annual average) continues decreasing from 13.1percent in
2004 to 9.1percent in 2007 and 7.5 percent in 2008. Notwithstanding the
economic slowdown, unemployment kept decreasing in 2009 to 7.3 percent.
Moderate poverty and extreme poverty have also decreased significantly
from 31.9 and 3.9 in 2004 to 20.5 and 1.5 respectively in 2008.

President Vázquez ended his presidency with an approval rating of over
60% (in November 2009) , a credit to his steady handling of the economy.
Moreover, President Vázquez’s personal popularity reached 64%’ at the
end of the administration period (with only 22% disapproving of his
performance).

In-country capacity to conduct social impact evaluation strengthened with
MIDES. Technical assistance on PANES evaluation using a variety of
approaches delivered. Participatory M&E system in MIDES established.
Capacity of local civil society to monitor quality in service delivery
strengthened.

By 2005, more than 60% of the higher education students come from the
two riches quintiles, and less than 15% of the students come from the two
lower income quintiles.

By 2006, the secondary school dropout rate remain high (50%) and the
majority of the drop-outs belong to the lowest income quintiles.

Students had lower average scores in 2006 than in 2003 in language and
science, but had higher average scores in mathematics. Results from the
2009 PISA exam will be available in December 2010.

PART III-IMPROVING LIVING STANDARDS
CAS
Outcomes and Milestones

4. Social Inclusion, Gender and Civil Society

Improved equity in higher education: share of
enrollment in higher education for students
from bottom two income quintiles increased
from 17% in 2003 to about 25% in 2009.

Development Objectives and
Outcomes

Annex B
Page 25 of 27

Annex B
Page 26 of 27

Attachment 2
Comparison of Programmed and Actual Lending FY05-FY10
Loan Amounts (US$ Millions)
Operations Proposed and/or Approved
2005 CAS Base
2007 Progress
Case Program
Report Base Case
Program
FY05
Transport Infrastructure Maintenance and
70.00
…
Rural Access
Int. Nat. Resources and Biodiversity
30.00
…
Management
DPL I18
75.00
…
FY06
Nat. Health Insurance and Soc. Sec. Support
20.00 …
DPLII
75.00 …
Infrastructure (Energy)
70.00 …
FY07
Innovation/Science & Technology19
35.00 …
20
DPLIII
75.00 …
Water Sector APL II
30.00 …
Institutions Bldg.
15.00 …
Suppl. Financing for Foot & Mouth
…
…
Disease21
FY08
Education
25.00
…
Coastal and Marine Resources
30.00
…
DPLIV
50.00
Non -Communicable Disease Prevention22
…
25.30
FY09
Social, Institutional & Infrastr. Investments
100.00
…
PRIIDPL II23
…
300.00
FY10
Social, Institutional & Infrastr. Investments
100.00
…
Third Basic Education Additional Financing
15.00
Transport Infrastr. Maintenance and Rural
50.00
Access - Additional Financing
Natural Resources Mgmt. – Additional Fin.
30.00
Railways Rehabilitation
50.00
IBTAL Additional Financing
10.00
Environmental Project
10.00

18

Actual Lending

70.00
30.00
75.38
Not Done
Not Done
Not Done
26.00
100.00
50.00
12.10
6.50

Not Done
Not Done
Not Done
25.30
Not Done
400.00
Not Done
29.90
Not Done
Not Done
Not Done
Not Done
Not Done

Social Program Support Loan DPL
Promoting Innovation to Enhance Technology
20
PRI DPL I
21
Not in the original CAS, but approved prior to the CAS Progress Report
22
Instead of National Health Insurance Project originally planned for FY06.
23
The CAS PR indicates that PRIDPLII and PRIDPLIII could be replaced by a $300 DDO. This operation, called PRIDPLII, was later
on increased to $400 million.
19

Annex B
Page 27 of 27

Attachment 3
Comparison of Programmed and Actual AAA
FY05-FY10
Fiscal
Year
FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08

2005 CAS

2007 Progress Report

Actual Delivered

-Policy Notes
-Sources of Growth
-Public Expenditure Review
-Health Strategy

-January 2005
-March 2004
-June 2005
- December 2005

-CPAR
-ROSC (Insolvency)
-ROSC (Governance)
-Investment Climate
Assessment
-Equity and Quality of
Education
-Country Gender Assessment
 Labor Opportunities
Study
 IDF on Legal Status
of Women
- Financial Sector Assessment

-December 2005
-August 2006
-June 2006
-November 2007
-February 2007
-November 2008
-December 2008
-May 2006
-ROSC (Accounting and Auditing)

-May 2006

-DPR Infrastructure
-Programmatic DPR Social
Sectors

Income Transfer Policy Study

‐December 2008

-Strengthening Energy Security
NLTA
-Opportunities and Informality24

‐June 2007

-Programmatic DPR
Agriculture & Environment

-Strengthening M&E of Social Policy
NLTA
-Programmatic DPR Infrastructure
-Investment Climate Assessment
(ICA)
-Programmatic PSIA Tax Reform
- Railways Efficiency Study
-Payments System Fee for Services
Study
-CEM Trade and Competitiveness
-NLTA on Quality of Spending on
Social Programs
-Pro-Employment Strategy
Family Farm Development

-June 2007

-June 2010 (planned)
-July 2007
-May 2008
-January 2008
-May 2008
-December 2009
-June 2009
-December 2009
No Done
Not Done
-June 2010 (planned)

Health Reforms Implementation
NLTA

24

-June 210 (planned)

Not included in the 2008 CAS Progress Report, but requested by the authorities following the presentation of the
regional study on inequalities and opportunities in 2009.

Annex C
Page 1 of 5

Annex C
Macroeconomic Framework

1.
Recovery from the 2002 Crisis. Growth in 2004-2008 averaged 6.6 percent per year
and largely resulted from a rebound in domestic demand. Investment, private consumption and
exports were the main drivers of growth during that period. Investment was fueled by large FDI
inflows during the 2006-2008 period and private consumption that expanded on the heels of
declining unemployment, rising real wages and increased bank lending. Export growth averaged
13 percent per year in 2004-2008. By sector, manufacturing, transport and communication,
wholesale and retail trade, and construction contributed the most to economic growth;
manufacturing alone accounted for about 29 percent of growth.
2.
Sound macroeconomic management instilled greater resilience to external shocks: the
overall fiscal deficit declined from 3.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to zero in 2007, as expenditures
growth was contained and the revenue tax base expanded. Monetary policy contained
inflationary pressures from higher commodity prices and rising wages, and consumer price
inflation converged to a preannounced target, which has been recently reduced to 4-6 percent.
International reserves accumulation further supported confidence in Uruguay’s currency, which
has been floating since mid 2002.
3.
Public debt as a share of GDP has fallen consistently and the Government’s debt
management policies have successfully reduced medium-term debt obligations. Due to strong
growth, the appreciation of the Uruguayan peso (27 percent), and a better fiscal position (average
primary balance of 3.3 percent in 2004-2008), gross public sector debt decreased by more than
40 percentage points of GDP from 105.0 in 2003 to 61.7 percent in end 2008.
4.
Effective social policies further contributed to job creation and poverty reduction prior to
the 2008 crisis. Social policies, particularly the Plan de Asistencia Nacional a la Emergencia
Social (PANES) as well as the Plan de Equidad that started in 2008, were successful in fighting
extreme poverty, which declined from 3.9 percent in 2004 to 1.5 percent in 2008. Unemployment
reached its lowest level in over a decade in 2008, falling from 13.1 percent in 2004 to 7.9 percent
in 2008.
5.
The Impact of the Recent Global Economic Crisis. The global crisis impacted
Uruguay initially through the financial sector. The Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in midSeptember 2008 sharply raised risk aversion in global financial markets which quickly spread to
Uruguay. Sovereign debt spreads widened substantially in 2008, by over 500 points, peaking at
907 basis points in October 2008 and remaining at high levels throughout the remainder of
200825. From August through December 2008, the peso depreciated by 26.4 percent against the
U.S. dollar and foreign-currency deposits increased from 76 percent of total deposits in August
2008 to 82 percent in May 2009. Inflation started to increase in September 2008 to a high of 9.2
percent in January 2009. Although capital inflows declined, they remained positive at about US$
1.7 billion in 2009, and their composition changed in favor of multilaterals. While private capital
25

The substantial rise in sovereign spreads through the global crisis was not explained by macro fundamentals,
which remained broadly adequate. Rather, it reflected global investor risk aversion towards sovereign paper,
especially from smaller countries such as Uruguay whose sovereign debt tends to be less liquid than other larger
middle-income countries’ debt.

Annex C
Page 2 of 5

inflows accounted for over 75 percent of total capital inflows in 2008, their share dropped to 25
percent in 2009, with large disbursements from multilaterals filling the gap. The overall fiscal
deficit widened from 1.5 to 1.7 percent of GDP in 2009, while the primary surplus declined from
1.3 to 1.1 percent of GDP, as revenues slowed with the crisis and expenditures increased with
fiscal stimulus. A severe drought further raised fiscal pressures as a shortfall in hydroelectric
power generation needed to be covered by costly energy imports.
6.
Although the impact of the global crisis has been moderate, economic activity slowed in
2009. GDP grew by 2.9 percent in 2009, one of the strongest growth performances in the region.
The main factor behind the slowdown in GDP was the decline in investment (-10.7%). The
contribution of public and private consumption was positive but small. The fall in domestic
demand was partly offset by a recovery in foreign absorption, mainly due to a substantial decline
in imports (-8.6 percent) and a moderate increase in exports (2.5 percent). The labor market
experienced a downward adjustment in 2009 Q2, which was however strongly reversed in
subsequent quarters. Unemployment peaked in April 2009 at 8.3 percent following the decline in
output, but fell to 6.6 percent in the last quarter of 2009, the lowest level in over a decade.
Overall, 32,400 new jobs were created during 2009.
7.
The Response to the Global Economic Crisis. The Government responded to the crisis
with a mix of monetary, fiscal and social policies. The Central Bank initially increased interest
rates to contain persistent inflationary pressures, but policy rates started to come down from
March 2009 onwards, as inflationary pressure subsided.26 Fiscal policy responded with a
moderate stimulus package that increased public investment, supported exporters, facilitated
access to credit, and strengthened social protection. Although Uruguay’s relatively high debt-toGDP ratio and underlying inflationary pressures did not provide sufficient space to adopt more
expansionary fiscal measures without threatening macroeconomic stability, the government
successfully avoided a contractionary stance: the Government reallocated public spending
towards objectives with a high growth impact and raised public investment by 0.3 percentage
points of GDP. Furthermore, all public entities were required to reduce operational expenditures
by at least 5 percent. At the same time, a moderate training subsidy was introduced.
8.
Growth: The Uruguayan economy is expected to continue to recover over the short and
medium-term, provided the currently sound macro policy framework is maintained. As
international and regional prospects improve, GDP growth is projected to increase from 2.9
percent in 2009 to 5.5 percent in 2010. In addition, private investment is expected to accelerate
after an upturn in the inventories cycle. Private consumption is also expected to hold up due to
declining unemployment and a firm exchange rate. Space for further fiscal and monetary
stimulus is restricted by a relatively high debt-to-GDP ratio and underlying inflationary
pressures. In 2011, growth is expected to slow to 5.0 in line with expected weaker global growth,
as policy stimulus packages around the world will be reduced and inventories have been
replenished. In subsequent years, growth is expected to revert back to the long-run pre-global
crisis average growth rate of 4.0 percent.
26 The Central Bank further implemented four additional measures: (i) development of a futures market for foreign currency, where prices are agreed as far as 1 year in advance, to
reduce foreign exchange risk; (ii) gradual reduction in the reserve requirements for deposits in foreign currency from 30 percent to 25 percent; (iii) an agreement with the Central
Bank of Brazil to use domestic currencies in bilateral trade, rather than in U.S. dollars; (iv) repayment of export pre-financing in Uruguayan pesos instead of U.S. dollars, for
operations performed in November 2009.

Annex C
Page 3 of 5

9.
Inflation: Inflationary pressures from increasing commodity prices and wage increases
are likely to persist and are expected to keep consumer price increases at the upper limit of the 46 percent target range throughout the forecast period. CPI inflation is projected to reach 7.5
percent in 2010, which would be slightly beyond the target range for this year of 5-7 percent, and
then to slowly converge to its target range in the subsequent years.
10.
Fiscal accounts: Economic recovery and reduced fiscal stimulus are expected to
contribute to gradual improvements on the fiscal side. The deficit is expected to narrow in 2010,
posting a primary surplus of 2.1 and an overall deficit of 1.0 percent of GDP. In 2010, the
primary fiscal balance is expected to improve as revenues increase faster than expenditures and
public investment maintains a constant GDP share according to government projections. Interest
payments increase by 0.3 percent of GDP in line with the payment schedule for public sector
debt. Over the following years, the primary fiscal balance is expected to gradually improve due
to lower projected expenditures. Following a high concentration of debt service payments in
2011 (see below), lower subsequent interest payments are expected to improve the overall fiscal
balance thereafter.
11.
Financing gap: Medium-term government borrowing requirements are manageable, but
some risks arise in 2011. Including amortizations, interest payments and the recapitalization of
Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay (BHU), gross financing needs of the overall government amount
to US$2.7 in 2010. The Government has already secured US$500 million from bond markets last
September and further holds more than US$1 billion in public sector deposits in the domestic
banking system. Together with available multilateral financing, borrowing financing needs for
2010 appear therefore manageable, even though the Government faces a concentration of
maturities in 2011, with payments worth US$2.3 billion or 5.6 percent of GDP. Based on a
conservative estimate of the primary fiscal balance, the gross borrowing requirements for 2011
are likely to amount to US$2.9 billion or 6.5 percent of GDP. Uruguay will therefore likely seek
additional financing from multilateral institutions and capital markets to cover financing needs.
12.
External accounts: The current account is expected to decline from 0.7 in 2009 to -1.8
in 2010, reflecting a decline in the trade balance and of net factor incomes.27 The current account
is expected to improve over the medium-term, as the economy recovers and due to a persistent
surplus in the services account, which is largely due to high tourism receipts that even held up
during the crisis.
13.
Monetary accounts: After depreciating substantially between August and December
2008, the Peso faced strong pressures to appreciate in 2009, with the UY$/US$ exchange
declining by 19 percent during the year. At the same time, international reserves steadily
increased as the Central Bank’s purchased foreign currency to smooth volatility. With CPI
inflation on the decline and moderate economic growth, the Central Bank has cut interest rates
from 10 percent to 6.25 percent in 2009. With the Government taking a more active stance in
exchange rate policy, the exchange rate has recently started to revert to levels considered more
competitive.

27

The 2009 GDP growth rate is based on World Bank staff estimations, 2009-2010 inflation rates are government
projections, the exchange rate projections for 2010-11 are Consensus Economist.

Annex C
Page 4 of 5

14.
Financial system: Since the outbreak of the international financial crisis, the Uruguayan
financial system has managed to navigate through the storm without major difficulties. In
particular, the banking system consolidation process that occurred in the aftermath of the 2002
crisis has apparently paid off as evidenced by the adequate performance of most financial system
indicators. Even though, a scenario of more acute systemic deterioration cannot be disregarded at
this stage, current fundamentals provide a high level of comfort. In 2009, total volume traded in
the primary market (Bolsa Electrónica de Valores) decreased 17 percent relative to the previous
year. Despite lower trading activity, the market evidenced an increase in the number of new
issuances relative to 2008.
15.
Medium-Term Challenges. Reducing macroeconomic vulnerability and sustaining
equitable economic growth are expected to remain priorities of the new Government. Uruguay is
still vulnerable to external shocks, through its dependence on neighboring Argentina and Brazil,
and commodity prices. While dependence on its two large neighbors has decreased over the last
few years, the correlation with economic activity in Argentina remains high and trade links with
Brazil are strong. In addition, given the large share of agricultural commodities in total export,
and its strong reliance on oil imports, the country’s economic performance is directly affected by
fluctuating commodity prices.28 Despite significant progress in debt reduction, debt remains high
and exposed to exchange rate fluctuations. During the current crisis, debt sustainability
considerations limited scope for fiscal stimulus. Further debt reductions would create necessary
space for effective countercyclical measures. A similar argument applies to monetary policy.
Although inflation has been broadly kept within its range, it still remains relatively high and
restricts monetary policy. At the beginning of the current crisis, monetary policy initially reacted
pro-cyclically to counteract inflationary pressures on the wage bill. Lower levels of debt and
inflation would ensure that monetary and fiscal policy can reinforce each other and act in a
synchronized and countercyclical fashion; lower levels of dollarization would further strengthen
the role of the exchange rate as a shock-absorber. Procedural and administrative obstacles for
business activities have been also recognized as key structural challenges for economic
development, and reform efforts have accelerated in this regard under the new administration.
Over the longer term, an integral part of the reform effort plans to place heightened priority on
expanding access to education, improving infrastructure and logistics, and reaching
environmental objectives.

28

This point is well illustrated in Box 4 of Uruguay—Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation, IMF,
October 2009.

Annex C
Page 5 of 5
Table 1. Uruguay: Macroeconomic Framework
(Key economic indicators in percent, unless otherwise indicated)
Uruguay: Macroeconomic Indicators
(in percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2004 2005

2006

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010p

2011p

Projected
2012p
2013p

National accounts
Real GDP growth (%)
GDP (US$ billion)

5.0
13.7

7.5
17.4

4.3
19.8

7.5
24.0

8.5
31.2

2.9
31.5

5.5
41.0

5.0
44.2

4.0
47.4

External sector
Current account balance (% of GDP)
excluding pulp mill projects 1/
Trade balance (% of GDP, incl. services)
Exports of goods and services (% of GDP)
Imports of goods and services (% of GDP)
FDI (US$ billion)

0.0
0.0
3.5
31.1
27.6
0.31

0.2
0.2
2.3
29.3
27.0
0.81

-2.0
-2.0
-0.5
29.2
29.7
1.49

-0.9
0.4
0.7
28.9
28.3
1.24

-4.8
-4.8
-2.9
30.1
32.9
1.79

0.7
0.7
2.4
27.2
24.7
1.23

-1.8
-1.8
-0.7
24.1
24.8
1.26

-1.5
-1.5
-0.4
24.5
24.9
1.30

Prices
CPI (% change, end of period)
CPI (% change, period average)
Exchange rate (local currency/US$, end of period)
Real effective exchange rate (2005=100, + = appreciation)
Merchandise terms of trade (2000=100)

7.6
4.9
6.4
9.2
4.7
6.4
26.4 24.2 24.5
89.1 100.0 101.9
99.9 90.7 88.6

8.5
8.1
21.6
103.9
88.7

9.2
7.9
24.4
116.1
92.3

5.9
7.1
19.6
121.5
—

7.3
7.5
20.1
—
—

Labor market (% )
Unemployment rate 2/

13.1

12.2

11.4

9.6

7.9

7.3

Fiscal (% of GDP)
Revenues 3/
Current surplus of Public Sector Enterprises
Current expenditures 3/
Public investment
Primary balance (deficit (-)/surplus (+))
Central Government & Public Sector Enterprises
BSE 4/
Central Bank
Local Governments
Interest payments
Overall fiscal balance (deficit (-)/surplus (+))

28.0
2.7
21.5
2.5
3.8
3.9
0.0
-0.2
0.1
5.6
-1.8

28.0
2.1
21.9
2.3
4.0
3.7
0.2
0.0
0.2
4.4
-0.4

28.0
1.4
22.0
2.6
3.6
3.5
0.0
-0.2
0.4
4.2
-0.5

28.0
2.4
21.9
2.9
3.5
3.2
0.2
-0.1
0.2
3.5
0.0

26.2
0.8
21.8
3.2
1.3
1.1
0.2
-0.1
0.1
2.9
-1.5

Savings and investment (% of GDP)
Gross domestic investment
Gross national savings
Foreign savings

17.5
17.5
0.0

17.7
17.9
-0.2

19.4
17.4
2.0

19.4
18.4
0.9

Indebtedness (% of GDP)
Public sector gross debt 3/
of which FX-denominated

89.6
68.7

79.3
57.9

70.4
47.8

62.6
42.4

2014p

2015p

4.0
50.9

4.0
54.6

4.0
58.4

-1.1
-1.1
-0.1
24.9
25.0
1.33

-0.6
-0.6
0.5
25.6
25.0
1.37

-0.4
-0.4
0.7
25.4
24.7
1.40

-0.2
-0.2
0.6
25.2
24.5
1.44

6.7
7.0
20.8
—
—

6.2
6.4
21.4
—
—

6.0
6.0
22.0
—
—

6.0
6.0
22.7
—
—

6.0
6.0
23.7
—
—

—

—

—

—

—

—

27.7
1.3
23.7
3.4
1.1
0.7
0.1
-0.1
0.3
2.8
-1.7

29.1
2.5
23.8
3.4
2.1
1.8
0.3
0.1
-0.1
3.1
-1.0

28.8
2.1
23.5
3.5
2.1
1.8
0.3
0.1
-0.1
3.2
-1.1

28.9
2.1
23.3
3.7
2.2
1.9
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.8
-0.6

29.0
2.1
23.0
3.9
2.4
2.1
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.7
-0.3

29.1
2.1
22.8
4.0
2.6
2.3
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.4
0.2

29.2
2.1
22.6
4.0
2.9
2.6
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.0
0.9

22.7
17.9
4.8

17.9
18.6
-0.7

20.7
18.9
1.8

19.9
18.5
1.5

19.4
18.3
1.1

18.9
18.2
0.6

18.4
18.0
0.4

18.3
18.1
0.2

61.7
40.0

60.0
34.0

53.2
33.8

49.2
35.0

45.9
34.3

43.2
33.9

40.8
33.2

38.8
32.3

Sources: Central Bank of Uruguay, Ministry of Economy and Finance, National Bureau of Statistics (INE), ECLAC, IMF, and World
Bank staff calculations.
Notes: 1/ Current account balance excluding imports related to the construction of pulp mill projects (Botnia and Ence)
2/ Covers urban population (cities and towns of more than 5000 inhabitants). Period Average
3/ Covers Central government and BPS. Public debt‐to‐GDP ratio is calculated using end‐of‐the‐period exchange rate.
"—" refers to data that is not available.

Annex D
Page 1 of 5

Annex D
Debt Sustainability Analysis

1.
While limiting the fiscal space to engage into counter-cyclical measures, Uruguay’s
public debt position is generally resilient to a range of simulated negative shocks. However,
further debt reductions would create necessary space for effective counter-cyclical
measures, underscoring the importance of sustaining prudent macroeconomic policies.
Under conservative assumptions, total gross public debt is projected to decline from 60.0 percent
of GDP in 2009 to 38.8 percent of GDP in 2015. A series of stochastic simulations indicate a
97.5 percent likelihood that gross public debt will be below 106.2 percent of GDP and a 50
percent probability that it will be below 44.7 percent of GDP by 2015. Even though stochastic
simulations suggest that the public debt profile is unlikely to differ from the baseline scenario,
stress tests show that adverse shocks could at least temporarily reverse the favorable debt trends
observed since 2003. Furthermore, different scenarios in terms of the share of foreign-currency
denominated debt in total government debt were considered to assess the impact of dollarization
on debt sustainability. The results of these bound tests (see below) indicate that de-dollarization
would be able to gradually reduce the country's vulnerability to exchange rate fluctuations.
PUBLIC DEBT TRENDS AND STRUCTURE
2.1
Over the last five years, a successful debt management strategy has resulted in lower
debt stock. As a result of the strong growth achieved in 2004-2008 (annual average of 6.6
percent), the appreciation of the Uruguayan peso (27 percent) and a better fiscal position
(average primary balance of 3.6 percent in 2003-2007), the gross public sector debt-to-GDP
decreased by more than 40 percentage points of GDP from 2003 to 2008. Total public debt
declined from 105.0 percent of GDP in 2003 to 60.0 percent of GDP in 2009 (in net terms, from
71.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 30.7 percent of GDP in 2009).
2.2
Debt composition has improved, with lower exposure to exchange risk and longer
maturity. In terms of debt composition, by end-2009, 78.9 percent of total gross public debt was
held by private creditors, compared to 55.7 percent by end-2004, reflecting restored access to
market financing. The foreign currency share of total public sector debt fell from 76.6 percent in
2004 to 56.7 percent in December 2009. As of end-December 2009, short-term debt (less than 1
year) of the overall public sector was 3.3 percent of total debt, with long-term debt (over 5 years)
representing 80.2 percent of all obligations, up from 58.6 percent in 2004.
2.3
In spite of these efforts to reprofile debt, medium-term borrowing requirements are
expected to peak in 2011. Although the Government has succeeded in smoothing short-term
obligations, attention should be paid to the medium-term debt calendar. Despite efforts made to
repurchase debt due until 2012, there is still some concentration of payments around 2011 and
2017-2018.

Annex D
Page 2 of 5

Annual public debt as a share of GDP
120
Total PS Debt

100

PS External Debt

Percent of GDP

PS Domestic Debt

80
60
40
20

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

0

Source: WB staff calculations.

DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
2.4
The debt sustainability analysis is performed on the basis of two methodological
approaches. The deterministic approach presents the evolution of main determinants of public
debt over time. The stochastic approach shows how the main determinants of public debt are
affected by stochastic shocks.
2.5
A favorable medium-term macroeconomic framework would help preserve a stable
path for Uruguay’s public debt in 2010-2015. The baseline for our debt sustainability analysis
is conservative. It assumes an economic slowdown in 2009, followed by a recovery to 5.5
percent growth in 2010. Fiscal accounts are expected to deteriorate with the economic slowdown
in 2009, but to recover in the subsequent years, although not to pre-crisis levels. Under these
assumptions, total gross public debt is projected to decline from 60.0 percent of GDP in 2009 to
38.8 percent of GDP in 2015. The baseline scenario is based on the assumption of an average
primary surplus of 2.4 percent during 2010-2015.
2.6
Sustained fiscal adjustment, economic growth and exchange rate stability are
critical for continued improvement in public debt indicators. For the baseline scenario, we
find that during 2004 and 2009 exchange rate stability accounted for 38 percent of debt
reduction, while fiscal adjustment (primary surplus) and continuing healthy growth also played a
significant role, with a contribution of 20 percent and 31 percent, respectively.

Annex D
Page 3 of 5
Table 1. 1. Cumulative Public Gross Debt Decomposition, 2001-2015
Public Gross Debt Decomposition

2001-2015

2001-2003
2004-2009
2010-2015
Percent of GDP
Change in public sector debt
-2.6
63.7
-45.0
-21.3
Primary deficit (- surplus)
-34.0
-2.4
-17.4
-14.2
-Seignorage
-7.9
-1.8
-9.3
3.2
Contribution from real interest rate
15.7
2.4
7.9
5.4
Contribution from real GDP growth
-33.3
5.3
-26.0
-12.6
Contribution from real exchange rate change
-11.3
24.3
-32.5
-3.1
Residual
68.3
35.9
32.4
0.0
Source: Central Bank of Uruguay, MEF, and World Bank staff projections. Note: gross debt of the overall public
sector
(NFPS and Central Bank).

2.7
Following a deterministic approach to the debt sustainability analysis, we find that
adverse shocks could temporarily reverse the favorable debt trends observed under the
baseline scenario. We consider various stress tests to evaluate the behavior of the public debt
ratio under different scenarios. First, a one-time 30 percent exchange rate depreciation in 2011.
This shock would cause the debt-to-GDP ratio to deteriorate rapidly to 58.6 in 2011, going back
to 53.8 in 2012 and declining gradually thereafter. Second, a combined shock (two-standard
deviations shocks to primary surplus-to-GDP ratio, real growth rate and real interest rates) in
2010-2011. This combined shock would cause the projected gross debt to reach 62.4 percent of
GDP and 65.0 percent of GDP in 2010 and 2011, respectively, decreasing in subsequent years.

Table 1. 2. Gross Public Debt: Alternative Scenarios and Bound Tests, 2009-2014

(in percent of GDP)

Actual
2009
60.0

2010
53.2

2011
49.2

Projected
2012
2013
45.9
43.2

2014
40.8

2015
38.8

Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2010-15
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2010-15

60.0
60.0

54.5
54.2

50.4
50.6

46.6
47.2

43.0
43.9

39.6
40.6

36.4
37.2

Bound tests
B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2010 and 2011
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2010 and 2011
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2010 and 2011
B4. Combination of 1-3 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B6. 5 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2010 and 2011

60.0
60.0
60.0
60.0
60.0
60.0

55.9
64.3
56.7
62.4
53.2
58.2

53.5
68.4
55.4
65.0
58.6
58.3

48.9
63.4
50.7
60.1
53.8
53.5

44.3
58.4
46.0
55.1
48.9
48.7

39.4
53.0
41.0
49.9
43.9
43.6

34.3
47.4
35.8
44.4
38.6
38.3

Summary

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Baseline
Second most extreme stress test (B4)
Most extreme stress test (B2)

60.0
60.0
60.0

53.2
62.4
64.3

49.2
65.0
68.4

45.9
60.1
63.4

43.2
55.1
58.4

40.8
49.9
53.0

38.8
44.4
47.4

Baseline

Source: World Bank staff projections. Note: gross debt of the overall public sector (NFPS and Central Bank).

2.8
Stochastic simulations are then run to assess the impact of volatility and uncertainty
on debt sustainability. Based on the historical variances of four simulated variables (real GDP
growth, change in real exchange rate, real interest rates of domestic and external debt), and
abstracting from any feedback of rising debt levels on fiscal policy, Monte Carlo simulations
were run to obtain confidence bands around the baseline projections of the gross-debt-to-GDP

Annex D
Page 4 of 5

ratio. Our simulations indicate a 97.5 percent likelihood that gross public debt will be below
106.2 percent of GDP and a 50 percent probability that it will be below 44.7 percent of GDP by
2015.
Figure 1. 1. Gross Public Debt-to-GDP: Stochastic Simulations
120
2.5 - 5.0 / 95.0 - 97.5
5.0 - 95.0

100

Baseline

Percent of GDP

80

60

40

20

Source: World Bank staff projections.
Note: gross debt of the overall public sector (NFPS and Central Bank).

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

0

Annex D
Page 5 of 5
Table 1. 3. Uruguay: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004-2014
(in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2005

2006

Actual
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projected
2012 2013

2014

2015

79.3
57.9

70.4
47.8

62.6
42.4

61.7
40.0

60.0
34.0

53.2
33.8

49.2
35.0

45.9
34.3

43.2
33.9

40.8
33.2

38.8
32.3

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
-Seignorage
+Automatic debt dynamics:
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Contribution from domestic real interest rate 2/
Contribution from real interest rate on foreign debt 3/
Of which (-) contribution from real GDP growth excl. OSF
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
-Privatization receipts
-Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
-Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

-10.3
-14.9
-4.0
28.3
24.2
-2.8
-8.1
-4.1
2.1
1.0
1.2
-6.2
-4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.6

-8.9
-8.9
-3.6
28.2
24.6
-1.5
-3.7
-2.1
1.1
-0.6
1.7
-3.3
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-7.9
-17.1
-3.5
28.2
24.7
-1.2
-12.4
-4.3
0.6
-1.2
1.8
-4.9
-8.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.3

-0.9
-4.2
-1.3
26.4
25.1
-2.0
-0.8
-4.7
0.2
-0.3
0.6
-4.9
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.3

-1.7
-11.6
-1.1
28.1
27.0
-0.9
-9.7
0.1
1.9
0.0
1.8
-1.7
-9.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0

-6.9
-6.9
-2.1
29.4
27.2
-1.2
-3.6
-1.9
1.2
0.0
1.2
-3.1
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-4.0
-4.0
-2.1
29.1
27.0
-0.4
-1.5
-1.3
1.3
0.0
1.3
-2.5
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-3.2
-3.2
-2.2
29.2
27.0
0.2
-1.3
-1.0
0.9
0.0
0.9
-1.9
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-2.8
-2.8
-2.4
29.3
26.9
0.8
-1.2
-0.9
0.9
0.0
0.9
-1.8
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-2.3
-2.3
-2.6
29.4
26.8
1.5
-1.3
-1.0
0.7
0.0
0.7
-1.7
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-2.1
-2.1
-2.9
29.5
26.7
2.1
-1.4
-1.1
0.4
0.0
0.4
-1.6
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

280.6

249.4

221.6

233.4

213.7

181.1

169.3

157.5

147.5

139.0

131.4

18.0
3.1

33.6
6.7

5.1
1.2

7.8
2.4

6.8
2.1

4.2
1.7

12.0
5.3

8.2
3.9

7.0
3.6

6.2
3.4

6.0
3.5

425.0
7.5
5.4
-2.2
24.2
-6.1
-8.6
0.7
8.3
-4.0

476.7
4.3
5.9
-0.6
24.5
-2.8
1.2
7.5
5.9
-3.6

562.2
7.5
5.9
-11.4
21.6
-17.5
-11.9
9.7
8.0
-3.5

653.2
8.5
5.3
7.1
24.4
9.7
13.0
7.0
10.1
-1.3

711.1
2.9
4.9
-13.3
19.6
-24.1
-19.4
5.9
10.8
-1.1

806.5
5.5
6.6
-0.8
19.7
-4.9
0.1
7.5
6.4
-2.1

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated (gross)

Gross financing need 5/
in billions of U.S. dollars
Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions
Nominal GDP (local currency)
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (including exchange rate revaluation on foreign currency denominated debt) 7/
Exchange rate, end of period (LC per US dollar)
Change in the real exchange rate (Local currency per US dollar) 8/
Nominal depreciation of local currency, end of period (LC per dollar)
GDP deflator (in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

906.1 1002.7 1105.4 1218.5 1343.3
5.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
6.4
5.6
5.4
5.0
4.7
1.8
1.1
1.0
0.6
0.3
20.5
21.1
21.7
22.3
23.0
-0.8
-0.9
-1.0
-0.9
-0.8
4.2
3.2
2.8
2.8
2.9
7.0
6.4
6.0
6.0
6.0
3.9
4.0
3.8
3.7
3.4
-2.1
-2.2
-2.4
-2.6
-2.9

Notes: 1/ Gross external and domestic public sector debt.
2/ The domestic real interest rate contribution is derived as (id‐)/[(1+)(1+g)] times previous period gross domestic debt ratio as defined in
footnote, with id=domestic interest rate, =domestic inflation rate; g=real GDP growth rate.
3/ The foreign real interest rate contribution is derived as (if‐*)/[(1+*)(1+g)] times previous period gross external debt ratio, with if=foreign
interest rate, *=US inflation rate; g=real GDP growth rate.

4/ The real exchange rate contribution is derived as e t  (1  i t )  b t 1  (1  i t )  nfa t 1 ) / (1   t )  (1  g t ) , with the change in real exchange rate êt
defined as in footnote 8/ and all other variables defined as in footnote 3.
5/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long‐term public sector debt, plus short‐term debt at end of previous
period.
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period gross public debt stock.
^

f

*

l

*

*

7/ The real interest rate on public debt is calculated as  t  (1  it )  (1  et ) /(1   t )  1  (1   t )  (1  it ) /(1   t )  1, with t as the share of foreign
currency denominated debt in total public debt and all the other variables defined as in footnotes 3/, 4/ and 6/.
8/ Change in the real exchange rate êt is defined as (et∙Pt*/Pt)/(et‐1∙Pt‐1*/Pt‐1) = (1+st)∙(1+t*)/(1+t), in percent.
f



*

d

Annex E
Page 1 of 8

Annex E
Banking Sector Update
The Uruguayan financial system has so far managed to weather the global economic
downturn without major difficulties. Lessons learned and reforms introduced after the 2001-2002 crisis
(with its epicenter in Argentina) have helped the system to be better prepared to resist turbulence from
abroad. In addition, proactive Central Bank intervention and supervision have contributed to assuring
financial system stability.
In recent years, the Banking System has consolidated its recovery and appears to have
recovered from most of the effects of the 2001-2002 crisis. In particular, financial system deposits have
recovered significantly and continued to grow at a strong pace while credit has also recovered, though at a
milder rate. Asset quality has improved as well, with NPLs reaching record low levels in 2008. Improved
regulation has facilitated reduced balance sheet mismatches and the creation of adequate capitalization
and liquidity positions. However, certain weaknesses inherent in the Uruguayan system, though less
harmful than in the past, still persist.
Uruguayan capital markets continue to be small and dominated by sovereign issues. In
contrast, international debt issues are sizeable in proportion of GDP compared to other Latin American
countries, but the bulk continues to be represented by the sovereign. For their part, equity markets are
among the less developed of Latin America relative to the size of the economy. In Uruguay, market
capitalization is approximately 0.5% of GDP (December 2009), versus 61% of GDP in Brazil, 46% of
GDP in Colombia, 21% in Argentina and 51% in Peru.

AFTERMATH OF THE 2002 CRISIS: FINANCIAL SYSTEM RECOVERY
Capital Markets
Uruguay’s capital markets still play a minor role in investment financing. Although pension
funds continue to accumulate funds, resources are largely channeled to investments in government
securities. Weaknesses in investor protection and corporate governance practices continue to limit
enterprises’ access to the capital markets. Leaving aside natural barriers such as the country’s small size
that may limit potential market activity, studies and interviews with market participants point to problems
not only at the issuer level but also at investors’ and exchanges’ level, as well as to weaknesses in the
regulatory framework.
In recent years, the Uruguayan Authorities have taken critical steps to facilitate the
development of capital markets. In particular, efforts have included the drafting of a new Capital
Markets Bill that was finally sanctioned in December 2009; and the reorganization of the Central Bank of
Uruguay to address capital market issues and facilitate the implementation of the new Law. In addition, a
new Bankruptcy Law has been recently sanctioned and is currently under implementation. The new
regime seems to properly address the weaknesses of previous legislation. Finally, as part of the initiatives
to enhance the reliability of information, a recently-signed decree puts in place a sustainable and effective
process for the adoption of the most recent IFRS standards while a process is currently in place aimed to
establish more homogenous working standards at the Registro de Estados Contables (REC).

Annex E
Page 2 of 8

Banking System
The Argentine crisis led to a significant contraction in terms of financial intermediation and
number of entities. However, the regulatory and operating environments as well as the Uruguayan
banking system fundamentals have improved substantially since then.
As result of the crisis, Uruguay has made significant efforts to improve financial system
regulation. In particular, progress has been made in the regulation and supervision of state banks. The
largest state bank, BROU, has made considerable improvements in information availability, risk
management and internal controls. The state housing bank, BHU has undergone an in depth restructuring
process that has precluded it from offering new loans or taking new deposits until very recently. Finally,
after a pause of several years, the proposed reform of the BCU charter was approved by the Parliament in
October 2008. The reform is aimed to improve Central Bank autonomy and its role in financial
supervision. In addition, the reform includes the creation of a (now operational) independent entity named
Corporación de Protección del Ahorro Bancario, responsible for managing deposits insurance.
In terms of structure, the banking system remains highly concentrated. The two existing
public institutions, Banco de la República Oriental del Uruguay and Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay,
account for approximately half of total banking system assets. In addition, if the five largest banks are to
be considered, concentration reaches figures above 80% of total assets. The recent acquisition of ABN
Amro Bank by Banco Santander has further increased financial system concentration.
Economic recovery consolidation and the gradual improvement in confidence have
contributed to the normalization of total system liabilities. In particular, total deposits have recovered
significantly both in domestic and foreign currency. Consequently, the system continues to be highly
dollarized with dollar denominated deposits representing near 80% of total private sector deposits as of
December 2009. However, the share of non-resident deposits, once a source of financial system
volatility, has dropped markedly from levels above 50% of the depositary base in 2001 to approximately
19.5% as of December 2009.

dic -2009

ju n-2009

dic -2008

ju n-2008

dic -2007

ju n-2007

dic -2006

ju n-2006

dic -2005

ju n-2005

dic -2004

ju n-2004

dic -2003

M illio n U S$

Deposits remain mostly short term in the form
Fig. 1: Evolution of Deposits
of checking and savings accounts (see Figure 1). The
(by Term, Million USD)
14.000
poor stock of term deposits that account for only 21% of
Sight Deposits
Term Deposits
12.000
total private sector deposits as of December 2009 can be
10.000
attributed to a series of factors. In the first place, excess
8.000
liquidity currently available in the system as a result of a
6.000
constant inflow of domestic and international funds
4.000
discourages banks from increasing interest rates in order
2.000
to raise additional funds. Secondly, the relatively high
0
reserve requirements of 35% and 25% for foreign
currency and domestic currency denominated deposits,
respectively; and the fact that no interest is paid on them
have substantially reduced the intermediation margin of Source: BCU
banks leading to further reductions in interest rates paid on deposits.

Annex E
Page 3 of 8

Financial system assets have experienced a gradual revival. Currently, nearly 65% of assets
are composed of cash and cash equivalents, deposits held in foreign banks and government bonds. The
remainder consists mainly of credit to the non-financial
Fig. 2: Breakout by Type of Borrower
private and public sectors. In particular, overall credit to
- Dollar denominated Credit, Dec 09the non-financial sector has improved in the last years
Household
Agricultural
ranging from 22% in 2003 to approximately 32% of
s 4%
Services
Sector 23%
17%
banking system assets as of December 2009. However,
origination volumes relative to GDP continue to lag
behind pre-crisis levels.
A breakout by type of borrower shows that
Commerce
corporate lending represents the majority of the stock
18%
of outstanding credit with a share of 72% of total nonfinancial private sector credit as of December 09. The
Real Estate
remainder corresponds to household related loans. A
3%
breakout by currency shows that most of dollar
Source: BCU
denominated credit corresponds to corporate lending
reflecting the series of prudential regulations currently in place (see Figure 2).

Industry
35%

Access to bank financing by Uruguayan firms continues to be limited. The 2008 World
Bank Investment Climate Survey highlighted the low use of bank credit by Uruguayan firms as it
accounts for as little as 6 percent of working capital and even less for asset financing. The problem is
more acute in the case of SME financing. Uruguayan enterprises are required to pledge more
collateral as a percentage of their loans than enterprises in many comparable countries.
Systemic liquidity has been enhanced in recent years with liquid assets to short term
liabilities (with less than 91 days maturity) near 77%
Fig. 3: Liquidity Ratio (*), 2004-2009
as of December 2009 (see Figure 3). On the funding
140%
side, Uruguayan financial institutions benefit from cheap
120%
retail deposits (mostly transactional) of domestic and
100%
international nature with limited reliance on market
80%
funding. In addition, tight BCU reserve requirements for
60%
domestic and foreign currency denominated deposits have
40%
helped increase the level of cash and cash equivalences
20%
available in the system. Finally, the modest growth in
0%
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
origination volumes has also contributed to further
strengthen banks liquidity positions. Not surprisingly, the (*) Liquid Assets (Cash+short term investments) / Short
Uruguayan financial system exhibits a relatively low loan Term Liabilities (includes credits below 91 days maturity)
Source: BCU
to deposit ratio of 47% as of December 2009.
Asset quality has improved considerably in recent years (see Figure 4). A combination of
sustained economic recovery, BCU support to troubled entities and the introduction of different
refinancing facilities for delinquent borrowers has led to a sound recovery in asset quality. This

Annex E
Page 4 of 8

improvement is evidenced by the ratio of NPLs to total
loans that has ranged from figures near 25% in 2003 to
new record lows of less than 1% in mid-2008. In addition,
current systemic coverage rates remain robust as they
represent more than five times the level of troubled loans.

Fig. 4: NPLs %, Coverage Rates %, 20032009
900

16

800

14

700

12

600

10

500

8

400

6

300

Banks continued with the process of reducing
4
200
2
100
their balance-sheet mismatches. In particular, the
0
0
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
exposure to foreign currency mismatches has been reduced
Provisions
NPLs (Right Axis)
significantly thanks in part to enhanced prudential
Source: IMF Global Financial Stability Report, 2010
regulation. Currently, currency composition of loans is
changing as the share of dollar denominated credit over total private sector credit has decreased from
figures near 80% in 2003 to figures close to 50% in December 2009 (see Figure 5). Moreover, household
related credit is currently originated almost entirely in Uruguayan pesos as borrowers income tends to be
denominated in domestic currency as well.
Profitability has accompanied economic
recovery. Uruguayan banking system benefits from a
wide net interest rate margin resulting from low cost
domestic retail deposits and relatively high returns bared
by assets deposited abroad usually in highly rated foreign
banks. Other sources of profits are Uruguayan government
securities and to a lesser extent proceeds arising from loan
origination. On the other hand, relatively high and
inelastic labor costs reduce the maneuverability margin of
financial institutions in cases of declining earnings.

Fig. 5: Private Sector Credit
-Breakout by Currency100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
2003

2004

2005

US$ Credit

2006

2007

2008

2009

Urg. Pesos Credit

Source: BCU

The capital adequacy ratio for the system Fig. 6: Capital Adequacy vs. Regulatory
remains robust with figures well above domestic and Minima, (# of times)
2,4
international requirements. The capitalization of the
2,2
financial system has improved during the last years as a
2
result of an increase in capitalized earnings and new
1,8
capital contributions. A more favorable operating
1,6
environment and a recovery of confidence have allowed
1,4
the financial sector to increase financial intermediation
1,2
and gradually stabilize its sources of recurrent earnings. In
1
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
addition, prudential regulation and more conservative
business strategies have led to a reduction in foreign Source: BCU
currency risk. Improvements in asset quality have also contributed to the strengthening of capital levels.
As a result, the systemic capital adequacy ratio relative to the minimum regulatory requirement has
improved in the last years reaching a level of 2.09 times in December 2009 relative to approximately 1.3
times in 2001 (see Figure 6).

Annex E
Page 5 of 8

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL CRISIS AND ITS EFFECTS ON THE URUGUAYAN FINANCIAL
SYSTEM
Uruguayan Risk Profile
Despite persistent volatility in the international front, the risk profile of Uruguay improved during
2009. As of December 2009, the average UBI (Uruguayan Bond Index) spread was at 226 bps and
remained below its 3-month moving average, showing a reduction of almost 500 bps from a peak reached
in December 2008. A gradual easing in international market conditions explains observed performance. In
January 2009, Moody’s upgraded Uruguay’s sovereign debt rating to Ba3 from B1 reducing to 3 notches
the gap to investment grade. According to Moody’s press release, “the upgrade reflects reduced
vulnerabilities associated with a somewhat lower degree of dollarization in government debt obligations
and, at the margin, Uruguay’s banking system”. In this regard, Uruguay benefits from strong market
access and relatively low spreads as a result of a series of measures undertaken in recent years aimed to
improve the sovereign debt profile.
When compared to regional peers, Uruguay performed strongly with a risk profile similar to those
of Chile, Brazil and Colombia (see Figure 7). Prospects on debt profile are encouraging – based on
Uruguay’s track record – but are linked to the preservation of a conservative fiscal policy and further
reductions in dollar denominated debt.
Figure 7: EMBI Evolution, monthly, 3-month MA

Capital Markets

2500
2000

1500
In 2009, total volume traded in the primary
1000
market decreased 17% relative to the previous
500
year. This performance was explained by extremely
0
weak activity during the first half of the year as in the
second and third quarters volumes surpassed by far
previous year levels. Also, trading activity around
ARG
BRA
CHL
COL
URU
VEN
public and private sector related issuances remained Source: Bloomberg
at similar proportions throughout the year. Most of
the volume traded in the primary market took place in the Bolsa Electrónica de Valores which accounted
for 95% of total trades.

Despite lower trading activity, the market evidenced an increase in the number of new issuances
relative to 2008. In particular, there were 5 corporate bond issuances for a total amount of USD 121
million relative to 2 issuances for USD 37.7 million during 2008. Similarly, financial trusts totaled 3 new
issuances for USD 34.6 millions relative to 1 large issuance in 2008 for USD 55.4 millions. As observed
in previous years, no equity issuances took place during 2009.
Banking System
Despite the negative economic effects of the current international financial crisis on most
developed and developing countries, the Uruguayan economy continued to exhibit strong economic

Annex E
Page 6 of 8
Figure 8: Monetary Policy Rate, Interbank Rate.
10
9
8
7
6

35
30
25
20
(% )

5
4
3
2
1
0

15
10
5

Policy Rate

Interbank Rate

F eb-10

O c t-09

Dec -09

J un-09

A ug-09

A pr-09

F eb-09

O c t-08

Dec -08

J un-08

A ug-08

A pr-08

F eb-08

0
Dec -07

activity until early 2009. This explains why the
Uruguayan monetary policy strategy has differed
substantially relative to regional partners as it has been
aimed to contain inflationary pressures rather than
boost economic activity. However, in the second
quarter of 2009 the monetary policy rate was adapted
to reflect an incipient less favorable economic
environment (see Figure 8). In this context, the
financial system exhibited signs of slight deterioration
but fundamentals remained adequate.

Inflation Rate (2nd Axis)

Source: BCU, Key Statistics, Daily

Non-resident deposits gained dynamism.
Since the beginning of the international crisis back in mid-2007 and the series of political instabilities
arose in Argentina during 2008, deposits far from losing dynamism, continued to exhibit strong growth
rates thanks in part to increases in non-resident deposits. In particular, total private sector deposits have
grown 21% in 2008 relative to 13% in 2007 while non-resident deposits have experienced a more
vigorous behavior with annual growth rates of 41% in 2008 versus 8.2% in 2007. Thus, non-resident
deposits could be a potential source of volatility in the future as they are susceptible to flight.
Dollar-denominated deposits maintained their
leadership in terms of level and growth rates (see
Figure 9). This dynamic has been further exacerbated
during 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 due to a series of
portfolio dollarization episodes triggered by foreign
exchange instabilities and inflows of non-resident deposits.

Fig. 9: US$, Domestic currency Deposits
(yoy growth)
80,00%
70,00%

in US$

in Urg. Pesos

60,00%
50,00%
40,00%
30,00%
20,00%

ene-2007
feb-2007
mar-2007
abr-2007
may-2007
jun-2007
jul-2007
ago-2007
sep-2007
oct-2007
nov-2007
dic-2007
ene-2008
feb-2008
mar-2008
abr-2008
may-2008
jun-2008
jul-2008
Ago-2008
Set-2008
oct-2008
nov-2008
dic-2008
Ene -2009
feb-2009
mar-2009
Abr -2009
may-2009
jun-2009
jul-2009
ago-2009
sep-2009
oct-2009
nov-2009
dic-2009

10,00%
A widespread slowdown in origination volumes
0,00%
-10,00%
of private sector credit began in the second half of 2008
-20,00%
and continued until recently. In the second half of 2009,
a reversal seems to have begun. Performance prior to the
second half of 2009 can be attributed to weakening Source: BCU
international and domestic economic conditions.
In
particular, credit stagnation has been more acute in commercial lines as companies (main destiny of credit
origination) have adopted a wait and see strategy due to deteriorating prospects in economic activity.
However, the recent easing in international conditions coupled with a change in the monetary policy
strategy (aimed to boost economic activity) have positively impacted on credit figures. It is still too early
to confirm the observed improvement as a trend but if costs of funding remain adequate and domestic and
international conditions do not deteriorate, demand for credit should improve further.

Systemic liquidity figures have not varied relative to a year ago and remained at adequate
levels. Liquid assets to short term liabilities (less than 91 days maturity) reached 76.6% as of December
2009 relative to 76.3% a year ago. These figures are explained by a growing depositary base coupled with
a decline in liquid assets due to a gradual revamp in origination volumes. In particular, credit stagnation
observed in 2009 could be argued to be demand-driven as companies (main destiny of credit origination)

Annex E
Page 7 of 8

adopted a wait and see strategy due to deteriorating prospects in economic activity. However, a more lax
monetary policy coupled with a more benign operating environment has increased the appetite for credit.
As of December 2009, systemic capital adequacy ratio and profitability indicators have
improved slightly when compared to a year ago and remain at adequate levels (see Figures 10 and
11). In particular, profitability figures experienced a gradual deterioration during 2008 as international
conditions worsened. The relatively low reliance of the system on loan origination activities has not
allowed developing a stable source of recurrent earnings. In turn, the main source of profits in recent
years has been the differential between returns on assets held abroad and interest paid by banks on their
deposits. Then, the drastic worldwide reduction in interest rates eroded significantly Uruguayan banks’
interest rate margin and thus their overall profitability.
Fig. 10: Capital Adequacy Ratio
20,0%
18,0%

18,7%
17,6%

16,0%

17,3% 17,2% 17,6%

16,7%

Fig. 11: ROE and ROA, 2008-2009
2009

16,7%

15,4%

2008

ROA

14,0%
12,0%
10,0%
8,0%

ROE

6,0%
4,0%
2,0%

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

16%

0,0%
mar-08 jun-08 sep-08 dic-08 mar-09 jun-09 sep-09 dic-09

Source: BCU

Source: IMF Global Financial Stability Report, 2010

Despite the current international financial crisis, asset quality continues to exhibit strong
figures with NPLs to total loans at historically low levels of near 2% as of December 2009.
Moreover, systemic coverage rates for public and private banks represent more than five times the level
of troubled loans. In particular, the modest growth of credit in recent years has reduced the potential
credit risk associated with unseasoned pools. Existing systemic coverage rates provide a high degree of
comfort, though a domestic downturn scenario might add pressure to observed performance,.

TO SUM UP: IMPROVEMENTS & CURRENT WEAKNESSES
Structural Improvements
-

Regulatory environment has improved as a result of the last crisis; the regulator (Central Bank of
Uruguay) takes a more proactive role.
Most weak banks have gone bankrupt or been absorbed; only strong entities remain.
Exposure of Uruguayan banking system assets to Argentine risk is currently limited in contrast with
the situation experienced during the 2001 crisis.
Capital adequacy ratios are above domestic and international requirements, except for Banco
Hipotecario del Uruguay (public bank) which underperforms.
Systemic liquidity continues to be high when compared to regional standards. Liquid assets account
for 60 percent of short term liabilities as of January 2010.
Banks count with good collateral and in many cases external support.

Annex E
Page 8 of 8

-

Asset quality remains strong despite the current international financial crisis. The modest growth of
credit in recent years reduces the potential credit risk associated with unseasoned pools. Coverage
rates exhibit robust levels. Still, a downturn domestic scenario might put pressure to observed
performance.

Weaknesses
-

-

-

Financial system remains highly concentrated. The two existing public institutions, Banco de la
República Oriental del Uruguay and Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay, account for approximately half
of total banking system assets. If the five largest banks are to be considered, concentration reaches
more than 80% of total assets. The recent acquisition of ABN Amro Bank by Banco Santander has
further increased financial system concentration.
Non-resident deposits have decreased significantly over the years but their current high levels still
pose a potential source of instability. Nevertheless, reserve requirements seem to be adequate to deal
with such an event.
Financial intermediation still has room for growth -- in particular, on the borrowers’ side. SMEs’
insufficient financing makes it a niche with enormous potential for growth.
The lack of a significant source of recurrent earnings exposes systemic profitability to substantial
volatility.
Relatively high and inelastic labor costs reduce the maneuverability margin in cases of declining
earnings.
Uruguayan financial system’s still high dollarization limits the power of BCU to act as a lender of last
resort.

WHAT LIES AHEAD
In sum, the Uruguayan Banking System has become more resilient than in the past to situations of
distress. Fundamentals have improved as evidenced by enhanced asset quality, high liquidity figures,
lower non-resident deposits and adequate capital ratios. However, Uruguayan banks still face risks
associated with balance sheet mismatches as financial system dollarization, although lower than in the
past, remains high in absolute and relative terms. An increase in exchange rate volatility could exacerbate
the risk of balance sheet mismatch, although its consequences to overall financial system stability should
remain bounded.

Annex F
Page 1 of 8

Annex F: IBRD Program Summary

1.

In line with the priorities identified by the Government, the 2010-2015 CPS will focus on the
following four pillars: (i) Sustainable Economic Growth and Reduction in Macroeconomic
Vulnerability; (ii) Competitiveness & Infrastructure; (iii) Agriculture, Climate Change, and
Environment; and (iv) Increasing Social Inclusion & Equity. Indicative support for this strategy is
proposed to include a series of two DPLs totaling US$200 million (FY11 and FY12), investment lending
totaling approximately US$500 million subject to IBRD’s overall lending capacity, and a well-focused
and demand-driven AAA program.

2.
The proposed strategy places a heightened emphasis on supporting Uruguay in accessing
international expertise and best practices, as well as sharing its own experiences with other
countries through South-South exchanges. Toward this end, the Government and the Bank agreed to
introduce an innovative modality for analytical services, knowledge transfers and technical assistance
based on the successful approach implemented as part of the Bank’s partnership strategy with Chile. This
modality–a joint analytical and technical assistance program–aims to enable the Bank to tailor its nonlending program to needs expressed by the Government and respond swiftly and flexibly to demands.
This joint program will be based on a framework agreement that clarifies the objectives, governance
structure, and shared financing of the program. Rooted fully in demand from the Borrower, an annual
work program would be agreed between the Government and the Bank and define the main knowledge
products and services to be elaborated in the following year, including a detailed timetable and cost
estimates.
3.

Beyond from the need for continuity in existing areas of support to maintain momentum of
reforms, the Government’s guiding principle for selecting new lending activities is “innovation.”
There is a focus on using Bank resources for adding important value to critical interventions, contributing
world class technical know-how in the respective areas and helping build strong institutional capacity, in
particular in reform program design and managing for results. Another important criterion for selecting
new lending operations is to ensure that through close coordination with other donors, most notably the
IADB, synergies are realized and duplications avoided. Table 4 provides the agreed lending program for
the first two years of the CPS, while providing only very indicative allocations for the reminder of the
CPS period.
Pillar 1: Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & Strengthening Public Sector Administration

4.
While Uruguay’s resilience in the face of the global financial crisis demonstrates the
progress made in mitigating macroeconomic vulnerabilities, this remains a key priority for the
Government and an area in which continued Bank collaboration is desired. The Government and
Bank concur that collaboration under the first two pillars of the previous CAS – reducing vulnerability
and sustaining growth – provide a successful basis on which to build. The CPS would have a particular
focus on supporting Government efforts to achieve the following outcomes: (i) contain expenditure
growth to ensure no further deteriorate of fiscal balance in 2010, (ii) keep inflationary pressures under
control, (iii) reduce dollarization levels. Bank efforts supporting these outcomes include the following:
5.

The Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion Development Policy
Loan Series (FY11 and FY12). DPL I supports the implementation of reforms which have been
identified by the new Government as priorities for obtaining Bank support. The program consists of a
series of two loans, each amounting to US$100 million, which will support implementation of the
Government’s agenda in three main areas: (i) public sector management, (ii) competitiveness, and (iii)
social inclusion. In particular, the main development objectives of the new loan are to strengthen the

Annex F
Page 2 of 8

efficiency of the public administration while promoting macroeconomic stability, improve
competitiveness through measures such as, facilitating trade, strengthening the business environment and
development of financial markets. It also seeks to improve social inclusion through measures targeted at
enhancing the equity and efficiency of health, education and social protection systems. DPL I also targets
the consolidation of reforms supported by the PRIDPL series (approved May 2007), and bolsters
Government efforts in other areas were not supported by the PRIDPL series. Specifically, the loan
recognizes recent achievements in public sector management, business climate and social service delivery
(prior actions for DPL-I). The indicative triggers for DPL-II reflect broad policy areas of support,
anchoring the new Government’s reform agenda through 2011.

6.
Institutions Building Technical Assistance Project (IBTAL) and Additional Financing
(ongoing). The Bank has been helping the Uruguay Government with its state modernization agenda
through the IBTAL including by financing technical exchanges between the New Zealand and Uruguay
authorities in various aspects of public sector management. Through the ongoing IBTAL loan of
US$12.1 million and a potential Additional Financing for the same, the Bank will continue to provide
support for the adoption and implementation of a program-based budget, as well as for the monitoring and
evaluation efforts to continually strengthen the budget process. The objective of the IBTAL is to improve
the Borrower’s public sector performance by: (i) supporting its public sector modernization program in
the areas of customs administration, monitoring and evaluation, performance-based budgeting, and egovernment; and (ii) strengthening its institutions involved with the design and implementation of public
policy reforms in the areas of taxation, promotion of the business environment, and social protection.
7.
Treasury Department Services. Uruguay has been a leading country in LCR in utilizing the
IBRD Treasury Department’s banking products and services in order to manage some of its balance sheet
risks, particularly interest rate and currency risks. This partnership will likely strengthen over the next
CPS period as further financing in Uruguayan Pesos is expected to be executed and as ongoing
discussions on broader hedging strategies (energy, weather, etc) are completed.
8.
CFAA using the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) methodology.
The last Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) was published in June 2005 (Report
No.32851-UY). Given the priority the administration places on its public sector reform program, this
exercise presents an opportunity for the Bank to provide technical advice and support on Public Financial
Management (PFM) reforms that are part of the government agenda. It is proposed to conduct a PEFA
study that would assess the status of country's Public Financial Management systems/ reforms against 28
high-level of PFM indicators. This study could serve as an objective baseline for the impact of the PFM
reforms that the Government is initiating and also serve to measure their progress.
9.
CPAR. As the last CPAR was conducted by the Bank in 1999 and the report delivered to the
Government in 2000, the Bank proposes to update this analytical tool. At that time, IADB, UNDP and
relevant government agencies provided valuable input on the local procurement environment, and the
Bank would actively seek collaboration with other partners in the execution of the updated CPAR as well.
A primary objective of the dialogue would focus on the attainment of consensus for the conducting of an
assessment of the public procurement system using the indicators-based OECD/DAC tool.
Pillar 2: Improving Competitiveness & Infrastructure

10.
The Government seeks to strengthen competitiveness through increased coverage and
better quality of infrastructure and establishment of a more conducive business environment.
Beyond the strong demand for Bank expertise in the area of public-private partnerships, with PPIAFfinanced activities already launched, sector dialogue has shaped a proposed infrastructure program under
the CPS to achieve: (i) improvement of the condition of key land transport infrastructure; (ii) efficiency

Annex F
Page 3 of 8

improvements in OSE to free up resources for additional investment; (iii) diversification of sources of
energy to reduce dependence on specific resources and decrease costs; and (iv) energy efficiency
improvements by industry, agriculture and residential consumers to slow the growth of electricity
demand. Means of support under the 2010-2015 CPS include the following:

11.
Energy Efficiency GEF Grant (ongoing): The Energy efficiency project is partially financed
by a US$ 6.9 million grant. The development objective of this project is to increase the demand for and
competitive supply of energy efficient goods and services, contributing to: (a) improved efficiency of
energy use; (b) reduced reliance of the Uruguayan economy on imported electricity and fuels; and (c)
reduced emissions from the energy sector. The Project’s global environmental objective is to promote
energy efficiency through (i) building capacity and know-how among stakeholders; (ii) stimulation of
consumer demand; and (iii) promotion of project development and investment financing. The project
consists of three main components: Energy Efficiency Market Development (implemented by MIEM);
Utility Based Energy Efficiency Services (implemented by UTE); and. Project Management
(implemented by MIEM and UTE). The project has supported the development of a string regulatory
framework in energy efficiency in the country as well as its inclusion in the public agenda.
12.

Energy Sector Strengthening Project (Timing TBD): The operation will strengthen energy
security in Uruguay. Given the draughts and the regional scarcity of natural gas, in recent years Uruguay
faced strong difficulties to satisfy its electricity demand. The operation would focus on enhancing
transmission and distribution capacity, with a view to contributing to assure the adequate ease of use of
electricity in all the country.

13.
Transport Infrastructure Maintenance and Rural Access (ongoing): The project’s
development objective is to upgrade the country’s road transport infrastructure to a condition that
facilitates the transportation of freight and passengers at a cost-efficient level of service. This is being
done by rehabilitating key transport links, removing existing bottlenecks, arresting any further
deterioration of infrastructure due to budgetary constraints, and improving infrastructure management and
safety. The project is helping to reduce transport costs and preserve the infrastructure stock in Uruguay in
an efficient and sustainable manner at both the national and local levels. In general, the structure and
composition of the transport industry in Uruguay is highly competitive. Thus, the net reduction in
transport costs brought about by the project should translate into freight tariff reductions, ultimately
reducing the price of the transported goods and stimulating higher levels o f productivity and economic
activity.
14.

Transport Infrastructure Modernization Loan (FY12). This operation would consist of an
output-based loan supporting the MTOP five-year work program that finances typical road works (mainly
CREMAS), and possibly supports the implementation of reforms in other surface transport modes as well
as the institutional improvement of the MTOP. The loan would disburse with indicators that link road
condition and progress of the transport sector reform.

15.
OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation project APL III/IV (FY12). The project
development objective (PDO) of the overall APL program is to increase the efficiency, coverage and
sustainability of water supply and sanitation services through: (i) improved efficiency and effectiveness of
OSE; (ii) increased capacity for pumping treated water in Montevideo and UFW reductions; and (iii)
increased sewerage treatment and a new strategy for sewerage expansion. There is currently an ongoing
project under this program (OSE APL II) and another under preparation (OSE APL IV). A study on the
preparation for the OSE APL IV project called Construction of Wastewater Treatment Plants is being
conducted to support this investment operation. It should be noted, however, that OSE is proposing to
jointly prepare the APL III and APL IV projects (in a combined APL III).

Annex F
Page 4 of 8

16.
Integration of Public Policies on Risk Management for Threats of Water Origin (ongoing
Technical Assistance) aims to support DINASA's (Direccion Nacional de Agua y Saneamiento)
institutional and technical strengthening throughout financial and technical assistance in a specific field.
It would be a bridge between the financial assistance provided by the World Bank Technical Assistance
Loan (closed) and DINASA's financial support throughout Uruguay's National Budget.
17.
The Sewerage Access Study Trust Fund (ongoing) aims to support preparation of a study to
evaluate impact on public health of connecting to a sewerage system. It’s the most advanced study of its
kind in the Bank (and maybe in the world) today.
18.
Road Safety Trust Fund (ongoing). The objective of this grant is to generate a sustainable
cultural change trough information, education, training and awareness. This campaign is line with the
GoU´s recently approved Road Safety National Strategy, the implementation of which is led by the
National Road Safety Unit (UNASEV), road safety lead agency created by law in 2008. It finances the
improvement of data collection on use of passive road safety elements for children, as well as a
communication campaign to raise social awareness on the importance of using road safety elements for
children. The activities financed under this grant are currently being disseminated at the regional level by
the Global Road Safety Facility as best practice. As a result of this grant the beneficiary is preparing a
manual describing the methodology used in Uruguay to develop this Road Safety campaign aimed at
protecting children, to share the experience and exchange information with other countries in LCR.
19.
IBRD has developed considerable experience in providing assistance on financial markets
and business climate-related challenges throughout the region, and the Bank has already deployed
a series of lending and non-lending instruments in Uruguay to tackle these fronts. Preliminary
feedback from these activities is promising. Thus, a range of WBG support is proposed to further
strengthen the business climate in the following ways: (i) promotion of the new one-stop shop for firm
creation; (ii) substantially increase the credit available to the private sector; and (iii) the completion and
operationalization of several Public-Private Partnerships as key elements of meeting targets for
infrastructure investment. In addition to the DPLs, the achievement of these outcomes will be supported
through the activities below.
20.

Promoting Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness Project (ongoing). This project’s
development objective is to strengthen Uruguay's capacity to generate, transfer and adapt knowledge and
technology by supporting: (i) the institutional framework for science, technology, and innovation (STI);
(ii) investments in human capital and high-quality research teams; (iii) technology transfer and private
sector innovation; and (iv) cross-sectoral and international research collaboration and mobility of
researchers between public institutions and the productive sector. There are 3 components. Component
one will support STI policies and institutional strengthening. Component two will build human capital
and high-quality research teams and will strengthen the capacity to develop new knowledge. Component
three will promote innovation and technology transfer to the productive sector.

21.
AAA on competitiveness (ongoing). In response to the Government’s request, this study
assesses Uruguay’s potential as a logistics hub and as a regional distribution center. The competitiveness
of Uruguay’s logistics system is assessed from an international perspective and policy recommendations
towards further efficiency gains are provided. The study focuses on policies related to enhancing
domestic and regional trade facilitation and assesses the wider economic impact of such reforms on
logistics costs and trade.
22.

Investment Climate Assessment (FY12). This activity would be a key ESW built on the
previous Uruguayan Investment Climate Assessment carried out in 2007. The study would seek to: (i)
measure prevailing investment climate conditions in Uruguay and their evolution relative to the last

Annex F
Page 5 of 8

assessment; (ii) provide international comparisons on key business climate indicators; (iii) identify the
features of the investment climate that matter most for firm productivity and competitiveness; and (iv)
make policy recommendations on key reform priorities. It will help identify priorities for policy reform
and will provide the Government and the private sector evidence that can be used to advocate for further
policy reforms.
Pillar 3: Protecting the Environment, Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change, and Strengthening
Family Agriculture

23.

The WBG is well positioned -- in terms of the financing options, knowledge and expertise at
its disposal – to support the implementation of the National Response to Climate Change Plan and
the National Action Plan on Production and Sustainable Consumption.

24.
Integrated Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project (ongoing). The
objective of this project is to conserve Uruguay's globally significant biodiversity particularly through
financing the incremental costs associated with promoting integrated production systems in key
biodiversity areas. In this context, this project fits perfectly with the Government strategy to expand the
work initiated under the PRENADER Project, but with more emphasis on natural resources and
biodiversity conservation and management. The mainstreaming of biodiversity in the rural sector and the
value added to rural land production based on sound practices may be replicated elsewhere with a strong
communications scheme. The academic sector and civil society organizations would be key elements to
disseminate and bring into concrete actions the lessons derived from this initiative.
25.
GEF Biodiversity Conservation (ongoing). The first component, Natural Resources and
Biodiversity Management Component provides technical and financial assistance to demand-driven
activities aimed at promoting sustainable management of natural pastures and rain-fed agriculture. The
GEF contribution to the Fund would support mainstreamed demand for biodiversity initiatives in priority
ecosystems. The second component, fully financed by GEF resources, establishes demonstration areas
within the selected areas of GEF-interventions (grasslands and serranías), for a sustainable use of natural
resources in key micro-catchments which are important for biodiversity, combining sound practices for
natural resources management, and creating increased public awareness on the significance, and
socioeconomic importance of biodiversity. The third component develops support services that
contribute to the efficient implementation of sub-projects, financed under the previous two components.
The fourth component supports the sound and efficient management of the Project.
26.
Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery Carbon Trust Fund (ongoing). The project aims to
design, install, and operate a landfill gas flaring unit at Montevideo's controlled landfill, thereby avoiding
1,299,836 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCOze) emissions from July 2007 to December 2012. In
addition to achieving carbon Emission Reductions (ERs) through methane combustion, the project will
contribute to a positive local environmental impact under objective one above by controlling flammable
gas migration and non-methane volatile organic compound (NMVOC) emissions, which can cause other
local and global environmental effects and are hazardous in high concentrations.
27.
UTE 10MW Grid-Connected Wind Power Farm at Caracoles Hill Trust Fund (ongoing).
This is a small-scale Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) activity aimed at reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by displacing electricity generated from carbon intensive sources in the Uruguayan grid. Its
main objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by grid-connected electricity generation from wind
power. The emissions reduction will arise from the displacement of fossil-fuel-based electricity
generation on the national grid. The project will contribute to the sustainable development of Uruguay,
most notably through energy security and the substitution of crude oil and derivatives imports. This

Annex F
Page 6 of 8

project being the first of its kind, it is designed as a small-scale pilot, aimed at being easily replicated in
case of success.

28.
Carbon Finance Assistance (disbursing under TF054846). The objective of this operation was
to strengthen the national capacity at both institutional and technical level in order to enable the
development of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects and other mitigation activities. This
technical assistance has achieved the following: (i) Capacity building within, and technical assistance to
the DNA, (ii) Capacity building within other Government Agencies, (iii) Participation in Carbon Expo
and preparation of promotional materials, (iv) Outreach to the private sector and the general public, (v)
Analysis of the legal and regulatory framework for the approval of CDM projects and the sale of the
corresponding CERs, and (vi) Technical assistance for development of programmatic CDM opportunities.
29.
Sustainable Industrial Development Project (FY12). This operation would also strengthen the
institutional capacity to enforce existing regulations both at national and sector levels. In terms of the
current institutional capacity to enforce compliance, the GoU has implemented some measures, including
the control of regulations compliance. However, these efforts have been isolated. In this context,
DINAMA, together with other ministries in relevant sectors, has agreed to coordinate efforts and to work
together in the design of new and comprehensive instruments to facilitate supervision and control of
cleaner production processes which would be part of the new IBRD operation.
30.
Promoting Cleaner Production & Improving Environmental Compliance in the Industrial
Sector Trust Fund (RETF). During 2010, the GoU has presented a National Action Plan on Production
and Sustainable Consumption. This plan seeks to identify, coordinate, integrate and potentiate a set of
actions, programs and projects targeted to prevent and minimize environmental impacts from production
and consumption. This project is expected to become active September 31 2010. Its objectives are to
support activities that will seek to promote cleaner production, improve environmental compliance and
boost competitiveness in the industrial sector (particularly for SMEs) in Uruguay, through the provision
of technical assistance to the Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente (DINAMA). These activities will
be part of the project preparation activities relating to the Uruguay Sustainable Industrial Development
Project.
31.

Integrated Agricultural Development and Natural Resources Management Project (FY12).
The proposed operation would represent an innovative results-oriented initiative that would replicate the
successful experience of the ongoing Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project, while
expanding the objective and scope to incorporate a strong focus on Climate Change adaptation and
mitigation in the agricultural sector. The project would incorporate specific support to the development
of innovative public instruments to improve information systems for planning and decision making, as
well as supporting private sector investments to mitigate emissions, utilization of biomass for energy
generation, and improve resilience to climate variability at the farm level. Project design would also
benefit from the conclusions and recommendations of the recently completed AAA on Family Agriculture
regarding the specific factors that increase the vulnerability of this important subsector of the farming
community, and the analytical work conducted on Climate Change. The project, financed by a blend of a
Bank loan and possibly GEF funds, would represent one element of an integrated results-oriented set of
instruments that would also include Bank assistance to the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and
Fisheries (MGAP) to access other possible sources of bilateral and multilateral financing for climate
change (such as the Adaptation Fund), as well as analytical support, technical assistance, and
collaboration with MGAP regarding dissemination of experiences, organization of conferences, and
participation in international events related to climate change.

32.
AAA on Family Agriculture (ongoing). The Development Objective (DO) of the this Economic
Sector Work (ESW) is to contribute to more equitable agricultural sector development in Uruguay while

Annex F
Page 7 of 8

maintaining the country’s natural resource base and guaranteeing the long term sustainability of the
farming community. Towards this objective, the ESW, through its diagnostics and recommendations
focusing on the family agriculture segment, would contribute to an improved knowledge base within
DGDR and a capacity for coherent programming of policies and instruments to address the main
constraints to agricultural development in general, and by family agriculture in particular.

33.
AAA on climate change and agriculture (FY12). This analysis would assess international
experiences and provide guidance to the development of the Government’s integrated strategy for
mitigating and adapting agriculture and livestock production practices to climate variability, including by
exploring the use of risk management (insurance) instruments.
Pillar 4: Increasing Inclusion & Social Equity

34.
The experience of the World Bank in Uruguay and other countries in the region positions it
well to respond to the Government’s demand for technical assistance in the implementation of the
National Plan for Social Equity, as well as to support the continuing reform in the health and
education sectors. Several interventions are proposed to support the aforementioned government
objectives in the social sectors.
35.

Output-Based Social Sector Project (Timing TBD). This lending operation would contribute to
finance the policies discussed and identified as efficient and priority in the studies on Health Reform
Assessment, One laptop per Child and Social Policy Analysis, to help the Government implement
necessary reforms.

36.
Human Opportunity Index (NLTA) (FY12). This is a possible follow-up work on "Monitoring
social policy through the HOI". It would be an input towards the preparation of the Social Sector Resultsbased project.
37.
Social Policy Analysis (FY12). This activity would comprise an evaluation of the Family
Allowances and Tarjeta Alimentaria programs and discussion of further reform options on income
transfer programs, including the use of FA and TA for the extreme poverty eradication plan, reforms in
the FA program, and reforms in the old age non contributory pension program. This ESW will include an
analysis of public expenditure efficiency and impacts of these policies on the Human Opportunity Index.
38.
Reform of Housing Policies (FY11). The objective of this study would be to consider policy
options to increase the supply of social housing, focused on creating incentives for self-initiatives.
39.

Social Sectors Public Expenditure Review (FY12). Upon taking office, the administration
proposed a public sector reform agenda aimed at, among other things, developing result-oriented
medium-term budgeting, reforming the civil service, enhancing governance and transparency, and
implementing effective and well-targeted social policies and programs supported by more effective social
service delivery. A Social Sector Expenditure Review would aim to achieve the following objectives: (a)
develop an overview of the fiscal stance and a debt sustainability analysis, and their prospects in the
medium term; (b) upgrade public expenditure management, supported by a PEFA evaluation; (c) assess
recent social policies and their budgetary implications; (d) examine the incidence of social expenditure of
the main social programs; and (e) complete an evaluation of key social programs (mainly family
allowances and Tarjeta Alimentaria), while implementing impact evaluations wherever data make it
possible.

40.

Third Basic Education Quality Improvement project (ongoing). The objective of this project
is to increase equity, quality, and efficiency in the provision of preschool and primary education. These

Annex F
Page 8 of 8

objectives will be achieved by: (i) expanding the full-time school model, which focuses on students from
socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds; (ii) improving the quality of preschool and primary
education by enhancing the teacher training system and introducing new teaching and learning
instruments in the classroom; and (iii) increasing the efficiency of education institutions. There is an
ongoing additional financing for this project which addresses the financing gap arising from the increase
in project costs associated with a change in the Government of Uruguay's (GoU) strategy on civil works,
and the significant escalation of construction costs in the country.

41.

Education Project (FY12). The proposed education operation (estimated $40 million) would
include continued support for the expansion of the full time school (FTS) and related activities, aimed to
increase the quality of education at the primary level. The envisioned activities expected to be financed
under the project include; (i) the construction, rehabilitation and equipping of new FTS schools; (ii) the
procurement of didactic materials for the schools (school equipment, learning materials, and school
libraries); and (iii) teacher training for FTS.

42.
AAA on the One-Laptop-Per-Child initiative (FY11). This activity would consist of an
assessment of the CEIBAL program and implementation so far, and discussion of possible options
regarding the use of laptops in the classroom and expansion to secondary education.
43.
The Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention Project (ongoing). The Non Communicable
Diseases Prevention Project seeks to support the Government’s efforts to further strengthen its health
delivery services and the current health policy framework for NCDs. In this context, the specific
development objectives of the operation are (i) to expand accessibility and quality of primary health care
services related to selected NCDs early detection and medical care; and (ii) to avoid and reduce exposure
to selected NCDs risk factors as well as their health effects. The operation consists of four components:
Component 1 - Strengthening of the MSP’s capacity to address the country’s changing epidemiological
profile; Component 2 -Improving access to quality care services for prevalent NCDs in public primarycare facilities; Component 3 - Implementation of the Previniendo Pilot Program; and Component 4 –
Project Management. These components are implemented by the three main directorships within the
MSP, with overall support and coordination from a Project Support and Coordination Unit (PSCU).
44.

IDF grant to Promote Equitable Access of Society to the Legal System (ongoing). The first
Bank grant to be executed by the Uruguayan Parliament, this is designed to raise awareness among
vulnerable groups of the benefits and rights established in select social legislation. It will allow
Parliamentarians to monitor the social impacts of selected laws, develop tools to incorporate a social
analysis when reviewing draft legislation, and, in cooperation with agencies of the Executive, develop
institutional capacity to better implement such laws.

Annex G
Page 1 of 2

Annex G: IFC Program Summary
1.
IFC activities in Uruguay are focused on the country’s rich natural resource endowment, while
fostering a more competitive private sector environment. The Corporation expects to move forward with a
balanced approach that aims to finance private sector players with the scale needed to compete in global
markets, while encouraging the growth of SMEs and supporting low-income groups. It expects to attain
these objectives by expanding the availability of financial services, supporting agribusiness and forestry,
financing infrastructure projects, and encouraging the growth of Uruguay’s tertiary and technical
education system. These aims areas are in line with two of the four CPS pillars: improving
competitiveness and infrastructure, and increasing inclusion and equity.
2.

Uruguay’s financial system has survived the global crisis, but lacks the depth achieved in other
countries in the region such as Brazil and Chile. In 2008, domestic credit provided by the banking sector
was equivalent to 33% of GDP, less than for regional upper middle income peers Chile or Brazil, but
better than Argentina. Uruguay has an embryonic microfinance industry. Uruguay’s microfinance sector
ranks 50th out of the 55 countries surveyed in the 2009 Global Microscope on the Microfinance Business
Environment, reflecting low scores for institutional development and regulatory framework.

3.

This suggests that substantial opportunities exist for financial institutions to expand the range of
services available to middle- and low-income households, as well as to second tier corporates and farms.
Corporate lending in Uruguay tends to be concentrated at large companies.

4.
IFC aims to support banks and non-banks that focus on the mid-market corporate and low-income
retail banking segments. IFC is looking at opportunities to support local banks with onlending facilities
for agribusiness SMEs and with trade finance lines for exporters. IFC currently has only one trade finance
client in Uruguay with $160,000 in guarantees outstanding as of May 2010. IFC has financed
microfinance ventures elsewhere in Latin America, particularly in Bolivia, Mexico and Peru and thereby
managed to reach groups that had previously been unable to obtain credit on acceptable terms. IFC is in
talks with a potential client in this sector. It intends to help develop Uruguay’s small microfinance sector
through investments with microfinance institutions, on a selective basis. The Corporation also aims to
support housing finance projects that can help expand this incipient market. IFC has also gathered
considerable experience in supporting the development of capital markets in other Latin American
economies.
5.
Agribusiness is an important market for the IFC given its significance to the Uruguayan
economy. Although it is a relatively small part of the economy, accounting for 10%-15% of GDP,
agribusiness products comprise the bulk of Uruguay’s exports. The recent resolution of the legal conflict
with Argentina over the construction of the Orion paper pulp project sponsored by UPM-Kymmene
(formerly Botnia SA), and partly financed by IFC, may open the way for fresh investment in this sector.
Uruguay’s excellent soils and temperate climate are favorable for the fast growth of commercial
plantations.
6.
Orion and similar large-scale projects have the potential to reshape the structure of Uruguay’s
industrial base and generate large export revenues in future years. Orion is the largest foreign investment
in Uruguay's history and is enabling the country to move up the value chain beyond the export of raw
materials. It is generating some 2,500 local jobs and has created opportunities for small independent
suppliers to enter the company’s value chain. Orion has also deployed advanced environmental
management techniques and technologies that allow it to sequester a net 500 kilos of CO2 equivalent per
year per ton of paper produced. The plant will produce one million tons of paper per year during its 30year life.

Annex G
Page 2 of 2

7.
Despite the attractiveness of Uruguay’s fundamentals, its lack of scale often imposes higher
financing and operating costs than direct competitors in neighboring countries. Competitors based in
Brazil and Chile are able to attract substantial volumes of capital into their agro-industrial sector either
through foreign direct investment or from their local financial system. Although FDI inflows have
become significant as a proportion of Uruguay’s economy, their absolute volume is relatively modest;
inflows have never greater than $2 billion per year.
8.

IFC’s investment focus is likely to remain on export-oriented enterprises with deep linkages to
farms. IFC expects to support projects that integrate SMEs into corporate supply chains. All three of
IFC’s currently active investment projects in Uruguay are in export-oriented agribusiness companies.
These include a citrus producer (Milagro, with a $9.56 million loan outstanding as of May 2010), and a
dairy cooperative (Conaprole $17.01 million loan and $3.33 million in quasi-equity financing outstanding
in May 2010), as well as UPM-Kymmene ($66.11 million loan outstanding in May 2010).

9.
IFC aims to reinforce the county’s competitiveness by financing infrastructure projects, especially
those in the renewable energy, logistics, and water sectors once Congress has approved the relevant
legislation and appropriate new regulations are in place. The ongoing legal and regulatory reforms related
to promotion of public-private partnerships and expanded scope of investments by institutional investors
in the local capital market could open further opportunities for IFC involvement in this area.
10.
Uruguay’s education system has benefited from attention under the previous government and the
Mujica administration has stated that it will remain focused on improving the country’s education system.
The IFC hopes to support this strategy should opportunities arise to finance private for- and not-for-profit
education institutions, particularly those that offer technical and vocational courses for low income
students to improve their employability, raise incomes, and improve productivity. This would support the
Government’s strategy by improving the range and quality of higher education and by improving equity
within the system. IFC has built a portfolio of investments in successful technical and vocational colleges
in Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico that are aimed at working adults and low-income students many
of whom are the first in their families to enter college. IFC-financed colleges enrolled 802,000 students in
calendar year 2008 throughout Latin America.

Annex H
Page 1 of 1

Annex H: Proposed Global Environmental Facility (GEF) Program

1.

The GEF provides financing for activities that achieve global environmental benefits. It is the
designated financial mechanism for the international conventions on biological diversity, climate change,
persistent organic pollutants, and desertification. It also collaborates closely with the Montreal Protocol the legal instrument to implement the objectives set out in the Vienna Convention on Ozone Depleting
Substances - and regional and international waters agreements. The World Bank is one of the main GEF
implementing agencies in Uruguay.

2.

Current GEF program: The World Bank GEF program comprises two operations with total
financing of US$ 13.8 million. The current operations span biodiversity and climate change (energy
efficiency):




Integrated Ecosystem and Natural Resources Management Project, (US$ 7 million)
Energy Efficiency Project, (US$ 6.8 million)

3.
The Bank's GEF strategy in Uruguay blends GEF-financed activities with Bank loans, not only to
better leverage GEF resources but also to better mainstream global environmental concerns in country
programs. The Bank’s comparative advantage for implementing GEF projects is based on the following:




Leveraging investments, particularly as part of co-financing with IBRD operations in the area. The
GEF helps develop, catalyze, and complement investment operations.
Leveraging dialogue based on areas of current engagement and technical expertise. The GEF is often
a new entry point for dialogue in key sectors, including energy and transport.
Fostering new ideas and innovation, often with NGOs, the private sector, and others.

4.
GEF potential in Uruguay: Current Government priorities are in the areas of climate change,
biodiversity, and water resources management. Whereas biodiversity and climate change (energy
efficiency) have been the dominant areas of World Bank GEF programming over the past few years, there
are additional opportunities in nearly all areas eligible for GEF support.
5.

Currently the World Bank is implementing large-scale projects on biodiversity, and climate
change and energy. These large projects are typically a blend between GEF-funds and WB loans while
some only receive financing from the GEF. However, a key issue to consider is the System for
Transparent Allocation of Resources (STAR) that the GEF has recently adopted, which implies a
maximum allocation for Uruguay in the areas of Climate Change (US$ 3.9 million), Biodiversity (1.9
US$ million) and Land Degradation (US$ 0.6 million) over 4 years. Although the current administration
has decided to take maximum advantage of GEF, the strategic use of available resources has not been
determined, and there are not projects have thus far been endorsed by the GEF under the new STAR.

6.
During the proposed CAS period, the Bank will continue its strategy of blending GEF activities
with Bank loans, and will support stand-alone operations in those areas where there is a high potential of
sector transformation while addressing global environmental issues. As an example of this approach, the
Bank will continue working with Uruguay to finance the incremental costs of conservation in rural areas
by means of a probable second phase for the Integrated Ecosystem and Natural Resources Management
Project. The potential of renewable energies and energy efficiency are still opportunities to expand the
future GEF cooperation. In addition, the Bank’s financial support for infrastructure, environment and
rural development under the proposed CPS could open additional opportunities for GEF co-financing.

Annex I
Page 1 of 3

Annex I: Consultations

1.

The preparation of the CPS was highly participatory in terms of public sector stakeholders, and
the new Government is leveraging the opportunity provided by the CPS preparation to plan an extended
series of stakeholder consultations that will not end with the finalization of the CPS but rather continue
into implementation.

2.
The consultative process commenced before the inauguration of the new administration.
Discussions on a set of Policy Notes were held between the Bank and the newly elected authorities in
February, 2010, followed by presentations to the main opposition parties. These discussions were
attended throughout by the President-elect, Mr. José Mujica, the elected Vice-president, Mr. Danilo
Astori, and future cabinet members. These interactions were appreciated both by the Government and the
opposition, and enabled the Bank to gauge the relatively high degree of consensus that exists today in
Uruguay on the policy agenda and development challenges.
3.
In April 2010, the dialog on the main priorities for the collaboration between the Bank and
Uruguay over the next five years was deepened. The Bank Vice President met with President Mujica,
Vice-president Astori, the economic and social cabinet, as well as with representatives from the
legislative branches, private sector and civil society. These discussions generally confirmed as valid the
proposed orientations of the DPL and, more generally, the forthcoming Country Partnership Strategy.
4.
In early May, 2010, consultations on the DPL, specifically, and the framework of the strategy,
more generally, were held. The main objective was two-fold: first, to seek feedback from Government,
partners from academia, civil society organizations, Parliament, and the private sector on the various
areas of reform covered by the new DPL series; and second, to explain the purpose and the design of the
new DPL series in the context of the Government’s own development strategy and the Bank’s CPS to a
wider stakeholder group, beyond the main partners in the Government.
5.
Another round of more detailed discussions on the results matrix and the program under the CPS
was held July 1, 2010, resulting in an agreed lending program and a general framework for a joint AAA
program. From that point intensive dialogue on the finalization of the CPS was continuous.
6.
Finally, the aforementioned systematic stakeholder consultations were kicked off in late
July/early August, 2010, and will continue through the first year of CPS implementation. Given the
multi-sectoral objectives of both the CPS and the Government’s own development strategy, this series of
consultations is generally organized around the following themes rather than individual ministries or
sectors:






Modernization of the Public Sector
Strengthening Competitiveness and the Business Climate
Strengthening the Infrastructure sector
Environmental Protection and Climate Change Adaptation
Social Protection and Equity

7.
The first round of consultations, organized jointly with the Ministry of Economy and Finance,
focused on the preparation of the CPS. While the broader CPS was presented, this group focused mostly
on Competitiveness, Business Climate and Infrastructure. There were participants from the Parliament,
research institutes, consultant firms, and the private sector.

Annex I
Page 2 of 3

8.

There was a general consensus among participants that the main constraints to competitiveness of
the Uruguay’s economy related to the insufficient quality of education, in particular the inability of the
educative system to generate skills demanded by the economy, as well as inadequate reach and quality of
infrastructure. Limited access to finance, caused by factors found both at the supply and demand side of
the financial sector were also highlighted as a key underlying problem.
Education

9.

Insufficient quality of education was a critical general concern voiced by participants. The
current problems at the secondary level (high dropout rates, teacher absentees, etc.) were mentioned as a
threat for the society and the economy. There was a discussion on how to strengthen education policy,
especially at the tertiary level, in order to better match educational program with demands for skills from
the private sector. An important deficit on professional skills was identified. Companies situated in the
interior of the country were particularly affected by this problem, as these areas suffered from a “brain
drain” of professionals to the capital.
Infrastructure and logistics

10.

The lack of well developed infrastructure, especially in areas beyond Montevideo, was mentioned
as critical constraint to growth, with the view that very sizeable investments are needed to remedy this
problem. It was recognized that these investments could not be financed without the participation of the
private sector, given the severe fiscal limitations. Some participants felt however that public-private
alliances were not possible without an initial injection of capital by the public sector (for instance for
upgrading the railway infrastructure). The reform of state-owned enterprises was seen by several
participants as a key element in this regard, as by opening up these companies to the private capital,
significant amounts of private capital could be mobilized.

11.
Logistics was highlighted by some participants as a key sector, both as source of growth itself as
well as a key factor determining production costs of other sectors. There was a discussion on how to
improve the regulatory and administrative environment of the logistics sector, and the streamlining and
professionalization of customs was highlighted in this regard.
Access to finance

12.
There was a sense among participants that improvements in strengthening the regulatory and
legal framework of Uruguay’s financial and capital markets have led to these markets now generally
complying with international standards. In view of this, it was advocated that the Bank should shift the
emphasis of its support from strengthening regulation to promotion of market participation.
13.

Several participants stated that the emphasis should therefore now be put on promoting activities
in the local financial and capital markets, in particular those that would help smaller economic agents
improve their access to financing. It was felt by most participants that the priority thereby should be to
strengthen the demand side, by enhancing awareness about financial instruments and promoting the
availability of information. Increasing capacity in risk management was highlighted, through measures
like promoting the use of derivatives by companies. At the supply side, there was still an important need
for professionalization of key agents active in financial and capital markets.

14.
Some participants stressed the importance of better adapting bank regulations to the particular
reality of small and medium enterprises (in terms of economic resources, time and human resource
capacity), as a key factor for facilitating their access to the finance. This was also mentioned as a valuable
tool for bringing small companies from the informal to the formal sector.

Annex I
Page 3 of 3

Competitiveness

15.

Since strengthening Uruguay’s competitiveness is a national strategic priority, it was suggested
by some participants that defining and implementing a reform agenda in this regard should be elevated
above the political and economic cycles. The creation of an independent institution for this purpose was
put forward. Participants also mentioned the lack of coordination among public institutions as hampering
the effectiveness of the Government in promoting competitiveness. In this context, there were some
references to a proliferation of institutions responsible for this reform agenda. Also, some participants
expressed a need for enhancing capacity of the Foreign Service in promoting Uruguayan products and
companies abroad.
Next Steps

16.

Subsequent rounds of consultations will provide ongoing feedback from stakeholders to
complement quantitative data on progress against the Government’s development objectives and against
the CPS objectives, as well as informing the continued evolution of Government strategy. Particular
emphasis will be placed on those themes which were not fully addressed in the first round.

