Public Disclosure Authorized

MYANMAR

NOVEMBER,
2 0 1 4

Ending poverty and boosting
shared prosperity in a time
of transition

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 93050-MM

A SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC

2 | World Bank Report

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB
AIDS
ASEAN
ATM
CBM
CEDAW

Asian Development Bank
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Automated Teller Machine
Central Bank of Myanmar
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women
CESD
Center for Economic and Social Development
CESR
Comprehensive Education Sector Review
CPF
Country Partnership Framework
CSO
Civil Society Organization
DB
Defined Benefit
DFID
Department for International Development
DSA
Debt Sustainability Analysis
DTIS
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
DU
Delivery Unit
EAP
East Asia Pacific
EITI
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EMIS
Education Management Information System
ESIA
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
EU
European Union
FAB
Farmland Administration Body
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
FESR
Framework for Economic and Social Reform
FIL
Financial Institutions Law
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
HIV
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HRD
Human Resource Development
ICA
Investment Climate Assessment
ICT
Information and Communications Technology
IDP
Internally Displaced People
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IHLCA
Integrated Household Living Conditions Assessment
IHLCA-2 Integrated Household Living Conditions Assessment - 2
ILO
International Labor Organization
IMF
International Monetary Fund
INGO
International Non-Governmental Organizations
IPP
Independent Power Producer
IRD
Internal Revenue Department
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
JMP
Joint Monitoring Program
KIO
Kachin Independence Organization
KNU
Karen National Union
LSCI
Liner Shipping Connectivity Index
LUC
Land Use Certificate
MADB
Myanmar Agricultural Development Bank
MDRI
Myanmar Development Resource Institute
MEB
Myanmar Economic Bank
MEC
Myanmar Economic Cooperation
MFI
Micro Finance Institution
MIC
Myanmar Investment Commission
MICS
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MIGA
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MOE
Ministry of Education
MOF
Ministry of Finance
MOH
Ministry of Health

MOHT
MNPED

Ministry of Hotels and Tourism
Ministry of National Planning and Economic
Development
MP
Member of Parliament
MPLCS Myanmar Poverty and Living Conditions Survey
MPT
Myanmar Posts and Telecommunications
MSE
Microfinance Supervisory Enterprise
MSME
Micro Small Medium Enterprise
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
NRC
National Registration Card
NSDS
National Strategy for the Development of Statistics
NTM
Non-Tariff Measures
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development
OOP
Out-Of-Pocket
PEFA
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PER
Public Expenditure Review
PFM
Public Financial Management
PPP
Public-Private Partnership
PSC
Production Sharing Contract
QSEM
Qualitative Social and Economic Monitoring
SABER Systems Approach for Better Education Results
SCD
Systematic Country Diagnostic
SEE
State Economic Enterprise
SEZ
Special Economic Zone
SIDA
Swedish International Development Agency
SIM
Social Impact Monitoring
SLORC State Law and Order Restoration Council
SLRD
Settlement and Land Records Department
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
SMP
Staff Monitored Program
SNA
System of National Accounts
SOE
State Owned Enterprise
SP
Social Protection
STEPS Skills for Training, Employment, Progression and
Self-development
SWG
Sector Working Group
TSI
Trade Support Institution
TVET
Technical and Vocational Education and Training
UMEHL Union of Myanmar Economic Holdings Limited
UN
United Nations
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
USA
United States of America
USD
United States Dollar
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
USDP
Union Solidarity and Development Party
VFV
Vacant, Fallow, and Virgin
WASH
Water, Sanitization and Hygiene
WB
World Bank
WBG
World Bank Group
WDR
World Development Report
WHO
World Health Organization
WTO
World Trade Organization

10

I. Country context
setting the stage

13

C. Economic growth,
structure, and
transformation

D. Rationale for a Systematic
Country Diagnostic

10

6
EXECUTIVE

B. Country’s economic
situation and historical
context

SUMMARY

20

21 25

B. The spatial distribution of
poverty

C. Characteristics of the
poor and the correlates and
causes of poverty

27

11

17

E. Conceptual framework
for the Myanmar SCD

F. Sources of information,
consultations, and quality
of data

17

II. A profile of POVERTY in myanmar

A. The incidence of poverty
and the extent of inequality

23

A. The transformation of
Myanmar’s polity, economy,
and society

16

24

D. Vulnerability to
poverty

E. A taxonomy of the
poor and what it
suggests about
pathways out of
poverty

25

III. PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY and
intervention areas

28
29

A. Strategic Framework for Inclusive
and Sustainable Growth
B. The Government’s
reform program

28

C. Critical next steps

1. Considerations in identifying priority
intervention areas and sequencing

29

29 2. Identified areas of intervention
3. Rationale for interventions 30

51

IV. KNOWLEDGE GAPS,
IMPLICATIONS, AND
PROPOSPED ANALYTICAL
WORK AGENDA

54

BIBLIOGRAPHY

4 | World Bank Report

LIST OF BOXES
Box 1: Myanmar’s Unique History and Circumstances

12

Box 2: What is an SCD?

16

Box 3: Overview of key data issues in Myanmar

17

Box 4: The Myanmar SCD consultations process

19

Box 5: Comparing Myanmar’s rice yield data with other countries in the region

45

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Myanmar real GDP growth rate, 2005/06-2013/14

13

Figure 2: Growth rates for comparator countries, 2012/13

13

Figure 3: Recorded export value and composition

14

Figure 4: Level and composition of exports

14

Figure 5: Sector GDP Shares

15

Figure 6: Agricultural Employment Shares

15

Figure 7: Informal Employment

15

Figure 8: Conceptual Framework for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity 17
Figure 9: A large fraction of the population is clustered around the poverty line

22

Figure 10: Small changes in the poverty line lead to large changes in poverty rates

22

Figure 11: Inequality in Myanmar is relatively low

22

Figure 12: Inequality varies within Myanmar

22

Figure 13: Poverty rates and number of poor in 2009/2010, by agro-ecological zone 23
Figure 14: Poverty rates and number of poor in 2009/2010, by states and regions 24
Figure 15: Access to basic services

24

Figure 16: Land and poverty in rural Myanmar

24

Figure 17:Poverty risk by ethno-linguistic group in 2009/2010

25

Figure 18: Pre-requisites, Pathways, and Key Intervention Areas for Poverty Reduction and
Shared Prosperity

30

Figure 19: Recent trends in Government Revenues

37

Figure 20: Government revenues across countries

37

Figure 21: Health expenditure shares

38

Figure 22: Education expenditure shares

38

World Bank Report | 5

Figure 23: Maternal mortality rate, per 100,000 live births

39

Figure 24: Secondary school gross enrollment rate, percentage

39

Figure 25: Share of firms identifying issue as constraint

43

Figure 26: Constraints by size of firms

43

Figure 27: Doing business ranking

44

Figure 28: Logistics performance index

44

Figure 29: Average paddy yield, 2010-2012

45

Figure 30: Rice as a share of total cereal production value

45

Figure 31: Percentage of population with access to electricity

47

Figure 32: Electric power consumption

47

Figure 33: Number of commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults

47

Figure 34: Number of borrowers from commercial banks per 1,000 adults

47

Figure 35: Mobile phone subscriptions per 100 people

48

Figure 36: Internet users per 100 people

48

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Economic Activity by Sectors of Origin

14

Table 2: Labor Productivity, Constant 2005 US$ 1

14

Table 3: Informal Employment and Poverty

16

Table 4: Myanmar: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, FY09-17

34

					
ANNEX: LIST OF TABLES
Table A. 1: List of knowledge and data gaps that need to be filled

61

Table A. 2: Summary of SCD consultation meetings and key focus areas
		

identified by stakeholders

65

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY

World Bank Report | 7

1.

2.

3.

4.

Myanmar is going through a critical transformation in its development path - from isolation and
fragmentation to openness and integration; and
from pervasive state control, exclusion, and individual disengagement, to inclusion, participation,
and empowerment.1 This dual shift is happening
against a backdrop of broader political reforms that
started in 2011 when a new administration took office.  
The country’s transition after the planned elections in
2015 will be a major test of the progress on political
reforms. There remain risks of political instability, policy
discontinuity, and stalled reforms due to vested interests.
The country’s history, demography, and geography create a unique set of development challenges
and opportunities: (i) emergence from a long period of international isolation; (ii) widespread poverty,
despite rich land, water, and mineral resource endowments; (iii) a strategic location in the fastest-growing
region in the world, and the only country sharing borders with both India and China, with prospects for rapid
economic growth and “catch-up” improvements in the
lives of people; (iv) a dominance, albeit slowly receding, of the military and associated groups in the economy, and (v) progress towards peace after a long period
of conflict in border areas.     
Despite its potential, Myanmar today is one of the
poorest countries in Southeast Asia. With a population of 51.4 million, the country has a per capita GDP
of $1,105, and the poverty rate is 37.5 percent, one of
the highest in the region.  Among ASEAN countries,
Myanmar has the lowest life expectancy and the second-highest rate of infant and child mortality. Less than
one-third of the population has access to the electricity
grid, road density remains low, at 219.8 kilometers per
1,000 square kilometers of land area, and ICT connections are scarce, with mobile phone and internet penetration rates at 1.1 percent and 0.3 percent, respectively.   
Myanmar’s level of development used to be on a par
with countries such as Thailand and Malaysia only a
few decades ago; today it is much lower, comparable
with Lao PDR and Cambodia.
The low level of development can be traced to
Myanmar’s long history of isolation, conflict, and
military control of political and economic life. For
most of its post-independence period, Myanmar has
been under military dictatorship and has been ravaged
by conflict in the ethnic minority border areas. State
controls and economic isolation resulted in suppressed
entrepreneurship and a diminished role of the private
sector, stagnating infrastructure and technology, under-developed markets, and low levels of foreign di-

1
The term “triple transition” was used to describe the changes in
Myanmar since a new administration took office in 2011 - from a military system to democratic governance; from a centrally-directed, closed
economy to a market-oriented one; and from 60 years of conflict to peace
in the border areas. This SCD focuses on the “dual shift” toward opening
and integration, and toward inclusion and empowerment, to highlight the
socio-economic changes associated with the triple transition.

rect investment. As Myanmar has been opening up, the
dominance of the military and groups associated with
it in the economy has begun receding, yet the shift is a
gradual one.
5.

Myanmar has made some progress in ending armed
conflicts in the border areas. Bilateral ceasefires have
been signed with several ethnic insurgent groups that
for decades had been engaged in armed conflict with
the central government.  However, the situation remains
fragile and a national ceasefire is still under discussion.  
An important recent concern is the recurrent outbreaks
of religious violence, primarily targeted at the country’s
Muslim minorities and particularly at those who identify themselves as Rohingya in Rakhine State.

6.

Growth has accelerated since the transition,
buoyed by improved macroeconomic management, increased gas production and exports, and
stronger performance in non-gas sectors due as
the economy opened up. On average, the Myanmar
economy grew at 5.1 percent between 2005/06 and
2009/10, and then at an average of 6.5 percent since
the transition. One of the key drivers of this growth has
been the export of natural gas, which is highly capital intensive and not intrinsically inclusive. Manufacturing, construction, and services have also registered
strong performance due to the opening up. At the same
time, the contribution of the more labor-intensive agriculture to growth has been small and variable. Overall,
notwithstanding significant structural change since the
mid-1980s, driven by the gas sector, Myanmar’s current economic structure resembles that of a lower income country. In 2012, agriculture still accounted for
36.4 percent of GDP (and employed over half of the
workforce), compared to 37.3 percent for services and
26.3 percent for industry.  

7.

This Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) aims to
identify priorities for Myanmar to reduce extreme
poverty and boost shared prosperity. In line with
the WBG’s new country engagement model, the findings of the SCD will provide inputs for the preparation of the upcoming Country Partnership Framework
(CPF), which will outline the WBG’s engagement to
help Myanmar achieve these twin goals for its member countries. Significant information gaps make this
exercise a particular challenge. The   SCD draws on
data from various sources, including a review of existing reports on Myanmar, a more in-depth analysis of
the 2009/10 Integrated Household Living Conditions
Assessment (IHLCA) survey data (the most recent
survey on poverty and living conditions), information
from other non-IHLCA surveys such as the Qualitative
Social and Economic Monitoring (QSEM) survey, the
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) Enterprise Survey recently conducted by the World Bank, and extensive consultations with stakeholders across the country.  
Weaknesses in data quality—particularly with regard to
poverty, national accounts and population—constrain
the analysis in this SCD (see Box 3).

8 | World Bank Report

8.

Conceptually, the framework for the Myanmar
SCD has four elements. First, it determines the profile of the poor in Myanmar, in order to understand their
characteristics, where they live, and the drivers of poverty. Second, it identifies the key pathways for ending
poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Third, it determines the constraints that lie along these pathways and
hence, fourth, the possible areas of intervention for the
country to accelerate progress towards ending poverty.

9.

With an estimated poverty rate of 37.5 percent in
2010, Myanmar’s absolute poor overlap with the
bottom 40 percent. This poverty rate, based on an internationally comparable method of analysis, is higher
than an earlier estimate of 26 percent using the same
2009/10 national household survey. Most of the poor
live in rural areas (76 percent), and poverty is most
heavily concentrated in conflict-affected areas: poverty
rates in Chin State stand at 71 percent and, in Rakhine
at 78 percent, both with substantial numbers of ethnic
minorities. Urban poverty (34.6 percent) is higher than
expected. With a Gini coefficient of 0.29, income inequality in Myanmar is relatively low, compared with
neighboring countries.

10. A range of economic and social factors are responsible for driving people into poverty in Myanmar.
The key drivers include low labor productivity, and in
a largely rural society, low agricultural productivity
(particularly for rice, the country’s main crop), landlessness, erratic rainfall, lack of access to markets due
to poor rural infrastructure, internecine conflict and
communal violence, and poor government policies.
Data also show that many households in Myanmar are
vulnerable to unanticipated shocks, which cause them
to stay or to fall back into poverty.  
11. The SCD identifies three groups of poor: traditional, transitional and excluded poor. The “traditional”
poor are heavily concentrated in rural areas, have very
low levels of education and depend on agriculture for
their livelihood, but have limited access to key productive assets and factors like land and finance.  The “transitional” poor often live in urban and peri-urban areas,
have transitioned out of traditional rural livelihoods but
still work as low-skill casual laborers.  Finally, the socially-marginalized and “excluded” poor are excluded
from opportunities for productive economic activity
for a range of reasons, including by virtue of ethnicity
and geography.  The causes of poverty for each of these
groups are many, with some that are common to all of
them, and some that are specific to each group.  

12. Ending the poverty of the working poor, both
“traditional” and “transitional”, will require increasing returns to their main asset—their labor.
For the majority, the “traditional poor”, who currently depend on agriculture for their livelihood, this will
mean both raising the returns to agricultural cultivation,
while in parallel facilitating their movement from lower value-added agriculture-related activities to higher
value-added activities off the farm by stimulating private-sector job creation.  For the “transitional” poor, the
opportunities for private-sector led off-farm employment and income generation will be critical.
13. Investments in human capital and better access to
quality basic services will be critical to ending the
poverty of all three groups of the poor — both their
income and non-income dimensions of poverty.
Better access to primary health care, water and sanitation, electricity, and basic education are important, not
only to improve well-being, but also to reduce vulnerability to poverty, enhance current income generating
opportunities and lower the inter-generational perpetuation of poverty.
14. Lastly, for the “excluded” poor—communities in
remote conflict-affected areas, members of socially-marginalized groups, families without anyone
capable of productive work—a focus on increasing the returns to labor is unlikely to be sufficient.
By definition, these groups have been or are likely to
be excluded from or less connected to opportunities
for productive economic activity. For these groups the
pathways out of poverty will likely have to include specific targeted interventions and programs of assistance.
15. Grounded in the poverty diagnostic, the SCD identifies two main pathways for ending poverty and
boosting shared prosperity in Myanmar. The first
pathway entails promoting openness and sustainable
private sector-led growth for more jobs. Growth is
expected to come from a combination of investment,
continued increase in natural resource exports, and
increasing productivity. A key over-arching principle
is ensuring greater participation of the domestic and
foreign private sector in the economy (particularly in
the sectors with greater potential for job creation), fostering integration with the global economy, enhancing
labor productivity, and adopting an integrated approach
to the management of its natural resources, particularly
the Ayeyarwaddy river basin. The other pathway entails
promoting universal access to basic services and empowerment for inclusive growth, particularly in rural
areas. This pathway will benefit all groups of poor.
16. Priorities for Myanmar to create jobs in manufacturing and services include opening up the space
for foreign and domestic investors and facilitating access to domestic, regional, and international
markets. One “quick win” will come from removing the
remaining policy and institutional constraints to entry
by new domestic and foreign private sector investors,

World Bank Report | 9

to the expansion of operations by existing investors,
and to domestic, regional, and international market
access. Some of the required policy and institutional
changes may take time to be carried out or may be politically sensitive but most can be implemented in the
short to medium term.
17. Increasing agricultural productivity is expected to
have a high impact on poverty, with much scope
for short term gains. Since the majority of the traditional poor are engaged in agriculture, increasing
productivity would have a high impact on poverty reduction as it would increase returns to labor. There is
huge potential for improvement in Myanmar - wide
deficiency gaps exist in rice yields, diversification, and
value-addition. Increasing access to land and tenure security will support increased agricultural productivity
but great care will need to be taken in carrying out land
reforms. In the short term, the focus should be on fully
understanding the nature and scale of the problem, as
well as carrying out consultations on the way forward.
18. Addressing shortages in power, an under-developed
financial sector, shortages in skilled labor, and low
supply of ICT services will have a significant impact.
In the short to medium term, it will be important to
build on efforts already underway to increase overall
generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity.
Similarly, significant progress can be made in the short
term in modernizing and deepening the financial sector. Finally, to ensure long-term sustainability of poverty reduction efforts, it will be important for Myanmar
to adopt an integrated approach to the management of
the Ayeyarwaddy river basin and develop a nationally
agreed environmental and social Safeguards framework that is based on best practices.
19. Promoting universal access to critical services and
extending them to the rural areas and other disadvantaged groups will have a high impact. Given that
most poor people in Myanmar live in rural areas and

have limited access to critical services, extending such
services to currently under-served rural areas and disadvantaged groups (such as the excluded poor) is important for reducing poverty. Expanding the coverage
of the health system and the quality of health services is
a priority where action can be immediately scaled-up.  
Increasing education services and vocational training
will also be important although its impact will not be
realized in the short-term. Interventions for increasing
access to water and sanitation are also likely to have a
high impact on poverty reduction. In addition, access to
electricity, better rural road connectivity, microfinance,
and rural telephone services all will empower the poor
both by facilitating access to social services and enhancing opportunities to engage in productive income
generating activities.
20. In addition to the two main pathways, the SCD
identifies four critical pre-requisites for Myanmar’s development: facilitating the political transition, enhancing social inclusion, maintaining macroeconomic stability, and improving public sector
capacity and governance for policy making, coordination, and service delivery.  Continuous action in all
these areas will be essential for sustained and inclusive
growth, poverty reduction and shared prosperity.  
21. Finally, the SCD identifies various knowledge gaps
and offers suggestions on future analytical work
to help fill these gaps. For example, there is need for
further work to better understand the extent and nature
of poverty in Myanmar, particularly the situation in the
border areas, as well as update the poverty numbers.
The census that was recently conducted is expected to
provide an updated sampling frame for carrying out a
nationally representative IHLCA, to lay the basis for
have more credible poverty numbers. Some of the
knowledge gaps to be filled will help in identifying
priorities at a more granular level i.e. priorities within
priorities.

I. country context
setting the stage

World Bank Report | 11

A. The transformation of Myanmar’s polity, 		
economy, and society
1.

2.

3.

Myanmar is going through a critical transformation in its development path characterized by
a dual shift - from isolation and fragmentation
to openness and integration; and from pervasive
state control, exclusion, and individual disengagement, to inclusion, participation, and empowerment.2 For over a quarter of a century, Myanmar was
under self-imposed isolation from the rest of the world,
and under economic sanctions by the West. As a result,
Myanmar’s trade and investment relations have been
limited to a few countries in the region that it considered friendly. Similarly, the country has followed a
fragmented approach to environmental sustainability,
including the management of its key water resource,
the Ayeyarwaddy river. At the same time, there has
been pervasive state interference and dominance in
the economic space normally occupied by the private
sector in other countries while a majority of the poor,
particularly in rural parts of the country, have not had
access to certain critical services and have therefore
been disempowered to extricate themselves from poverty through participation in productive income earning opportunities. Since the transition started, these
patterns are being reversed: the country has been opening up to and integrating with the outside world in the
areas of trade and investment, the state is rolling back
and encouraging greater private sector participation in
many areas of the economy, while investments in key
services are being expanded.
These critical socioeconomic shifts are happening
against a backdrop of political reforms that started
in 2011 when a new administration took office. Key
milestones in the political transition include the release
of political prisoners and the opening up of space for
the opposition through the holding of by-elections in
2012 that brought in a significant number of opposition
MPs into parliament, including the opposition leader,
Aung San Suu Kyi.
Myanmar’s elections next year and the transition
to the next government will be an important test
for progress with political reforms. An immediate
challenge is how the country will deal with calls for
various constitutional amendments, including a provision that makes the opposition leader ineligible to run
for president.

4.

Some progress has also been made towards ending
the country’s armed conflicts in the border areas,
although the situation remains fragile. Ceasefires
have been signed with several ethnic insurgent groups
that for decades had been engaged in armed conflict
with the central government.  However, conflict continues with the Kachin Independence Organization (KIO)
in Kachin State, where armed clashes increased in the
first half of 2014 despite the KIO’s participation in discussions about a national ceasefire.  In November 2013,
leaders of ethnic armed groups met at a “Leaders’ Summit” to consider the government’s proposal to begin a
national ceasefire process (i.e. a roundtable including
all 13 armed groups, rather than a series of bilateral
discussions) and formed a National Ceasefire Coordinating Team (NCCT).  While subsequent discussions
between the NCCT and the government’s negotiating
team underlined remaining differences between the
two sides, there remains a shared commitment towards
a peaceful solution.  

5.

An important additional dimension of establishing peace and security across the country involves
finding a sustainable solution to address the systematic exclusion of the Muslim minority that
identifies itself as Rohingya in Rakhine State. The
government considers members of this Muslim minority illegal migrants from neighboring Bangladesh and
does not recognize them as an ethnic group.  Following
outbreaks of violence directed against this minority in
the summer of 2012 that killed 89 people and displaced
over 110,000, the government established temporary
camps to separate communities and avoid further violence.3 Subsequent violence took place against Muslim
minorities in Rakhine in 2013 and 2014, which spilled
over into broader anti-Muslim violence in other parts of
Myanmar in 2013 and evolved into widespread protests
against international aid workers in Rakhine in early
2014.4 As of January 2014, the number of displaced
persons in Rakhine had reached 140,000.5

B. Country’s economic situation and historical context
6.

Myanmar is one of the poorest countries in the
South East Asian region and has certain features
that are unique to its country context (See Box
1). In 2013/14, the country’s GDP was estimated at
US$56.8 billion. Based on the preliminary population figure of 51.4 million from the census conducted
in March/April 2014, the country’s per capita income
is therefore around US$1,105, one of the lowest in
the East Asian region. Analysis of the last nationwide

3
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human
Rights in Myanmar, UNOHCHR, August 2012.
2
The term “triple transition” was used to describe the changes in
Myanmar since a new administration took office in 2011 - from a military system to democratic governance; from a centrally-directed, closed
economy to a market-oriented one; and from 60 years of conflict to peace
in the border areas. This SCD focuses on the “dual shift” toward opening
and integration, and toward inclusion and empowerment, to highlight the
socio-economic changes associated with the triple transition.

4
International Crisis Group, Myanmar Crisis Watch, April 2014.<
http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/publication-type/crisiswatch/crisiswatch-database.aspx?CountryIDs=%7b7E12FB4D-6C23-449D-AF08-550AD5FD2F2E%7d#results>
5
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human
Rights in Myanmar, UNOHCHR, September 2014.

12 | World Bank Report

Integrated Household Living Conditions Assessment
(IHLCA) conducted in 2009/10, found that 26 percent
of the population was living below the poverty line6.
New calculations by the World Bank that expand the
consumption basket used to determine the poverty line
by including expenditures on health and durable goods,
and also takes into account spatial differentials in cost
of living, finds a substantially higher poverty rate of
37.5 percent7 of the population, and a high concentration of households living very near the poverty line and
thus vulnerable to falling into poverty.  
Box 1: Myanmar’s Unique History and
Circumstances
Myanmar’s history, demography, and geography create
a unique set of development challenges and opportunities: (i) emergence from a long period of international
isolation; (ii) widespread poverty, despite rich land, water, and mineral resource endowments; (iii) a strategic
location in the fastest-growing region in the world, and
the only country sharing borders with both India and
China, with prospects for rapid economic growth and
“catch-up” improvements in the lives of people; (iv) a
dominance, albeit slowly receding, of the military and
associated groups in the economy, and a fragmented
society with diverse ethnic and religious groups; and  
(v) progressive peace after a long period of conflict  in
border areas.  
Myanmar is emerging from a long period of isolation, with a devastating impact on its economy and the
well-being of people.  For the past fifty years, private
entrepreneurship has been heavily suppressed and distorted: initially, following the military coup in 1962, by
widespread nationalization of industries and closure to
outside markets and investors, then, following attempts
at reform in the 1990s, by a focus on natural resource
extraction controlled by a small, politically connected
elite. Over the past twenty years, this focus on resource
extraction was amplified by economic sanctions that
further limited market opportunities.  As a result, market institutions and government capacity to regulate
them are nascent and trade and investment relations
limited, while the country’s human capital has been depleted, as the education system, once one of the best
in Asia, withered.  While several other countries such
as Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, have emerged from
shorter periods of isolation, Myanmar is one of a handful of countries that has remained largely isolated for
almost half a century.          

6
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey in Myanmar
(2009-2010): Poverty Profile. Prepared jointly by MNPED, UNICEF, UNDP,
and SIDA, 2011.
7
The recalculated poverty rate of 37.5 percent has been presented to the authorities in Myanmar who have acknowledged the fact that a
variation in the measurement methodology shows that poverty may have
been higher in 2009/10. However, the official figure remains 25.6 percent as
originally published.

Myanmar’s reforms today and its strategic location in
the fastest growing region in the world, between the
two huge markets of China and India, create important
opportunities for economic development, but also some
risks.  Myanmar is well placed to join the global manufacturing networks that have propelled growth in Asia.  
A young population and access to the sea provide additional advantages.  However, this strategic location,
along with rich resources, also means that international
powers and domestic vested interests will compete for
influence in Myanmar.
Myanmar enjoys rich land, mineral and water resources. Exports of natural gas to Thailand have been an important source of foreign exchange and macroeconomic
stability in recent years. Exports of oil are starting and
exploration is underway as the potential for further finds
are high.  Myanmar also has significant jade and other
precious stones, forestry and other resources. Myanmar
is blessed with a long coast line and relatively abundant
rainfall.   However, many of the natural resources are
located in border areas and their extraction has contributed to conflicts. Myanmar’s strategic location, rich resources, and the interest and conflicts around them put
a premium on strong and transparent governance.
Myanmar has a long history of armed conflict of ethnic
groups along the border with the country’s central authorities, with entrenched patterns of political, social,
and economic exclusion.   There are officially 135 different ethnic groups in Myanmar. In addition, although
a large majority of the population practices Buddhism,
other religions are present too, mainly Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism. This ethnic and religious diversity
has been a source of tensions and conflict in the country.  
The main drivers of exclusion have been religion, ethnicity and citizenship, gender, geography, and conflict.
There has been long-standing discrimination and marginalization of non-Buddhists, dating back to colonial
times became highly visible recently, as deadly religious violence, particularly directed at Muslim minorities, erupted in various parts of the country.  Significant
parts of the country are not entirely within the Government’s controls.  The Government has made significant
progress in reaching agreements with the various ethnic
groups along the border, including through the launch
of a decentralization process, and the successful conclusion of ongoing negotiations will be important for
sustained development and poverty reduction.
Finally, almost unique to Myanmar is an attempt to
address the challenges and harness the potential benefits all at once.  Other transition countries have either
not been isolated in the same way, had relatively slow
transitions towards democracy or make slow economic
transitions.   Due to its unique circumstances, Myanmar is undertaking multiple challenges simultaneously.  
The potential benefits are enormous and the risks are
commensurately high.

World Bank Report | 13

7.

The low level of development can be traced to
Myanmar’s long history of isolation, conflict, and
military control of political and economic life. (Box
1)   For most of its post-independence period, Myanmar has been under military dictatorship and has been
ravaged by conflict in the ethnic minority border areas.
State controls and economic isolation resulted in suppressed entrepreneurship and a diminished role of the
private sector, stagnating infrastructure and technology,
under-developed markets, and low levels of foreign direct investment. As Myanmar has been opening up, the
dominance of the military and groups associated with
it in the economy has begun receding, yet the shift is a
gradual one.

C. Economic growth, structure, and transformation
8.

9.

Real growth has been accelerating ever since the
massive destruction caused by hurricane Nargis. Much
of that growth was driven by natural resource exports,
particularly gas. At the same time, the pace of structural transformation has been limited. Labor productivity
has improved, while the reallocation of labor appears to
have stalled.  A carefully designed sequence of policy
and institutional reforms will be needed for Myanmar
to realize its growth potential.   

10. Myanmar’s international trade is growing rapidly from a low base. Myanmar had long been living
in economic isolation due to economic sanctions and
inward-looking policies. The opening up of the economy and gradual lifting of sanctions have produced
rapid growth in international trade, with exports and
imports of goods and services growing at estimated annual average rates of 11 percent and 17 percent, respectively, between 2008/09 and 2013/14.8 Consequently,
Myanmar has become the second fastest-growing importer among ASEAN countries. However, the export
response in Myanmar has been slower than it was in
Vietnam at the start of Vietnam’s transition, especially
in the rice sector.

Growth has accelerated since the transition, but
the economy had been growing at reasonably enviable rates even before then (See Figure 1 below).
On average, it grew at 5.1 percent between 2005/06
and 2009/10 and could have been higher if not for the
devastation caused by cyclone Nargis in 2008 when
growth slowed down to 3.6 percent.   However, since
the transition started, the economy has grown at an average of 6.7 percent.

11. Exports increased substantially in 2012/13 compared to 2010/11, with natural gas contributing
the largest gains. Exports in 2008/09 were approximately US$7.2 billion, as illustrated in Figure 3. They
increased to US$8.8 billion in 2010/11 and at least
US$10.3 billion in 2012/13 with US$11.9 billion expected in 2013/14.9 Between 2010/11 and 2012/13,
natural gas exports grew by US$1.1 billion, and saw
logs and veneer grew by US$0.4 billion, as did textiles,
clothing, and footwear.10 Recorded rice exports are minimal. There are indications of  unrecorded exports over
land to China in 2012/13 and 2013/14. Nevertheless,
weak export performance of non-mineral products after three years of economic liberalization is a matter of
concern.  There is also an opportunity for future growth
if export obstacles can be identified and removed.

8
From IMF Country Reports. The corresponding growth rates for
goods based on trading partner data from the UN COMTRADE are 9 percent
for exports and 31 percent for imports.
9

Ibid.

10

UN COMTRADE.

14 | World Bank Report

(rice) and categories (vehicles).13   It is expected that
Myanmar’s exports will move increasingly toward the
level and composition seen elsewhere as sanctions are
phased out and policies improve.  As a sign of normalization, the United States suspended sanctions barring
U.S. investment in Myanmar in July 2012, and the European Union reinstated trade preferences to Myanmar
under the EU’s Generalized System for Preferences for
least-developed countries in July 2013.
13. The economic structure of Myanmar is consistent
with that of a lower income country. According to official national accounts estimates for 2010 summarized
in Table 1, the agricultural sector employed 52 percent
of the workforce and generated almost 37 percent of
GDP.  The services sector employed 36 percent of the
workforce and produced 37 percent of GDP.  The industrial sector employed only 12 percent of the workers
and generated 26 percent of GDP.  The industrial share
of employment is low compared to regional outcomes.14
Cambodia and Vietnam have levels of GDP/capita that
are close to Myanmar’s.  Their industrial employment
shares in 2010 were 16 percent and 21 percent respectively compared to 12 percent in Myanmar.  
Table 1: Economic Activity by Sectors of Origin

Sources: UN Statistical Division for national accounts, population
and percent of population between ages 15 and 64; UNDP IHCLA
2011 for all other data.

12. Trade in Myanmar had been limited by both sanctions and policy. An Asian Development Bank working paper suggests that Myanmar had been trading at
only 15 percent of its potential through 2010.11 Figure
4 shows that exports in 2012, as a share of GDP, were
far higher in neighboring countries than in Myanmar.12
For example, Vietnam and Thailand both exported
the equivalent of 70 percent of GDP in 2012. Larger
countries typically need to export less, given their large
internal markets. Thus, India exported 20 percent of
GDP while China exported 27 percent of GDP. Figure
4 also shows that the exports from Myanmar’s neighbors had a much higher manufactured content.  Much
of this shortfall was attributed to a lack of trade with
industrialized economies.   Other constraints included
policies such as import and export licensing requirements, the old dual exchange rate system, and government monopolies on trade in certain commodities
11

“Myanmar’s Trade and its Potential” (ADB 2013).

12
The data has been adjusted to remove receipts from fuel exports
from each country depicted in order to make cross-country comparisons
easier.

Table 2: Labor Productivity, Constant 2005 US$ 1

1. Defined as value-added per worker.
2. Value-added per worker in agriculture divided by value-added
per worker in industry.
Sources: World Development Indicators and Table 1.

13
According to the WTO (2014), several monopolies may still be in
place. See Section 3.1.9 State Trading, and Section 3.2.5 Export Operations
of State Enterprises, or State Trading.
14
This sector is dominated by manufacturing but also includes
mining and quarrying, construction, and the provision of electricity, gas and
water.

World Bank Report | 15

14. Labor productivity in Myanmar, defined as value-added per worker, is low in all sectors and is
much lower than in most other countries in the region. Most comparator countries in East Asia, except
Cambodia and Vietnam, have substantially higher labor
productivity in agriculture than Myanmar (see Table
2).  Myanmar’s productivity is the lowest among these
comparator countries in services, and is also the lowest
except for Cambodia in industry.
15. Structural transformation has proceeded slowly
to date. Myanmar is still largely dependent on agriculture where labor productivity is very low.   Figure
5 shows that the agricultural share of GDP has fallen
significantly from a peak of 61 percent in 1986 to 36
percent in 2011, while the share of industry increased
from less than 10 percent to 26 percent over the period.  
This coincides with the agricultural reform of 1987 and
the formal official abandonment of the “Burmese Way
of Socialism” in 1988.15   The share of agriculture in
the workforce remained essentially unchanged during
2005-2010, per Figure 6, while its contribution to GDP
has been declining.16  The labor productivity in agriculture is the lowest compared with other sectors. Labor
productivity in manufacturing is the highest and over
four-times that of agriculture (see Table 1).

15
In response to falling rice production and exports, the government in 1987 decided to reduce the amount of statutory government
procurement and gave farmers more freedom to sell the surplus in private
markets. Although rice export was still under the state monopoly, domestic
paddy/rice marketing was deregulated, resulting in active participation by
private traders.
16
The estimates are based on survey data. After accounting for
margins of error, it is unlikely that the difference between 2005 estimate of
53.0 and the 2010 estimate of 52.4 percent is statistically significant.

16. Myanmar has a large informal sector with the majority of the poor. According to the UNDP IHLCA (2011)
report, own-account workers represented 40 percent of
total employment in 2009-10.   Casual laborers represented another 18 percent, mainly from the rural areas,
and mainly in the lower income deciles.  Unpaid family workers represent another 15 percent.  Thus, a rough
estimate of the informal sector in 2009-10 would be 73
percent of the total labor force.  This estimate is up 4 percentage points from the 2005 estimate of 69 percent.  If
agricultural activities are excluded, per ILO practice, the
share of the informal sector in 2009-10 was an estimated
57 percent.17  By way of comparison, according to ILO
estimates, the informal sector share of non-agricultural
employment was 42 percent in Thailand (2010) and 68
percent in Vietnam (2009).  The average for a sample of
39 lower and middle income countries was 51 percent
(see Figure 7).   Importantly, the household survey data
in Table 3 show that those in the informal sector represent the dominant share of the poor in Myanmar.  

17
The job-based definition for informal sector workers from the ILO
includes the non-professional self-employed, domestic workers, contributing
family workers, and workers in enterprises employing 5 or fewer workers. See
Hussmann (2004).

16 | World Bank Report

of the goal is consistent with the World Bank Group’s
goals of helping its member countries end absolute
poverty and boost shared prosperity.
19. The World Bank Group is undertaking a Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) in order to identify priorities for accelerating progress in ending
poverty and boosting prosperity. The SCD seeks to
identify key constraints to remove and key opportunities to leverage in order to end poverty and boost shared
prosperity, and hence, priority areas of focus for the development of the country (See Box 2 for additional information). This report presents the key findings of the
SCD conducted on Myanmar. Apart from being a public good, the findings of the SCD will be used as inputs
in the preparation of the WBG’s engagement strategy
in Myanmar, the CPF.
17. The high share of natural resource exports may
constrain opportunities for the reallocation of labor. Natural gas is becoming a key driver of export
growth but it brings new challenges. Myanmar has large
proven reserves of gas estimated at 23 trillion cubic feet,
(20 trillion are off-shore and 3 trillion on-shore), equivalent to more than 46 years of current production (about
498 billion cubic feet (bcf per annum).  Full scale commencement of production and exportation of gas was
achieved in 2002. In 2014 natural gas exports were $4.2
billion, equivalent to 34 percent of total exports and 7
percent of GDP.18  The sector is the main destination for
FDI, particularly with several large projects ongoing.  
As portrayed in Figure 3, there are also large exports
of timber and smaller exports of gemstones – although
this volume is likely under-recorded.  Given that these
sectors are highly capital-intensive, their growth is not
likely to contribute to poverty reduction unless revenue proceeds from the sectors are used in a manner that
promotes growth in labor-intensive sectors, helps to expand and improve public service delivery, or to implement critical social protection programs.  In addition,
world prices for commodities are generally much more
volatile than manufactures.  This may create a risk of
macroeconomic volatility to the extent that one commodity, in this case, natural gas, dominates.
D. Rationale for a Systematic Country Diagnostic
18. Going forward, a key measure of success of the
economic and political reforms under the transition will be the extent to which progress can be
made towards ending poverty and boosting shared
prosperity. The President has challenged his cabinet
to reduce poverty in Myanmar from the earlier estimate
of 26 percent to 15 percent by the end of this Government’s tenure, with a particular focus on rural poverty reduction through “people-centered development.”
While the specific targets are ambitious, the main thrust
18
Consolidated public sector oil and gas revenues are those collected by the oil and gas SEEs less the income and commercial taxes they
paid to the Union.

Box 2: What is an SCD?
The SCD is an analytical report prepared by World Bank
Group Staff under the Bank’s new country engagement
model. The objective of the SCD is to identify the most
critical constraints and opportunities facing a country in accelerating progress toward the goals of ending
extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in a
sustainable manner. Thus, unlike most other WBG analytical reports, the SCD has a sharper focus on what it
will take for a country to end poverty and boost shared
prosperity, the twin goals that the WBG has committed
to helping its member countries to achieve.
The WBG will use the SCD as an input towards the
preparation of its Country Partnership Framework
(CPF), which will outline a framework for the Bank’s
engagement and support in a country. The SCD is
therefore intended to become a reference point for consultations with the Government and other stakeholders
on priorities for WBG country engagement. It is intended to help the country, the World Bank and other development partners establish a dialogue to focus
their efforts around goals and activities that have high
impact and are aligned with the global goals of ending
absolute poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a
sustainable manner.
Although the SCD is expected to help inform the identification of areas where the WBG can support a country and which will be outlined in the CPF, it will not
be limited a priori, to areas or sectors where the WBG
is currently active or where the WBG expects government demand. The SCD simply seeks to identify areas
that will have the biggest impact on ending poverty in
a country and boosting shared prosperity, whether the
WBG will be involved or not. By not limiting the scope
of the analysis, the SCD can stimulate an open and forward-looking dialogue between the WBG, member
governments, and the broader public, with a focus on
what is important for the country’s development agenda rather than the WBG’s areas of engagement.

World Bank Report | 17

The SCD is based on the best possible analysis,
drawing on available evidence. It also identifies critical data and knowledge gaps that merit attention. It
draws upon and synthesizes existing knowledge and
evidence, complemented by additional analysis as necessary, including consultations with various stakeholders. Knowledge products it could draw upon include
those produced by the WBG (e.g. country, sectoral
or thematic reports including poverty, equity, fragility, social, gender or investment climate assessments,
country economic memorandums, public expenditure
reviews, lending and Technical Assistance programs,
and others), the country government (e.g. national or
sectoral development plans), as well as national and international researchers, think tanks, the private sector
or other development partners, as relevant.
E. Conceptual framework for the Myanmar SCD
20. The guiding framework for the Myanmar SCD is
as follows (See Figure 8): The starting point is determining the profile of the poor in Myanmar, in order
to understand their characteristics, where they live, and
the drivers of poverty. The second aspect of the framework is the identification of key pathways for ending
poverty and boosting shared prosperity. This entails
identifying activities and aspects of men and women’s
livelihoods that have strong direct or indirect links to
ending absolute poverty and boosting shared prosperity. For example, the ability of a person to earn income
from productive economic activities (e.g. farming, micro-enterprises, wage employment) is an example of a
pathway to ending poverty. Significant changes to the
pathways can impact on a person’s chances of coming out of poverty or falling into it. Therefore, another
key element of the diagnostic is to identify challenges, constraints, and risks that lie along these pathways
and therefore act as headwinds against efforts to ending poverty as well as opportunities that need to be
leveraged. Gender equality along with cross important
cross-cutting issues such as governance and conflict
will influence all the key diagnostics of pathways out
of poverty.   The final element of the diagnostic is the
identification of priorities for removing the identified
constraints and challenges.
Figure 8: Conceptual Framework for Ending Poverty and
Boosting Shared Prosperity

F. Sources of information, consultations, and quality of
data
21. It is worth mentioning from the outset that the
country suffers from significant information gaps
that make a comprehensive and rigorous diagnostic difficult to undertake. The national accounts
data are not reliable as are survey data because they
are based on an old sampling frame – before the 2014
census whose preliminary results were released in August, the last was conducted in 1983. This paucity of
data not only makes it difficult for government and the
private sector to make decisions, but also complicates
efforts to carry out a comprehensive and rigorous diagnostic. Box 3 provides an overview of the key data
issues in Myanmar. In some cases, a problem might be
identified, but there may not be enough information to
determine what needs to be done about it because of
lack of key Myanmar specific data and information.
Although the preliminary results of the census show a
lower total population figure (51.4 million) than previously estimated by the Government (60 million), those
socio-economic indicators used in the SCD expressed
in per capita terms are not affected. This is because the
main source of such data was the WDI, which has already been using a population estimate broadly consistent with the census results.
Box 3: Overview of key data issues in
Myanmar
Myanmar’s statistical system is generally characterized by poor quality data. This is the result of limited
capacity and funding over the years, while the use of
some data became highly politicized. Since taking office, the current Government identified improving the
quality of statistics as one of its key strategic development goals.  Some of the key data issues are summarized below.
Poverty: Two Integrated Household Living Conditions Assessment (IHLCA) surveys were conducted,
one in 2005 and one in 2010. There are two weaknesses inherent in these surveys.  First, given that until
the 2014 population census, the last was conducted in
1983, the sampling frame used for the survey may not
be representative of the population.   Second, due to
conflict, the survey did not cover some of the border
areas. These weaknesses have called into question the
extent to which the survey data was representative of
the country.  Some of the results appear to be inconsistent with available data regarding public service delivery and infrastructure.  It is hoped that the results of
the 2014 population census will provide a more up to
date sampling frame for the next full round of IHLCA,
currently planned for 2015.
National accounts: Historical data show high real
growth rates that are inconsistent with economic fun-

18 | World Bank Report

damentals and available data from key sectors.  Public
sector activities were recorded at significantly over-valued exchange rates.   Growth rates from recent years
appear to be more realistic and consistent with other
indicators but there remains considerable uncertainty
about the actual level of GDP. The IMF Assessment of
Data Adequacy for Surveillance observes several additional short-comings but also notes good progress in
improving the quality of new estimates.
Population: Until preliminary results from the most
recent census, conducted in March/April 2014 were
announced, there had been uncertainty around Myanmar’s population figure, with numbers ranging from 48
to 61 million, with an estimated 3 million people living
abroad.  Uncertainty about the true population size has
created doubts about estimates of GDP per capita. The
last census was conducted in 1983.
Trade: There are substantial flows of jade and timber
from the border areas which is difficult to capture in
officially produced export statistics.  Trade data are recorded at the time of entries by customs, causing serious volatility in values and incorrect time records.  As
in many countries, data recorded by the authorities and
data recorded by trading partners are inconsistent.  Recent data are, however, fairly well correlated over time.
Balance of payments: According to the IMF Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance, detailed data
on services transactions and financial flows are generally not available and transactions that are not undertaken through the official banking system are usually
not estimated.
External debt: Systems for recording and monitoring
debt exist but are largely manual. Nonetheless, records
on external debt and debt service payments in arrears
are comprehensive, up to date, and broadly consistent
with records from creditors. The good record keeping and tracking of debt and arrears was critical in the
speedy resolution of arrears. However, a key weakness
is that the evaluation of external obligations which are
not nominated in U.S. dollars is conducted irregularly.  
Historical data are sometimes distorted by applying the
exchange rate at the evaluation point.
Consumer price statistics: Consumption basket
weights represent urban households only.  Some construction inputs are included; rentals of owner occupied
housing are excluded; missing prices are not imputed;
and the classification of items is outdated.
Fiscal data: Myanmar’s budget classification system,
which is the backbone of its fiscal accounts, is not fully consistent with modern classification structure such
as the Government Financial Statistics (GFS). While
fiscal data are broadly credible, no comprehensive
monthly or quarterly compilation is done for sharing
with external stakeholders.   Annual comprehensive
data are compiled with delays of up to 12 months after

the end of the reference year although this is not unique
to Myanmar.   In addition, only consolidated data for
state economic enterprises are available, and some
transactions are recorded partly on an accrual basis and
partly on a cash basis.  It is difficult to know the true
size of consolidated government because the full array
of transactions between the Union government and its
state economic enterprises are not well identified.  Fiscal and monetary data are not consistent. The recording
of government debt statistics is not comprehensive.
Monetary and financial statistics. The monetary
survey compiled by the CBM covers the central bank
and all commercial banks (public and private). Reporting of monetary data in accord with IMF classification
principles was established only by January 2012.  Prior data may have problems associated with the use of
the previously overvalued official exchange rate for
valuing foreign currency-denominated balance sheet
accounts.
Sector level data: Quality of data on key sectors including agriculture, health, and education varies, but is
generally poor. Administrative data are more credible
than survey data.
Sources: IMF Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance and World Bank staff assessments.

22. Taking into account the information gaps, the
analyses in this SCD have been informed by data
from various existing reports and surveys. First,
the analyses have benefited from reviewing existing
study reports on Myanmar. A full list of all the reports
reviewed is presented in the bibliography. Second, the
SCD has also been informed by more in-depth analyses of household level data from the 2009/10 Integrated
Household Living Conditions Assessment survey, particularly for the poverty diagnostic. The findings from
the analysis of the IHLCA have been complemented by
information from other surveys—albeit smaller scale
or more narrowly focused in terms of geographic or
thematic coverage than the IHLCA—as well as a number of qualitative studies. Third, the SCD has benefited
from the Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) survey
recently conducted by the World Bank.
23. In addition, the SCD findings have also been informed by extensive consultations with key stakeholders in Myanmar. The range of stakeholders consulted included Government officials both at central
level as well as sub-national level, members of parliament at central as well as sub-national level, the private sector, civil society organizations, development
partners, academics, think tanks, and researchers.  The
purpose of the consultations was to seek inputs from
key external stakeholders on specific issues as part of
the systematic and evidence-based identification of
Myanmar’s key opportunities and challenges towards
achieving the twin poverty goals, and subsequently,

World Bank Report | 19

in identifying the priorities for taking full advantage
of these opportunities and removing the constraints.
In addition, consultations were used to triangulate and
validate some information collected from study reports,
fill in gaps, as well as obtain further insights that were
useful in carrying out the diagnostic. Table A.2 in the
Annex contains a summary of the consultations meetings held, including some of the key focus areas that
came up from each of the individual meetings.
Box 4: The Myanmar SCD consultations process
Preparation of the Myanmar SCD benefited significantly from an extensive consultation process. The consultations were undertaken over a period of February to
June 2014. In total, 15 consultation events were held
across the country in six locations: Yangon, Nay Pyi
Taw, Pathein, Mandalay, Taungyi, and Hpa An. Apart
from the meetings, inputs were also received through
the World Bank’s website and via email submissions.
Stakeholders consulted included central Government
officials; state and regional Government officials, parliamentarians at central and state/regional level; civil
society representatives including from NGOs, INGOs,
CBOs, political parties; private sector representatives;
researchers and think tanks; and development partners.
Invitations and materials for consultations were sent
out at least two weeks in advance for most of the events,
both in English and Myanmar language. Consultation
meetings were announced on the World Bank website,
Facebook page, and local newspapers. Translation was
available at each event, and participants completed
feedback forms to help improve the format of future
consultation events.

II. A profile of
POVERTY in myanmar

World Bank Report | 21

24. The profile of poverty in Myanmar presented in
this section is based mainly on analyses of data
from the 2009/2010 IHLCA (IHLCA-2) survey, but
draws on other information sources as well, both
quantitative surveys and qualitative studies. 19 The
IHLCA-2 covered 18,660 households nationwide, and
was implemented in two rounds – December 2009/
January 2010, and May 2010.20 The IHLCA is comprehensive in its coverage of a wide range of household
level activities and outcomes. It thus promises a fertile
source of information on livelihoods needed to understand the causes and dimensions of poverty in Myanmar. There are two weaknesses inherent in the survey.
First, because the last population census was conducted
in 1983 and hence was out-of-date, the sampling frame
used for IHLCA-2 was based on administrative data
of unconfirmed reliability. Second, due to conflict, the
survey did not cover some of the border areas. These
weaknesses have called into question the extent to
which the IHLCA-2 survey data are representative of
the country. Nonetheless, the survey is the only source
of information that comes close to providing a nationallevel and relatively comprehensive picture of the poverty situation in Myanmar. And so the approach taken
here in constructing a poverty profile for Myanmar is
to carefully and selectively use analysis of data from
the IHLCA, and combine this with insights gleaned
from the numerous other studies and surveys that are
smaller-scale or more narrowly focused--in terms of
geographic scope or thematic coverage—but provide a
more granular picture, to both validate and flesh out the
IHLCA-based analysis. With the successful completion
of the Population Census in March 2014, and with a
number of technical assistance and surveys planned in
the next three years, it will be possible, going forward,
to measurably improve the quality and depth of the
household-level information available in Myanmar for
evidence-based policies and programs and to develop
an up-to-date information base on poverty and living
conditions in Myanmar.
A. The incidence of poverty and the extent of inequality
25. The analysis of the IHLCA-2 data (see UNDP
(2011)), found a poverty rate of 25.6 percent in
2009-2010, but more recent analysis of the same
data, using a different methodology, suggests that
the incidence of poverty may have been considerably higher, at 37.5 percent. The more recent analysis
used the same cost-of-basic needs approach as earlier,
and retained the same caloric threshold—2,300 calo19
Information sources included, amongst others, the LIFT
(Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund) surveys, the Multiple Indicators
Cluster Survey (MICS) by UNICEF, and surveys carried out by the Border
Consortium, as well as the Qualitative Social and Economic Monitoring
(QSEM) studies.
20
The survey was implemented in two rounds so as to cover both
the main harvest season and the main lean season in terms of agricultural cultivation. In Myanmar, as in many other poor agrarian economies,
consumption levels and household welfare can vary seasonally with the
seasonality in incomes stemming from the agricultural cycle.

ries per adult equivalent per day—to anchor the poverty line. But, in keeping with the latest international
practice, the re-estimation used a more comprehensive
measure of consumption expenditures, which included
health costs and expenditures on durable goods. Further, a new approach, also in line with international
practice, was used to capture and adjust for the cost of
living differences in different regions of the country in
coming up with the poverty lines.
26. A direct comparison of the incidence of poverty in
Myanmar to that in other countries, using a 2005
PPP $1.25-a-day line, is not possible because there
are no reliable price survey-based estimates of the
2005 PPP conversion factors for Myanmar. Myanmar was not part of the 2005 round of globally comparable price surveys carried out under the International
Comparison Project (ICP).21 Myanmar did participate
in the 2011 ICP round, and it will therefore be possible
to include Myanmar in the global poverty monitoring
system once the 2011PPP-based poverty numbers are
finalized.
27. The new census and the resultant sampling frame
will allow potential biases in the IHLCA-2 poverty estimates to be revisited by “reweighting” the
IHLCA-2 sample. As indicated in Box 3 under data issues for Myanmar, the IHLCA-2 survey was conducted
using an outdated sampling frame, based on the 1983
census.  Therefore, the poverty estimates based on the
IHLCA-2 data are likely to have some bias. However,
it is not possible to know ex-ante, which direction the
bias is likely to go.
28. More importantly, the new census will provide an
updated sampling frame for the planned MPLCS
and potential IHLCA-3 that will help provide more
up to date poverty numbers. Initially, a Myanmar
Poverty and Living Conditions Survey (MPLCS) will
be conducted as a pilot small-scale (3,500) household
survey to collect information on consumption and income levels as well as additional key welfare and other
indicators of relevance to specific sectors. The MPLCS
will aim to quickly generate up-to-date and credible estimates of poverty, and to inform the design and implementation of the large-scale (18,000 households) national survey (IHLCA-3). The IHLCA-3 will provide
more comprehensive and updated poverty estimates.
The new census will therefore be critical in providing
an up to date sampling frame for both surveys.
29. Key socio-economic indicators also show a high
incidence of non-income poverty. More than a third
of children under five years of age in Myanmar are
reported to be stunted while about 23 percent are underweight. While these rates lower than in Laos and
Cambodia, they are significantly higher than those
21
There are some indirect estimates of the PPP conversion factor
available but these are unlikely to be reliable given the highly distorted dual
exchange rate system in place in Myanmar in 2005.

22 | World Bank Report

prevailing in Vietnam, the Philippines, Thailand and
China. Similarly, while the maternal mortality rate in
Myanmar (200 deaths per 100,000 live births) is lower
than in Laos and Cambodia, it is more than double than
that in the Philippines and more than 3 times high than
in Vietnam. Housing indicators also suggest that standards of living in Myanmar lag behind in the region.
Several surveys in Myanmar including the LIFT baseline survey and the IHLCA 2 indicate that only about
half of the households in Myanmar live in houses that
have durable roofing, compared to more than 80 percent in neighboring countri Source: World Bank staff
estimates from new analysis of 2009-2010 IHLCA survey
data. es such as Cambodia. Myanmar’s net enrollment

rate of 47 percent and gross of 50 percent, at the secondary level in 2010, while slightly higher than that for
Laos, was significantly less than the regional average
of 73 percent for East Asia and the Pacific (UNESCO).  

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

30. Not unlike in many low income economies, a large
fraction of Myanmar’s population was clustered
around the poverty line, both above and below,
in 2009-2010 (Figure 9). What this implies is that
the measured incidence of poverty will be sensitive to
slight differences in where the poverty line is set (Figure 10). If, for instance, a 2,100 calories per day standard were used to anchor the poverty line, resulting in a
poverty line that is 10 percent lower in monetary terms,
the measured poverty would be 28.3 percent, nearly 10
percentage points lower. A 10 percent increase in the
poverty line would, analogously, increase the poverty
rate by nearly 9 percentage points. The clustering of
households around the poverty line also implies that
relatively small changes in circumstances—adverse
shocks or increase in incomes—can lead to significant
movements into and out of poverty.  
31. With a poverty rate of 37.5 percent, the poor and the
bottom 40 percent are largely synonymous in Myanmar. Therefore, for all practical purposes, as of 2010, the
aim of enhancing shared prosperity coincided with the
goal of ending absolute poverty in Myanmar. And both
entail raising the incomes of the poor, and ensuring that
they continue to rise as the economy prospers.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

World Bank Report | 23

32. Measured consumption inequality in Myanmar is
relatively low in comparison with its regional neighbors (Figure 11). The initial analysis of the IHLCA-2
(UNDP and GoM, 2011) produced a Gini coefficient
of 0.20, which would have been remarkably low by
global standards. The more recent re-examination of
the data, which are still subject to wide margins of error
(see Box 3), yielded an estimated Gini coefficient of
0.29, higher than the initial estimate but still relatively
low. Inequality is higher, in some cases considerably
higher, in all of Myanmar’s regional neighbors. Within Myanmar, inequality is estimated to be much higher
in urban areas (0.36) than in rural areas (0.25) (Figure
12). Among Myanmar’s four agro-ecological zones, inequality is estimated to be highest in the Delta (0.33),
in part because the region includes the city of Yangon
(0.36) but likely also due to high levels of inequality in
access to key assets like agriculture land.  
B. The spatial distribution of poverty
33. The incidence of poverty varies substantially across
the different geographic regions of Myanmar. In
terms of agro-ecological zones, poverty rates are highest in the Coastal zone (53.1 percent) and lowest, surprisingly low, in the Dry Zone (29.5 percent), with the
Hills (40.9 percent) and the Delta (40.4 percent) falling
in the middle, close to the national rate (Figure 13).22
Poverty rates vary as well, across the states and regions,
in many cases even within the agro-ecological zones
(Figure 14). Rakhine (in the Coastal zone) and Chin
(in the Hills), on the eastern border with Bangladesh,
are by far the poorest states, with poverty rates of 78
percent and 71.5 percent respectively. Ayeyarwaddy (in
the Delta) and Shan (in the Hills) are next with poverty
rates in mid-40s. The incidence of poverty in the regions in the Dry Zone on the other hand are uniformly
lower than the national rate, as are those in the remaining hilly border states, on the north and the east, adjoining China and Thailand.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

34. The poorest areas—the areas with the highest incidence of poverty—are not always where most of
22
The mapping of states and regions into the four agro-ecological zones is as follows: Hills (Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Shan), Dry Zone
(Bago, Magwe, Mandalay, Sagaing), Coastal (Rakine, Mon, Taninthayi), and
Delta (Ayeyarwaddy, Yangon).

the poor live and so geographic targeting of the
poor needs to take account of both poverty rates
and the share of the poor that live in an area. For
instance, using 2009-2010 population and poverty data
(subject to the significant data quality issues set out in
Box 3), although the Dry Zone and the Delta have a
lower incidence of poverty than the Coastal zone or the
Hills, because of the relatively high population share
of the Dry Zone and the Delta, they account for nearly two-thirds of the poor in Myanmar. Conversely, although Chin has the second highest poverty rate (71.5
percent) amongst all states and regions, it accounts for
only 1.4 percent of the poor due to its small population.
Rakhine and Ayeyarwaddy stand out in that they both
have high poverty rates and account for large shares of
the poor. The available 2009-2010 data (subject to wide
margins of error) indicate that Rakhine has a poverty rate of 78 percent and accounts for 14.9 percent of
Myanmar’s poor, while Ayeyarwaddy, given its size
and moderately high poverty rate (45.7 percent), accounts for 18 percent of the poor—the highest of any
state or region. Geographical targeting to reduce poverty must take account of both the rate of poverty and the
population share.
35. At 34 percent, the poverty rate for the Yangon region seems surprisingly high (Figure 14). The 33
percent poverty rate for the Mandalay region also seems
high, particularly in light of the important commercial
role that both Yangon city and Mandalay city play in
Myanmar’s economy. These high rates of transition
poverty in part reflect the high and rising cost of living
in urban areas; although urban areas have much better
local infrastructure and basic services, residents pay a
lot to access these services. Limited access to stable,
well-paid jobs is another contributing factor to urban
poverty.  In recent years, Yangon has become a magnet for rural migrants seeking new employment opportunities and a chance at a better life.   But these new
opportunities have been slow to develop.  According
to the 2009/10 IHLCA2, the urban poor are typically
employed in the informal sector, or as casual, unskilled
workers in construction or other service sectors, and
many have limited education and job skills.    
36. Although the rate of poverty is high in Yangon,
the depth and severity of poverty is relatively low.
Many poor households are clustered near and just below the poverty line, and promoting good growth and
expanding economic opportunities could ensure they
grow out of poverty very quickly.  Managing this process of transition--and related issues linked to rising
expectations, rising inequality, and ensuring equitable
access to public assets and basic services--is an important poverty challenge for Myanmar.  

24 | World Bank Report

spatial distribution of poverty. The other two prominent
correlates of poverty in Myanmar are discussed below.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

C. Characteristics of the poor and the correlates and
causes of poverty
37. Like the poor in most low-income economies, the
poor in Myanmar live predominantly in rural areas, rely on agriculture and casual employment for
their livelihood, have low levels of human capital
and few physical and financial assets, lack reliable access to quality basic services, are exposed
to a variety of shocks, and are poorly connected
to markets because of inadequate infrastructure,
imperfectly functioning markets, weak institutions
and incomplete information. Many of these characteristics are not unique to the poor. They are also true
of the population at large given that Myanmar is a lowincome country that has yet to undergo a fundamental
structural transformation and is characterized by poor
service delivery, weak institutions, low capacity, and
under-developed markets. For instance, while 76 percent of the poor live in rural areas, so does 74 percent
of the population as a whole. Agriculture is the primary source of livelihoods, not just for half the poor,
but also for nearly half of all households. And in terms
of many basic services, while it is the case that the poor
do have less access, in some cases significantly lower,
the numbers are still very low for the non-poor and so
the challenge of basic service delivery is one that applies not just for the poor (Figure 15).

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

38. In terms of observable household characteristics
that are most strongly correlated with a household
being poor, three are worth noting—a household’s
location, land ownership, and religious-ethno-linguistic identity. The importance of location has already been highlighted in the discussion above on the

39. Poverty in rural Myanmar is closely associated
with landlessness or functional landlessness—cultivation rights to less than 2 acres of cultivable
land—particularly in the Delta, Coastal and Dry
Zones. The rural landless and marginal farmers (with
cultivation rights to less than 2 acres of land) constitute
two-fifths of Myanmar’s population, but make up over
half the poor. The association between land and poverty is particularly strong in the Delta, Coastal and Dry
zones (Figure 16). In the Hills the correlation is less
evident but that is mostly because landlessness is less
prevalent and shifting cultivation on cleared forest land
more common, as well as the fact that the threshold of
2 acres is less relevant in the Hills, where soil quality
is poorer and larger tracts of land are needed even for
subsistence.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

40. There is a strong correlation between poverty and
ethno-linguistic identity (proxied in the 2009/10
IHLCA by “mother tongue”), suggesting that
social and political exclusion are a continuing
challenge in Myanmar. Native Myanmar speakers
constitute over three-quarters of the population, but
only two-thirds of the poor, implying that the risk of
poverty is much higher for non-Myanmar groups as a
whole. But there is considerable variation amongst the
non-Myanmar ethno-linguistic groups, with some, like
the Mon, Chinese and Arabic speakers, much less likely to be poor, and others much more so. In particular,
Chin speakers (1.2 percent of the population), Rakhine
speakers (3.9 percent of the population) and speakers
of “other foreign languages” (3.1 percent of the population), who are primarily Muslim minorities identifying
themselves as Rohingyas living in Rakhine are, respectively, 1.7, 1.8 and 2.4 times more likely to be poor than
the population at large.

World Bank Report | 25

future will therefore be important. Finally, other individual characteristics such as ethnicity and religion
have put many people at risk of being poor.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 20092010 IHLCA survey data.

D. Vulnerability to poverty
41. Data from the IHLCA survey and other sources indicate that households in Myanmar are exposed to
a wide variety of shocks and have limited means to
manage them, resulting in significant vulnerability
to falling into or further into poverty. The shocks
households are exposed to range from ones that affect
individual households to localized shocks limited to
certain areas, to those that are economy-wide.  
42. Health-related shocks appear to be the main
shocks that affect individual households. Illness or
accidents requiring hospitalization or long-term medical attention, have pushed households surviving just
above the poverty level into poverty, while the poorest
households are unable to cope financially, due to the
combined lack of social protection mechanisms and the
burden of out-of-pocket health expenditure. Similarly,
old and disabled persons are unable to participate in
physical and productive income generating activities.
43. Weather and climate-related shocks and conflict
and communal violence are the main categories of
localized area-specific shocks, with the former primarily but not exclusively affecting households that
depend on agriculture, and the latter, more prevalent in certain areas (e.g., border states) or relevant
for certain ethno-linguistic groups. Crop loss due to
pests and extreme weather events such as droughts and
floods are a significant risk for agriculture in all parts of
Myanmar. This has introduced a new dimension of vulnerability in rural livelihoods. Myanmar is also highly
vulnerable to hydroclimatic extremes, with significant
exposure to cyclones, and a quarter of the country faces
periodic flood risk (threatening 36 percent of the coastal population). Conflict in the border areas has led to
a population of internally displaced families who are
at greater risk of poverty because they are unable to
participate in normal income earning activities and invest in developing the human capital of their children.
The size of this population remains unclear and it is
almost certainly the case that poverty amongst them is
under-estimated. Understanding the poverty challenges
of the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and ethnic
minorities in general is currently not feasible, given the
limited coverage of the previous “national” household
survey (IHLCA-2). Better data and deeper analysis in

44. The main economy-wide shock households face
are fluctuations in the prices of basic needs (including food), as well as essential inputs and crops,
with the latter being particularly important for
agricultural households. Price fluctuations, whether
they stem from exchange rate shocks, supply shocks,
or shocks to transport and logistic costs, matter in two
ways. Increases in food prices and in the prices of other
basic commodities and services make it harder for the
working poor in both rural and urban areas, who are net
“consumers”, to meet their basic needs. On the other
hand, the main risks that farmers face are declines in
the prices of the crops they produce and increases in the
prices of essential inputs.
E. A taxonomy of the poor and what it suggests about
pathways out of poverty
45. The poverty profile presented above suggests three
main faces of poverty in Myanmar: the “traditional” poor, who are heavily concentrated in rural areas, have very low levels of education, depend on
agriculture for their livelihood, have limited access
to key productive assets and factors like land and
finance; the “transitional” poor, many of whom
live in urban and peri-urban areas, have transitioned out of traditional rural livelihoods but still
work as low-skill casual laborers; and the socially-marginalized and “excluded” poor. The “causes”
of poverty for each of these groups are many—some
that are common to all of them, as well as some that
are specific to each group. And so the pathways out of
poverty for each of these groups have some common
elements but also some that differ.
46. Investments in human capital and better access to
quality basic services would be critical to ending
the poverty of all three groups of the poor — both
their income and non-income dimensions of poverty. Better access to primary health care, water and
sanitation, electricity, and basic education are important, not only to improve well-being, but also to reduce
vulnerability to poverty, enhance current income generating opportunities and lower the inter-generational
perpetuation of poverty.
47. In order to end the poverty of the working poor,
both “traditional” and “transitional”, would require
increasing returns to their main asset—their labor.
For the majority, the “traditional poor”, who currently depend on agriculture for their livelihood, this will
mean both raising the returns to agricultural cultivation,
while in parallel, facilitating their movement from lower value-added agriculture-related activities to higher
value-added activities off the farm, by stimulating private-sector job creation.  For the “transitional” poor, the
opportunities for private-sector led off-farm employ-

26 | World Bank Report

ment and income generation will obviously be critical.
The specifics of the interventions that will be needed
are discussed in greater detail in later sections. But they
are likely to vary from region to region. For instance,
securing land titles and improving access to credit may
be essential for increasing plot-level yield-enhancing
investments that are particularly important for raising
agricultural incomes and alleviating rural poverty in the
Delta, further investment in irrigation systems and water
basin management may be the most relevant for the Dry
Zone, and investments in connectivity infrastructure
may be the most critical for the Hills.

48. Lastly, for the “excluded” poor—communities in
remote conflict-affected areas, members of socially-marginalized groups, families without anyone
capable of productive work—a focus on increasing
the returns to labor is unlikely to be sufficient. By
definition, these groups have been or are likely to be excluded from or less connected to opportunities for productive economic activity. And so for these groups, the
pathways out of poverty will likely have to include specific targeted interventions and programs of assistance.   

III. PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
and intervention areas

28 | World Bank Report

49. This section seeks to identify the most efficient
and effective pathways (strategies) for lifting the
poor out of poverty, the critical pre-requisites,
constraints to be addressed, and the intervention
areas for removing the constraints. A major feature
of the SCD is that it has a sharp focus on intervention
areas that have a strong direct or indirect link to ending
poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Ultimately, the
aim is to identify priorities for accelerating progress towards the twin goals. It is in this regard that given the
taxonomy of the poor in Myanmar and the country’s
unique context presented in the previous section, key
pathways out of poverty are identified, based on some
over-arching principles. Once these pathways have
been determined, intervention areas are identified for
removing critical constraints within the pathways.
A. Strategic Framework for Inclusive and
Sustainable Growth
50. A growth strategy for Myanmar has to fit Myanmar’s circumstances. Myanmar is confronted by
many of the same challenges seen in most poor, rural
and resource based economies. Yet, Myanmar is not
typical.   It has a potentially powerful advantage with
its large internal market (about the same as the Republic of Korea) surrounded on both sides by two of the
world’s largest markets in China and India.  It also trying to resolve 60 years of conflict over ethnic and religious autonomy and deciding how best to complete the
transition away from the old, socialist-military model
adhered to in earlier years.  Thus, both the framework
for growth through structural transformation and open
trade and investment, and the conflict, security and
development framework set out in the World Bank
Group’s World Development Report 2011 provide salient elements of a growth framework for Myanmar.
Over the medium-term, other factors will also gain importance, such as diversification through imitation and
innovation.
51. Shifting labor from low productivity to high productivity jobs, typically from agriculture to manufacturing and services, will drive growth. Achieving this shift will involve careful sequencing of policy
reforms and investment.  Several initial steps have been
taken (see paragraph 53 below).  The prioritization in
Section III.C identifies some key factors, such as: (i)
removal of obstacles to private sector investment arising from instability, poor regulation or lack of finance;
(ii)   screening of government investments to encourage
private investors without crowding them out; (iii) quick
and affordable transport of food from rural to urban
areas; (iv) quick and affordable access to information
about new job opportunities and removal of obstacles
to labor mobility; progress toward universal access to
quality education and training to upgrade skills. The
prospects for poverty reduction are greater when newly
released farm labor can find its way to good, formal
sector jobs rather than those in the informal sector with
its lower wages, lower retirement and healthcare bene-

fits and higher vulnerability to lay-offs and accidents.  
52. Myanmar’s location in Southeast Asia, large labor
force, membership in ASEAN and excellent coastline suggest that joining the manufacturing supply chains centered in Asia can kickstart growth.
Myanmar will likely be among the countries to
gain the most from increased economic integration
through ASEAN Economic Community. Exports
make it possible to procure a larger volume and wider
variety and good quality capital goods not available locally.  Export demand can also help drive the expansion
of manufacturing and services jobs required for structural transformation.  Policies to help Myanmar to take
full advantage of the gains from trade include those
promoting access to financing, both domestically and
from abroad, strong macroeconomic policies (including real exchange rate level and stability), conducive
tariff and foreign investment regimes.  There are risks
for Myanmar too. Opening the economy to more trade
almost always creates some losses for some individuals
and firms that cannot compete with external products
and services. Growth and poverty reduction will be
aided by policies that help these people transition to industries where Myanmar has a competitive advantage
and to provide welfare programs for those who cannot
make the needed transitions.
B. The Government’s reform program
53. The Government has launched and begun implementing some key reforms. Initial reforms focused
on the political system and national unity, but key macroeconomic reforms were put into play early as well.
The severely over-valued official exchange rate was
unified under a managed float in 2012.  The change has
been beneficial to government fiscal operations and has
put an end to the unfair advantage over private firms
held by state economic enterprises due to their previous
access to inexpensive foreign exchange.  External arrears were cleared in 2013.  The central bank has been
divested from the Ministry of Finance in 2013 with independent monetary authority. Details have also been
released on increasing transparency in the national
budget. New laws to facilitate foreign direct investment
have been passed. These changes have been followed
by a large number of new laws for almost every sector in the economy – many aimed at facilitating more
public and private investment in human and physical
capital.   However, most ministries have been unable
to catch up with the sheer speed and volume of these
changes, creating implementation backlogs and bottlenecks.  At the same time, as mentioned in Part I above,
conflict continues in several parts of the country.  These
challenges leave private investors with uncertainty,
divert government resources and attention from more
productive uses, and jeopardize the sustainability of
reforms.

World Bank Report | 29

C. Critical next steps

1.

Considerations in identifying priority intervention
areas and sequencing
54. Within each pathway, it is important to identify
priority intervention areas and how action could
best be sequenced over time. Given Myanmar’s current high poverty rate and low level of development
more generally, progress will need to be made in many
areas for the country to accelerate progress towards
ending poverty and boosting shared prosperity. At the
same time, it is recognized that there are financial, human, and institutional capacity constraints both in the
public and private sectors to adequately deal with all
the constraints concurrently, hence the need for prioritization and proper sequencing.
55. The main basis for identifying priorities is the likely magnitude of impact on reducing poverty of action on an intervention area. In turn, magnitude of
impact depends on many factors. A key factor is the
current severity of the problem.   If Myanmar faces a
wide deficiency gap in a particular intervention area
then action is likely to have a high impact on poverty
reduction. Similarly, if an intervention area has strong
linkages or complementarities with other intervention
areas then action would also have a high impact on
poverty reduction.
56. Sequencing of intervention areas needs to take into
account several considerations. In particular, time
preference need to be first given to those high impact
intervention areas whose actions can easily be implemented, where available evidence is strong on the nature and scale of the problem to be solved and what
exactly needs to be done, and where the impact on poverty reduction can be realized sooner rather than later.
However, the need to have a long-term perspective of
development may require that some action starts now
even if not meeting the above criteria. For instance, although impact of action in an area may only be evident
in the medium to long-term, it may be advisable to start
implementing some actions in the short-term since delaying action would only prolong the problem further.  

2.

Identified areas of intervention
57. The analysis below identifies two pathways encompassing 12 priorities, along with four prerequisites
that need urgent attention. The first pathway focuses on increasing agricultural productivity and creating
more lucrative job opportunities.    The second pathway focuses on universal access and empowerment for
inclusive growth, particularly in rural areas.   Finally,
there are four prerequisites that, if left unaddressed,
will either diminish Myanmar’s success in poverty reduction or risk the sustainability of the reform effort.  
Figure 15 provides a broad picture of how the various
interventions can be prioritized and sequenced. A precise rank-order of relative priorities in Myanmar is not

possible because there is not enough data and analytical
base to support it.
58. Growth can be a powerful driver of poverty reduction. For Myanmar, returns in agriculture and outside
agriculture have been low due to low productivity. In
addition, the country has not been able to create enough
jobs due to limited participation of the domestic and
foreign private sector in the economy, and because of
isolation from the global economy, while sustainability
has been at risk because of a fragmented approach to
Myanmar’s key natural resource – the Ayeyarwaddy
river basin.   Therefore, a key over-arching principle
is ensuring greater openness and participation of the
domestic and foreign private sector in the economy
(particularly in the non-gas sectors which have greater potential for job creation), fostering integration
with the global economy, enhancing productivity, and
adopting an integrated approach to the management
of the Ayeyarwaddy river basin. Ultimately, this is
about growing the economy in order to increase the pie
and ensuring sustainability. Over a 3-5 year horizon,  
growth will come from increasing investment,continued growth in natural resource exports, and increasing
productivity. These considerations lead to the identification of the first key pathway out of poverty in Myanmar: promoting openness and sustainable privatesector led growth for more jobs.
59. All three groups of poor, including the socially marginalized, will need to have access to basic services
and infrastructure networks to reduce non-income
poverty and become empowered to participate
in income earning opportunities – whether in the
form of wage or self-employment. Access to critical services will also help break the inter-generationalcycle of poverty.  However, as mentioned in the previous sections, access to these services, especially in the
rural and remote areas, has been limited due to Myanmar’s past political and economic history. Therefore, a
second key over-arching principle for ending poverty
in Myanmar is universal access and empowerment.
While fighting poverty via the first route above is more
about fostering growth, this second route is more about
making such growth inclusive. This leads to the identification of a second key pathway out of poverty in
Myanmar: promoting universal access to critical services and empowerment for inclusive growth, particularly in rural areas.

30 | World Bank Report

Figure 18: Pre-requisites, Pathways, and Key Intervention Areas for Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

take full advantage of these opportunities.  

(a). Facilitating the political transition
62. Uncertainty around the key elements of the political transition poses a major challenge to efforts for
creating jobs, increasing returns, and increasing
access to services. In particular, internal and external
actors are unable to take long-term decisions on their
investments and livelihoods. Key to facilitating the
political transition will be attaining lasting peace and
moving out of fragility and consolidating trust and legitimacy between the state and its people.

(i). Attaining lasting peace and moving out of fragility
63. Comparative research across countries affected by
conflict has demonstrated the negative impact of
conflict on economic growth and poverty. Historically, for every three years a country is affected by major violence or conflict, poverty reduction lags behind
by 2.7 percentage points, with the average cost of civil
war equivalent to more than 30 years of GDP growth
for a medium-sized developing country.23  Poverty reduction rates in countries affected by violence are on
average one percentage point per year lower than those
of peaceful countries, dramatically altering the trajectory of a country’s development course.
64. In Myanmar, 60 years of conflict have created areas facing extreme poverty. Poverty is most heavily
concentrated in conflict-affected areas: poverty rates
in Chin State stand at 71 percent and, in Rakhine at
78 percent, compared to 37.5 percent nationally,24 and
populations in these areas have some of the lowest
human development indicators in Myanmar, with 58
percent of children under five stunted (UNICEF MICS
2010). Moreover, the long legacy of conflict in these
areas not only increases absolute poverty, but also
makes it more difficult to address other issues,
including displacement, land, and opium cultivation
(Myanmar remained the second largest opium poppy
grower in the world after Afghanistan in 2013 and its
production is almost exclusively concentrated in conflict-affected areas in Shan and Kachin State) (UNODC Opium Survey 2013) – all of which complicate the
context for development interventions. A fragile peace
process negatively affects Myanmar’s investment climate and also negatively impacts on the Government’s
ability to deliver critical basic services particularly in
the border areas.

60. To accelerate progress towards the twin goals
through the above main pathways, some pre-requisites need to be in place. These pre-requisites serve to
lay the critical foundations for growth, inclusiveness,
and sustainability. The pre-requisites define the overall political, governance, and macroeconomic environment of Myanmar within which job opportunities
are created, people are empowered to take full advantage of these opportunities, and goods and services are
supplied and delivered. They also define the technical
capacity of the public sector to unleash the country’s
potential and sustain progress. Progress in the pre-requisites affects the speed (efficiency), effectiveness, and
sustainability of the main pathways identified above in
lifting the poor out of poverty.

3.
1.

Rationale for interventions
Pre-requisites for inclusive and sustainable growth
61. Facilitating the political transition, enhancing social inclusion, maintaining macroeconomic stability, and strengthening public sector capacity and
governance will be critical pre-requisites for the
fight against poverty. Action in these areas is needed
in the short term but they also require continued attention. Without addressing the constraints identified in
these areas, it will be difficult to make and sustain progress in creating job opportunities, increasing returns,
promoting universal access, and empowering people to

65. The Government is pursuing efforts to bring an
end to the multiple conflicts in ethnic areas. Talks
between Government and ethnic armed groups to bring
about a national ceasefire ahead of a political dialogue
are continuing, with the Government signaling a willingness to consider decentralization and devolution
23

2011 WDR

24

World Bank staff estimates from 2009-2010 IHLCA survey.

World Bank Report | 31

to accommodate some of the long-standing grievances voiced by ethnic armed groups.  Following the
signing or renewal of a series of ceasefires (including
with the Karen National Union, bringing to an end
Myanmar – and the world’s – longest-running armed
conflict), a series of leadership meetings between the
Government and the groups starting in late 2013 have
made progress and built trust.  This process has included the Kachin Independence Organization (KIO), even
though conflict continues between Government and
KIO forces.  The renewed conflicts in early 2014, with
armed clashes in both Kachin and parts of northern
Shan State that displaced over 5,000 people, underlined
the continued fragility of this process and the importance of a successful resolution to establish peace and
security across the country.
66. While peacemaking in the Myanmar context has
long been focused on the armed conflicts with ethnic minority groups, the recent opening of political
space has brought to the fore other potential fault
lines and areas of conflict. This most notably includes
recurrent incidents of religious violence over the past
two years, where finding sustainable solutions is important not only to address violent conflict and citizen
security, but also to address broader issues of social inclusion.
67. Establishing peace and security across Myanmar
will involve finding a sustainable solution to the
issue of the Muslim minority that identifies as Rohingya in Rakhine State. As mentioned in the previous section, this Muslim minority is not recognized
as an ethnic group by the Government, but rather seen
as illegal migrants from neighboring Bangladesh.  Following outbreaks of violence directed against this minority in the summer of 2012 that killed 89 people and
displaced over 140,000, the Government established
temporary camps where most of the displaced continue
to live today.25 Subsequent violence took place against
Muslim minorities in Rakhine in 2013 and 2014, which
spilled over into broader anti-Muslim violence in other parts of Myanmar, including in the country’s second
largest city Mandalay in 2014.26
68. General elections are scheduled for end 2015. As
is common in many countries, there is a potential for
a polarization of politics (and a politicization of development decisions) ahead of the elections, and a period of uncertainty will likely follow the elections as a
new government takes office and establishes its policy priorities.  Complicating this situation are ongoing
campaigns to change the constitution, including around
the eligibility for high office of the opposition leader.
Beyond uncertainty, this situation could create domes25
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human
Rights in Myanmar, UNOHCHR, August 2012 and September 2014.
26
International Crisis Group, Myanmar Crisis Watch, April 2014.<
http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/publication-type/crisiswatch/crisiswatch-database.aspx?CountryIDs=%7b7E12FB4D-6C23-449D-AF08-550AD5FD2F2E%7d#results>

tic political tensions and instability, and depending on
its resolution impact investment and aid flows to the
country.  

(ii). Consolidating trust and legitimacy between the state and
its people
69. A long history of poor governance and corruption
eroded the trust of individuals and firms in the
State preventing them from responding positively
to opportunities or participating fully in Government-led development initiatives and programs.
Before the transition, the governance environment was
very poor, with people rarely playing by the rules. In
particular, the system was characterized by high corruption, cronyism, social discrimination, and poor
public services. Therefore, although the Government
is taking steps to create a conducive environment for
doing business, there is a perception, based on past experience, that public procurement has not been fair and
the private sector has not been able to compete on a
level playing field with public sector or public linked
entities. Similarly, unresolved issues about ethnic autonomy as well as a flawed election process have undermined the state’s legitimacy amongst certain groups
of people and geographical areas. In turn, this has hampered the Government’s efforts to operate and deliver
services in such areas.
70. The constitutional reform and upcoming elections,
offer huge opportunities for gaining people’s trust
and achieving state legitimacy. Under democratic
governance, it has become necessary for the Government to become more transparent and accountable to
its citizens, which is critical to building trust. Government now has an opportunity to be more transparent
in various areas of political and economic governance,
including procurement, as has been demonstrated in the
award of mobile phone licenses, a tender process that
won widespread praise for its transparency and integrity. Similarly, the on-going constitutional reform and
upcoming elections offer an opportunity for Government to ensure that the concerns of ethnic minorities
are addressed, including through further decentralization.  
71. A key challenge and risk to consolidating trust and
state legitimacy lies in the weak capacity of the police and judiciary, and likelihood of vested interests frustrating reforms. There have been concerns
about the capacity of the police and judiciary to ensure
that the rule of law is enforced and upheld. As a legacy
of the past, there is still skepticism about the ability of
the police and the judiciary to act with independence,
such as when it comes to punishing corrupt practices.
Further, those who have benefited from the system in
the past, both within Government and outside, may not
be happy with reforms that open up the space to competition, equity, transparency, and accountability, and
may therefore try to frustrate reform efforts.

32 | World Bank Report

75. The on-going reforms provide an opportunity for
the Government to promote social inclusion in development. This is because it offers a platform for evidence-based policy making and bottom-up approach
to development. Therefore, there is now an opportunity for the government to ‘do development better’ by
ensuring that future development programs and policies are more consultative; include social assessment
and social accountability measures; and benefit a wide
cross-section of society, particularly in ethnic minority areas.  The World Bank’s Social Impact Monitoring
(SIM) and Qualitative Social and Economic Monitoring (QSEM) qualitative social research programs have
documented the strength of social capital and collective action at village level, at least within homogenous
groups.

(b). Enhancing social inclusion
72. There are patterns of social exclusion in Myanmar which pose obstacles to groups seeking to lift
themselves out of poverty, gain equitable access
to services and share in prosperity. Certain social
groups face barriers, by virtue of their identity or location, to participating fully in society and sharing in
prosperity. The main drivers are religion, ethnicity and
citizenship, gender, geography, and conflict. There has
been long-standing discrimination and marginalization of non-Buddhists, dating back to colonial times
but which has most recently been directed particularly at Muslims, but also historically at Christians and
other groups.  For example, in Rakhine State, people
belonging to the Muslim minority that self-identifies
as Rohingya are stateless, poor, and face systematic
discrimination, including restrictions on family size,
marriage, birth registration, and movement. This severely constrains livelihood opportunities and access
to markets and basic services, and prevents integration.
Elsewhere, anti-Muslim sentiment has grown since the
reforms began, and since 2012 has spilled over into
violence outside Rakhine State, specifically Meiktila.  
Burmese people of Chinese or Indian descent are not
recognized as an official ethnic group.  An NRC, which
is a ‘citizenship scrutiny card, is needed to access higher education, register a business, buy land, stand for office, move past checkpoints, migrate internally, and to
get jobs outside the informal sector.

(c). Maintaining macroeconomic stability
76. Ensuring macroeconomic stability is important because it offers a more predictable environment in
which businesses can plan and operate. Most fundamentally, there is solid empirical evidence that economic uncertainty reduces private investment. Excessive
fluctuations in prices, interest rates, exchange rates,
wages and output can all cause harm.  Macroeconomic
stability requires effective monetary management. It is
therefore important to establish early adequate capacity in monetary and fiscal institutions.  This, by itself,
is not enough in fragile states.  Conflict can be source
of price instability when governments find they can finance conflict related spending and other activities only
through excessive money creation.29  In the 1990s and
2000s, inflation rates were quite high in Myanmar, as a
result of heavy monetary financing of the large budget
deficits that resulted from pursuing development concurrently with the prosecution of multiple conflicts.

73. The challenge of dealing with social exclusion came
to the fore in Rakhine during Myanmar’s census
carried out in April 2014. The majority Buddhist Rakhine residents were concerned about the intent of the
census to allow enumeration and self-identification by
the Muslim minority residents that identify themselves
as Rohinghya and led a boycott of the census that led
to mass demonstrations.  In the face of demonstrations
and threats of violence against government officials
and international aid workers, enumeration in the area
with mostly Muslim minority residents was halted.  
Elsewhere, the census, which was the country’s first
since 1983, was considered successful.

77. Although macroeconomic performance has generally been strong in Myanmar, there is weak institutional capacity for macroeconomic management.
Fiscal policy has largely been the main macroeconomic stabilization tool, but with the CBM playing the role
of treasury and no department in the MOF dedicated to
fiscal strategy and policy. The CBM relies heavily on
direct monetary policy instruments, mainly in the form
of reserve requirements and prudential limits on the
structure of commercial bank balance sheets. Interest
rates have been administratively set for all instruments
and maturities, and, until recently, rarely changed.
There is no formal interbank market and pervasive
controls on banks impede the monetary transmission
mechanism. In the past, a fixed, multiple, and restrictive exchange rate policy has had damaging effects on
the economy while deficit monetization has fueled inflationary pressures.

74. Women’s participation in decision making and access to resources has been limited. The proportion
of women in national parliament is only at 6 percent in
2013, starkly lower than the low income countries average of 19 percent. A recent study found that ideas about
leadership are set in the home, where men are commonly considered the household head.  These ideas are then
reinforced in public and religious life, where men dominate positions of power.27 In addition, customary laws
of some ethnic populations have discriminated women
from land ownership and property inheritance.28

27

78. Myanmar’s macroeconomic situation has improved significantly in recent years (See Table 4).

Action Aid, Care, Oxfam (2011)

28
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW) Report (2007).

29

Elbadawi and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2007.

World Bank Report | 33

Growth accelerated in recent years (see paragraph 8).
Inflation declined significantly from 22.5 percent in
2008/09 to 5.7 percent in 2013/14 , due mainly to improved fiscal discipline by the new Government, which
has committed to keeping the fiscal deficit below 5 percent of GDP. In addition, there has been a significant
policy shift in the financing of the fiscal deficit from
reliance on the printing of money towards greater use
of treasury bonds. Management of the exchange rate
has also improved significantly following the floatation
of the exchange rate on April 1st, 2012. As a result, the
official and parallel market exchange rates have now
converged (See Table 4). Similarly, with support from
the international community, the country has managed
to clear all external debt arrears. As a result, total external debt has declined significantly from 37.7 percent
of GDP in 2008/09 to 24.6 percent in 2012/13. The last
three joint World Bank – IMF debt sustainability analyses have concluded that Myanmar is at low risk of debt
distress.  
79. The medium-term economic outlook is favorable
but faces significant downside risks, particular
weak institutional capacity for macroeconomic
management and the possibility of a slow down
or steps back in the transition. Under the baseline
scenario (see Table 4), growth is expected to increase
slightly further, averaging 8.4 percent over the next few
years. The key underlying assumptions are continued
strong performance in the productive sectors, including construction and manufacturing in special export
zones, and robust performance in the service sectors.  
The nominal and real effective exchange rates have
been depreciating and are projected to continue doing
so in the medium term.30  Inflation is forecast to reach
6.6 percent in 2014/15, fueled by electricity price increases and demand pressures, but should moderate in
following years. The external current account deficit is
projected to be around 4.9 percent of GDP, but is expected to be more than offset by rising FDI-related inflows while the fiscal deficit is projected to rise to 4.5
percent of GDP in 2014/15 mainly due to significant
increases in transfers to state and regional governments
and an increase in civil servants salaries. In spite of a
general positive outlook, the economy faces significant
downside risks. Basic macroeconomic management
tools are still being built and the authorities’ capacity to
develop and implement policies and absorb technical
assistance is already stretched. Given Myanmar’s dependence on gas, strong capacity will be needed to deal
with the challenging reforms that can foster inclusive
growth, including growth of the non-resource sectors
which will be needed to diversify the economy. The
CBM’s international reserves would be insufficient to
resist short-term exchange rate pressures, should antic30
The real depreciation in Myanmar is in contrast to the normal
pattern observed in other fast growing countries in East Asia where the real
exchange rate has been appreciating. While further study might be needed,
this difference in outcome could be explained by the limited capacity of the
economy to absorb foreign investment, the unattractive real interest rate
which discourages hot money inflows and limited gains in productivity.

ipated foreign exchange inflows not materialize soon.
Risks also arise from rapid growth of the financial sector, particularly given the lack of reliable data on the
quality of bank’s balance sheets, and still nascent supervisory capacity. Finally, as mentioned earlier, a stalling of the political transition would have a significant
negative impact on the medium-term macroeconomic
prospects.

(d). Strengthening public sector capacity and governance
80. The effectiveness and efficacy of the various pathways in ending poverty and boosting shared prosperity will depend critically on the capacity of
Government to design and implement the right interventions, whether in the form of policy, institutional reforms, or investments. Each of the identified
intervention areas will require careful identification and
design of more specific policies, programs, and projects to remove the key constraints as well as effective
and efficient implementation and coordination. This is
where the technical capacity of the public sector becomes critical. In addition, it will require strong institutions of governance to ensure that services are delivered in a transparent and efficient manner.

34 | World Bank Report

Table 4: Myanmar: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, FY09-17

World Bank Report | 35

(i). Improving public sector capacity for policy making, coordination, and service delivery
81. Broadly, the Myanmar civil service suffers from a
deficiency of critical skills. To a large extent, this is a
result of decades of under-investment in education and
brain drain. However, this has been compounded by the
fact that existing public sector training programs have
been deficient in equipping civil servants with the critical skills needed to effectively and efficiently design,
implement, coordinate, monitor, and evaluate Government policies and programs. As a result, there is deficiency within Government of certain specialist skills in
the areas of policy analysis, planning, and formulation,
procurement, monitoring, and evaluation. In addition,
current organizational structures do not provide for
these specialized functions in most ministries. Finally,
as a legacy of the past, there is lack of initiative, critical thinking, and orientation to conduct policy analysis,
provide policy advice and implement policy amongst
technocrats, both, at central Government level, as well
as within line ministries and agencies; and government
has a pronounced “silo” character, whereby ministries
and agencies do not coordinate well with each other.
82. The country’s legacy of excessive bureaucracy and
its opening up have further stretched the already
weak capacity of the public sector, with a high risk
of staff attrition. In particular, the workload of regulations and management that each policy and new law
entail further stretch the already limited expertise and
technical capacity of the bureaucracy. In addition, in
spite of the recent increases in the salaries of civil servants, pay and compensation of civil servants in Myanmar remain very low. As a result, the increase in foreign
direct investment in response to the country’s reform
drive poses a significant risk to the competiveness of
the public sector and hence, its capacity to retain civil
servants with skills that are on high demand.
83. The establishment of Delivery Units (DUs) is aimed
at improving the effectiveness of the public sector
to deliver some tangible results in the context of
reforms. Established in August 2013, the DUs are essentially sub-committees of Cabinet level committees
with the overall objective to implement “quick wins” in
service delivery.  However, it is not clear how the DUs
fit within a broader public sector reform framework
that is aimed at dealing with the underlying capacity
constraints.
84. A key priority will therefore be to strengthen the
capacity of Government agencies to come up with
appropriate sector strategies that are consistent
with Government policy priorities and well-coordinated with other sectors; and to improve the Center of Government’s efficiency in coordination and
delivery of services. In this way, binding constraints
which derive from government systems can be addressed. The development of the necessary specialized
skills will take time. In addition, a systematic approach

requires that a careful diagnostic be undertaken to identify the binding capacity constraints within each of the
identified intervention areas and at the Center. However, progress can be made in the near term in ensuring
that different sectors come up with sector strategies that
indicate sector priorities, no matter how basic the strategies may be. Through the sector working groups that
have been established, these sector strategies will also
provide a forum for coordination of efforts by Government, development partners, and the private sector. In
addition, the efficiency of Government in making decisions, coordination, and delivering of services can be
significantly improved, including by leveraging on ICT
through the introduction of e-governance.  
85. Sectoral approaches to capacity building have
been effective in addressing some of the capacity
constraints. Some ministries are formulating and implementing reform programs that among other issues,
seek to address specific capacity constraints. In particular, progress has been made in PFM, pensions, health,
education, energy, safety nets, and telecommunications,
just to mention a few. Therefore this offers another avenue that needs to be explored in dealing with some of
the capacity weaknesses in the public sector.  
86. Improving the quality of data by strengthening
statistical systems will be critical to promoting evidence-based policy making. Even if the authorizing
environment and culture becomes more conducive, the
capacity of the Government to formulate appropriate
policies and strategies will be hampered by the poor
quality of data and knowledge gaps. A key opportunity
lies from the fact that improving the quality of statistics is one of the four policy priorities identified by the
new Government. In addition, development partners
have committed to supporting the Government in the
preparation of a National Strategy for the Development
of Statistics (NSDS) that will ensure a more systematic approach to the strengthening of statistical systems
as well as funding elements of the strategy once it is
finalized.31
87. Finally, fostering transparency will be key to reducing interference of politicians in decisions and
processes that are technical in nature. Encouraging
technocrats to play a more prominent role in designing
processes and making decisions that are technical in
nature may not be effective unless the system makes
it difficult for politicians to interfere. In this context,
designing systems and processes that are transparent
will be critical.

31
The NSDS sets out the strategic goals of the statistical system
over the medium term, usually, 5 years (but could be longer) by assessing
the current situation, identifying needs and gaps and developing action
plans and budgets.

36 | World Bank Report

ii). Strengthening governance institutions and reducing
corruption
88. Improving the governance environment will be a
critical pre-requisite to unlocking Myanmar’s potential to grow and reduce poverty. In order to have
a good foundation for growth and inclusiveness, investors and the general population need to have confidence
in the public sector’s capacity to protect stable property
rights, enforce the rule of law, effectively implement
anti-corruption policies, promote participation, and
achieve government accountability.
89. Progress has been made in improving participatory
development through decentralization. Apart from
strengthening the role of parliament in the bourgeoning
democracy, efforts have been made to devolve political, administrative, and fiscal powers to sub-national
governments. Since 2011, the Government has emphasized “people-centered development,” by creating
consultative bodies or elected positions at state/regional,
township, district, and village levels (Nixon & Joelen,
2014). In rural development, the government has begun
to address significant investment needs by providing
grants to village tracts and shifting decision-making
(and prioritization) authority to communities themselves
as part of the people-centered approach to development.
In addition, there has been an increase in the amount of
resources transferred to states and regions (World Bank
PER, forthcoming).
90. In spite of progress made in the devolution of authority to regional and local governments, weaknesses remain. First, the functional responsibilities
that have been devolved to states and regions so far are
too limited for meaningful decentralized governance
(World Bank PER, forthcoming). In particular, unlike
in most decentralized systems, basic education and
health remain under the purview of the central government. In addition, the lack of clarity on the division of
responsibilities in some of the areas represents a tremendous risk to improving access to required services.
Also, while progress has been made to ensure equity in
determining inter-governmental fiscal transfers, there
remains a lack of clarity on the parameters considered
in determining the specific amounts transferred to each
individual state or region. In this regard, there is a particular concern that states and regions from which natural resource revenues are derived do not yet receive
shares that reflect their respective contributions and
burdens.   
91. Corruption in Myanmar is perceived and reported
to be high. A major feature of corruption in Myanmar
has been a phenomenon known as “cronyism” where
a few people with connections to the military government benefitted from business contracts and public appointments. In 2012, Myanmar ranked 172 out of 175
countries on the Corruption Perceptions Index In 2013,
its rank improved to 157 out of 177 countries. The improvement may reflect in part some anti-corruption

measures by the Government. In January 2013, an Anti-Corruption Committee was formed followed by the
enactment of an Anti-Corruption Law in August 2013.
In addition, in 2013, the authorities awarded licenses
to two foreign mobile companies through an open tender process that was widely hailed as very transparent
by international standards. Going forward, improved
transparency in the management of the extractive industries will be critical given their role as a major
source of public revenues. Having attained EITI candidate status, it will be important for the Government
to meet its obligations under the initiative of producing
the first audit report within the next 18 months.
92. An apparent lack of capacity of the judiciary to
uphold the rule of law, including the protection
of property rights, is widely perceived as a major
weakness in Myanmar’s governance environment.
The degree of merit-based appointment within the judicial system is unclear, as there is no independent process for appointing even lower court judges. Given the
history of military rule, there remains a strong perception within civil society that judges are susceptible to
corruption and bribery.  Moreover, judges have seldom
given any explanation or written justification for decisions, leading to the perception that they were largely
carrying out instructions from the executive rather than
applying and enforcing the rule of law.

(iii). Mobilizing public financial resources and improving the
quality of expenditure
93. Sustaining improvements made so far on improved
access to information and freedom of the media
will be critical to improved governance. The historical dominance of the military has meant that genuine
participation, voice or representation in the broader national government were limited, and attempts to voice
dissent were suppressed harshly.  Now, as part of the reform process, newspapers and journals are freely publishing information, which was previously not possible.
Similarly, previously exiled media organizations have
also been able to establish operations within the country. According to Reporters Without Borders, “thanks
to the Burmese spring’s unprecedented reforms [on
press freedom], it has reached its best-ever position” of
151 out of 179 countries on the Press Freedom Index
in 2013. Government transparency with information
has increased considerably, although a key limitation
is the unreliability of some data, particularly from surveys. Building on these improvements will be critical
to improved governance, including the fight against
corruption.

World Bank Report | 37

to considerable negotiation of tax liabilities between
tax officers and individuals. This also compromises the
fairness and equity of the tax system, at a time when
Myanmar is eager to encourage both foreign and domestic investment and private sector growth. Following recent improvements in tax and non-tax revenues,
Myanmar’s revenue efforts are now well within regional levels (See Figures 19 and 20). There has recently
been some progress in reforming tax administration, including through the establishment of a Large Taxpayer
Office. However, there is still need to accelerate policy
reforms to broaden the tax base and simplify the tax
structure.
95. Significant off-budget revenue flows cause budget
fragmentation, elevate fiduciary risks, and raise
transparency issues. According to the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, approximately 40 percent of revenues (mostly
from the natural resource sector) are managed through
Other Accounts at the MEB which are essentially
off-budget. Such off-budget financing fragments and
undermines strategic resource allocation through the
budget, weakens external oversight, and gives rise to
concerns about accountability and transparency.
96. The Government has not yet significantly exploited
the potential for public private partnerships, although
efforts are underway. Over the last twenty years, governments of developing economies have embraced the
private sector as a source of efficiency and innovation
as well as a partner in mobilizing financing for infrastructure and service provision. In stark contrast, official government policy has promoted the sourcing of
public sector needs from SEEs. Given the country’s
significant development needs, there has been overwhelming private sector interest. However, Myanmar
has not significantly exploited this potential but efforts
to scale up PPPs are now underway with support from
development partners.

Source: Ministry of Finance, IMF and World Development Indicators, 2014

94. The level of public financial resources remains
inadequate to meet the country’s critical development spending needs, although there have recently
been significant improvements. A narrow tax base
and weak compliance have curtailed tax returns, as a
result of the extensive use of exemptions, and an outmoded tax administration system. Myanmar’s current
system of tax administration is characterized by official
assessment rather than self-assessment, and is subject

97. Given Myanmar’s large development needs, limited
fiscal space, and high dependence on gas sector, the
quality of expenditure will be critical to accelerating
growth and making it inclusive. Ensuring quality expenditure is always critical for achieving development
objectives but is especially critical in the case of Myanmar given its huge development needs but limited fiscal
space. In addition, given the high prominence of the gas
sector in the country’s economic structure, the quality
of expenditure will play pivotal role in ensuring that
growth is inclusive. In particular, since the gas sector
on its own does not create many jobs, its contribution
to inclusive growth will be through the Government’s
success in utilizing gas revenues in a way that helps to
spur growth in labor intensive sectors and improves the
delivery of services.

38 | World Bank Report

98. In spite of recent improvements, a major weakness
in Myanmar’s quality of expenditure remains the
low level of resources allocated to health and education. Public expenditure on health increased from
0.2 percent of GDP in 2011/12 to 1.5 percent of GDP in
2012/13 while that of education increased from 0.8 percent of GDP to 1.6 during the same period. In spite of
these large increases, Myanmar’s expenditure on health
and education remains low by international standards
(see Figures 21 and 22).   In addition, while the Government has increased its own financial allocation to
the sectors, operational costs for institutions delivering
services at the front line remain underfunded. Most of
the additional resources have gone towards capital expenditures and salaries.
99. More generally, weaknesses along various stages of
the budget cycle undermine the quality of expenditure in Myanmar, and hence, reduce prospects
for achieving the Government’s poverty reduction
policy objectives. First, the budget preparation framework and process are not appropriately designed to ensure that resources are allocated to policy priorities. At
present, most of the Budget Department’s manpower
is absorbed in performing cumbersome routine tasks
of budget compilation and reporting. A Fiscal Policy
and Strategy Division in the Budget Department has
just been established and is yet to become operational. Therefore, key budgetary decisions have been made
without being informed by rigorous analytical foundations. Proposed budgets submitted by line ministries to
MOF and thereafter to Parliament are simply a collection of line items without narratives and therefore not
easy to analyze the budget-policy linkages. Second,
when it comes to implementation, a key weakness of
the expenditure framework is the lack of centrally defined standards in areas such as payroll management
and procurement. Currently, these functions are highly
delegated to ministries and spending units at different levels within them. This situation has allowed line
agencies to develop rules and regulations in isolation of
central guidance. As a result, spending agencies have
not been subjected to minimum standards and controls
to ensure value for money in spending. This has created
loopholes that have been exploited by some functionaries. In addition, the official requirement to purchase
from state-owned suppliers and producers has limited
the public sector’s ability to benefit from private sector
efficiencies and innovations. Finally, a key weakness
in Myanmar’s public expenditure framework has been
lack of focus on results and outcomes. For example,
within education, there is no national assessment of
learning outcomes at the lower levels of basic education. Therefore, no one knows if increased expenditure
to education is achieving the desired results.

Source: World Bank, Public Expenditure Review (forthcoming)

100. Since the reforms started, opportunities abound
but there are risks too. There is high level political
and technical buy-in to modernize the PFM backbone
to support service delivery. The Parliament, Office of
the President, and key economic ministries, are keen
to modernize and reform the system to improve service
delivery, foster greater transparency, and link polices
to fiscal outlays. The entering into the market of two
mobile phone companies will significantly improve
telecommunication services and hence provide a platform for a more automated and interconnected PFM
system. At the same time, increasing pressure from
executive and scrutiny from legislative branch could
result in rushed and uncoordinated reform efforts, to
the detriment of a mature system. Similarly, vested interests that have benefited from a weak PFM system
could frustrate reform efforts. In natural resource management, a key opportunity is the strong political will
to greater transparency in the sector demonstrated by

World Bank Report | 39

the Government’s commitment and progress made on
EITI manifested in the recent attainment of candidate
status. Finally, the fiscal decentralization drive offers
an opportunity for improving the quality of expenditure
through better alignment of resource allocations to local circumstances and development needs as well as increased and more direct mechanisms of accountability.
2. Promoting universal access to basic services and empowerment for inclusive growth, particularly in rural areas
101. As most poor people in Myanmar live in rural
areas and have limited access to critical services,
promoting universal access and extending services
to the rural poor and other disadvantaged groups,
will have a high impact. Access to rural infrastructure (rural electrification, roads, telephone services)
will empower the rural poor by facilitating access to
basic social services, and by enhancing opportunities
for and raising incomes from productive activities.  In
turn, improved access to basic social services (health,
education, water and sanitation) will help deal with the
non-income dimension of poverty, and investments
in human capital are crucial in preparing people for
productive work and empowering them to pursue opportunities in the labor market.  In appropriate circumstances, social protection interventions may support the
empowerment agenda through facilitating human capital acquisition (e.g., by increasing the demand for and
usage of education and health services through conditional cash transfers), providing income smoothing for
the poor (e.g. seasonal public works to provide meaningful temporary employment during the lean season),
or providing last resort support for those without work
ability (e.g. disabled elderly) where resources permit.   

(a) Ensuring universal access to social services
102. The health status of the people of Myanmar is
low and does not compare favorably with other
countries in the region. Among ASEAN countries,
Myanmar has the lowest life expectancy at birth, and
second-highest in terms of infant and under five mortality rates, prevalence of underweight, prevalence of
HIV and incidence of tuberculosis.  Maternal and child
mortality and malnutrition remain serious problems
for Myanmar, although there have been significant
improvements in the past two decades, with maternal
mortality now lower than in most countries in the region (Figure 23).

103. Decades of low public spending means that households have to shoulder a large part of the costs,
with significant disparities in geographical coverage and minimal quality of services delivered.
Myanmar has one of the lowest Government expenditures on health globally.  In 2011-2012 the health sector
accounted for only 1.3 percent of total government expenditure (about US$ 2 per person per year). As a result
of these low levels of spending, out-of-pocket (OOP)
payments are exceptionally high, accounting for almost
80 percent of total health spending, one of the highest
in the world.  In addition, many areas of the country are
poorly served by health services, with difficult terrain,
geographical remoteness, conflict and cultural diversity hindering the delivery of essential services. Even
where services are available, systemic challenges seriously undermine the quality of the services delivered.

40 | World Bank Report

104. Increasing access to basic quality health would
have a high impact on poverty reduction and some
key actions can be scaled up relatively quickly. Basic health has strong complementarities and linkages
with basic education, sanitation, and agriculture productivity. Further, the opportunity cost of ill health in
a household is very high in terms of lost opportunities.
Therefore, in light of the high deficiency gap compared
to other countries, action on improving access to health
would have a high impact on poverty reduction. In addition, the impact on poverty reduction can be realized
relatively quickly, with key additional areas of action
relatively easier to implement - they mainly entail increasing budgetary allocation to health and scaling up
existing programs such as provision of free essential
drugs at primary health care facilities and township
hospitals, and provision of free health care services for
children under 5, pregnant mothers, and free hospital
admission on the first day for patients needing emergency surgery.
105. In basic education, although enrollment rates in
Myanmar are respectable (Figure 24) by international comparison, completion rates indicate
a significant problem and quality has been poor.
Only about 11 percent of a cohort graduates from high
school, around 30 percent of the students reach to the
end of high school and about 25 percent of a cohort
leaves basic education after primary school.
106. Private costs associated with attending education
represent an important reason why poor households have been excluded in Myanmar. Although
the economic burden faced by parents does not seem
excessive compared to neighboring countries, there is
evidence that the high costs to households (both direct
and lose of child’s labor) is a barrier for households in
which children are not in school. When these households are asked why their children are not in schools,
over half (55.5 percent) of the main reasons identified
for never attending school related to economic and cost
factors (World Bank, Forthcoming).  Since both the direct and indirect costs of education increase as a child
progresses through the education system, cost related
factors are particularly an issue at the lower and upper-secondary levels.
107. Action on increasing access to education and vocational training would have a high impact on poverty
reduction although its impact will not be realized in
the short-term. Although the deficiency gap in terms
of overall access to education does not appear wide nationally compared to health, quality basic education has
strong complementarities and linkages with a number of
other areas particularly health, water and sanitation, ICT,
financial services, all of which are critical for empowering people to take full advantage of income earning
opportunities. Ensuring that students have foundational
skills such as functional literacy as basic numeracy is
especially critical for empowering people to benefit
from opportunities for wage and self-employment, and

allow them to benefit from additional training, including vocational training. However, the impact on poverty reduction of improving access to quality basic education is not likely to be seen in the short-term since education has a relatively longer gestation period. But this
may also be the reason why action needs to start now
so that the impact can be seen sooner rather than later.
108. The picture on access to water and sanitation is
mixed and is hampered by the fact that data on
service coverage and functionality are unreliable.
The government has not published an annual statistical
review since 1997-832, while the last water sector review was in 199333.  Latest Joint Monitoring Program
(JMP) data suggest a broadly positive state of affairs,
with levels of access to improved water supply and sanitation that are high and compare well to regional averages for both rural and urban areas. However, the data
also shows significant disparities in access to safe water
in selected parts of the country, indicating large areas in
which the population depends on surface water, such as
open ponds and shallow wells, for drinking water. Furthermore, township data indicate that diarrhea is still
a major killer of children under the age of five which
suggests that sanitation is still a problem in the country.
109. Interventions for increasing access to water and
sanitation would have a high impact on poverty reduction but the focus in the short-term would need
to be on getting a handle of the data situation. Given that water and sanitation are basic needs, improving
access can therefore be expected to have a high and
direct impact on poverty reduction. In addition, there
are strong complementarities with health – better access to water and sanitation is critical to the prevention
of many diseases. However, in the absence of credible
data, initial work would need to focus on filling data
gaps on the size of the deficiency gap.       

(b). Expanding rural infrastructure networks
110. Expanding critical rural infrastructure will be key
to reducing poverty since it will integrate the rural with the peri-urban and urban economy and
empower the rural poor to access social services
and participate in income earning opportunities.
Like with social services, access to critical rural infrastructure such as ICT, electricity, and roads has been
significantly low in rural areas. Greater emphasis on
expanding coverage to rural areas can have a significant impact in reducing poverty.    

32
Meehan, P. (2010) The WASH Sector in Myanmar: Addressing
the Challenge of Building Sustainable WASH Services. WaterAid.
33
Cowater International in association with Thant Syn Co. Ltd., and
General Administration Department, Urban Water Supply Division, United
Nations Development Programme and The World Bank (1993) Water Supply
and Sanitation Sector Review, Myanmar. UNDP, MYA/86/012

World Bank Report | 41

111. While there is low access to ICT broadly in the
country, most rural areas do not have access even
to the most basic of ICT - telephone services. Telecommunications related infrastructure has been biased
towards the urban areas in Myanmar, even though
75–80 percent of the population lives in the rural areas.
Rural and remote areas continue to have poor coverage
which has limited the usage of mobile, fixed line or internet when travelling to the rural areas.  
112. The advent of wireless technology is an opportunity for increasing telecommunication
access to people who live in the rural areas.
Wireless technology can cover a wide range of areas
without the use of physical cables, and its equipment
is relatively easy to install (ADB, 2014). Fixed lines
are expensive to install and deployment requires more
time. Nonetheless, although wireless technology is
relatively cheaper, access of sparsely populated and
remote areas remain an issue as these are not commercially viable activities.  
113. Expanding the rural telephone network can reduce poverty substantially, by empowering the
rural poor to benefit from opportunities for productive economic activities and service delivery.
Through improved telephone access, the poor will be
able to have access to information that would be useful
in making production and trading decisions, but also in
facilitating access to microfinance and critical services
such as health.   Experience from other countries has
shown that the benefits of using mobile phone technology in health care systems in developing countries
are diverse, and include improved reporting in health
information systems, telemedicine providing care to
populations otherwise deprived, and texting to improve
adherence to treatment therapy.
114. Similarly, rural electrification is critical to enhancing
the inclusiveness of growth through empowerment.
Reliable access to electricity will be key to the creation
of a conducive business environment for small and micro-enterprises in rural areas. In addition, electricity is
critical to improving the delivery of other services such
as health, education, security, and finance. Lack of electricity in an area can act as a disincentive for qualified
staff in health and education to locate in rural areas.
Similarly, lack of electricity makes it difficult for rural
hospitals and clinics to preserve drugs through refrigeration.
115. At the same time, the proportion of people without access to electricity in Myanmar is significantly higher in the rural areas than in urban areas.
While the electrification rate in urban areas is about 75
percent (e.g. Yangon and Mandalay), the rural areas
have an extremely low electrification rate of only 16
percent. In fact, most of rural communities in border
areas have no access to the grid-based electricity at all,
and some regions and states with a high share of rural
population (e.g. Ayeyarwaddy and Magway Regions

and Rakhine State) have access to grid-based electricity below 10 percent, which is on par with only few
very poor countries in Africa. Therefore, low level of
rural electrification is a key constraint to inclusiveness
of growth in Myanmar.
116. Also, although Myanmar has made significant
progress in developing rural roads, most parts of
the country remain difficult to reach. In 1988, there
were 7,850 kilometers of rural roads. Significant improvements have been made since. Under the rural development program the road network reached 57,700
kilometers in 2010. Rural bridges also increased to 10,
997 kilometers from 3,663 kilometers in 1988. Nonetheless, half of the rural roads in Myanmar remain impassable during the monsoon season. Therefore, greater
attention needs to be paid to improving the condition of
rural roads.

(c). Increasing access to safety nets and reducing vulnerability
117. Given the high levels of vulnerability for households to fall into poverty, increasing access to safety
nets and reducing vulnerability can also contribute
to reducing poverty. This is particularly important in
the rural areas where most households rely on agriculture for their livelihoods, which is in turn susceptible to
weather related shocks. Without any form of safety net,
natural disasters such as floods or draughts can easily
plunge many people into poverty or deeper poverty.
118. At present, Myanmar’s formal social protection
system does not adequately address the needs of its
population. The only SP sector review to date suggests
that over 95 percent of the population has no access
to predictable social protection, relying instead on informal and community-based coping mechanisms and
ad hoc assistance from donor-financed programs. The
Government SP spending is almost entirely focused
on social security provisions that benefit a small and
relatively privileged section of the population. In 201213, the expenditure on civil service pensions and social
security provisions amounted to about 0.5 percent of
GDP and constituted 2.3 percent of the national budget.
However, these old age pensions and health insurance
provide inadequate protection due to low pension levels (a function of low civil service wages) and weak delivery mechanisms. In addition, these programs cover
only the small group of formal sector workers, leaving
households vulnerable to health, weather-related and
other shocks. Myanmar also in effect does not have
a publicly financed safety net program; government
spending on safety nets was less than 0.01 percent of
GDP in 2012-13. This is well below the 1-2 percent of
GDP being spent on safety nets in much of East and
South Asia, and even in poorer Sub-Saharan African
countries (World Bank 2014). At present, the biggest
financers of SP provision in Myanmar are development
partners engaged predominantly in emergency and humanitarian relief with parallel, non-government delivery mechanisms.

42 | World Bank Report

119. Opportunities exist for expanding safety net programs that would need to be leveraged. These include the emerging political and fiscal space for redistributive policies, increased desire from Government
for a transition from emergency-relief related and
donor-funded programs towards a sustainable government-led social protection system and increased focus
on delivering benefits and services effectively to the
poor. Myanmar also has a latecomer’s advantage to benefit from international experience in developing building blocks for a robust SP system, including new technology-based solutions. There is compelling evidence
that SP programs have contributed to reducing poverty
and inequality in both low and middle income countries, and countries such as Ethiopia, India, Bangladesh,
Pakistan, Rwanda, Nepal, and Ghana, have invested in
SP programs at various scales, depending on the specific needs and fiscal sustainability.34 Countries at an early
stage of development with emerging natural resource
wealth are also investing in SP systems (as in the case
of many African countries such as Mozambique). In
many cases, SP programs in both LICs and MICs leverage human capital acquisition and livelihoods, and IMF
analysis has demonstrated both benign growth effects
and positive distributional impacts of such policies.
120. Apart from expanding safety nets, reducing vulnerability to poverty will require focusing on effective disaster risk management. It is the poor and
vulnerable – women, children, the elderly, marginalized groups, and those recovering from conﬂict – who
often are most exposed to hazards, with their homes in
fragile and often low-lying environment are most affected, and their lives feel the greatest pressure when
droughts increase the food prices. Myanmar is exposed
to multiple natural hazards which include cyclone,
storm surge, floods, landslide, earthquake, Tsunami,
drought, and forest fire. The rainfall-induced flooding
is a recurring phenomenon across the country while
some parts of the country are exposed to landslide and
drought risks. As per the data from 1998 to 2007, fires
constituted about 71 percent of reported disaster events,
followed by floods (10 percent), storms (11 percent)
and others (8 percent) including earthquakes, tsunami
and landslides.35 Cyclone Nargis (2008) was the worst
natural disaster in the living memory of Myanmar,
with over 130,000 people killed, and millions affected
by losses of homes and livelihoods.  The Post-Nargis
Social Impact Monitoring indicates that women were
more likely than men to be killed by Nargis – research
in 40 townships shows that at least 396 women and 338
men died.  The study found that women typically had
more limited access to information with regard to early
disaster warning36.
34
See for example Fiszbein et al 2011, Subbarao et al 2013,
Velarde and Fernández 2011, Andrews et al 2013, World Bank 2013b,
Himanshu and Sen (2013).
35

Government of Myanmar (2009), page 1

36
Finding from QSEM II presented corresponds with World Bank
led research findings from the EAP region on the impact of natural disas-

121. At the same time, climate change also represents
a major challenge for Myanmar. The country is already experiencing increased climate variability (notably with regard to rainfall), is significantly exposed to
extreme events (notably destructive cyclones), and is
expected to experience increased temperatures, heavier
rains but also longer dry spells with fast growing impact
in the coming decades.  Myanmar has experienced devastating cyclones Mala, Nargis and Giri in 2006, 2008
and 2010 respectively, claiming thousands of lives. Cyclone Nargis was the worst, claiming 130,000 lives. Ten
percent of the country is projected be further affected
by a sea-level rise of between one and five meters. The
country therefore ranks among the world’s top countries
most at risk from the combined effects of climate change.
122. Currently, Myanmar faces many challenges to effective management of the environment and mitigation of climate change impacts. At present, the
country’s legislation covering natural resources does
not define the licensing process, the role of government
authorities, or the fiscal system for extractives revenues.
Environmental disturbances by mining industry are increasing but have not yet been accompanied by substantive regulatory responses. In addition, there is limited information on the management of the extractive
sector. The country has no freedom of information law
and there is no requirement to prepare or implement
environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA).
The legal formulation and implementation of the ESIA
rules and regulations, relevant pollution control rules
and regulation for solid and hazardous waste management have been just recently launched for development
in line with best international practices.
3. Promoting openness and sustainable private sector led
growth for more jobs
123. In order to sustainably reduce poverty for the transitional and traditional poor in Myanmar, there is
need to create jobs outside agriculture and to increase returns to agriculture. Given that the gas sector is not labor intensive while the agricultural sector
will not be able to create enough jobs to absorb all the
transitional poor while returns in the sector are low for
the traditional poor, efforts need to be focused on promoting greater private sector investment in the non-gas
sectors and increased productivity in agriculture. Sectors
outside the agriculture and gas sectors with potential for
creating jobs in Myanmar include manufacturing, mining, tourism, ICT, the financial sector, and construction.  
124. Myanmar can start tapping opportunities in the
context of regional and global production/value
chain networks. Sophisticated production and distributional networks in East Asia have been developed
through fragmentation of production activities across
borders (Kudo, 2009). In particular, multinational corporations divide their manufacturing processes into septers on women.

World Bank Report | 43

arate production blocks and locate them across borders
so that they can exploit the non-integrated elements of
location advantages such as wage differences. Due to
sanctions, poor policies, infrastructure and connectivity,
Myanmar has been the missing link in the region.

over which results on poverty reduction can be expected.       

125. Jobs created through growth in non-agriculture
sectors will be especially critical in tackling urban poverty, particularly through the creation of
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) alongside
large firms. As shown from the poverty profile, urban
poverty in Myanmar is much higher than originally
reported. Therefore, creating employment opportunities in and around towns and cities will be critical to
ending urban poverty. Evidence from India shows that
urban growth (particularly in small towns to which
rural areas tend to be more closely linked) have been
a critical driver in reducing rural poverty as well. As
policy initiatives are put in place to stimulate investments by large foreign and domestic firms, it will be
important to create a conducive environment for the
urban poor to set up their own businesses, in the form
of SMEs. Policy initiatives will need to recognize potential synergies between large firms and SMEs that
can be critical to driving growth and creating jobs –
SMEs can be major players in the supply chain of the
larger firms as suppliers, consumers, or intermediaries.
126. For Myanmar to create more jobs in the non-gas
and non-agricultural sectors, continuing with current efforts to open up the space for foreign and
domestic investors will need to be a priority, complemented by facilitation of access to domestic,
regional, and international markets. In particular,
the country needs to remove the remaining policy and
institutional impediments that are still hampering entry
by new domestic and foreign private sector investors
into the economic space, and expansion of operations
by existing investors.   In addition, there is also need
to remove policy and institutional barriers to domestic, regional, and international market access. Some of
the required policy and institutional changes may take
time to be carried out or may be politically sensitive but
many can be implemented in the short to medium term.
127. In addition to opening up the economic space, attention will also need to focus on removing key constraints related to actual factors of production that
are critical to business start-up and increased productivity – such as electricity, finance, land, labor,
transport connectivity, and ICT. From the 2014 ICA
enterprise survey, most of these featured highly as critical constraints amongst firms interviewed (See Figure 25
and 26 below). All are expected to have a high impact on
poverty reduction given their strong linkages to the pathways out of poverty. However, there is need for careful
consideration in determining the sequencing of actions
for dealing with each of the constraints, including how
much knowledge already exists on what exactly needs
to be done, complexity of the underlying issues and the
required reforms to deal with them, and period of time

Source: World Bank, Investment Climate Assessment–Enterprise
Survey, 2014

(a). Opening trade and foreign investment
128. Due to state dominance and international isolation, Myanmar has not benefited fully from jobs
created through greater participation by the domestic private sector and foreign direct investment
(FDI). The country has 44 formally defined State Economic Enterprises (SEEs) some of which are operating

44 | World Bank Report

in areas that do not justify public sector involvement.
In addition, SEEs have an unfair advantage over the
private sector because they enjoy significant subsidies
from Government. Government mandates requiring
purchasing from state producers where possible has
severely restricted the scale of public procurement and
sharply constrained an important driver of private sector growth. Finally, due to the country’s past isolationist
policies and international sanctions, Myanmar has not
fully benefited from high levels of FDI as other countries in the region. To date, FDI has mainly been concentrated in the extractive industries.

low and in terms of road density (219.8 kilometers per
1,000 square kilometers), it is the second lowest among
ASEAN countries. The road network had expanded at
a rate of about 8,600 kilometers of new roads per year
between 2005-2008. This slowed down to 5,800 kilometers of additional roads per year from 2009 to 2012.
Similarly, Myanmar’s port infrastructure lags behind
its peers. The country’s Liner Shipping Connectivity
Index37 is at par with Cambodia but lower than other
Southeast Asian countries. Railway and river transport
networks also are relatively underdeveloped compared
to peers in the region.

129. Beyond SEEs, military involvement in businesses
also casts a heavy cloud on private sector space.
The Ministry of Defense owns two holding companies
with vast business interests: The Union of Myanmar
Economic Holdings Limited (UMEHL) which was established to focus on light industries, trading, and services, and the Myanmar Economic Corporation (MEC)
which was established to focus on heavy industries. Although the military owned companies are not regarded
as SEEs, they enjoy certain privileges which make the
playing field for the private sector uneven. For example, in the past they were exempted from commercial
and profit taxes and have had exclusive access to secure
preferential contracts with foreign firms.
130. In order to create more jobs through increased
private foreign investment, the Myanmar economy also needs to be more integrated with regional
and global markets. The lifting of trading sanctions
by the west and the coming into effect of the ASEAN
Economic Community (AEC) in 2015 significantly expands Myanmar’s market opportunities abroad which
could make trade a major driver of growth and hence,
job creation.  The range of tariff rates, the average tariff, and average effective rates have been declining
since Myanmar became a member of the ASEAN in
1997. However, the country still has many non-tariff
measures (NTMs) that significantly hamper integration
with regional and global markets although efforts are
now underway to streamline them. Similarly, with few
exceptions, customs procedures for the processing of
import and export declarations are cumbersome. The
Customs Department lacks essential equipment and requires a laboratory facility, possibly shared with other
government departments, that has the capacity to test
and quickly return a multiplicity of import and export
samples. In general, Myanmar performs poorly on the
Logistics Performance Index (See Figure 25) compared
to most countries in the region.
131. Poor transport connectivity is a key constraint to
Myanmar’s full integration with markets. Currently, Myanmar’s transport infrastructure lags behind
most of its peers in the region. For example, according
to an ADB report (2014), the total road network as of
2012 was 148, 600 kilometers. However, considering
its size (676,577 square kilometers) and population of
51 million, the country’s total road length is considered

37
The LSCI measures how well countries are connected to global shipping networks. It is computed by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) based on five components of the maritime transport sector:
number of ships, their container-carrying capacity, maximum vessel size, number of
services, and number of companies that deploy container ships in a country’s ports.

World Bank Report | 45

(b). Increasing agricultural productivity
132. With the slow creation of non-farm jobs, agriculture will continue to employ many people in Myanmar for years to come and therefore play a critical
role in reducing poverty in the country. Increasing
agricultural profitability and returns to labor will be
central  for effective poverty reduction. Higher profitability, due to increasing yields, shifting or diversifying cropping or livestock holding patterns, and more
efficient use of inputs (including labor), is a necessary
condition to increase farm welfare. There is likely to be
some substitution of capital for labor, although incremental farm mechanization will enable increased utilization of spare land in some areas and generate demand
for off-farm service provisioning. A more productive
agriculture would also encourage job creation through
agro-processing and food distribution activities and
earn foreign exchange through exports.
133. Poor rice yields are the main reason behind low
agricultural productivity in Myanmar. This is because rice is the main agricultural product in Myanmar,
covering about 60 percent of the country’s total cultivated land area. Rice also accounts for 97 percent of
total food grain production by weight and is one of the
country’s major exports. Although official data seem to
suggest that rice yields in Myanmar are comparable to
other countries in the region, a closer scrutiny shows a
much larger gap (Box 5). The most acute problems behind low rice productivity are at the farm level, mainly
inefficient irrigation, lack of access to extension services, and poor production practices.

Box 5: Comparing Myanmar’s rice yield data
with other countries in the region
The official statistics of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Irrigation (MOAI) place average paddy yields at 4.0
tons per hectare, yet this results in an estimated level of rice production far in excess of what is considered to be consumed in or traded from Myanmar. The
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has
estimated that average paddy yields were 2.5 tons per
hectare over the 2010-2012 period. This would place
productivity levels near the bottom for Southeast Asia,
above only Cambodia (Figure 26). The recent large
sample farm survey conducted by the World Bank and
LIFT found the average 2013 wet season yields to be
2.4 tons per hectare in Sagaing, 2.8 tons per hectare in
Ayeyarwaddy, and 3.0 tons per hectare in Bago. Those
three areas account for the bulk of Myanmar’s rice production.
The yield gap of Myanmar is large.  Its varietal mix is
more comparable with the Central region of Thailand,
Indonesia, Philippines, and Vietnam than with Cambodia, Lao PDR, and the Northeast of Thailand. A large
proportion of Cambodian, Lao and Thailand’s rice production is of high-value jasmine, aromatic and glutinous varieties, which inherently have lower yields than
conventional varieties. For example, in the Northeast of
Thailand (where nearly all the jasmine is grown, along
with glutinous varieties), the average yield of main crop
is 2.3 tons per hectare. The more suitable comparator
with Myanmar is the wet season crop in Thailand’s
Central region where conventional varieties dominate.
The average yields there were 3.8 tons per hectare over
the 2011-2013 period. This would imply a ‘yield gap’
of some 58 percent for Sagaing, 36 percent for Ayeyarwaddy, and 27 percent in Bago. Paddy yields in some
of the better growing areas in Vietnam’s Mekong Delta
region range between 6 and 7.5 tons per hectare, implying even potentially larger yield gap in Myanmar.

46 | World Bank Report

134. At the same time, over-dependence on rice means
that Myanmar has been unable to increase overall
agricultural productivity through diversification
or alternative patterns of specialization. The Government has over the years emphasized food self-sufficiency through rice production, and, for considerable
periods, actually directed farmers to grow rice in order
to meet fixed production targets. Opportunities to grow
other cereals, for food or feed, were generally neglected.
As can be seen from Figure 30, Myanmar, rice has accounted for nearly 94 percent of total cereals production value, a much higher proportion than for several
comparator countries. Significant growth opportunities
also exist for higher value agro-food commodities, as
evidenced by the recent emergence of a very substantial regional trade in beans, pulses and horticultural
products. Domestic consumption of animal products
is expected to increase, sharply, with rising incomes.  
Myanmar will therefore need to diversify away from
rice if the country’s agricultural potential is to be fully
realized.
135. In addition, an inefficient milling industry produces low quality processed rice. The majority of rice
mills in Myanmar employ antiquated technology, resulting in lower technical efficiency, higher levels of
product loss, and a low quality milled rice product. It
is estimated that less than one-fourth of the mills are
capable of producing medium-to-high quality rice. This
situation limits the market segments which Myanmar
can supply abroad, leads to relatively low unit values
for rice exports, and results in low prices paid to farmers. Historical factors—including periodic or sustained
bans on rice exports and heavy state enterprise involvement in the trade—inhibited private investment in the
sector. Policy uncertainties continue to deter some potential investors.
136. Finally, lack of access to land and tenure security
are also a critical constraint to agriculture productivity, and private sector investment more broadly.
Myanmar has the highest rate of landlessness in East
Asia, estimated at between one-third and forty percent
of the rural population. At the same time, most people
with land are unsure of long term tenure security due to
a history of widespread land grabs. Evidence in other
countries has shown that secure land tenure can be critical to increased agriculture investment, and therefore
increased incomes. More broadly, lack of access to land
and tenure security has also been identified as a critical
constraint to businesses. According to the findings of
the ICA enterprise survey, this is particularly a problem amongst medium, small, and micro enterprises but
not so much amongst large enterprises (Refer to earlier
Figure 25 and 26). The ICA further finds that access to
land is a key obstacle across all sectors – manufacturing, retail, and services.  
137. Some progress has been made recently to improve
tenure security but land conflicts persist due to unclear rules for land acquisition and compensation

and weaknesses in the institutional framework for
handling disputes. Since the transition began, two
land laws have been enacted which aim to improve
land property rights. These are the Farm Land Law
(2012) and the Vacant, Fallow, and Virgin (VFV) Lands
Management Law (2012). Together, the two laws enable farmers to acquire formal land use rights and include provisions that recognize and respect existing use
of land by farmers, even if there has previously been no
recognition of the use by the Government. However,
in spite of these new laws, acquisitions and compensations are still being governed by the 1894 Land Acquisition Act. Lack of clarity in procedures and provisions
in this Law has led to arbitrariness in decisions, resulting in conflicts. To compound the situation, there are
significant weaknesses in the institutional framework
for handling land disputes. Recently, Government has
set up a Land Loss Enquiry Commission of Parliament
to investigate claims of land confiscation by the military during 2008 and 2011.
138.Given the critical nature of land in investment decisions on and off-farm, improved access to land
and improved land tenure security will have a
significant impact on job creation and increased
returns to investment in Myanmar, and hence,
on poverty reduction. There are opportunities for
Myanmar to learn from the experiences of other
countries in moving forward with land reforms. For
example, land consolidation38 and land acquisition
processes in Myanmar have so far been practiced
as land readjustment procedures of technical nature
and not as land right altering processes according to
international practices. The experience from other
countries shows that such reforms can be successful
if they are anchored in proper and enforceable legal
frameworks, and are based on inclusive and transparent processes, which include community awareness raising and consultations at various stages of
the process.

(c). Improving Myanmar’s overall productive efficiency and
competiveness  
139. For Myanmar’s products to be competitive internationally, there is need to deal with constraints
currently hampering the economy’s overall productive efficiency, mainly critical shortages in power, under-developed financial sector, shortages in
skilled labor, and low supply of ICT services. Poor
polices and long period of isolation have led to critical shortages of these key factors of production, leading to high costs of opening and operating businesses.
Unless these constraints are removed, the potential of
the country’s dual shift to create more jobs through in38
Land consolidation has been a process where farmers with adjacent plots have been asked to combine them in order to make the farms
amenable to mechanized commercial agriculture. Once combined, the land
has usually been operated by large corporations on a concession basis, with
the owners of the land supplying labor. Such arrangements have resulted in
disputes due to lack of clarity about the terms of the agreement.

World Bank Report | 47

creased private sector investment and trade will not be
fully maximized.
140. Inadequate power is a particularly critical constraint to existing and potential business activities
in Myanmar (See Figures 31 and 32). Due to advances in technology, most production and non-production processes depend heavily on power, whether
in the manufacturing or service industries. But as mentioned earlier, Myanmar has one of the lowest rates of
electrification in Southeast Asia with connectivity to
the public grid at less than 30 percent while overall access to electricity (including private generators) at 48.8
percent.

141. Similarly, the country’s financial sector has largely been underdeveloped, with less than 20 percent
of the population having access to formal financial
services (See Figures 33 and 34). Not surprising, access to finance was mentioned as a major obstacle to
doing business in Myanmar by most firms during the
ICA Enterprise Survey (Refer to earlier Figures 25 and
26). The banking industry is beset with cumbersome
banking requirements and high transactions costs, and
lacks depth in the provision of financial services. For
example, it is currently not easy to transfer funds into
or out of Myanmar. Migrants do not have access to appropriate financial services for them to remit foreign
earnings back to their families. Access to loans is hampered by stringent collateral requirements while most
banks do not offer credit card services. In addition, interest rates are administratively controlled which limits
profitability of banks and hence their ability to extend
credit.

Source: World Development Indicators, 2014

Source: World Development Indicators, 2014

48 | World Bank Report

142. Low supply of skilled labor is another key constraint mentioned by most investors in Myanmar.
Since the country is emerging from a long period of
isolation, there is a significant gap between locally
available skills and the skills demanded by employers,
particularly foreign companies just coming in. Apart
from sector specific technical skills, many people who
have graduated from schools within Myanmar also lack
basic proficiency in the English language. In addition,
most institutions offering vocational and technical education schools were converted into formal universities
under military rule.   Given the current wide gap, increasing the supply of skilled labor force would therefore have a high impact on poverty reduction.
143. However, more sustainable actions to increase the
supply of skilled labor will take time to show results, hence the need for some necessary actions
to start being implemented in the short-term. As
a stop-gap measure for filling the skills gap, the Foreign Investment Law currently allows companies to
hire foreigners, initially up to 75 percent in the first two
years, then declining over the years. However, a long
term solution lies in the ability of the education system
to produce enough numbers of people with the skills
required in the market. This will take time to be implemented and to yield results therefore some small but
critical actions need to start now. In particular, there is
need to determine the nature of the skills in short supply and come up with policies that will ensure that the
public and private sectors are able to make and expand
investments in areas that will meet employers’ longterm skills needs.

Source: World Development Indicators, 2014

144. ICT in Myanmar is significantly underdeveloped
compared to other countries in the region and in
the world, although the situation is now expected
to improve rapidly. The most recent internationally comparable data (WDI 2014), subject to the wide
margins of error for the underlying data for Myanmar
(see Box 3) indicate very low mobile phone and internet penetration rates of 1.1 percent   and 0.3 percent,
respectively (Figures 35 and 36). However, telecommunication sector reforms are taking place with the liberalization of the market.  A new Telecommunications
Law was approved in October 2013 and it is largely
in line with good practice.   Two new operators have
been licensed through an internationally recognized
transparent process and the incumbent state owned operator will soon select an operating partner. Myanmar
will transition from a monopoly market into a multi
operator environment.  Key secondary legislation was
also developed through a public consultation process
and other issues are being addressed in the next phase.
145. Improving the supply of ICT services will have a
high impact on poverty reduction by creating jobs,
enhancing productivity, and improving access to
information, markets, and services, hence the need
to build on the significant progress already made
by Myanmar so far. Given its many applications,
ICT has great potential for transforming Myanmar’s
economy and people’s lives. As experienced in more
advanced economies, improved ICT can help create
jobs through, for example, the emergence of new value chains that provide online work opportunities for
unskilled to higher skilled workers from anywhere in
the world, as long as they have computers and internet
access. In addition, it can help increase returns through
use of more efficient ICT-based production and marketing applications and communication. Finally, public service delivery could be improved significantly
in terms of quality, timeliness and reach by taking advantage of the expected steep increase of internet and
mobile penetration. Given these potential benefits, the

World Bank Report | 49

country will now need to build on the progress it has
made of opening up the ICT market to competition. In
particular, there is need to provide an enabling regulatory and policy environment for the country to start
participating in the global online/virtual work opportunity. In addition, mobile and e-Government platforms
and services need to be developed in order to improve
efficiency and reach in the delivery of services.

(d). Ensuring sustainability through improved and more integrated environmental and natural resource management
146. Myanmar’s ability to sustainably reduce poverty
will depend on its capacity to properly manage the
environment and its vast natural resource endowments. The country relies heavily on natural resources
for its productive economic activities that are critical
to job creation including agriculture, mining, tourism,
transportation, and power generation. Therefore, to ensure sustainability in the reduction of poverty, the country needs to build effective institutions and implement
reforms that are integrated into Myanmar’s environment and natural resource sector.
147. Hydropower is a major natural resource for Myanmar. Hydropower investments carry a great potential
to contribute to poverty reduction and shared prosperity if they are well executed, with benefits accruing to
the population at large, but they also carry huge risks if
environmental and social considerations are not properly integrated in an optimal hydropower development
program.   Currently, hydropower accounts for about
75% of electricity production in the country.   Many
new projects are at different stages of development
(58 projects totaling about 45GW, according to ADB
and JICA draft master plans for the power sector), only
some of which are likely to be developed in the next
5-10 years.  To realize the potential benefits of hydropower, Myanmar will depend on substantially strengthened government capacity for sustainable hydropower
planning, in order to identify and prioritize the projects
with the highest impact for development and poverty
reduction. Donors support for institutional development and capacity building (currently led by the Government of Norway) and participation of experienced
private sector developers are essential for sustainable
development of hydropower in Myanmar.
148. Critical to ensuring environmental sustainability
is the integrated management of the Ayeyarwaddy river basin, which is central to Myanmar’s capacity to exploit its full growth and development
potential. The Ayeyarwaddy river basin has been described as the heart of the nation, accounting for about
60 percent of Myanmar’s landmass, and home to some
70 percent of its population.  It is a river of global proportions, with an average annual flow of over 400 billion cubic meters, equivalent to roughly 85 percent of
the Mekong.39   Many of the opportunities considered
39
Annual volumes of the Ayeyarwaddy (410 bcm) and the Mekong
(475 bcm) are as reported by the Government of Myanmar and the Mekong

most promising for Myanmar’s growth relate directly
to water, and particularly the Ayeyarwaddy, such as enhanced production and trade in agricultural products,
hydropower generation,40 and the expansion of national and regional green transport systems via rivers and
ports.  
149. A fragmented approach to the management of the
river basin has been a major risk to sustainable
growth and development in Myanmar, but efforts
are now underway to address this problem. Due
to institutional weaknesses in the public sector, economic activities in the river basin have proceeded in
a fragmented manner and without taking into account
their long-term impact on sustainability. To address
the broad inter-related risks and opportunities of the
Ayeyarwaddy River, as well as to address the fragmentations among the national water resources agencies, a
National Water Resources Committee (NWRC) was
established by Presidential decree in July 2013.  In addition, the World Bank plans to provide financial and
technical assistance to the Government of Myanmar
that will help rationalize and strengthen public sector
institutions for an integrated approach to the management of economic activities and projects in the river basin, particularly large-scale infrastructure investments
in agriculture, hydropower, navigation, municipal and
industrial water supply and wastewater treatment.
150. More broadly, sound management of natural resources and the broader environment will be important to sustain economic growth and reduce
poverty rates in Myanmar. Apart from the Ayeyarwaddy river, Myanmar is also rich in natural gas, has
sizeable oil reserves, and significant mineral resources
(ADB, 2012a). These have been among Myanmar’s
growth sectors, registering an annual growth rate of
15.5 percent during 2001-2006 (ADB, 2012b). At the
same time, without adequate safeguards, policies and
regulations in place and capacity to implement them,
these activities can lead to irreversible eco-system degradation, deforestation, and water and air pollution.
Poor communities that depend on forests for wood
and non-wood forest products and use drinking water from contaminated wells would be affected most
by such environmental impacts. A significant proportion of natural resource extraction has taken place in
ethnic minority areas and poor sector governance has
fueled conflicts between armed groups and the central
Government, contributing to long-term poverty and under-development.

River Commission, respectively. Recent literature (Robinson et al. 2007)
suggests the Ayeyarwaddy’s volume may be even higher, in the range of 420
to 440 billion cubic meters (+/- 48 bcm).
40
In total, Myanmar has an estimated 100,000 MW of total
hydropower resources. Of this, the Ayeyarwaddy River alone is believed to
account for 38,000 MW of potential installed capacity. The total installed
capacity of existing hydropower plants is 2,660 MW.

50 | World Bank Report

151. The development of a nationally agreed Environmental and Social Safeguards framework that is
based on best practices will be critical to ensuring
that investments in the various intervention areas
proceed in a manner that is consistent with longterm environmental sustainability. A key opportunity arises from the fact that there is wide awareness
amongst stakeholders in Myanmar, within and outside
Government, about the need for environmentally responsible investments. At the same time, there is a risk
that planned investments could face significant delays
unless there is evidence that they have passed environmental and social impact assessments that are based on
a nationally agreed framework. Therefore, a key priority going forward is the preparation of a nationally
agreed framework for Environmental and Social Safeguards.
152. Similarly, Myanmar does not have a well-functioning
framework for the management of natural resource
revenues that ensures long-term sustainability of
development. As already mentioned, natural resource
revenues are the dominant source of public revenues
in Myanmar, and are set to increase with new gas
field coming on stream and significant scale up of oil
production planned. Experience from other countries
shows that these natural resource revenues can be
volatile, as demand and prices are subject to global
political and economic events. In addition, given that
natural resources are finite, there is need to ensure
that the management of natural resources also caters
for future generations. Unless there is an appropriate
framework, volatility in natural resource revenues can
lead to unwarranted volatility in expenditure. Similarly,
imprudent use of natural resource revenues threatens
the sustainability of development beyond the current
generation. Currently, Myanmar does not have any
framework for managing the volatility of natural resource revenues that promotes the build-up of fiscal
buffers through saving in good years that can then be
spent prudently over the medium term, or for ensuring
savings for future generations.
153. The management of natural resource revenues is
also seen to lack in transparency, accountability,
and fairness, although progress is being made to
enhance transparency of natural resource revenues. There is general been lack of publicly available
information about contracting arrangements, payments
made by companies, volumes of revenues received, and
destination of revenues and extent to which revenues
are included in budget. In addition, a large portion of
potential revenues is currently not captured – Myanmar
is the world’s leading producer of jade, sapphires, and
rubies. Data on the gems trade is very limited, with
poor accounting and reporting of sales and a very large
proportion of sales going through unregulated border
trade. Finally, many of Myanmar’s natural resources
are concentrated in the ethnic minority states and regions, home to the world’s longest running civil wars,
and have fueled generations of conflict. Progress has

recently been made to improve transparency and accountability through the EITI process - Myanmar recently attained EITI candidacy status,41  but more work
remains especially in ensuring that states and regions
from which resources are extracted feel that there is
fairness in the manner in which natural resource revenues are allocated across the country.
154. Given the growing rate of urbanization and high
levels of urban poverty in Myanmar, it will also
be important to ensure that urban development
proceeds in a sustainable manner. In response to the
reforms, most new investments coming into the country are locating in the country’s main cities and other
urban areas since infrastructure and services are relatively better than in rural areas. Similarly, most people
looking for jobs are flocking to towns and cities. Rapid
industrialization and urban population growth are
therefore putting pressure on the country’s cities and
its environment. Data on the rate of urbanization are
not available although anecdotal evidence suggests that
it is high.
155. Promoting sustainable urban development will be
a complex and long-term agenda, but some critical
first steps could be taken to lay the foundation for
the future. In particular, it is important for Myanmar
to start investing in proper urban planning and strengthening policies and institutions for sustainable urban development. The goal should be to ensure that cities and
other urban areas continue to function at levels of quality
of life desired by the community without restricting the
options available to the present and future generations
and causing adverse impacts inside and outside the urban boundaries. In the medium-term, the development
of Special Economic Zones will ensure that industrialization proceeds in a more systematic manner and without
putting pressure on cities and towns.

41
This means that the International Board of the EITI confirmed
that Myanmar has, amongst others, successfully put in place a Multi-Stakeholder Group comprising representatives from government, civil society
and operators. As an EITI Candidate country, Myanmar is now required to
publicly disclose a range of information about its extractive industries in
an annual EITI Report. This includes payment and revenue data, production data as well as information about how licenses are allocated, who the
license holders are and other contextual information about the extractive
industries. Myanmar has 18 months to produce its first EITI Report.

IV. KNOWLEDGE GAPS, IMPLICATIONS,
AND PROPOSPED ANALYTICAL
WORK AGENDA

52 | World Bank Report

156. In spite of best efforts, knowledge and data gaps
have imposed limitations on some of the analyses
in the SCD. Going forward, a number of knowledge
gaps have been identified in various areas, together
with current plans and future options for filling these
gaps (See Table A.1 in the Annex). This list is by no
means exhaustive but provides pointers to critical areas
where future analytical work may need to focus on.  
157. Data constraints have limited the poverty analytics
in this SCD. In particular, it has not been possible to
assess how poverty has changed in Myanmar since the
2009/10 IHLCA survey was conducted. In addition,
there is still no clear understanding of some aspects of
poverty and of local context in conflict affected areas.
Going forward, the Bank plans to undertake a Myanmar Poverty and Living Conditions Survey (MPLCS)
in 2014/15 that will aim to quickly provide up-to-date
and credible estimates of poverty, and to inform the
design and implementation of the large-scale (18,000
households) national survey that the government is
planning to undertake in 2015. It is hoped that the next
surveys will be able to cover the border areas that have
not been properly represented in previous surveys. This
will need to be complemented by targeted studies to understand better the local context of the social, political,
and economic issues in the conflict-affected minority
areas.
158. Similarly, lack of data has hampered analyses of
unemployment and the job market in Myanmar.
There are currently no recent and credible unemployment figures, labor income trends, migration patterns
within and beyond Myanmar, and returns to education.
The last labor force survey was conducted in 1990.
The Ministry of Labor recently signed an agreement
with the International Labor Organization to conduct
a new labor force survey. In addition, there has not
been a comprehensive analysis of the labor intensity of
various sectors. As a result, it has not been possible to
assess in empirical terms the potential contribution of
various sectors to job creation.  On the demand side,
there is also lack of more comprehensive information
on the type of skills on demand in the market or by
potential entrants to the market would be useful to help
in the design of programs aimed at filling the skills gap.
The design of such program would need to be informed
by an assessment of the effectiveness of existing programs for increasing the supply of skills in the market.
Finally, due to the expected role that ICT is likely to
play in creating jobs in Myanmar, an in-depth study on
ICT and the jobs agenda would be warranted beyond
the Ericsson Study on the potential economic impact of
mobile communications in Myanmar.
159. In addition, it has not been possible in some cases
to fully understand the scale of certain development challenges. Detailed and more robust macroeconomic analysis has not been possible due to the lack
of credible national accounts data. Planned support by
the ADB to update the SNA will help address this chal-

lenge. Similarly, while it is generally understood that
more broadly, there are weaknesses in the capacity of
the public sector to design, coordinate, and deliver services, there is need for a more in-depth understanding
of the critical capacity constraints within each sector. It
would also be useful to understand the impact of politics in decision making within the country’s bureaucracy. To fill these gaps, there is need to conduct a comprehensive public-sector assessment.
160. On service delivery, knowledge gaps exist in the
area of outcomes and government performance,
particularly in hard-to-reach areas; and potential
of private sector participation in the provision of
public goods. For example, in education, there is currently no national assessment of learning outcomes at
the lower levels of basic education. As a result, no one
knows how much learning actually occurs at different levels of basic education. Going forward, there is
need to   conduct an assessment of students’ learning
outcomes at key stages of the education cycle, starting
with Early Grade Reading and Math Assessments. In
health, there is lack of robust information at community
level, particularly in hard to reach areas. Conducting
service delivery satisfaction surveys would also provide invaluable information on Government performance in the delivery of services, particularly in hard to
reach areas. Finally, it also not been possible to assess
the potential of private sector participation in the provision of public goods. The Bank recently conducted
such an assessment in the power sector as part of the
PER. Going forward, there is need to extend this type
of assessment to other sectors with potential for private
sector participation in the provision of services.
161. While the on-going PER has started filling some
of the gaps on revenue and expenditure patterns
in Myanmar, additional work will be warranted.
It has not been possible to conduct a more comprehensive assessment of the level of Government revenues
due to limited knowledge on revenue levels from Gems
trade and the mining sector. This gap will be filled by
a comprehensive analysis of revenues from the mining
sector and other extractives currently planned under the
EITI support program. Similarly, while the PER shows
that SEEs contribute significantly to public sector revenues, a more detailed analysis is warranted in order to
understand the different contributions of various SEEs.
This will help determine the potential implications on
Government revenues, of the various types of SEE reforms being envisaged by the Government, including
corporatization and privatization. Finally, the sector
level PERs on health, education, and energy should be
expended to other sectors as well, particularly agriculture and transportation. This will help determine priorities for public expenditure in these sectors.
162. As mentioned earlier, knowledge gaps have made
it difficult to identify priorities at a more granular level or make specific recommendations within
sectors or thematic areas. For example, the SCD has

World Bank Report | 53

highlighted the importance of increasing productivity,
diversification, and value addition. However, yield data
is unreliable and there is little information on the status
of diversification in the country. Therefore, a comprehensive and in-depth study on agriculture diversification would be useful. A farm production economics
study is planned by the World Bank. The study seeks
to determine farm production costs in Myanmar which
will be used to compare the likely costs and benefits of
various policy interventions.
163. A key area where additional analytical work is
necessary before undertaking significant additional public action is land reform. First, there is limited knowledge on the relationship between land tenure
security and agriculture investment in Myanmar. An
in-depth study would therefore be warranted. Second,
there is need to understand the full scale of the current
land problems including the extent to which complaints
on land are related to past injustices or new land laws,
the transition, and other policies and institutions. More
fundamentally, there is need to understand the binding
constraints to secure land tenure in Myanmar. Land
governance is about power and the political economy
of land. To understand the land-related problems that
challenge Myanmar, and to appreciate the challenges
facing land-sector reforms, it is therefore necessary to
understand land’s role in the country’s historic political
economy and the history of land-related legislation and
ownership.   Land tenure arrangements involve social
relations and social institutions and have complex histories, and are multi-dimensional.42 Therefore there is
42

A range of frameworks, guidelines, and initiatives are now avail-

need for a comprehensive assessment of the political
economy of land in Myanmar and an analysis of options for land reform that draws on lessons from the
experiences of other countries with various types of
land reform.
164. Similarly, without robust information, specific
and prioritized recommendations have not been
possible in the areas of safety nets, financial sector, and access to microfinance. In the area of safety
nets, it will be important to conduct an assessment of
government-led safety net pilots (such as stipends and
maternal and child health vouchers) as well as selected
safety net programs being implemented by development partners. It would also be useful to conduct a
feasibility assessment for making benefit payments
through financial institutions. In the financial sector, the
finalization of the Financial Sector Master Plan currently under preparation with help from the World Bank
will be helpful. However, beyond preparation of the
plan, a Financial Sector Assessment Program will be
warranted in order to gauge the stability of Myanmar’s
financial sector and assess its potential contribution to
growth and development. In microfinance, there is also
need for a comprehensive assessment of the industry in
order to understand its dynamics including the scale of
demand for microfinance from micro enterprises and
households.  

able to help conduct a thorough assessment of land governance such as the
World Bank’s Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF), the UN’s
Voluntary Guidelines on Land Governance, and the WB-UN global initiative
on the Principles of Responsible Agricultural Investment

54 | World Bank Report

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abe, M. & Molnar, M. (2014),
“Myanmar Business Survey,” Survey Results, OECD &
UNESCAP
Alderman, H. & R. Yemtsov (2013),
“Productive role of safety nets,” Social Protection Discussion Paper 67609, World Bank

Transparency in the Oil and Gas Sector,” Arakan Oil
Watch
Asia Society, (2010),
“Current Realities and Future Possibilities in Burma/
Myanmar: Perspectives from Asia”, Asia Society

Andrews, C., & Kryeziu, A. (2013). Public Works and
the Jobs Agenda: Pathways for Social Cohesion. World
Bank, Washington DC.

Aung, N.M. (2012),
“Production and Economic Efficiency of Farmers and
Millers in Myanmar Rice Industry,” V.R.F Series No.
471, IDE, JETRO.

Andrews, C., A. Kryeziu and D. Seo (2013),
World Bank support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013:
A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services and Results, World Bank.

Barker, R., et al, (1985),
“Resources for the Future,” The Rice Economy of
Asia, Volume 2, Washington DC in cooperation with
The International Rice Research Institute, Manila.

Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2012),
“Myanmar: Summary of ADB’s Initial Sector
Assessments,” ADB, Manila

Baroang, K. (2013),
“Burma Bio-Physical Characterization: Summary
Findings and Issues to Explore.” Center on Globalization and Sustainable Development, Earth Institute at
Columbia University.

ADB, (2012a),
“Myanmar in Transition: Opportunities and Challenges.”ADB, Manila.
ADB, (2012b),
“Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector Assessment, Strategy and Road Map.” Asian Development
Bank, Manila.
ADB, (2013),
“New Energy Architecture: Myanmar.” Asian Development Bank, Manila, June 2013.
ADB, (2013),
“Myanmar Country Diagnostic Study: Policy Brief,”
ADB, Manila
ADB, (2013),
“Myanmar’s Trade and its Potential,” ADB, Manila
ADB, (2014) “Myanmar Country Diagnostic Study”
Allan, D. (2013),
“Myanmar’s Energy Challenge: Business as Usual” is
Not Working, Inclusion and Innovation Offer Access
for All: An Essay/Compilation for Myanmar’s Energy
Sector,” Consultation Report, Spectrum: Sustainable
Development Knowledge Network
Anukoonwattaka W. & Mikic M. (2012),
“Myanmar: Opening up to its Trade and Foreign Investment Potential,” Staff Working Paper 01/12, Trade and
Investment Division, UNESCAP, Bangkok.
Arkan Oil Watch, (2012),
“Burma’s Resource Curse: The Case for Revenue

Berwin Leighton Paisner. (2013),
“Myanmar Foreign Investment Law, Foreign Investment Rules and Notification: Shining Light or Muddy
Waters?” Berwin Leighton Paisner.
Bin, P. (2012),
“Political Economy of the Garments Sector,” Consultancy Report, DFID.
Bissinger, J. (2012),
“Foreign Investment in Myanmar: A Resource Boom
but a Development Bust?”, Contemporary Southeast
Asia, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 23-52.
Bissinger, J. (2012),
“Firm Perceptions of Myanmar’s Business Climate,”
International Academic Symposium, “Myanmar in
Reform 2012” June 18-20, 2012
Border Consortium,
The. (2011), The Border Consortium Report.
Burma Partnership (2012),
“We have Seen this Before”: Burma’s Fragile Peace
Process,” Mae Sot, Thailand
Business Monitor International, (2012),
“Myanmar Awakens: Unearthing Asia’s Hidden
Gem”, Special Report, Business Monitor International
Ltd.
Cambodia National Institute of Statistics, (2004),
“Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey.” Phnom Penh.

World Bank Report | 55

Callahan, M., & Steinberg, D. (2012),
“Drivers of Political Change in Post-Junta, Constitutional Burma,” USAID
Central Statistical Organization, (2009),
“Myanmar Statistical Yearbook,” Ministry of National
Planning and Economic Development
Crandall, R. et al. (2007),
“The Effects of Broadband Deployment on Output
and Employment: A Cross-sectional Analysis of U.S.
Data.”
Dapice, D. et al., (2009),
“Assessment of the Myanmar Agricultural Economy,”
Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation:
Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D. et al., (2010),
“Revitalizing Agriculture in Myanmar: Breaking Down
Barriers, Building a Framework for Growth,” Harvard
Kennedy School, Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D. et al., (2011a),
‘‘Myanmar Agriculture in 2011: Old Problems and New
Challenges’, Harvard Kennedy School, Ash Center
for Democratic Governance and Innovation: Harvard
Kennedy School
Dapice, D. et al., (2011b)
“The Exchange Rate in Myanmar: A Barrier to National
Strength,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance and
Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D., (2012a),
“Electricity in Myanmar: The Missing Prerequisite for
Development,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance
and Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D. (2012b),
“Electricity Demand and Supply in Myanmar,” Ash
Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation:
Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D. (2012c),
“The Exchange Rate in Myanmar: An Update to January 2012,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance and
Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D. et al. (2012d),
“Appraising the Post-Sanctions Prospects for Myanmar’s Economy: Choosing the Right Path,” Ash Center
for Democratic Governance and Innovation: Harvard
Kennedy School
Dapice, D. (2013),
“Against the Odds: Building a Coalition – Using a New
Federalism for Unity and Progress in Myanmar,” Ash
Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation:
Harvard Kennedy School

`Dapice, D. (2012c),
“Myanmar: Negotiating Nation Building – A Path to
Unity and Progress,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School
Dapice, D. (2013),
“Rice Policy in Myanmar: It’s Getting Complicated,”
Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation:
Harvard Kennedy School
Dawe, D. (2013),
“Geographic Determinants of Rice Self-Sufficiency in
Southeast Asia.” ESA Working Paper No. 13-03, Agricultural Development Economics Division, UN Food
and Agriculture Organization.
Delloite. (2012),
“The Potential Impact of Mobile Communications in
Myanmar,” Consultancy Report prepared for Ericsson.
Diamond L. et al. (2012),
“The Opening in Burma,” Journal of Democracy, Volume 23, Number 4.
Duflos E. et al. (2013),
“Microfinance in Myanmar Sector Assessment,” IFC
Advisory Services in East Asia and the Pacific, IFC.
Economist Intelligence Unit. (2012a),
“Myanmar: White Elephant or New Tiger Economy?”
The Economist
Economist Intelligence Unit. (2012b),
“Country Report: Myanmar (Burma)” Economist Intelligence Unit, London.
Engle P.L. et al. (2011),
“Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving
developmental outcomes for young children in low-income and middle-income countries” Lancet, 378(9799)
pp.1339-53.
European Union & MDRI. (2013),
Myanmar EITI Guidebook
European Union. (2011),
“Baseline Study 4, Myanmar: Overview of Forest Law
Enforcement, Governance and Trade, EU FLEGT Facility, European Forest Institute – FLEGT Asia Regional
Office, Kuala Lumpur
Food and Agriculture Organization. (2011),
“Myanmar and FAO: Achievements and Success Stories,” FAO Representation in Myanmar, Rome.
Food Security Working Group (2012),
“Legal Review of Recently Enacted Farmland Law and
Vacant, Fallow, and Virgin Lands Management Law:
Improving the Legal & Policy Frameworks Relating to
Land Management in Myanmar,” Food Security Working Group’s Land Core Group.

56 | World Bank Report

Global Justice Center. (2013),
“The Gender Gap and Women’s Political Power in
Myanmar/Burma,” Global Justice Center, Human
Rights Through the Rule of Law

IBAHRI. (2012),
“The Rule of Law in Myanmar: Challenges and Prospects,” International Bar Association’s Human Rights
Institute (IBAHRI), London.

Goletti, F. (1999),
“Agricultural Diversification and Rural Industrialization
as a Strategy for Rural Income Growth and Poverty
Reduction in IndoChina and Myanmar,” Markets and
Structural Studies Division, International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI).

International Crisis Group. (2012),
“Myanmar: Storm Clouds on the Horizon,” Asia Report
No. 238, International Crisis Group

Government of Myanmar, ASEAN and UN (2008),
“Post Nargis Joint Assessment.”
Government of Myanmar. (2009),
“Myanmar Action Plan on Disaster Risk Reduction,
2009-2015,” Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement, Relief and Resettlement Department, Nay
Pyi Taw.

International Crisis Group. (2012),
“Myanmar: The Politics of Economic Reform,” Asia
Report No. 231, International Crisis Group
International Crisis Group. (2013),
“A Tentative Peace in Myanmar’s Kachin State,” Asia
Report No.140, International Crisis Group
International Finance Corporation. (2012),
“Microfinance in Myanmar: Rapid Sector
Assessment,” Unpublished Report.

Government of Myanmar & European Union. (2012),
“ Education for All: Access to and Quality of Education
in Myanmar,” Paper Presented at the Conference on
Development Policy Options, 13-15 February, 2012, Nay
Pyi Taw.

International Labor Organization. (2005),
“Key Indicators of the Labor Market,” fourth edition.

Government of Myanmar & European Union. (2012),
“Conference on Development Policy Options with Special Reference to Education and Health in Myanmar,”
Conference on Development Policy Options, 13-15
February, 2012, Nay Pyi Taw.

IMF. (2012),
“Report on Government Financial Statistics”

Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., & Valentinyi, A.
(2013). Growth and Structural Transformation, No.
w18996. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hiebert, M. & Nguyen, P. (2012),
“Land Reform: A Critical Test for Myanmar’s Government,” Center for Strategic International Studies,
South East Asia from the Corner of 18th Street & K
Street, Volume III, Issue 21.
Hoddinott, J., et al. (2008),
The Impact of Nutrition during Early Childhood on
Income, Hours Worked, and Wages of Guatemala
Adults,” Lancet, Volume 371, pp. 411-16
Horsey, R. (2013),
“The Current Status of the Ceasefires in Myanmar,”
SSRC, Conflict Prevention and Peace Forum
Horsey, R. (2013),
“Amending the Myanmar Constitution,” SSRC, Conflict
Prevention and Peace Forum
Hussmanns, (2004),
“Defining and Measuring Informal Employment,” Bureau of Statistics International Labor Office.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). (2012),
“A Review of the Public Finance Management System”

IMF. (2012),
“Myanmar-Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation”, IMF, Washington DC.
IMF. (2013),
“Myanmar-2013 Article IV Consultation and First
Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program – Staff
Report”, IMF Country Report No. 13/250IMF, Washington DC.
IMF. (2014),
“Second Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program
– Staff Report”, IMF Country Report No. 14/91, IMF,
Washington DC.
International Organization for Migration. (2013),
“Assessing Potential Changes in the Migration Patterns of Myanmar Migrants and Their Impact on Thailand,” International Organization for Migration and the
Asian Research Center for Migration, Thailand.
Jones, L. (2014),
“The Political Economy of Myanmar’s Transition,”
Journal of Contemporary Asia, No. 1 , pp. 144-70.
J.P Morgan, (2012),
“Myanmar: Clouds begin to Lift - History, Politics,
Sanctions, Economics, and the Possibility of Change,”
Asia Pacific Emerging Markets Research

World Bank Report | 57

J.P Morgan, (2013),
“Myanmar: Gauging the Impact of Recent Economic
Reforms,” Economic Research Global Data Watch

MGI. 2013.
“Myanmar’s Moment: Unique Opportunities, Major
Challenges.” McKinsey Global Institute, June 2013.

Kan Zaw, (2008),
“Challenges, Prospects and Strategies for CLMV Development: The Case of Myanmar,” in Sotharith, C. (ed),
Development Strategy for CLMV in the Age of Economic Integration, ERIA Research Project Report 2007-4,
Chiba: IDE-JETRO, pp. 443-496

Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT)
Baseline Survey, 2012. Nishino, Y. and G. Koehler,
(2011),
Myanmar development policy review: Social protection,
UNICEF.

Katz, R. L. et al. (2010).
The Impact of Broadband on Jobs and the German
Economy.
Korea Development Institute. (2012),
“Priority Assignments for Economic Development of
Myanmar,” Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Seoul
KPMG. (2013),
“Infrastructure in Myanmar,” KPMG Advisory (Myanmar) Ltd.
Kubo, K. (2012),
“Trade Policies and Trade Mis-reporting in Myanmar,”
Institute of Developing Economies (IDE) Discussion
Paper No. 326, Chiba, Japan
Kudo, T. (2009),
“Location Advantages and Disadvantages in Myanmar:
The Case of Garment Industry,” IDE Discussion Paper
No. 203, Chiba, Japan
Kudo, T., et al. (2012),
“Distribution of Myanmar Rice Mills in the Age of Economic Integration.” In Economic Integration and the
Location of Industries, The Case of Less Developed
East Asian Countries, ed. Ikuo Kuroiwa.

McMillan, M. S., & Rodrik, D. (2011).
Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity
Growth (No. w17143). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Marsh, P. (2014),
“Growth Diagnostics in Myanmar: What are the
Most Binding Constraints to Private Sector Development in Southeast Asia’s Final Fronier?”, MA
Thesis, University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, Germany
McKinsey Global Institute, (2013),
“Myanmar’s Moment: Unique opportunities, major
challenges”, McKinsey & Company
Meehan, P. (2010),
The WASH Sector in Myanmar: Addressing the Challenge of Building Sustainable WASH Services. WaterAid.
Mon M. (2000),
“Determinants of Female Labor Participation in Burma: An Empirical Analysis of Socio-Economic Survey
Data,” ABAC Journal, Vol. 21, No. 1.
Myanmar Legal Services Ltd (2013),
“Doing Business in Myanmar,” Myanmar Legal Services Ltd.

Kudo, T. & Kumagai, S. (2012),
“Two-Polar Growth Strategy in Myanmar: Seeking
“High” and “Balanced” Development,” IDE Discussion
Paper No. 371, Chiba, Japan

Nakanishi, Y. (2013),
“Post-1988 Civil-Military Relations in Myanmar,” IDE
Discussion Paper No. 379, Chiba, Japan

Kudo, T. & Kumagai, S. (2013),
“Export-Oriented Growth Strategy for Myanmar Joining East Asia’s Production Networks,” Policy Review
Series on Myanmar Economy, No.09

Nishino, Y. & Koehler G. (2011), “Social Protection in
Myanmar: Making the Case for Holistic Policy Reform,”
IDS Working Paper No 004, Vol. 2011, No. 386.

Kubo, K. (2012),
“Restructuring the State Budget System for Disinflation and Exchange Rate Unification in Myanmar,” IDE
Discussion Paper No. 320, Chiba, Japan
Lall, M. & South, A., (2012),
“Education, Conflict, and Identity: Non-State Ethnic
Education Regimes in Burma.”
Larkin, S. 2010.
“The Rice Supply Chain: Study of Yangon Port.” Working Paper.

National Commission for Environmental Affairs
(NCEA) et al. (2009),
“National Sustainable Development Strategy for Myanmar” (2009)
Nehru, V. (2012),
“Myanmar’s Economic Policy Priorities,” The Carnegie
Papers, Carnegie Endowment
New Perimeter et al. (2013),
“Myanmar Rule of Law Assessment,” New Perimeter,
Perseus Strategies, and The Jacob Blaustein for the
Advancement of Human Rights

58 | World Bank Report

Nishino, Y. & G. Koehler (2011),
Myanmar development policy review: Social protection,
UNICEF.
Nixon, H. & Joelene, C. (2014),
“Fiscal Decentralization in Myanmar: Towards a Roadmap for Reform,” Discussion Paper No. 5, MDRI-CESD
and The Asia Foundation
Nixon, H. et al. (2013),
“State and Region Governments in Myanmar,” MDRICESD and The Asia Foundation, Yangon
OECD. (2013a),
“Multi-dimensional Review of Myanmar: Volume I:
Initial Assessment”, OECD
OECD. (2014),
OECD Investment Policy Reviews: Myanmar 2014,”
OECD Publishing
Okamoto, I. (2005),
“Transformation of the Rice Marketing System and
Myanmar’s Transition to a Market Economy.” Institute of Developing Studies, December 2005.
Okamoto, I. (2009),
“Transformation of the Rice Marketing System
after Market Liberalization in Myanmar.” In The
Economic Transition in Myanmar After 1988, Market Economy versus State Control, eds. K. Fjita, F.
Mieno, and I. Okamoto.
Oo, U. T. H and T. Kudo. 2003. “Agro-Based Industry
in Myanmar Prospects and Challenges.” Institute of
Developing Economies, IDE-JETRO.
Oxford Analytica. (2013), “Myanmar Central Bank
Overhaul Exposes Reform Challenge,” Oxford Analytica Daily Brief, Friday, August 16, 2013.
Oxford Analytica. (2013),
“Myanmar Political Buddhism to Shape Transition,”
Oxford Analytica Daily Brief, Tuesday, June 25,
2013.
Perkins, (2012),
“Industrial Policy Reform in Myanmar,” Harvard
Kennedy School ASH Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, and Rajawali Foundation
Institute for Asia.
PWC. (2012),
“Myanmar: Business Guide”, Price Waterhouse
Coopers, Singapore
Rieffel, L. (2012),
“The Myanmar Economy: Tough Choices,” Global
Economy and Development, Working Paper 51

Robinson et al. (2007),
“The Irrawaddy River Sediment Flux to the Indian
Ocean: The Original Nineteenth-Century Data Revisited”, The Journal of Geology, volume 115, pP. 629–640,
The University of Chicago.
Rodrik, D. (2013).
Structural Change, Fundamentals and Growth: An
Overview. Institute for Advanced Study, United States.
Saha, S. 2011.
“Working Through Ambiguity: International NGOs in
Myanmar”. The Hauser Center for Nonprofit Organizations at Harvard University.
Sheehan, J. & Greenlee. (2014),
“Doing Business in Myanmar,” Myanmar Insider,
Volume 1, Issue 2, December-January, 2014, p. 4.
Slayton, T. 1984.
“Rice Trade and Economy of Selected Asian Countries.” Foreign Agriculture Circular, FAS/USDA.
Soe, N.Z. (2000),
“The Role of Agriculture in the Development of [the]
Myanmar Economy,” MA Thesis, School of Public
Policy and Management, Korea Development Institute,
Seoul.
Soe, T. (Undated),
“Myanmar in Economic Transition: Constraints and
Related Issues Affecting the Agriculture Sector,”
Yangon University of Distance Education, Yangon,
Myanmar
Soe, U. T. and B. Fisher. 1989.
“Burmese Rice Policies – An Economic Analysis of Developments since Independence.” Paper presented at
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Australian Agricultural Economics Society, Christchurch, New Zealand,
February 6-9, 1989.
Steinberg, D.I. (1997),
“Myanmar: The Anomalies of Politics and Economics,”
Working Paper No. 5, The Asia Foundation Working
Paper Series
Subbarao, K., C. et al. (2013),
“Public works as a safety net: Design, evidence and
implementation,” World Bank.
The Burma Environmental Working Group. (2011),
“Burma’s Environment: People, Problems, Policies,”
Wanida Press: Chiang Mai
Thein, S. (2006),
“Agro-based Industries in Myanmar: The Long Road to
Industrialization.” IDE, March 2006.
Thein, S. & Kudo, T. (2008),
“Myanmar Sugar SMEs: History, Technology, Location

World Bank Report | 59

and Government Policy,” IDE Discussion Paper No.
147, Chiba, Japan
Thein, S. (2012),
“Industrial Readjustment in Myanmar: Agro-Industrial Preparedness for Integrating with the AEC,” in
Industrial Readjustment in the Mekong River Basin Countries: Toward the AEC, edited by Ueki. Y &
Bhongmakapat, BRC Research Report No. 7, Bangkok
Research Center, IDE-JETRO, Bangkok.

Vriens & Partners. (2012),
“Political Analysis of Myanmar’s New Foreign Investment Law,” Vriens & Partners, Yangon.
Winn, K. 1991. “A Century of Rice Improvement in Burma.” The International Rice Research Institute, Manila.
Women’s Protection Technical Working Group. (2010),
“Women’s Protection Assesments: Post Cyclone Nargis, Myanmar.”

Timmer, P. (2012),
“Rice Consumption: Changing Preferences and Implications for the Industry.” Presented at the World Bank
Workshop on Rice and Risk in Asia, HCMC Vietnam,
October 17-18, 2012.

Wong, L., and E. Wai. 2013.
“Rapid Value Chain Assessment: Structure and Dynamics of the Rice Value Chain in Burma.” Background
paper 6 for the USAID-sponsored “Strategic Agricultural Sector and Food Security Diagnostic.”

Turnell, S. (2011),
“Fundamentals of Myanmar’s Macroeconomy: A Political Economy Perspective,” Asian Economic Policy
Review, 6, pp. 136–153

Woods, K., (2013),
“Emerging Agribusiness Trends in Myanmar: An Overview,” Kunming: Yunnan University Press.

Turnell, S., (Undated),
“Burma’s Poverty of Riches: Natural Gas and the Voracious State”
Turnell, S., (2008),
“Burma’s Economy 2008: Current Situation and
Prospects for Reform,” Burma Economic Watch,
Economics Department, Macquarie University, Sidney,
Australia
Turnell, S., (2010),
“Dissecting the Data: Burma’s Macroeconomy at the
Cusp of the 2010 ‘Elections’,” Economics Department,
Macquarie University, Sidney, Australia

World Bank, (1985),
“Burma: Policies and Prospects for Economic Adjustment and Growth,” Country Report 4814-BA.
World Bank (1993),
“Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Review, Myanmar”, Washington D.C.
World Bank (1995),
“Myanmar: Policies for Sustaining Economic Reform”
Country Economic Report, Washington D.C.
World Bank. (2011),
“World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security,
and Development,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Turnell, S., (2011),
“Fundamentals of Myanmar’s Macroeconomy: A Political Economy Perspective,” Asian Economic Policy
Review, 6, pp.136-153

World Bank. (2012a),
“Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT)
Baseline Survey,” World Bank and Livelihood and Food
Security Fund.

UN (2007).
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Report.

World Bank. (2012b),
“World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
Development,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

UNDP. (2011),
Integrated Households Living Conditions Survey in
Myanmar (2009-2010) Poverty Profile, IHLCA Project
Technical Unit, Yangon.

World Bank & MDRI. (2012),
“Qualitative Social and Economic Monitoring reports,”
LIFT

UNICEF (2011),
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2009-2010, Myanmar.
UNODC (2013),
Opium Survey.
Vokes, R. & Goletti, F. (2013),
“Agriculture and Rural Development in Myanmar:
Policy Issues and Challenges,”Agrifood Consulting
International, Kensington, Maryland, U.S.A.

World Bank. (2013a),
“Social Assessment for Myanmar Decentralizing Funding to Schools Project,” Yangon
World Bank. (2013b),
“Poverty Assessment Note.” Draft Report, October 18,
2013 Version. Yangon, Myanmar.
World Bank. (2013c),
“Diagnostic of the Myanmar Agricultural Development
Bank.” Draft version as of October 15, 2013, World

60 | World Bank Report

Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. (2013d),
“Global Monitoring Report 2013: Rural-Urban Dynamics and the Millennium Development Goals” World
Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. (2013e),
“Program Document for a Proposed Credit in the
Amount of SDR 287.75 million to the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar for a Reengagement and Reform
Support Program,” World Bank, Washington, D.C.
World Bank. (2013f),
“Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity,” Social Development, World Bank, Washington,
DC.
World Bank & IFC. (2013),
“Doing Business 2013,” Doing Business Survey Report
Comparing Business Regulations for Domestic Firms
in 185 Economies, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. (2014a),
“Myanmar: Capitalizing on Rice Export Opportunities,”
Economic and Sector Work Report No. 85804, Sustainable Development Network, East Asia and Pacific
Region, World, Washington, DC.
World Bank. (2014b),
“The State of Social Safety Nets 2014,” World Bank,
Washington, DC.
World Bank. (Forthcoming),
“Myanmar: Public Expenditure Review – Education”.
World Development Report (2012),
Young, K. et al. (1998),
“An Economic Assessment of the Myanmar Rice Sector: Current Developments and Prospects,” Research
Bulletin 958, Arkansans Agricultural Experiment
Station, University of Arkansas.
Zuijlen, M., (2006),
“Assessing Gender Equality in Myanmar,” Gender Assessment Undertaken for DFID South East Asia

World Bank Report | 61

ANNEX
Table A. 1: List of knowledge and data gaps that need to be filled

62 | World Bank Report

World Bank Report | 63

64 | World Bank Report

World Bank Report | 65

Table A. 2: Summary of SCD consultation meetings and key focus areas identified by stakeholders

66 | World Bank Report

World Bank Report | 67

Photo by: Ni Ni Myint/World Bank, 2014

World Bank Office Yangon

No.57, Pyay Road
(Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road)
61/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
+95 (1) 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar

