d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 55931-ET 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR THE 

FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 

September 28, 2010 

Ethiopia Country Management Unit 
Africa Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Country Assistance Strategy for Ethiopia was discussed on April 29, 2008 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
[US$1.00 = Ethiopian Birr 13.5 (July 2010)] 
FISCAL YEAR 
July 8 – July 7 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
Analytic and Advisory Activities 
AfDB African Development Bank 
AGP 
Agricultural Growth Project 
APL 
Adaptable Program Loan 
CAS 
Country Assistance Strategy 
CASPR Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report 
CIC 
Credit Information Center 
CIDA Canadian International Development Agency 
COM 
Country Operations manager 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
DAC 
Development Assistance Committee 
DAG 
Development Assistance Group 
DCI 
Domestic Construction Industry 
DFID Department for International Development  
EC 
European Commission 
EFA 
Education For All 
EIB 
European Investment Bank 
ETB 
Ethiopian Birr 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FPEW Flood Preparedness and Early Warning 
FTI 
Fast Track Initiative 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GEQIP General Education Quality Improvement 
Program 
GFRP Global Food Crisis Response Program 
GoE 
Government of Ethiopia 
GPOBA Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid 
GTP 
Growth and Transformation Plan (2010-2015) 
GTZ 
German Agency for Technical Cooperation 
ICA 
Investment Climate Assessment 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technologies 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IFAD 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFPRI 
International Food Policy Research Institute 
IFRS 
International Financial Reporting Standards 
IHP 
International Health Partnership 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
ISA 
International Standards of Auditing 
JICA 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
Kebele Village level council 
LIG 
Local Investment Grant 
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
MAP Multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS Program 

MDGs Millennium Development Goals  
MEFF Macroeconomic and Fiscal Framework 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MoFED Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
MoH Ministry of Health 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MoWUD Ministry of Works and Urban Development 
NAFP National Adaptation Framework Program 
NAPA National Adaptation Plan of Action 
NBE 
National Bank of Ethiopia 
NBI 
Nile Basin Initiative 
NEPAD New Partnership for Africa’s Development 
OBA 
Output Based Aid 
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development  
OFAG Office of the Federal Auditor General 
PASDEP Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development 
to End Poverty (2005-2010) 
PBS 
Protection of Basic Services 
PCDP 
Pastoral Community Development Program 
PPD 
Public-Private Dialogue 
PRSC 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit 
PSCAP Public Sector Capacity Building Program 
PSNP 
Productive Safety Nets Program 
PTA 
Parent-Teacher Association 
RCBP Rural Capacity Building Project 
REDFS Rural Economic Development and Food Security 
SIDA 
Swedish International Development Cooperation 
Agency 
SIL 
Specific Investment Loan 
SLMP 
Sustainable Land Management Project 
SNNPR Southern  Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ 
Region 
SWAp Sector-Wide Approach 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TF 
Trust Fund 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
UNFPA united Nations Population Fund 
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Fund 
UNIDO United National Industrial Development 
Organization 
USAID United States Agency for International 
Development 
Woreda District with elected council 
WCBS Woreda-City Benchmarking Survey 
WFP World Food Program 
WHO World Health Organization

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 
Co-TTL 

Obiageli Ezekwesili 
Kenichi Ohashi 
Greg Toulmin 
Janet Entwistle 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

Table of Contents  

I. 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. 1 
II. ECONOMIC AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS ................................................ 1 
III. CAS PROGRESS IMPLEMENTATION AND PROPOSED ADJUSTMENTS . 4 
        a. Assessment of CAS Progress To-Date ............................................................... 4 
        b. Portfolio Performance and Implementation ....................................................... 7 
        c. Adjustments to the CAS Program .................................................................... 11 
IV. STRATEGY GOING FORWARD: FUTURE BANK ENGAGEMENT .......... 14 
V. RISKS AND MITIGATION ............................................................................... 17 

TABLES AND BOXES  
Table 1. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2005-2013 ............................................. 2 
Table 2. Revised CAS Lending Program, FY08-12 ..................................................... 12 
Box 1.   IDA Core Indicators ......................................................................................... 9 

ANNEXES 
Annex  1. CAS Results Matrix and Progress To-Date ................................................. 19 
Annex  2. Revised Core CAS Outcomes, Indicators and Milestones .......................... 31 
Annex  3: Summary of Revised Core CAS Outcomes ................................................. 33 
Annex  4. Progress Towards Achieving the MDGs ..................................................... 34 
Annex  5. Ethiopia at a Glance ..................................................................................... 35 
Annex  6. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance .................................... 37 
Annex  7. Summary of Non-Lending Services ............................................................ 38 
Annex  8. Key Economic Indicators ............................................................................ 39 
Annex  9. Key Social Indicators ................................................................................... 41 
Annex 10. Key Exposure Indicators ............................................................................. 42 
Annex 11. Operations Portfolio ................................................................................... 43 
Annex 12. Trust Fund Portfolio ................................................................................... 44 
Annex 13. IFC Program and Portfolio ......................................................................... 45 

Map 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 

I. INTRODUCTION  

1. 
The Board of Executive Directors discussed the FY08-11 Country Assistance 
Strategy (CAS) for Ethiopia on April 29, 2008 (Report No. 43051-ET).  The CAS, the first 
results-based strategy for Ethiopia, supports the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) to achieve many 
of the outcomes envisioned in its 2005-10 Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to 
End Poverty (PASDEP). This CAS Progress Report (CASPR) takes stock of the implementation 
progress made under the CAS, and presents a revised program.  It extends the CAS to FY12 due 
to slower than expected progress toward CAS outcomes, and to allow sufficient time to 
undertake poverty diagnostics and prepare a full CAS program, in collaboration with the GoE, to 
support agreed priorities within its 2010-15 Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP).  This 
extension will also ensure the new CAS can fully reflect the priorities specified under IDA 16, 
and in the Bank’s Africa Region forthcoming strategy. 
2. 
The key objectives of the CAS were designed to sustain a dual take-off process of 
rapid economic growth and a simultaneous improvement in service delivery, as well as to 
reinforce trends promoting societal change.  These objectives, (i) fostering economic growth, 
(ii) improving access to and quality of basic services, (iii) reducing vulnerability, and (iv) 
fostering improved governance, remain broadly relevant, and in alignment with the country 
objectives in PASDEP.  During CAS implementation, the program has emphasized, across these 
four objectives, help for Ethiopia to address the deeper and complex issue of encouraging 
bottom-up initiatives that are becoming increasingly necessary as a complement to traditionally 
strong top-down action.   
3. 
Some adjustments to the lending program have been instrumental in helping to 
mitigate shocks related to the food, fuel and finance crises of recent years.  To help avoid a 
possible crisis due to drought and food shortages, the lending program was adapted in November 
2008 to include an emergency food crisis response program. This addition was facilitated by a 
larger International Development Association (IDA) 15 allocation than programmed in FY08, 
frontloading, and a portfolio restructuring which also helped to enhance portfolio performance. 
The significant differences of views between the government and the Bank on some 
longstanding, structural issues mean that the conditions for a possible Poverty Reduction Support 
Credit (PRSC) have not yet materialized and the program has comprised sector investments, a 
large part of which are programmatic in nature and supported by other donors, and analytical and 
advisory activities (AAA). Additional financing has proved an efficient lending instrument, and 
enabled some operations to be prepared more rapidly than originally programmed to help 
mitigate the effects of the global crises. The FY11 and FY12 programs will continue to support 
the dual take-off process through new lending, including through piloting results based 
investment lending, implementation support and AAA. In light of frontloading, new lending in 
FY11 will be lower than the earlier years of the CAS period and in FY12 will be subject to the 
IDA16 replenishment and allocation process. 

II.  ECONOMIC AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS 

4. 
Ethiopia has a long history of rich civilization that has coexisted with suffering from 
recurring disasters.  In the last two decades, Ethiopia has achieved remarkable progress against 
social and economic indicators.  The country is on track to achieve, or come close to, many of 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  The economy has diversified significantly and 
1 

 
 
 
delivered sustained rapid growth for the past six years, even through the global financial crisis.  
Yet, there is a sense of imbalance in this progress.  Successful economies bring together private 
sector initiative complemented by effective delivery by government.  However, progress in 
decentralizing social sector service delivery has not yet been matched by equivalent progress in 
social accountability for services, and strong expansion of public investment has not been 
mirrored by vigorous growth in private investment.  These divergent trends might stem from the 
many years of highly centralized rule, as well as the planned economy, that Ethiopia had 
experienced. 
5. 
Ethiopia macroeconomic situation deteriorated dramatically after the onset of the 
global economic crisis and despite a steady recovery in recent months, the situation 
remains fragile. Ethiopia’s end-of-period inflation rate, which generally hovers in single-digit 
number, increased to 64 percent in July 2008. Its foreign exchange reserves fell steadily over 
time to hit a bottom of less than $770 million (or less than 4 weeks of imports cover) by October 
2008. The government was forced to depreciate the local currency by nearly 30 percent between 
January 2009 and August 2009 to address the overvaluation of the real exchange rate. The 
situation started to turnaround as global economic recovery resumed and the GoE stabilization 
program, supported by the IMF’s Exogenous Shock Facility, started to bear fruit. The end of 
period inflation fell steadily and remains stable in the range of 6-8 percent in recent months. 
Foreign exchange reserves have been accumulated to provide more than two months of import 
cover. But problems remain. Major distortions and structural impediments to growth remain to 
be tackled. According to the IMF, monetary policy is dysfunctional and the exchange regime is 
heavily distorted with an active parallel market.  Table 1 provides a summary of selected 
macroeconomic indicators. 
Table 1.  Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2005-2013 

Source: IMF 

6. 
Although Ethiopia did overcome the food, fuel and finance crisis, the food crisis in 
2008 proved to be broader, deeper and more complex than in other countries. In 2008 
Ethiopia experienced the failure of the small (belg) season rains, high inflation for food, in 
particular, which peaked at 91.7 percent for the 12 months ending July 2008, as well as a high 
trade deficit and severe foreign exchange shortages. Towards the end of the year 6.4 million 
people were dependent on emergency food assistance, in addition to 7.3 million chronically food 
insecure people.  The macro-economic situation threatened overall economic development, 
2 

 
 
 
including through the foreign exchange crunch that threatened the import of commodities such as 
fertilizers that are crucial for further development. 
7. 
Ethiopia’s external position has improved but remains fragile. Merchandise exports 
fell only 1.0 percent during FY09 compared to the global average decline of 14 percent. In the 
first 7 months of FY10, exports increased 11 percent and with the increase in imports, the current 
account deficit, excluding grants, worsened from 10 to 13 percent of GDP. Previously dwindling 
foreign exchange reserves have recovered to about 2 months on import coverage. The growth 
rates of exports, private transfers and foreign direct investment have yet to reach their pre-crisis 
levels. Despite an improved reserve situation, and 30 percent depreciation of the currency, 
persistent shortages of foreign exchange are a severe constraint on the private sector, and an 
active parallel market persists, reflecting a restrictive exchange regime. 
8. 
There remains a large divergence between the growth of overall demand and 
relative weakness in growth of supply. This shows up in the trade deficit and persistently high 
non-food inflation. To curb rapid growth of aggregate demand, the government has imposed 
limits on bank lending, which has reduced access to credit and compounded the worrisome 
demonetization trend since 2002.  
9. 
Significant macroeconomic challenges remain and key structural changes are 
needed to protect the high growth rate. A 14-month arrangement under the International 
Monetary Fund’s (IMF) High Access Component of the Exogenous Shocks Facility was 
approved in August 2009 for US$235 million and the first review was completed in June 2010.  
IMF forecasts indicate continued strong growth of 7 percent for 2009/10 and 7.7 percent for 
2010/11.  But achieving this pace in the medium-term would require stepped up structural 
changes, including a reform of monetary policy, a liberalization of the exchange regime, more 
room for private sector development and a better investment climate, a more flexible industrial 
policy, modernization of the financial sector, creation of a competitive telecommunications 
sector and establishment of a transparent and effective system of land development and 
administration.  Ethiopia’s continuing vulnerability, to both climatic and external economic or 
financial shocks, makes the need for a robust macroeconomic stance all the more compelling. 
10. 
Ethiopia is making significant progress on all the MDGs. It is projected to be one of 
the few African countries on track to meet goals relating to extreme poverty and hunger.  
However, a significant portion of the population is still chronically food insecure and food 
security remains a key challenge. Ethiopia is also on track to meet the goals on combating 
HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases (with the exception of TB), and developing a global 
partnership for development. Good progress is also being made towards universal primary 
education, reducing child mortality and ensuring environmental sustainability. Ethiopia is likely 
to fall short, as of 2015, on the targets for eliminating gender disparity in education and 
improving maternal health in spite of major efforts in these areas. 
11. 
Ethiopia has a mixed track record in improving governance.  Regional and woreda 
administrations are becoming increasingly influential as their capacity strengthens.  However, at 
the federal level, there have been continuing concerns that the space for debate has narrowed, 
particularly for civil society organizations (CSOs), the media, and the opposition groups.  The 
May 2010 elections resulted in the ruling party winning a near complete sweep with it and its 
affiliate parties securing all but two of the parliamentary seats.  The 2009 Proclamation for the 
Registration and Regulation of Charities and Societies, provided the first clear framework for 
such organizations, but also restricted the operations of CSOs, particularly excluding those 
receiving more than 10 percent of funding from external sources from some areas of activity, 
3 

 
 
such as advocacy on human rights, gender or ethnic equality, conflict resolution, the 
strengthening of judicial practices or law enforcement, which areas the GoE considers internal 
issues open only to Ethiopian citizens.  Recently GoE revised the federal procurement law to 
improve the structures for procurement management.  However, enforcement of the procurement 
law continues to be weak and largely ineffective, mainly due to inadequate remuneration and 
incentives. The procurement oversight bodies both at the federal and regional levels remain 
undermanned and cannot attract and retain qualified and experienced staff. Ethiopia’s recent bid 
to become a member of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) is encouraging, 
though its membership status is pending. 
12. 
Policies and commitments related to gender are in place, but implementation is 
lagging due to poor institutional capacity. Several challenges still remain to strengthen the 
effectiveness of gender work at all levels of government.  These include weak networking among 
institutions meant to ensure gender equality, inadequate mainstreaming of gender in all 
development programs and their implementation strategies, and absence of reporting system 
among government and non-government actors working on women 
thus weakening 
accountability for achievement of gender equitable results. 
13. 
Ethiopia confronts the challenge of being one of the countries in Africa potentially 
most vulnerable to future climatic changes.  Existing climatic variability already hampers 
growth through extreme weather events such as droughts and floods.  However, given its large 
potential in renewable energy, Ethiopia can lead the way - within Africa and the developing 
world - in promoting low or neutral carbon growth. At the global level, GoE has taken a 
leadership role among African countries in international negotiations on the future climate 
governance framework. Domestically, GoE has, as a first step, established institutional 
mechanisms to ensure the climate change agenda is pursued in a coordinated but decentralized 
manner.  It has an approved National Adaptation Framework Program (NAFP), covering 20 
vulnerable sectors, and a National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) including 83 concrete 
projects that have been registered with the UNFCCC Secretariat in line with the Copenhagen 
Accord. GoE has also begun development of a National Climate Change Strategy and Action 
Plan (NCCSAP), which will elaborate on the transfer of environmentally sound mitigation and 
adaptation technology needed for carbon resiliency. Key policies and regulatory frameworks 
related to environmental sustainability are in place, including the 2008 Ethiopian Sustainable 
Investment Framework (ESIF) for sustainable land management (SLM), a long-term strategy for 
SLM, which seeks to provide guidance in addressing the interlinked problems of poverty, 
ecological vulnerability, land degradation and deforestation at the rural community level. 
Enforcement has been weak as a result of institutional capacity constraints, including weak 
political will and lack of space for active citizenry involvement.  

III.    CAS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND PROPOSED ADJUSTMENTS 

A.    Assessment of CAS Progress To-Date 

14. 
Progress in FY08-10 towards CAS outcomes has been mixed. Mixed progress is partly 
a reflection of the relatively ambitious selection of outcomes, many of which are drawn directly 
from the PASDEP given the programmatic nature of the Bank’s assistance, as well as portfolio 
implementation challenges and country realities.  See Annex 1 for details including an update of 
progress where information is available. 
15. 
The Government has made remarkable strides in strengthening the essential 
building blocks for sustained development supported by the CAS.  There has been relatively 
4 

 
 
strong progress in increasing access to basic services in an equitable manner.  There has also 
been strong progress in overcoming food insecurity and building a transport, energy, and 
communication backbone that is a pre-condition for economic take-off. Progress has been 
particularly strong in increasing access to potable water, sanitation and health services, although 
access to services has taken priority over increasing their quality. 
16. 
The Government has also made progress toward other CAS objectives such as 
investments in infrastructure and decentralization initiatives that could facilitate a  
well-functioning market economy and improve governance.  It has not been easy, however, 
for the Government to overcome the deep-rooted legacy of central control, tightly managed 
information, and constricted space for citizen engagement and private initiatives. In its economic 
policy, the Government has focused on creating good infrastructure and providing public support 
for strategic sectors but has done less to strengthen the private sector. In its decentralization 
program, the Government has emphasized greater transparency, accountability and citizen 
participation as the foundation for improved governance and better service delivery, but progress 
has been slow.  As Ethiopia becomes a more complex society and economy, in an increasingly 
challenging global environment, it will be progressively more difficult to drive forward the 
economy largely through government interventions.  The ability of Ethiopia’s citizens and 
businesses to access accurate information and organize to respond to developments will be an 
increasingly important determinant of the country’s resilience and competitiveness. 
A.1   Fostering Economic Growth 
17. 
Progress has been mixed toward a key objective of the CAS of supporting structural 
and macroeconomic policies that are conducive to sustain internal and external balance.  
The Bank supported the IMF’s lead in providing crucial policy advice on improving 
macroeconomic management that has contributed to reducing inflation and reducing imbalances.  
The tax policy and administration reforms, vital to reducing the demand on domestic monetary 
financing, are beginning to show some promising results with tax revenue to Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) improving in 2009/10 – the only annual improvement in the last seven years.  
Domestic fuel subsidies were eliminated in October 2008.  Monetary policy has been tightened, 
though a fundamental reform is needed to contain high powered liquidity and abolish the 
deleterious bank-by-bank credit ceilings.  The Bank has, however, not yet been successful in 
reaching agreement with GoE on how to advance structural changes in such areas  as creating 
competitive financial and telecommunications sectors and hence the progress on CAS outcomes 
in these areas remain less than satisfactory.  
18. 
Progress has been strong toward the CAS objective of sustainably accelerating the 
level and productivity of infrastructure. Strong government commitment and capacity 
building efforts supported by a series of Bank Adaptable Program Loans (APL) are leading to 
strengthened road sector institutions and increasing contracts for the domestic road construction 
industry. The level of investment in road infrastructure is high and road density and 
disbursements to domestic contractors as a percentage of the total are increasing.  Regional 
power initiatives are proceeding well.  With support from the Nile Basin Initiative-Ethiopia-
Sudan Interconnection project, a transmission line link with Sudan is near completion. 
19. With Bank support, the government has put in place a number of factors that are 
expected to lead to increased agricultural productivity.  GoE has strengthened the agricultural 
extension and research system.  It has also increased the first of two phases of certification of 
cultivated land from 44 percent in 2007 to 66 percent in 2009.  The development of irrigation has 
been further promoted.  For instance, feasibility studies covering 104,000 ha. are in the pipeline 
5 

 
 
or have been drafted.  Improvements have already led to increases in agriculture production and 
value in some areas.  The Rural Capacity Building, Sustainable Land Management and Tana 
Beles Integrated Water Resources Development projects contributed to these achievements, 
including through the development of sustainable watershed management plans with strong 
community participation. 
20. 
There has been some progress supported by the Bank toward improving the 
environment for private sector development, but much remains to be done.  Together with 
the International Finance Corporation (IFC), United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO), United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the Ministry of 
Trade and Industry, the Bank supported the establishment of the Ethiopia Public-Private 
Dialogue Forum.  This Forum brings together representatives of the private sector in a structured 
dialogue with the Government to improve the business environment.  Already, Ethiopia’s Doing 
Business Rank has improved slightly to 107 out of 183 in 2010 from 111 out of 181 in 2009; it is 
anticipated that the Forum will provide a stimulus to accelerated reforms.  There have been some 
other signs that GoE is opening space for expanded private sector involvement in economic 
growth.  For instance, while not allowing private sector ownership in telecommunications, GoE 
awarded the management of the Ethiopian Telecommunication Corporation in April 2010 
through a competitive process to an international management company (France Telecom).  GoE 
has provided incentives for private sector investment in select industries including floriculture.  
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has increased substantially, from US$365 million in 2005/06 to 
about US$880 million in 2008/09, largely due to GoE incentives tied to large scale commercial 
agriculture for export—however, GoE has not sought our support in the latter area, nor have we 
analyzed it in any detail.  According to Investing Across Borders foreign equity ownership 
restrictions are above the average for other sub-Saharan African countries, and FDI is prohibited 
in 13 sectors, including telecommunications, financial services, transportation and retail.  
Progress over the next two years will be critical to the establishment of a flexible economic and 
industrial policy, including the implementation of National Payments Systems and the Credit 
Information Center (CIC), a Competition Law, and legislation allowing the private sector to 
participate in value-added telecommunications services. 

A.2.   Improving Access to and Quality of Basic Services 
21. 
Access to primary education increased dramatically in the years prior to the CAS, 
but girls’ access to education continues to lag, and progress on quality improvements is 
mixed but promising.  There has been some progress on equal access to primary education as 
measured by the ratio of girls to boys, but girls’ enrollment still lags.  This continues to be an 
area of key Bank focus given the abundant research on the singular importance of a mother’s 
educational background in reducing infant and child mortality, reducing fertility and improving 
school attendance for girls. The Pastoral Community Development program is helping to address 
the special needs of pastoralist children, and is reaching an increasing number of woredas.  
Nonetheless, efforts need to be expanded, including through the use of block grants under the 
Protection of Basic Services Program (PBS), for the pace of girls’ enrollment to improve.  With 
Bank support, GoE has embarked on the General Education Quality Improvement Program 
which is at an early stage of implementation. Quality of education is improving as measured by 
the Grade Five completion rates, and student-teacher ratios have slightly improved, although 
inadequate resource availability is hindering faster progress in this area. 
22. Organization of user groups to operate and maintain water points and promote 
hygiene is leading to an increase in access to potable water and sanitation.  The Bank-
financed Water Supply and Sanitation Program has bolstered GoE commitment to a 
6 

 
 
 
decentralized capacity building system which has led to improvements in water and sanitation 
services.  Communities participating in this program are organized to plan, manage and operate 
their water supply and sanitation schemes, and coordinate with health extension workers to 
promote good hygiene.  Nonetheless, implementation pace is slower than expected and there is 
more to be done to strengthen capacity in the rural areas and public awareness about good 
sanitation practices. 
23. 
Access to health care is improving through a clear vision, sound strategy and strong 
leadership and there are some signs of quality improvements.  But progress in some areas is 
falling short of targets, and data is not yet available in other areas.  Through the PBS 2 program, 
the government has increased block grants to regions and woredas every year, enabling the 
purchase of medical equipment and supplies, an increase in the number of primary health 
extension workers, and strong progress in increasing immunizations.  Ethiopia has been making 
an extensive effort to control malaria through implementation of a malaria control and 
elimination strategy, but data is not yet available to measure progress since the CAS baseline. 
The HIV/AIDS awareness program has supported woredas to carry out information campaigns to 
sensitize the target groups.  Data is expected to be available to assess progress in FY11.  Overall, 
access to maternal health services has not increased as much as expected, through the percentage 
of pregnant women receiving iron and folate supplementation is on track.  Maternal mortality 
continues to be high, but there are signs that the quality of services in this area is improving, 
although probably not enough for Ethiopia to reach the MDG on improving maternal health. 
A.3.   Reducing Vulnerability 
24. 
Ethiopia’s vulnerability to adverse weather remains significant, and possibly more 
so as the effects of climate change become more pronounced.  The Bank has supported GoE 
to put in place a number of measures to help reduce Ethiopia’s vulnerability to shocks.  Under 
the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP), a long-term program for food security has been 
developed and a National Policy and Strategy on Disaster Risk Management, essential in light of 
the potential impacts of climate change, has been prepared and is pending ratification.  PSNP 
also provides food and cash payments to food-insecure households in exchange for their efforts 
on community projects.  The Bank has helped integrate this effort with a long-standing 
government-managed household asset building program designed to support food-insecure 
households by increasing their productive assets.  And rural food security has improved with the 
introduction of alternative crops and financial support 
to expand non-farm 
income.  
Notwithstanding these important achievements in reducing rural food insecurity, urban food 
security has become a growing concern and inadequate benchmarks and follow-up data 
availability have delayed graduation of beneficiaries. Bank support has also helped the GoE 
address land degradation.  Through the Sustainable Land Management and Tana Beles Integrated 
Water Resources Development projects, institutions for sustainable land management have been 
established and investment in community based flood management systems is rising. Information 
on progress toward Bank supported measures to address population growth, a main driver of land 
degradation, is pending the forthcoming Demographic Health Survey. 
A.4.   Fostering Improved Governance 
25. 
Progress has been made toward improving the performance and integrity of the 
public sector.  Business process reengineering has been adopted across GoE, including in the 
judicial sector, to eliminate excessive steps that added no value to the user and streamline work 
processes, though progress has been marred by allegations that political affiliation influenced 
which civil servants were retained or promoted. Public Financial Management is showing 

7 

 
 
improvement with the roll out of expenditure management and control reforms, and capacity 
building efforts underway to ensure continuous enhancement and sustainability.  The most recent 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) study (2010) showed an improvement 
in 9 out of 30 indicators covered.  The strengthening of the public procurement agencies, 
including the setting up of a procurement professional institution, is making slow progress, with 
Bank support available through the PBS 2 project and PSCAP Additional Financing. The GoE 
has put in place policies to support local transparency and citizen engagement at the 
woreda/kebele level, and there are indications of increased local government commitment to 
provide more information to citizens and solicit their opinions more frequently, although budget 
literacy among citizens needs greater attention.  Balanced score cards are being rolled out as a 
tool to encourage a results focus in public sector management—but they remain a work in 
progress.  There is some evidence of citizen engagement in budgeting at the woreda level. At the 
city level, there has been an increase in citizen involvement in planning, budgeting and 
monitoring. 
A.5.   Increasing Donor Harmonization through IDA-supported Multi-donor Programs 
26. 
Donor support, including from IDA, has become largely programmatic.  Both CAS 
targets in this area have been achieved.  The target that 66 percent of donor support be channeled 
through program-based approaches was achieved in FY07 as reported through the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)/Development Assistance Committee 
(DAC)-coordinated survey on monitoring the Paris Declaration.  At that time, the Bank’s 
programmatic assistance extended to five programs—roads, protection of basic services, public 
sector capacity building, water supply and sanitation and productive safety nets—which 
accounted for 58 percent of IDA disbursements.  Since then the Bank has continued to increase 
its support for programmatic approaches through lending, and now includes three other areas:  
energy and education sector development programs, and the sustainable land management 
program.  The agricultural growth program, awaiting approval, is designed on a similar basis.  
The target that 66 percent of IDA disbursements flow through program-based approaches was 
surpassed in FY10 when over 80 percent of IDA assistance flowed through the eight approved 
programs. 

B.   Portfolio Performance and Implementation 

27. 
Portfolio restructuring and actions to address portfolio issues have led to improved 
performance.  Portfolio performance has been strong following deterioration between end-FY08 
and mid-FY09. As of the end of FY10, US$2,530.1 million of the US$4,703.4 million in net 
investment lending commitments have been disbursed.  Four out of 32 projects and 9.2 percent 
of net commitments are considered at risk.  Disbursements for the US$833 million trust fund 
portfolio have been strong, with only US$222 million remaining undisbursed.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 1.  IDA CORE SECTOR INDICATORS 

Core Sector Indicators of progress towards key results, linked to the MDGs, which were introduced under 
IDA15, have been rolled out across IDA’s portfolio in Ethiopia.  The following figures provide a brief 
snapshot of preliminary results achieved through IDA programs that were active in the period of the 
current CAS. 

Sector 

Indicator 
Primary completion rate 

Education: 

Health: 

Water Supply: 

Gender parity index   

 Long-lasting insecticide-
treated malaria nets 
(ITNs) were purchased 
and/or distributed 
Health facilities 
constructed, renovated 
and/or equipped 
People provided with 
access to improved water 
sources 
Improved community 
water points  constructed 
or rehabilitated 
Water utilities receiving 
support 

FY08-10 
From 65% in 2006/07 to 78.90% in 2008/09. 
Grades 1-4:  89% 2006/07 to 90% in 2008/09. 
Grades 5-8 73%; in 2006/07 to 89% in 
2008/09. 

1.7 million ITNs were purchased and 
distributed. 

7,000 health posts and 1,999 health centers 
were equipped (out of respective totals of 
15,022 and 3,200). 
1.5 million people in rural areas and 150,000 
in urban areas have been provided with access 
to improved water sources from 2004 to 2010. 
138,873 improved community water points 
were constructed or rehabilitated 2008 to 
2010. 

38 water utilities are receiving support.  

ICT: 

Retail price of internet 
services 

Roads and 
Highways: 

Roads in good and fair 
condition as a share of 
total classified roads 

Federal Paved: 71% to 88% between 2005/10. 
Federal Gravel: 61% to 72% between 2005/10. 
Rural/regional roads: 67 to 79% between 
2005/10. 
Rural Roads Rehabilitated 42,417 km of rural roads rehabilitated.  
Rural Roads Constructed 
23,736 km of rural roads were constructed.  
The monthly cost for an internet connection 
(incl 600 minutes) went from US$4.32 to 
US$2.88.  
28. 
A November 2008 portfolio restructuring not only freed up funds for the Global 
Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP), but also focused on addressing problem projects.  
This operation was by far the largest under GFRP—see paragraph 33 below—and covered 12 
projects, from which funds were redeployed based either on cost savings, revised financing plans 
or major restructurings.  Seven of the 12 projects affected were among the slower disbursing 
projects in the portfolio, including all four projects that underwent a major restructuring.  The 
combined result was a disbursement ratio of 49 percent in FY09 and 36 percent in FY10. 

9 

 
 
 
  
29. 
IDA core sector indicators were introduced as of the beginning of FY10, and adopted 
as relevant across the portfolio--into new lending and projects already under implementation.  
Box 1 above provides a sample of progress against these indicators. 
30. 
Efforts to improve the portfolio remain concentrated in four areas highlighted in the 
CAS.  A portfolio review was undertaken in FY09 to take stock of progress in addressing these 
portfolio management issues:  (1) transparency and accountability, (2) procurement and contract 
execution delays, (3) financial management weaknesses, and (4) weak monitoring and evaluation 
and results frameworks.  A follow-up portfolio review is planned for FY11 to take stock of 
progress and agree on further action.  
 On transparency and accountability, progress has been mixed.  There has been concern 
about the possible, indirect impact of the federal Proclamation for Charities and Societies 
on social accountability initiatives.  However, operationally the Bank has continued to 
ensure progress.  For example, for PBS 2 accountability and fairness make up one of the 
four main principles against which progress is being reviewed.  In addition, the Bank and 
other donors have ensured that programs have mechanisms to monitor for any systemic 
distortion of access to project benefits, for political gain, and are working with the GoE 
on ways further to strengthen these mechanisms.  
 The Bank is concentrating its efforts on four key areas of procurement weakness that 
contribute to persistent procurement and contract execution delays:  borrow readiness to 
begin project implementation following financing approval, capacity enhancement, 
communication and prior reviews.  Progress is slow and has been compounded by 
difficulties in recruiting Procurement Officers, but overall communication with project 
executing agencies has improved as internet connectivity increases.  A rise in the 
maximum prior review and International Competitive Bidding thresholds represents a 
shift of responsibility to GoE for processing most contracts. 
 Already significant progress has been made 
in following up on some key 
recommendations to improve financial management, including a move from manual to 
computerized systems at the federal level for Bank-financed projects channeled through 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED), recruitment of roving 
accountants and intensive training of accountants to build project management capacity 
and of Office of the Federal Auditor General (OFAG) and Audit Services Corporation 
auditors, which audit about 90 percent of Bank financed projects. Internal audit training 
is planned for FY11. Very little progress has been made toward improving the timely 
submission of withdrawal applications.  
 As a critical step in improving weak Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and results 
frameworks, an M&E workshop for Bank Task Team Leaders and government 
counterparts, followed by project clinics to address specific challenges in implementing 
and reporting on project M&E, is planned for FY11.  
31. 
Recently, the Bank has also begun enhanced and joint supervision of financial 
management under large multi-donor programmatic investments.  Enhancements are 
designed to help prevent loss of project resources, including by providing a system for full 
supervision coverage at the federal, regional and woreda levels.  This enhanced financial 
management supervision ensures better sharing of knowledge among donors on financial 
management issues and coherent and efficient dialogue with GoE. 

 

10 

 
 
C.   Adjustments to the CAS Program 

32. 
The FY08-10 CAS program continued to be aligned with the PASDEP objectives 
which have remained unchanged through CAS implementation. Changes largely facilitated 
GoE’s progress toward its objectives, and larger than programmed resource availability.  In 
addition, in FY10 the Bank began tracking relevant IDA core indicators for new lending 
approvals and projects under implementation. 
33. 
An IDA 15 allocation that was larger than foreseen, and also front loaded, 
supported a lending volume greater than that presented in the CAS.  The CAS was prepared 
before IDA15 had been allocated and thus included only indicative future commitments, based 
on an IDA14 allocation of US$1.875 billion.  However, the IDA15 replenishment, coupled with 
no changes in Ethiopia’s overall Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA), resulted in 
an allocation equivalent to about US$2.5 billion for FY09-11, some 80 percent of which has 
been committed in FY09 and FY10.  The Government requested frontloading of the program to 
help meet its external financing needs and sustain overall macro-economic performance. 
34. 
The Bank also responded rapidly to GoE’s request to help mitigate a looming food 
crisis in FY09.  To help Ethiopia avoid a crisis due to drought and food shortages, in November 
2008 the Bank added support for an emergency food crisis response program.  Under this 
program, two IDA credits were approved: 
 additional financing for the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP), which supported 
food and cash assistance to food-insecure households, and  
 a Fertilizer Support Project providing foreign exchange to support the import, distribution 
and sale of fertilizer. 

These credits were financed in part through portfolio restructuring, under the terms of the GFRP, 
which allowed the reallocation of US$137.5 million. 
35. 
The program has comprised sector investments most of which were planned in the 
CAS, with the exception noted above and a few other additions.  In the absence of agreement 
with GoE on significant changes in structural policies, the economic conditions for a PRSC have 
not materialized.  The program of investments anticipated in FY08 and FY09 went forward 
largely as planned, with some upward adjustments in program size to accommodate financing 
needs and the addition of a regional agriculture program reflecting the Africa Region’s growing 
commitment to regional initiatives.  For FY10, additional financing has been favored as the most 
efficient lending instrument instead of the new operations that had been programmed for public 
sector capacity building, roads, and water supply and sanitation, and enabled expedited 
preparation to bring the latter forward from FY11.  The prospective project for rural 
development was renamed the Agriculture Growth Program to reflect its emphasis on growth as 
an essential complement to ongoing efforts targeted directly at food insecure households, and has 
been postponed to FY11.  Additional private sector development support has been delayed 
because the existing project has progressed more slowly than expected.  Additional financing for 
the electricity access expansion project was added to better support distribution networks in 
urban areas.  Table 2 provides a detailed comparison of the original CAS Program, actual 
commitments, and the indicative program for FY11. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2:  Revised CAS Lending Program, FY08-11 (Actual or Indicative) 
See Paragraph 45 for discussion of the proposed FY12 lending program. 

Original CAS Lending Program  (US$ M) 
FY08 
Rural Electricity Access Expansion 2 
Protection of Basic Services Add. Financing 
Ethiopia/NBI Power Export:  Ethiopia/Sudan 
Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources 
Urban Local Government Development 
Sustainable Land Management 
Nutrition 
Pastoral Community Development 2 

$133.5
215
41
45
100
20
30
50

CAS Progress Report Lending Program  (US$ M) 
FY08 Actual 
Rural Electricity Access Expansion 2 
Protection of Basic Services Add. Financing 
Ethiopia/NBI Power Export:  Ethiopia/Sudan 
Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources 
Urban Local Government Development 
Sustainable Land Management 
Nutrition 
Pastoral Community Development 2 

$133.5
215
41
45
150
20
30
80

Total FY08 
FY09 
Protection of Basic Services 2 
General Education Quality Improvement 
Sustainable Tourism 
Roads Adaptable Program Loan APL 4 

Total FY09 
FY10 
Productive Safety Net Program APL 3 
Rural Electricity Access Expansion 3 
Rural Development 
PSD Support 
Public Sector Capacity Building Program 

Total FY10 
FY11 
Power/Ethiopia Kenya Interconnector 
Water Supply and Sanitation 
Sustainable Land Management 2 
Pastoral Community Development 3 
Roads APL 5 
Possible PRSC 

$634.5 

Total FY08 
FY09 Actual 
Protection of Basic Services 2 
General Education Quality Improvement 
Sustainable Tourism 
Roads APL 4 
East Africa Agriculture Program** 
Global Food Crisis Response Program: 
     Fertilizer Support Project 
     Productive Safety Net APL 2 AF 
     Restructuring 

$635* 

Total FY09 
FY10 Actual 
Productive Safety Net Program APL 3 
Electricity Access Expansion Add. Financing 
Public Sector Capacity Building Program AF 
Water Supply and Sanitation Add. Financing 
Roads APL2 Additional Financing 

$635* 

Total FY10 
FY11 Indicative 
Agricultural Growth Program†
Protection of Basic Services 2 Add. Financing 

Total FY11 

$635* 

Total FY11 

Total Lending FY08 – FY11 

$2,539.5 Total Lending FY08 – FY11 

* Indicative IDA 15 amount based on FY08 IDA allocation.   ** Regional program.   † Includes $86.5 million allocated from the  
   Crisis Response Window.  “tbd” to be determined. 

$714.5 

$540
50
35
245
30

250
25
($137.5)

$1,037.5 

$480
180
50
80
100

$890 

$150
$340

$490 

$3,132 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37. 
As anticipated in the CAS, the lending program is shifting towards investments that 
are programmatic in nature, results based and include multiple donors.  All lending in 
FY10 supported one of the eight comprehensive government results-based, multi-donor 
programs described in paragraph 26.  In comparison, about half of the investments approved in 
FY08 and FY09 were programmatic, results based and multi-donor in nature (PBS, General 
Education Quality Improvement Program (GEQIP), Roads, PSNP, Rural Electrification, and 
Sustainable Land Management).  These programs help facilitate coherent dialogue that focuses 
on results on program implementation and important policy issues, including capacity 
development, and reduces transaction costs for GoE by providing an efficient platform for 
dialogue.  They have served as models to other countries seeking to apply a results-based 
approach and have been important inputs into the discussions around the design of a new results 
based investment lending instrument. Ethiopia was the first country to endorse the new 
International Health Partnership, a multi-donor program inaugurated in 2009, through which 
development partners intend to channel programmatic support for health in the future through an 
intended pilot of the results based instrument. 
38. Much of the support to Ethiopia from other donors has continued to be channeled 
through a variety of Bank-administered trust funds which build on the results-based focus 
of Bank-financed programs.  The trust fund portfolio continues to be one of the largest in the 
Africa Region and has disbursed US$787 million so far during the CAS period.  Trust funds 
include multi-donor and single-donor funds set up exclusively for specific programs in Ethiopia, 
as well as grants under global and regional programs such as the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF), Education for All – Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI), the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI), and 
the Global Partnership for Output Based Aid (GPOBA). 
39. 
The Bank’s AAA program was carried forward largely as planned with some delays 
in timing. These delays arose partly because of our focus on frontloading the lending program to 
help GoE meet its external financing and macro-economic needs, particularly in the roads and 
energy sectors, and partly reflected longer than anticipated review processes by GoE.  There was 
in addition a focus on growing areas of concern such as climate change.  As anticipated, the 
Bank undertook jointly with the government investment climate assessments in urban and rural 
areas to help strengthen existing government mechanisms for data collection around country 
objectives, together with annual public finance reviews.  The Bank and GoE also carried out 
studies on the growth corridors in Amhara and Addis Ababa to explore ways to manage their 
economic potential better, and derive maximum development benefits from economic activity.  
Findings of a study on unleashing the economic potential of women, looking at the linkages 
between gender and poverty may form the basis for a possible FY12 lending proposal.  
40. 
As anticipated in the CAS, IFC resumed investment activities in FY08, and in early 
FY09 posted a representative in Ethiopia after a hiatus of about eight years.  Following its 
strategy to explore direct investments in high growth priority sectors, IFC committed a 
US$55 million loan to a cement manufacturing plant in FY08, and in FY10 committed an 
investment of US$11.3 million in the mining sector to help expand and diversify export 
revenues.  In addition, US$10 million of a US$50 million regional investment in FY09 with a 
Saudi hospital operator will be used to establish a new hospital in Addis.  However, GoE 
restrictions on foreign borrowing, foreign ownership, lending growth, and regulated tariff 
structures  have held up a series of initiatives that could have deepened financial markets,  
improved access to financing, particularly for smaller firms that dominate the economy, and 
attracted private investments in the power generation sector.  Despite these restrictions, IFC has 
continued to find innovative ways to support Ethiopian agribusiness and manufacturing 
corporates and Micro & Small/Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), using domestic banks as vehicles 

13 

 
 
when required.  For example, IFC is working with TechnoServe and selected domestic banks to 
guarantee lending to coffee farmer cooperatives under the Ethiopian component of the East 
Africa Coffee Initiative, a US$50 million rural income improvement program funded by the 
Gates Foundation.  In addition, IFC is working with the Ethiopia Commodity Exchange and 
domestic commercial banks to develop a warehouse receipts finance market.  This market would 
help small- and medium-size firms, in the agricultural production and marketing value chain, 
access credit through standardized and affordable lending instruments (Warehouse Receipt 
Loans) to finance their operations and grow their businesses.  In manufacturing, IFC is exploring 
support to industrial zones projects, and the companies which would eventually locate in them, 
with one project under active development.  Finally, IFC was instrumental in the establishment 
of the Ethiopia Public-Private Dialogue Forum. Together with UNDP, IFC will fund the first 
years of operations, and it will expand its staffing to support the program.  

IV.   STRATEGY GOING FORWARD:  FUTURE BANK ENGAGEMENT 
41. 
The overall objectives set out in the original CAS remain valid, and are broadly 
consistent with the GTP—GoE’s new PRSP—which puts increased emphasis on private 
sector involvement in economic growth.  Several adjustments in the CAS program are needed 
to respond to the changing environment and progress toward CAS outcomes, and to capitalize on 
potential post-election opportunities to move forward including on needed structural changes.  
Overall, this CASPR introduces the following two adjustments: 
a) The current CAS period will be extended by one year to cover FY12.  This extension 
reflects the fact that the CAS’s main themes and pillars remain appropriate but also 
responds to three particular concerns.  First, as discussed in section III.A above, progress 
toward the outcomes specified in the CAS has, overall, been slower than expected.  
Besides adapting some of the indicators where they were over-ambitious, overlapping or 
difficult to monitor, an additional year for implementation will better ensure achievement 
of the targeted outcomes.  Second, it is important for the next CAS to be based on a 
strong understanding of poverty in Ethiopia.  Current, detailed data on the incidence and 
distribution of poverty date from 2005, and the next household survey (due to begin in 
fall 2010) is unlikely to produce information until well into FY12, so a CAS written in 
FY12, to cover FY13 and beyond will be better able to ensure appropriate targeting of 
Bank activities.  Third, it gives the Bank a year to better understand the GoE’s GTP, and 
design in collaboration with the GoE a program that reflects shared priorities.  

b) The CAS Results Matrix has been revised, updated, and streamlined to improve its 
quality and realism.  The original matrix was rather long and ambitious with 26 core 
outcomes and 51 indicators.  Baselines and targets were missing from some indicators, 
with data not readily available.  The matrix has been revised and streamlined to 22 core 
outcomes and 38 indicators (7 of which are non-core).  A CAS outcome to mainstream 
gender considerations in the project development objective of all lending, from FY11 
onwards, has been added.  Three CAS outcomes have been dropped where either 
progress has been substantially slower than expected, reflecting shifts in GOE’s 
priorities, or there is an absence of an underlying Bank program, or data is not expected 
to become available during the CAS period.  Two other outcomes have been consolidated 
to reduce overlap.  The revised matrix also reflects the moderately slower pace of 
implementation in some cases; overambitious targets have been modified to more 
realistic levels and/or the timeframe extended.  Most targets have been revised and 
adjusted to coincide with the extension of the CAS period through FY12. The revised 

14 

 
 
results matrix continues to include a mix of high-probability, but relatively, low-impact 
outcomes, as well as some lower-probability but higher-impact outcomes. As such, 
consistent with the CAS, satisfactory performance will have been achieved if 70-75 
percent of the entire set of outcomes are fully attained by the end of the revised CAS 
period.  Annex 1 presents the revised matrix. Annex 2 explains the changes made to the 
core outcomes and related indicators, and Annex 3 summarizes the revised set of core 
CAS outcomes. 

42. 
The focus of lending and AAA activities will continue to support the CAS’s dual 
take-off strategy and strong partnerships with other donors.  The emerging consensus 
among donors active in Ethiopia is that the conduct and outcome of the 2010 national elections 
need not imply major change in collective engagement with GoE, although they reinforce 
concerns about the space for the contestation of ideas.  Within the framework of the GTP, the 
Bank will therefore continue to look for elements that can help promote more accurate and 
accessible information that expands the space for citizen engagement and private sector 
initiatives. Increasing support to development programs at the local levels will present 
opportunities for citizens to engage more actively in development-related decisions as well as to 
ensure greater transparency and accountability.  More conscious support to programs that 
address needs at the community levels or of disadvantaged groups (especially, women) could be 
another way to build on the Government’s strong commitment to equity.  Supporting GoE’s own 
new emphasis, the Bank will also promote new ways of supporting innovations by the private 
sector to improve the investment climate, including through a role in modernizing the financial 
sector.  Finally, the Bank anticipates continuing with other donors its partnerships with the 
private sector and civil society, including academia, to help them play their important role in the 
development process. 
43. 
Decentralization has continued to gain prominence in the Bank’s lending program 
and policy dialogue, reflecting its importance in the GoE’s strategy.  Decentralization is 
embodied in Ethiopia’s 1994 constitution.  It has been progressively implemented, especially 
over the last ten years, as capacity at lower levels of government has developed, with support 
from the Bank, and other development partners, through a range of interventions, including both 
PSCAP and PBS.  These programs both recognize the risks that weak decentralized capacity may 
pose, and have components specifically directed to address those risks.  Reflecting this approach, 
Bank investments and AAA activities across the portfolio are carried out increasingly at the 
regional and woreda level, although the legal and financial structures on which these activities 
are based remain focused at the federal level.  Looking forward, the Bank will explore with GoE 
how this decentralized focus should evolve and the case for streamlining the underlying legal and 
financial structures for Bank engagement. 
44. 
Based on extension of the CAS period, and country and portfolio developments, 
including progress toward CAS outcomes, the proposed lending program and AAA is 
different than that presented in FY08. 
 The FY11 core lending program (Table 2) is expected to consist of the US$150 million 
Agricultural Growth Program, delayed from FY10, together with additional financing of 
US$ 340 million for PBS 2, which is needed as IDA funding for the PBS 2 block grant 
component has been exhausted, and PBS 2 underpins a large number of CAS outcomes 
on access to and quality of basic services, reducing vulnerability and fostering improved 
governance.  The proposal under discussion with the GoE would provide up to two extra 
years of block grant support (leveraging new financing expected from other donors).  

15 

 
 
Besides continuing to support delivery at the local level in education, health, agriculture, 
water supply and sanitation, and rural roads, PBS 2 would also sustain improvements in 
public financial management systems to promote service delivery, and deepen 
transparency and local accountability. 
 Of the original FY11 program, two operations are deferred to FY12—see below—while 
one was advanced to FY10 as additional financing (Water Supply and Sanitation).  The 
remaining three operations have been delayed until at least FY13—the Ethiopia/Kenya 
interconnector depends on whether environmental issues regarding the Gibe III 
hydropower scheme are satisfactorily addressed; the Pastoral Community Development 
Program received more financing than expected in FY08, which, when coupled with 
slower than expected implementation, means there is no likely financing need in FY11 or 
FY12;  the Roads APL 5 depends on completion of an ongoing piece of AAA and 
agreement with GoE on a program for universal roads access. 
 The non-lending program for FY11 and FY12 will focus on key themes critical to 
implementing GoE’s strategy.  It will revolve around a series of deliverables to explore 
innovations tailored to the Ethiopian context, and through which to improve decentralized 
service delivery, spur private sector led industrial growth and ensure food security.  
Dissemination will build on a successful seminar series hosted by the University of Addis 
Ababa (supported by the Bank and other donors), and will include inputs and 
commentary from cutting edge leaders and practitioners from within and outside of 
Ethiopia. Building on previous climate change AAA, the Bank is also producing a 
comprehensive analysis aimed at spelling out the economics of adaptation (EACC), from 
both a sectoral and macro perspective.  The findings of this report will help inform the 
dialogue on how the Bank could support GoE’s efforts to promote a carbon neutral and 
climate resilient economy. This might include follow-up AAA work that would spell out 
the policy and operational implications of the EACC results in selected strategic sectors 
(such as transport, irrigation, energy) and underpin possible future lending in this area. 
45. 
For FY 12, the Bank is currently discussing the precise program with GoE.  Subject 
to the resources available under IDA 16, it is expected to include some additional financing 
proposals to scale up existing operations (e.g. rural electricity, roads, private sector 
development).  We are also discussing a new phase of the Sustainable Land Management 
Program, likely with a strengthened emphasis on land administration. Beyond that the Bank has 
identified for discussion an operation to build on ESW about women’s economic empowerment, 
and another to explore the potential of piloting results-based investment lending to support 
achievement of the health sector MDGs in Ethiopia, building on progress in the health sector 
supported by PBS 2, experience with results based approaches (e.g. under a GPOBA grant) and 
the IHP.  The program will include a PRSC, if the Bank and GoE can agree on an agenda of 
structural changes, particularly those relating to private sector development, including industrial, 
financial sector, telecommunication and land policy. 
46. 
The IFC will continue to explore opportunities for deepening its engagement.  Its 
strategy, which it has fine tuned based on about two years of renewed engagement, focuses on 
supporting private sector investment in agribusiness and the industrial sectors where there is 
strong market growth combined with a lack of supply response, and/or strong export potential.  
Where opportunities arise, it will seek to integrate its advisory services and investments building 
on the advanced partnerships forged with domestic banks, the Ethiopia Commodity Exchange 
and other partners. IFC will work through the financial sector, where possible, to improve access 
to finance, and in infrastructure to explore avenues for private participation that may emerge 

16 

 
 
through large-scale projects under consideration.  It will continue to partner with the Bank and 
others on policy dialogue related to growth and private sector development, including through 
the recently established Ethiopia Public-Private Dialogue Forum, which may become a platform 
for more focused advisory assistance on various areas of investment climate reform.  

V.   RISKS AND MITIGATION 
47. 
The four main risks identified in the CAS are still valid.  Risk is relatively steady in 
two areas—governance-related risks and macroeconomic risks—and mitigation are the same as 
described in the CAS.  It has increased in two others—vulnerability to external shocks and weak 
capacity. 
48. 
There is heightened vulnerability to external shocks due to a risk of food price 
shocks that could result from a rise in global commodity prices, uncertainty of the 
probability of major drought or extensive rains in the near future, and a risk of decreased 
availability of external finance. 
 Ethiopia appears on course for a good domestic harvest in 2010.  However, the country 
has a structural food deficit, making it reliant on food aid, and it is also experiencing 
changing consumption patterns, both of which make Ethiopia somewhat vulnerable to an 
increase in global wheat prices.  Climatic conditions this year seem likely to depress 
wheat production, and prices are therefore likely to rise significantly. 
 The CAS did note the prevalence of drought in Ethiopia and the potential for resulting 
impacts.  In addition, as weather patterns become more erratic because of climate change, 
extreme events such as droughts or floods may become both more frequent and more 
intense. Quite conceivably, after six years without a severe drought, the next occurrence 
may have a major impact.  To mitigate the risk of extreme weather events, the Bank has 
been supporting the government to prepare a disaster risk management strategy which is 
pending ratification and implementation.  A drought could result not just in food 
shortages (to be mitigated through the Bank supported productive safety net program), 
but also have an impact on power generation as Ethiopia relies heavily on hydroelectric 
power.  The government is mitigating this risk through increasing energy capacity, 
improving energy efficiency, and through interconnectivity with neighboring countries.  
Increased rains could have implications for flooding which the government is mitigating 
through the development of flood management systems with Bank support. 
 There is some evidence that African countries continue to be vulnerable to the financial 
crisis in other parts of the world.  The unfolding debt crisis in Europe may have 
reverberations that are more serious than the first wave of the financial crisis and 
Ethiopia’s access to external sources of financing may tighten, particularly if governance 
or environmental concerns are exacerbated. To mitigate this risk, the Bank will maintain 
our close dialogue with the government, private sector and civil society representatives, 
other donors and regional institutions.  Potential options for responding include a further 
portfolio restructuring to accelerate disbursements for programs with broad agreement; or 
bringing forward a PRSC provided there were to be agreement on an appropriate program 
of structural changes. 
Effects of rain failure or a rise in global commodity prices likely will be more pronounced if 
energy shortages and currency issues are not addressed and credit to the private sector remains 
tight.  

17 

 
 
49. 
Risks related to weak capacity are increasing as the Bank’s program engages more 
and more at the local level. The Bank will continue to support improvements in financial 
management and procurement capacity as described in the CAS to mitigate this risk.  In addition, 
the Bank’s move toward programmatic support, by supporting a comprehensive government 
sector program implemented by civil servants rather than isolated ring-fenced donor financed 
projects 
that operate 
in parallel 
to government programs, facilitates coherent policy 
recommendations and suggestions on institutional policies that could help the government find 
and adopt solutions to build capacity.  However, this brings with it a subsidiary risk that if, for 
any reason, the development partnership underlying such programmatic approaches were to 
fragment, the implementation approaches used for most of the Bank’s program would need to be 
reviewed and revised. 

18 

 
 
ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 

Milestones  

Progress to date 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

1.1 Support macro-
fiscal stability 

Rapid growth poses risks of macro 
imbalances (especially inflation 
and external balance).  GoE is 
well aware of these risks and 
addressing them.  The Bank, with 
IMF, to continue providing policy 
advice and look ahead for 
emerging issues. 

Revenue growth has fallen short of 
GDP growth recently and 
constrains the fiscal space.  IMF 
and the Bank have worked closely 
with GoE in developing a plan for 
more effective domestic resource 
mobilization.  The Bank to 
continue the effort. 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
Strategic Objective 1:  Fostering economic growth 
1. 
Structural and macroeconomic 
M1.  Prudent 
policies are conducive to sustain 
management of 
internal and external balance 
monetary policy to curb 
I1.  Inflation rate declines from 
inflation. 
34% in 2007/08 to single digits by 
2010/11 and is sustained through 
2011/12. 
Progress to date: Inflation 
declined to 7.3% in June 2010.( 
The annual moving average 
inflation rate at June 2010 is 2.8%) 
Increase domestic resource 
mobilization 
I2.  Revenue/GDP ratio increases 
from 12.1% in 2007/08 to 14.3% in 
2011/12. 
Progress to date: Revenue/GDP 
fell to 12.0% in 2008/09, but is 
expected to increase marginally to 
12.6% in 2009/10. 

m3.  MEFF is prepared on 
time and its consistency has 
improved, though some of its 
macro assumptions need 
further improvements. 

M3.  Timely preparation 
of an integrated and 
consistent Macro-
Economic and Fiscal 
Framework. 

M2.  Establishment of  
M & E system for 
investment and 
contingent liabilities in 
the public enterprises. 

m2.  A Committee has been 
set up to monitor domestic 
borrowing of public 
enterprises, but not their 
investment programs. 

m1.  Broad money growth has 
slowed down, but reserve 
money growth rate has 
increased. 

M4.  Full 
implementation of 
ongoing tax 
administrative reforms. 

AAA 
Macro Fiscal Issues Growth 
New Lending 
Possible PRSC 
Partners 
IMF 

AAA 
Public Finance Review 
(JBAR) 
Macro Fiscal Issues Growth 
Public Expenditure Review 
On-going Lending 
PSCAP 
New lending 
Possible PRSC 
Partners 
IMF, PSCAP Partners2 
AAA 
Strategic Review of Road 
Sector Development 
On-going Lending 
Road Sector APLs 2-4 
New lending 
Roads APL 3 AF 
Partners 
EC, DFID, AfDB 

m4.  Tax administrative 
reforms are under 
implementation, though IMF 
has recently suggested more 
changes. 
m5.  The DCI policy was 
drafted and distributed for  
feedback in early 2009.  The 
comprehensive capacity 
building program has not yet 
been launched, pending 
finalization of the DCI policy 
and increased priority given to 
it within the Ministry of 
Works and Urban 
Development. 

1.2. Accelerate the level 
and productivity of 
investment in 
infrastructure in a 
sustainable manner 

High costs due to lack of 
competition and slow contractor 
performance in implementation 
constrain the progress of 
ambitious road network expansion 
plan.  To remedy this, GoE is keen 
to strengthen domestic 
construction industry.  The Bank 
will support GoE in developing a 
program to foster domestic 
industry and robust competition. 

2. Strengthen road sector 
institutions and domestic road 
construction industry 
I3. Volume of civil works contracts 
disbursed by Domestic Contractors 
increased from 35% of total in 
2007/08 to 54% by 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 43% showing 
steady progress from the base line 
in 2009/10. 

M5.  Domestic 
Construction Industry 
(DCI) policy formulated 
and comprehensive 
capacity building 
program launched. 

1 List of partners is not intended to be exhaustive and any omissions are unintentional. 
2 PSCAP Partners include DFID, CIDA, and Irish Aid, with Italy and EU support planned. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 
1.2. Accelerate the level 
and productivity of 
investment in 
infrastructure in a 
sustainable manner 
(continued) 

Ethiopia’s economic fortunes are 
closely linked with neighboring 
countries in a number of ways.  
The Bank will support regional 
investments that can not only 
bring economic benefits, but can 
also build greater 
interdependence, which could 
reduce the likelihood of intra-
regional conflict.  In both respects, 
regional integration can be a key 
factor in helping to sustain 
Ethiopia’s recent economic 
growth.   
GoE is committed to expand 
generation capacity and access 
rapidly.  Care needs to be taken to 
ensure efficient modalities of 
delivery (i.e., grid vs. off-grid) and 
implementation.  Expansion of 
generation capacity requires 
careful phasing and financial 
planning.  The Bank will focus on 
offering advice on efficient plans 
and providing or facilitating 
financing where needed. 
Raising agriculture productivity 
has been central to PASDEP.  
Extension services need further 
strengthening.  There is some 

1.3. Increase 
productivity of 
agriculture  

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
Improve road density 
I4.  Road density per 1000 sq.km 
increases from 38.6 km in 2007 to 
45.7 km in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 42.6 km in 2010. 

M6.  Ethiopian Road 
Authority reformed on 
commercial basis and 
operational departments 
spun off from ERA. 

Milestones  

Progress to date 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

m6.  The government plans to 
unbundle  the ERA into 
operational and  regulatory  
institutions  by end-2010.  A 
regulation establishing the 
Ethiopian Roads Construction 
Corporation and a 
proclamation for the re-
establishment of the ERA are 
being submitted as drafts to 
the Council of Ministers. 
m7.  Transmission 
interconnector with Sudan is 
under construction. Power 
Purchase Agreement has been 
signed.   

3. Enhance regional integration 
I5.  Power traded between 
Ethiopia, Sudan, and/or Djibouti. 
Progress to date: Power is 
planned to be traded starting in 
2010.  

I6.  Establishment of an East 
Africa Power Pool under the NBI 
framework by end-2011/12.  
Progress to date: Funds have been 
allocated to carry out studies to 
develop an East Africa Power Pool. 

M7. Transmission line 
from Ethiopian power 
grid to Sudanese border 
completed.  

M8.  Eastern Nile 
strategic basin 
assessment and 
assistance strategy 
completed.  

m8.  Eastern Nile Strategic 
Basin Assessment and 
assistance strategy underway; 
draft report anticipated in 
Nov. 2010. 

On-going Lending 
Ethiopia/Nile Basin 
Initiatives Power Export: 
Ethiopia/Sudan 
Partners 
AfDB, NBI Partners 

Increase access to electricity  
I7.  Percent of towns with access 
through at least one connection to 
electricity increases from 16% in 
2004/05 to 50% in 2010/11. 
Progress to date: 
>50% in 2010.  

M9.  Increase the pace 
of connections to the 
grid by 20% in 
electrified towns and 
villages, leveraging 
Output Based Aid 
(OBA) instruments.  

M9.  The electrification 
program has progressed well, 
but there is a country wide 
moratorium on new 
connections, including 
GPOBA beneficiaries. 
Ethiopian Electric Power 
Corporation should resume 
connections in September 
2010. 

On-going Lending 
Energy Access SIL 
Rural Access Exp’n 1 
Rural Access Exp’n 2 
GEF Energy Access 
New lending 
Rural Access Exp’n 2 AF 
Partners 
EIB, EC, AfDB, Italy, 
China, India, Kuwait Fund, 
GPOBA 

4. 
Increase agricultural 
productivity in selected intervention 
areas 
I8.  Average agriculture value 

M10.  Increase in area 
with land certification.  

m10.  Coverage of private 
rural land holdings with first 
level certificate estimated at 
44% in 2007 and 66% in 

AAA 
Rural Investment Climate 
Assessment  
Rural Access Development 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

ambiguity on whether productivity 
has increased significantly. The 
Bank’s PBS and RCBP will 
continue to help improve access 
and quality of extension services.  
Some analytical work is likely to 
help ensure proper focus of 
resources on the right 
interventions for productivity 
enhancement. 

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
added to increase by 5% per annum 
Progress to date: Average 
agricultural value added increased 
7.5% in 2007/08 and 6.0% in 
2009/10.  

M11.  Results-based 
M&E system developed 
for agricultural 
extension, vocational 
education, and research.  

Progress to date 

Milestones  

2009. 
m11.  (a) Development of 
M&E system for the national 
agricultural research under 
way. 
(b) M&E for agricultural 
extension and vocational 
education under RCBP has 
made progress including 
through an impact assessment 
study (June 2010).  
m12.  SLMP is under active 
implementation in 35 woredas 
and Tana Beles Project in 5 
woredas. 

m13.  Feasibility studies for 
24,000 ha have been 
completed, and are underway 
for an additional 80,000 ha. 
m14. IDA has provided its no 
objection to the procurement 
process for both assignments 
and for the NBE to proceed to 
contract negotiations with the 
chosen firms for the NPS and 
CIC 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

Regional Growth Study 
On- going Lending 
PBS 2 
Pastoral Community 
Development Program 2 
(PCDP 2) 
Irrigation & Drainage SIL 
Sustainable Land 
Management1 Specific 
Investment Loan (SIL) 
Tana Beles 
Eastern African 
Agricultural Productivity 
Capacity Building for 
Agriculture Service 
New Lending 
PBS 2 AF 
Sustainable Land 
Management 2 SIL 
Agricultural Growth 
Program 
Partners 
REDFS group3 
AAA 
Financial Sector Review 
On-going Lending  
Financial Sec. Cap. Bldg.  
New Lending 
Possible PRSC 
Partners 
IMF 

M12.  Sustainable Land 
Management Project 
(SLMP) and Tana Beles 
Project actively 
implemented in a 
minimum of 35 
woredas.  

M13.  Feasibility studies 
completed for irrigation 
of 104,000 ha by end-
2011/12.  
M14. Conclude the 
implementation of 
National Payments 
Systems (NPS) and the 
Credit Information 
Center (CIC), 

1.4 Strengthen supply 
responsiveness of 
industry and services 
sector 

Inefficiency of the banking sector 
will hamper private sector growth.  

1.4 Strengthen supply 
responsiveness of 
industry and services 
sector 
(continued) 

The low penetration rate of 
telephone service and the high 
rate for international calls hinder 
private sector growth.  Limited 
access to internet also hurt small 

5. 
Improve financial sector 
performance 
I9. Credit to the private sector as a 
ratio to GDP increases from 12% 
in 2005/06 to 16% in 2011. 
Progress to data: Credit to the 
private sector increased in absolute 
terms from ETB16.1 billion in 
2005/06 to ETB30.5 billion but in 
relative terms it decreased to 9% of 
GDP in 2009.  
Reduce cost of internet service  
I10.  Cost of broadband and dial-up 
Internet services to decline by 40% 
and 20%, respectively, between 
2008 and 2011. 

6. 

3 Rural Economic Development and Food Security (REDFS) Group includes AfDB, Austrian Development Cooperation, CIDA, DFID, EC, FAO, German Development Cooperation, IFAD IFPRI, Irish Aid, Italian 
Cooperation, JICA, Norway, SIDA, The Netherlands, UNDP, USAID, WFP. 

21 

M15. At least 5 private 
retail Internet Service 
Providers operational.  

m15. While Ethiopian 
Telecommunication Agency 
has licensed 5 private ISPs, 
none are operational. 

AAA 
Telecom Reform Options 
New Lending  
Possible PRSC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

businesses.  The focus on 
sustaining growth should open a 
space for further dialogue. 

GoE’s strategy has tended to pick 
a small number of ‘winners.’  To 
elicit much greater supply 
response from the economy, 
Ethiopia is likely to need a more 
open approach to promotion of 
investment.  Focusing on the need 
to sustain rapid growth, 
encourage a strategic shift. 

The quality and standards of 
corporate financial reporting in 
Ethiopia need to be improved and 
brought in line with international 
good practices.  The necessary 
legal framework and institutional 
infrastructure for this need to be 
put in place. 

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
Progress to date: Monthly cost of 
internet connection (incl. 600 
minutes) fell from ETB60 in 2008 
to ETB40 in 2010 (33% reduction). 
Broadband infrastructure is under 
development, but service is still 
limited.  Monthly cost of a 2 Mbps 
ADSL connection has fallen from 
ETB47,479 in 2008 to ETB10,747 
in 2010 (77% decrease).  
7. 
Improved investment climate 
helps Ethiopia benefit from increased 
globalization  
I11.   Cumulative increase in FDI 
of at least 40% by the end of the 
CAS period. 
Progress to date:  FDI increased 
from about US $365 million to 
about US $880 million, about 
141% increase between 2005/06 
and 2008/09.  

m16. MOU between the 
Ethiopia Chamber of 
Commerce and Sectoral 
Association, governing the 
PPD process signed. 

m17.  A revised Competition 
Law has been submitted and 
deliberated on by the Council 
of Ministers and is waiting to 
be lodged for Parliamentary 
approval. 

M16.  Public-Private 
Dialogue (PPD) Forum 
reinstituted and 
considered effective by 
private sector.  

M17.  Revised Trade 
Practices Proclamation 
adopted to address 
current deficiencies.  

M18. Satisfactory 
national accounting and 
auditing standards 
issued, and legal 
framework established 
to ensure compliance 
with these standards.  

Improve quality of corporate 
financial reporting 
I12.  Ethiopia’s corporate sector 
follows accounting and auditing 
standards that are in line with 
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) and International 
Standards of Auditing (ISA) as 
assessed by the 2012 ROSC.   
Progress to date: Financial 
reporting law and directive which 
require adherence to IFRS and ISA 
passed.  

m18. (a) Proclamation 
submitted to OFAG to adopt 
Ethiopian standards for IFRS 
and ISA--next steps COM and 
Parliamentary approval. 
(b) Draft Constitution, by laws 
and Code of Conduct for 
Institute of CPAs of Ethiopia 
and draft organizational 
structure and scope of 
activities of the National 
Accounting and Auditing 
Board submitted to OFAG. 

Milestones  

Progress to date 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

AAA 
Investment Climate 
Assessment (ICA) 
Public Private Forum 
Tourism Competitiveness 
Service Trade and Growth 
Innovation for Devel’p’t 
On-going Lending 
PSD Cap. Building  
Tourism Dev. Project 
New Lending 
PSD Cap. Building AF 
Partners 
US, EC, DFID, ADB, IMF 
AAA 
ROSC Accounting and 
Auditing 
EITI MDTF 

2.1 Improve 

PASDEP commitment to universal 

8. 

Increase girls’ enrollment in 

M19.  Block grants to 

M19.  GoE continues to 

AAA 

Strategic Objective 2:  Improving Access to and Quality of Basic Service Delivery 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Milestones  

woredas continue to 
increase.  

M20.  PCDP coverage 
increased to address 
special needs of 
pastoralist children.  

Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 
access/coverage of basic 
services 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

education is strong, but continued 
improvement in decentralized 
service delivery is needed.  The 
Bank to continue support for this 
process, with particular focus on 
creating more space for localized 
responses to address obstacles.  

While progress has been made, 
access to potable water and 
sanitation services remains low.  
Availability of resources remains a 
big challenge, and sustainability 
of the system deserves attention.  
The Bank has been well engaged 
in the sector.  It will continue to 
scale up support in part by 
bringing other donors into the 
sector. 

2.1 Improve 
access/coverage of basic 
services 
(continued) 

GoE’s commitment to improving 
access to health care is clear, but 
there is a scope for much greater 
harmonization.  The Bank will 
focus on resource mobilization 

increase block grants to 
regions & woredas every 
fiscal year. In 2006/07 
US$1.1 billion was 
distributed and increased to 
US$1.47 billion in 2009/10. 

m20.  In the first phase of 
the program, PCDP covered 
32 woredas (2003-2007), 
and in the second phase 
(2008-present) the coverage 
increased to 55 woredas. 

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
primary and secondary education  
I13. Ratio of girls to boys in 
primary school increases from 89% 
in 2006/07 to 93% in 2011/12 in 
grades 1-4 (1st cycle of primary), 
76% to 93% in grades 5-8 (2nd 
cycle of primary), from 63% to 
75% in grades 9-10 (1st cycle of 
secondary) from 50% to 50% in 
grades 11-12 (2nd cycle of 
secondary) (the 2011/12 target for 
grades 11-12 is the same as the 
2006/07 baseline due to decline in 
percentage in 2008/09) 
Progress to date: Ratio of girls to 
boys in 2008/09 in Grade 1-4 was 
90%, in Grade 5-8 89%, in Grade 
9-10 72%, and Grades 11-12 41%.  
9. 
Increase sustainable access to 
potable water and sanitation services 
I14.  Total population with access 
to safe drinking water (rural and 
urban) increased from 52% in 
2007/08 to 74.5% in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 66.2% in 
2009/10.  
I15.  % of rural/urban households 
using latrines increased from 39% 
2007/08 to 60% 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 56% in 2009/10.  
I16.  Proportion of malfunctioning 
rural water facilities reduced from 
25% in 2007/08 to 16% in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 20% in 2009/10.  
10. Increase delivery of key health 
services: malaria control, HIV/AIDS 
prevention, vaccination, nutrition, 
contraception 
I17.  Proportion of children 

m21.  90% of participating 
communities are organized 
to plan, manage, and 
operate their WSS schemes 
and coordinate with the 
health extension workers in 
promoting health and 
sanitation practices.   
m22.  85% of the 87 small 
towns pop. <15,000; 50% 
of the 29 large towns pop. 
>15,000; and 100% of the 
six loan receiving towns 
have autonomous board 
management and most have 
completed business plan. 
m23.  See M29 for block 
grants Distribution of 
Medical equipment and 
supplies was completed for 
976 health centers as of 

M22.  Autonomous 
urban utilities 
strengthened to operate 
with business plans and 
with improved 
management.  
M23.  Woreda 
governments receive 
increased funding for 
service delivery through 
block grants and 

M21.  User groups 
organized to operate and 
maintain water points 
and promote hygiene 
and sanitation practices.  

Progress to date 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

Decentralized Service 
Delivery 
On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
Pastoral Comm. Devt. 2 
GEQIP 
New Lending 
PBS 2 AF 
Partners 
PBS Partners4 

AAA 
Decentralized Service 
Delivery 
Public Finance Review-Water 
On-going Lending 
Urban Water and Sanitation 
Water Supply & Sanitation 
SIL 
PBS 2 
Pastoral Comm. Devt. 2 
Urban Local Government 
Development  
New Lending 
PBS 2 AF 
Partners 
DFID 
AAA 
Decentralized Service 
Delivery 
Health Financing Policy Note 
Education and Nutrition 

4 PBS Partner Group includes World Bank, DFID, AfDB, EC, CIDA, KfW, Netherlands, Austria, Italy, Ireland, Spain. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

and efficiency of resource use.  It 
will support Ministry of Health 
(MoH) implement its road map for 
International Health Partnership 
(IHP). 

GoE’s commitment to improving 
access to health care is clear, but 
there is a scope for much greater 
harmonization.  The Bank will 
focus on resource mobilization 
and efficiency of resource use.  It 
will support Ministry of Health 
(MoH) implement its road map for 
International Health Partnership 
(IHP)(continued). 

Milestones  

Progress to date 

2010. 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

Linkages 
On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
Mulitsectoral HIV/AIDS 2 
Pastoral Comm. Devt. 2 
Nutrition SIL 
New Lending  
PBS 2 AF 
Health MDG Fund 
Partners 
PBS Partners, USAID, Global 
Fund for Malaria, TB and 
HIV-AIDS, Global Alliance 
for Vaccines and 
Immunization 

increased amounts of 
centrally procured health 
commodities with PBS 
support.  

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
vaccinated against DPT3 increases 
from 72.6% in 2006/07 to 83% by 
2009/10. 
Progress to date: 82% in 2008/09 
and it is expected to reach 85% by 
June 2010.  
I18.  Number of new malaria cases 
decreases from 370,000 in 2006/07 
to 100,000 by 2011/12. 
Progress to date: Progress 
assessment pending Demographic 
Health Survey 2010.  
I19.  Percentage of young people 
(age 15-24) with understanding of 
how to prevent HIV/AIDS 
transmission increases from 67% 
of women and 54% of men in 
2004/05 to 75% overall by 
2011/12. 
Progress to date:  Progress 
Assessment pending the follow-up 
Demographic Health Survey 2010.  
I20.  Percentage of pregnant 
women receiving iron and folate 
supplementation increases from 
10% in 2004/05 to 23% in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 19% as of 
August 2009. 

m25.  IHP+ roadmap 
finalized and the first round 
review of Health Sector 
Development Programme-
IV zero draft using JANS 
tools conducted. Following 
the review a second draft 
was prepared and circulated 
in May 2010 for another 
review.  
m26.  Woredas have been 
implementing action plans 
on prevention focusing on 
Most at Risk Population 
Groups. .  

M24.  2.4 million 
replacement Insecticide 
Treated Nets distributed 
between beginning- 
2009/10 and end-
2011/12.  

M25.  Donors and MoH 
make progress on 
implementation of IHP 
roadmap.  

m24.  1.7 million 
Insecticide Treated Nets 
were distributed in 2009/10. 

M26.  95% of Multi-
sectoral HIV/AIDS 
Program 2 (MAP 2) 
participating woredas 
implementing action 
plans on HIV/AIDS 
prevention targeting 
most-at-risk groups. 

2.2. Enhance quality of 
basic services 

With access significantly 
improved, GoE’s focus is shifting 
toward quality enhancement. The 
Bank to support the general 
direction with expansion of PBS 

11. Improve quality of education 
I21.  Grade 5 completion rate 
increases from 65% in 2006/07 to 
above 87% in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: Primary school 

24 

M27.  Primary grade 1-4 
student-teacher ratio 
declines from 65:1 in 
2006/07 to 54:1 in 
2011/12.  

m27.  Pupil-teacher ratio in 
Grade 1-4 was 62:1 in 
2008/09.  

On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
GEQIP  
New Lending 
PBS 2 AF 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
completion rate (grade 5) increased 
to 78.9% in 2008/09.  

Progress to date 

Milestones  

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

Partners 
PBS Partners, USAID 

Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

funding and funding for Ministry 
of Education’s own General 
Education Quality Enhancement 
Plan. 
Integrating essential healthcare 
services at the kebele level is key 
to harmonization of donor 
assistance.  The Bank will help 
mobilize additional resources, 
achieve greater harmonization 
along the International Health 
Partnership (IHP) initiative, and 
strengthen results monitoring.  

12. Roll-out of kebele health 
extension package leads to improved 
services 
I22.  Percentage of births attended 
by trained health personnel 
increases from 9% in 2004/05 to 
27% in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: Skilled health 
attendant delivery rose from 20.7% 
in 2007/08 to 24.9% in 2008/09. 

M28.  Substantially all 
rural kebeles have two 
trained health extension 
workers (an increase to 
about 30,000 workers 
total from the 2006/07 
baseline of 17,600).  

m28.  The GoE trained and 
deployed 31,831 health 
extension workers by 
2009/10. This translates to 
a 106% achievement.  

AAA 
Decentralized Service 
Delivery 
Health Financing Policy Note 
On-going Lending 
Nutrition SIL 
PBS 2  
New lending  
PBS 2 AF 
Health MDG Fund 
Partners 
PBS Partners, USAID, WHO, 
UNICEF  
Lending 
ICTAD project 

2.3 Enhance citizens’ 
voice to improve quality 
of basic services. 

Independent community radio 
service can help improve service 
delivery quality, if used as a 
vehicle for promoting awareness 
and social accountability.  Support 
the development of a framework 
for operation of community radios. 

13. Greater use of community radios 
for improved service delivery  
I23.  At least 10 woredas with 
community radio station in 
operation. 
Progress to date: Eight 
community radios have been set up 
and are operational.  

M29.  Regulatory and 
institutional framework 
for community radios in 
place covering licensing, 
training of trainers, and 
content development 
training.  

m29.  The Government has 
put in place the policy 
framework and regulations 
for licensing of both 
commercial and community 
radios. 

Strategic Objective 3:  Reducing Vulnerability 

3.1 Reduce exposure to 
chronic food insecurity 
and shocks 

With PSNP, GoE’s focus has 
shifted toward a programmatic 
approach to food security. The key 
is to consolidate the other 
elements of the Program, 
particularly efforts to rebuild 
livelihoods of the poor, promote 
diversification and encourage 
innovation.  Confirmation that 
households are beginning to move 
toward graduation is critical.  The 
Bank to focus on ensuring PSNP 
will withstand the test of a real 
emergency. 

14. Reduce food insecurity 
I24.  Reduce the average number 
of days chronically food insecure 
households participating in PSNP 
public works activities (comprising 
5.75 m people) report being food 
insecure from 110.6 days in 2006 
to 98.5 days by end-2010. 
Progress to date: PSNP public 
works participants that also 
received Household Asset Building 
Program reported being food 
insecure 97.1 days and PSNP 
public works participants for 98.6 

25 

m30.  86% of Woredas 
completed in November 
2009. 

M30.  Proportion of 
PSNP program woredas 
completing 80% of 
transfer distributions by 
end-July annually 
increases from 12% in 
2007 to 75% in 2010.  

AAA 
Urban Safety Nets Note 
Rural Safety Nets Note 
Urban Poverty 
On-going Lending 
PSNP 3  
Partners 
PSNP Partners 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

In moving to phase 3 of PSNP and 
designing effective interventions to 
ensure graduation, donors need 
clarity on GoE long term plan for 
food security and disaster risk 
management.  Phase 3 of PSNP 
will be leveraged to engage GoE 
on this issue, which is central to 
PASDEP success. 

3.1 Reduce exposure to 
chronic food insecurity 
and shocks 
(continued) 

Land degradation has become a 
major environmental threat.  Both 
for environmental reasons and to 
improve food security, land 
degradation has gained attention.  
The Bank will help translate this 
concern into quick actions by 
GoE. 

3.2 Address 
environmental 
degradation and 
population pressures 

GoE recognizes that SLM 
programs need to be implemented 
on a large scale and in a 
coordinated manner.  
Implementation of SLM project 
should occasion establishment of 
the necessary institutions. 

26 

M31.  Impact 
assessment of PSNP 
completed.  

Milestones  

Progress to date 

m31. 2008 Impact 
Assessment completed. 
Final report dated 30 June 
2009. 2010 Impact 
Assessment in progress.  

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
days in mid-2008.  
15. Develop long-term strategy for 
food security and vulnerability to 
natural disasters 
I25.  A food security program and 
disaster risk management strategy 
that is coherent and consistent with 
macro outlook developed. 
Progress to date: Food Security 
Program (2010-2014) and Disaster 
Risk Management Strategy 
developed that are consistent with 
macro outlook. Disaster Risk 
Management Strategy pending 
ratification. 
16. 
Increase investment in 
community-based watershed 
management 
I26.  60,000 hectares watershed 
rehabilitated  2007/08 and 2011/12. 
Progress to date: 167,150 hectares 
of watershed rehabilitated end 
2009/10.  
I27.  Investment in community 
based flood management rises from 
0 in 2007/08 to US$5m end 
2011/12. 
Progress to date: As of end 
2009/10 investments have been 
minimal. 
Establish institutions for sustainable 
land management 
I28.  Federal and Regional SLM 
Platforms hold regular meetings to 
provide policy and technical 
guidance in the implementation of 
SLMP activities, including annual 
planning sessions to develop 
collaboratively annual work 
programs. 
Progress to date: Federal and 
Regional SLM Platforms have met 

m32.  SLMP and Tana 
Beles Project ware both 
launched in Oct 2008. 
m33.  Flood preparedness 
& early warning Phase II 
(FPEW II) is a sub-
component of Tana Beles. 
Financing agreement signed 
June 2008; effectiveness 
declared Oct. 2008. A 
continuation of FPEW 
Phase I implemented by E. 
Nile Technical Regional 
Office and the Eastern Nile 
Countries since June 2007.  
m34.  Federal and Regional 
SLM platforms to facilitate 
coordination across sectors 
have been established, 
including a Steering 
Committee and a Technical 
Committee at the national 
level and in each Region 
covered by the SLM 
Project. 

M32.  SLM and Tana 
Beles projects launched. 

M33.  Flood 
preparedness and early 
warning system in Tana 
Basin launched. 

M34.  Federal and 
Regional SLM 
Platforms established.  

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

AAA 
Urban Poverty 
Rural Safety Nets Note 
Urban Safety Nets Note 
On-going Lending 
PSNP 3 
Partners 
PSNP Partners 

On-going Lending 
PSNP 3 
Sustainable Land Mgt SIL 
Tana Beles  
Partners 
RED&FS group 
IDA/GEF, KfW, GTZ 

AAA 
Climate Change 
Climate Change Adaptation 
Land Administration 
On-going Lending 
Sustainable Land Mgt 1 
New lending 
Sustainable Land Mgt 2 
Partners 
RED&FS group 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

Continued rapid growth in 
population is an obstacle for 
Ethiopia to get out of a poverty 
trap.  Use dialogue on long-term 
sustainability of rapid growth to 
highlight the importance of 
demographic issues.  

3.2 Address 
environmental 
degradation and 
population pressures 
(continued) 

With rapid growth, GoE is aware 
of social risks of leaving certain 
groups being left behind, including 
women and youth.   

4.1 Improve 
government 
effectiveness and 
quality of public 
administration.    

Modern public service requires 
effective, rule and merit-based 
civil service.  The Bank will 
continue to support GoE’s state 
transformation process through 
the public sector reform program, 

Milestones  

Progress to date 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
regularly since Oct 2008, including 
annual work program meetings. 
17. Accelerate demographic 
transition 
I29.  Contraceptive prevalence rate 
as measured by Demographic 
Health Survey (DHS) increases by 
2 percentage points p.a. from 15% 
in 2004/05 to 25% in 2011/12. 
Progress to date: Progress 
assessment pending the 2010 DHS.  

m35.  No direct data 
available. However, 
contraceptive acceptance 
rate rose from 53.8% in 
2008/09 to 56.2% in 
2009/10. 

m36.  97 million condoms 
were distributed in the year 
2008/09.   

On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
MAP II 
New Lending  
PBS 2 AF 
Partners 
UNFPA, WHO,  

M35. Hormonal 
contraceptives 
distributed to cover 8.75 
million couple-years of 
protection in 2009/10, 
up from 6.1 million in 
2006/07.  
M36.  Annual 
distribution of male and 
female condoms 
increases from 80 m in 
2006/07 to 140 m in 
2009/10.  
M37.  PBS 2 social 
accountability interface 
meetings take place in 
172 woredas. 

18. 
Increased voice of women 
within communities.  
I30.  Participation of women in 
community meetings (social 
accountability interface meetings) 
related to PBS 2 increases by 30% 
between December 2010 and June 
2012. 
Progress to date:   
New indicator.  Monitoring to 
begin in FY11. 

m37.  Monitoring to begin 
in FY11. 

AAA 
Gender Study 
On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
Partners 
PBS partners  
50-60 CSOs 

Strategic Objective 4:  Fostering Improved Governance 

19. 
Improve performance of the 
public service 
I31.  Woreda/City Bench-marking 
Surveys (WCBS) show improving 
perception of integrity and 
performance of public service: 
performance measured by 
percentages of people satisfied 
with Agriculture Extension 
Service, Solid-waste service, Water 
supply service and Health service, 
increasing from 82%, 69.9%, 60% 
and 34% in 2008 to 85%, 75%, 

27 

M38.  Business process 
reengineering 
implemented in all 
federal and regional 
public institutions.  

m38. a) 18 out of 48 
Federal institutions and all 
Bureaus in Amhara, 
Oromiya, Tigray, SNNP, 
Addis Ababa and Harari 
Regional states are at full 
implementation stage.  
b). 8 out of 41(the number 
of institutions engaged in 
balanced scorecard)  
Federal institutions and all 
Bureaus in Dire Dawa City 
Administration are at the 

AAA 
ICA 
Public-Finance 
Review(JBAR) 
Procurement Reforms 
On-going Lending 
PSCAP 
PBS 2 
Urban Local Government 
Development  
New Lending 
PBS 2 AF 
Partners 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

Milestones  

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
62% and 60% in 2012 respectively, 
and integrity measured by 
percentage of people who made 
extra payments for general service, 
decreasing from 4.3% in 2008 to 
4% in 2012. 
Progress to Date: The 2010 
WCBS reported 84%, 73.7%, 57% 
and 57% of people were satisfied 
with the services respectively, and 
4.1% made extra payments.   

Progress to date 

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

PSCAP Partners, CIDA DFID 

4.1 Improve 
government 
effectiveness and 
quality of public 
administration. 
(continued) 

Modern public service requires 
effective, rule and merit-based 
civil service.  The Bank will 
continue to support GoE’s state 
transformation process through 
the public sector reform program. 
(continued) 

I32.  Improvement in public 
financial management performance 
evidenced by at least 25% of the 
Public Expenditure and Financial 
Accountability indicators showing 
improvement over corresponding 
2007 scores. 
Progress to date: Nine indicators, 
PI (performance indicator) -2, PI-6, 
PI-10, PI-14, PI-16, PI-17, PI-20, 
PI-24 and PI-27 out of 30 
indicators have improved reflecting 
a change in performance of the 
PFM areas covered by the 
indicators in 2010. Two (2) 
indicators PI-3 and PI-26 were 
overrated in 2007.  

4.2 Enhance the 
accountability and 
responsiveness of 
government.   

With greater decentralization of 
service delivery, effective citizen 
engagement at local levels has 
become critical.  Sustained 
capacity building of local 
government is needed to engage 
citizens in shaping their own 

20. Greater capacity of local 
government to engage with citizens 
for more responsive services 
I33.  Participatory planning of 
basic services adopted by 2011/12 
in 30% of woredas that receive 
Local Investment Grants (from 0% 

28 

M39.  Balanced score-
card performance 
management system 
rolled out to all federal 
and regional institutions. 

M40.  Functional public 
procurement oversight 
with annual procurement 
audits for 50% of 
procuring entities. 
M41. Planning 
guidelines with 
procedures and formats 
for citizen engagement 
issued in woredas.  

M42.  Capital 

m42.  Eighteen cities have 

pilot testing stage.  
c) 16 of 48 Federal 
institutions and all Bureaus 
in Benshangul and Afar 
Regional States are under 
preparation for 
implementation.  
d) 6 of 48 Federal 
institutions as well as all 
Bureaus in Somali and 
Gambela Regional States 
are conducting process 
review (study) stage for the 
reengineering. 
m39.  5 Federal institutions 
are at full implementation. 
9 Federal institutions and 
all Bureaus in Tigray, 
almost in all Bureaus in 
Amhara and 41 Bureaus in 
Oromiya Regional States 
are at the stage of planning 
for implementation. 27 
Federal institutions as well 
as all Bureaus in SNNP, 
Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa 
and Harari Regional State 
are under the process of 
preparation (total no. of 
federal inst’ns approx. 48) 
m40.  Procurement 
oversight is about 30% 
functional. 44 of 125 
Procuring Entities audited 
in FY10.   
m41. Planning guidelines 
expected to be issued in 
2010.  

AAA: 
Country Fiduciary 
Assessment 

AAA 
Capacity Building TA 
On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
PSCAP 
Urban Local Government 
Development  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

development.  The Bank will 
continue engaging in dialogue and 
support this effort through a range 
of instruments. 

4.2 Enhance the 
accountability and 
responsiveness of 
government. 
(continued) 

While perceptions of corruption in 
Ethiopia differ considerably, there 
has been little systematic analysis 
of its nature, scope and incidence.  
The Bank will develop a new 
initiative with GoE and other 
donors to diagnose corruption and 
develop a targeted program of 
support. 
GoE is currently improving 
transparency around budgets and 
spending, but concerns about 
transparency and access to public 
information remain. The Bank will 
continue to support government to 
improve transparency around 
policy, planning, budgeting and 
performance at all levels. 

Milestones  

Investment Plans in 19 
selected cities prepared.  

Progress to date 

prepared rolling 3 year 
Capital Investment Plans 
for 2008/09.  

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 
in 2008/09).  
Progress to date:  15% of woredas 
adopted participatory planning by 
the end of 2009/10.  
I34.  12 out of 19 selected cities 
will have reported a 75% increase 
(from the 2008 baselines reported 
by each city) in the number of 
citizen groups participating in the 
planning process for Capital 
Investment Plans by the end of 
2011/12. 
Progress to date: 6 cities out of 19 
achieved 75% increase in 2009/10.  
Better targeted anti-corruption 
strategies  
I35.  Satisfactory implementation 
of targeted anti-corruption 
strategies to reduce corruption in 
key hotspots, as assessed at the end 
of FY2011/12. 
Progress to date: Strategies not 
yet formulated.  
Greater transparency and citizen 
access to public information  
I36.  Layperson’s Budget and 
Service Facility Templates posted 
in +50% of woredas by the end of 
2011/12. 
Progress to date: Templates 
finalized and posting begun.  
I37.  19 selected cities disclose 
budget and expenditure 
information by the end of 2011/12 
from 0 in 2007/08. 
Progress to date: All 19 cities 
have disseminated key information 
to the public on budgets and 
expenditures for 2008/09 and 
2009/10.  

m45. The use of 
Standardized Service 
Delivery Templates is 
behind the schedule as the 
Templates are under 
customization by regions. 
Training of trainers has 
been completed and posting 
of customized templates 
will start end of 
FY2009/10. 

M43.  Knowledge and 
consensus developed 
over key corruption 
hotspots by end- 2010.  

M44.  Strategies 
developed in selected 
areas by mid-2011.  

M45.  All Regions 
encourage posting of 
Service Delivery 
Templates in service 
providers (schools, 
health clinics, etc.).  

m43.  Diagnostics 
completed but consensus on 
hotspots pending.  

m44.  Strategies pending 
identification of hotspots.  

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

New Lending 
PBS 2 AF 
Partners 
PBS, PSCAP partners, CSSP, 
CSF, JGAM partners 

AAA 
Public Finance Review 
(JBAR)  
 Partners 
DFID, Dutch, CIDA 

AAA 
Decentralized Service 
Delivery 
On-going Lending 
PBS 2 
PSCAP 
Urban Local Government 
Development  
New Lending  
PBS 2 AF 
Partners 
PBS, PSCAP partners, JGAM 
partners 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term Development Agenda for Ethiopia 

Strategic and Longer-
Term Country 
Outcomes 

Issues/obstacles and Bank 
strategy 

5.1 Deepen 
partnerships 

Follow this approach to 
strengthen dialogue and results 
focus, as well as rationalize the 
Bank’s program.  

5.2 Reinforce gender 
sensitivity in 
development activities.      

Importance of gender outcomes 
for development has been 
increasing, but implementing/ 
monitoring gender sensitivity 
remains a challenge.  With GoE 
and development partners, the 
Bank intends to mainstream 
gender considerations and help 
empower women through all 
operations.   

ANNEX 1: CAS Results Framework 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program by end Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 
CAS Outcomes that the Bank 
expects to influence and indicators 
(the 21 CAS core outcomes are 
bolded and shaded) 

Progress to date 

Milestones  

Bank Assistance and 
 Partners1 

Other Outcomes 

M46.  66% of IDA 
support provided 
through programmatic 
approaches by 2010 
(Baseline: 59% in 2005). 

m46. In 2007, 83% of IDA 
support was provided 
through program-based 
approaches. 

M47.  All FY11 new 
lending includes gender 
considerations in the 
PDO.  

m47.  Monitoring to begin 
in FY11. 

AAA 
Coordination through 
Development Assistance 
Group and Sector Working 
Groups 
Lending and new lending 
Especially PSNP, Roads, 
PBS, PSCAP, Water Supply 
and Sanitation, SLM, GEQIP, 
Energy Access, AGP 
Partners 
All development partners 
Regional initiatives including 
NEPAD/ Comprehensive 
Africa Agriculture 
Development Program 
AAA 
Gender Study 
Lending and new lending 
PBS 2, PBS 2 AF, AGP, 
FY12 program to be agreed. 
Partners 
All development partners 

21. 
Increase donor partnership 
through IDA-supported multi-donor 
programs 
I38.  Paris Declaration target for 
66% of donor support to be 
provided through program-based 
approaches is met by 2010, as 
measured by OECD (Baseline: 
53% in 2005). 
Progress to date: According to 
2008 survey on monitoring the 
Paris Declaration coordinated by 
OECD-DAC, 66% of donor 
support was provided through 
program-based approaches in 2007. 

22. Mainstream gender in IDA 
supported programs.  
I39. All new lending in FY11-12 
includes gender considerations in 
the Project Development Objective 
(the baseline is 0 and target is 
100%). 

Progress to date: New Indicator.  
Monitoring to begin in FY11. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Revised Core CAS Outcomes, Indicators and Milestones  

Original Core CAS Outcome 
1. Structural and macroeconomic policies are 
conducive to sustain internal and external 
balance. 
2.  Strengthen road sector institutions and domestic 
road construction industry.  
3.  Enhance regional integration. 

4.  Creation of an enabling environment to make 
growth corridor concept a reality. 

5.  Increased agricultural productivity. 
6.  Small town development, rural and 
management and rural credit systems support 
rural diversification. 
7.  Improve financial sector performance. 
8.  Improve urban governance. 

9.   Reduce cost of internet service. 
10. Improved investment climate helps Ethiopia 
benefit from increased globalization.  
11. Substantially achieve universal access to 
primary education and increase girls’ 
enrollment.  

12. Increase sustainable access to potable water 
and sanitation services. 
13.  Increase delivery of key health services:  
malaria and HIV/AIDS control, vaccination, 
contraception. 
14.  Improve quality of education 

15. Roll-out of kebele health extension package 
leads to improved services. 
16. Greater use of community radios for improved 
service deliver. 
17.  Increased PTA engagement in schools. 

18.  Reduce food insecurity. 

31 

Key Changes  
Indicator target extended. 

 

 

 

 

Indicator revised to better reflect actual 
progress. 
Indictor on regional road network dropped 
because Bank financing is no longer needed. 
Indicator and milestone on Nile Basin 
Initiative revised to make them more 
concrete. 
 Outcome and indicator dropped due to slower 
than expected implementation of the GOE 
strategy, and to reduce overlap with others. 
 No change. 
 Outcome and indicator dropped due to the 
absence of Bank support in this area. 

 No change. 
 Outcome and indicator consolidated with the 
outcome on improving the performance of the 
public sector. 
 No change. 
 No change. 

 

 Changed outcome to:  “Increase girls’ 
enrollment in primary and secondary 
education” to better reflect what is being 
monitored through the CAS Results Matrix. 
Indicator targets adjusted to more realistic 
levels. 
Indicator targets adjusted to more realistic 
levels. 
 Some indicator and milestone targets adjusted 
to more realistic level. 

 

 

 

Indicator target adjusted to more realistic 
level. 
Indicator target adjusted to more realistic 
level. 
 No change. 

 Outcome and indicator dropped due to lack of 
data availability. 
 No change. 

        Continued……… 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Revised Core CAS Outcomes, Indicators and Milestones (continued) 

Key Changes  

 

 

 

 No change. 
 
Indicators revised to clarify timeframe for 
measurement. 
 
Indicator target date extended. 
 Changed outcome to “Increased voice women 
within communities” and indicator revised to 
clarify what is being measured and align to 
indicator in use in ongoing operation. 
 Milestone revised to reflect ongoing 
operations. 
Indicator on perceptions of integrity of public 
service revised to integrate outcome on 
improving urban governance.  2008 baseline 
documented and target for 2011/12 added. 
Indicator derived from investment climate 
survey dropped to eliminate overlap with 
other indicators. 
Indicator on participatory planning, budgeting 
and monitoring in woredas narrowed to 
reflect the slow pace of implementation on 
the latter aspects.  Baseline added. 
 Milestone on procedures for citizen 
engagement revised to make it more concrete. 
Indicator on participatory planning, budgeting 
and monitoring in cities adjusted to reflect 
indicator in use in ongoing operations.  
Baseline added. 
 Outcome and indicator consolidated with 
others that monitor community participation, 
including of women. 
 Changed outcome to “Increase donor 
partnership through IDA-supported multi-
donor programs.” 
 Added a new outcome (outcome 22), 
“Mainstream gender in IDA supported 
programs.” 

 

Original Core CAS Outcome 
19. Develop long-term strategy for food insecurity. 
20. Increase investment in community-based 
watershed management. 
21.  Accelerate demographic transition. 
22.  Improve access by women and youth to micro 
finance and technical support. 

23.  Improve performance of the public service. 

24.  Greater capacity of local government to engage 
with citizens for more responsive services. 

25.  Ethiopian citizens are empowered by and 
engage in development process. 

26.  Increase donor harmonization through IDA-
supported multi-donor programs. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3:  Summary of Revised Core CAS Outcomes 

1.2.  Accelerate the level and 
productivity of investment in 
infrastructure in a sustainable 
manner  
1.3.  Increase productivity of 
agriculture  
1.4.  Strengthen supply 
responsiveness of industry and 
services sectors 

Focus Areas 

Core CAS Outcomes 
Strategic Objective 1: Fostering Economic Growth 
1.1.  Support macro-fiscal stability 
1. Structural and macroeconomic policies are conducive 
to sustain internal and external balance 
2. Strengthen road sector institutions and domestic road 
construction industry 
3. Enhance regional integration 

4. 
Increase agricultural productivity in selected 
intervention areas 
5. 
Improve financial sector performance 
6. Reduce cost of internet service 
7. 
Improved investment climate helps Ethiopia benefit 
from increased globalization 
Strategic Objective 2: Improving Access to and Quality of Basic Service Delivery 
2.1  Improve access/coverage of 
8. 
Increase girls’ enrollment in primary and secondary 
basic services 
education 
9. 
Increase sustainable access to potable water and 
sanitation services 
10. Increase delivery of key health services: malaria and 
HIV/AIDS control, vaccination, contraception  
11. Improve quality of education  
12. Roll-out of the kebele health extension package leads 
to improved services 
2.3  Enhance citizens’ voice to 
13. Greater use of community radios for improved service 
improve quality of basic services 
delivery  
Strategic Objective 3: Reducing Vulnerability 
3.1  Reduce exposure to chronic food 
14. Reduce food insecurity 
insecurity and shocks 
15. Develop long-term strategy for food security 
3.2  Address environmental 
16. Increase investment in community-based watershed 
degradation and population 
management 
pressures 
17. Accelerate demographic transition 
3.3 Greater engagement of women.  
18. Increased voice of women within communities 
Strategic Objective 4: Fostering Improved Governance 
19. Improve performance of the public service 

2.2  Enhance quality of basic 
services 

4.1  Improve government 
effectiveness and quality of public 
administration 
4.2  Enhance the accountability and 
responsiveness of government 

5.1  Deepen partnerships  

5.2  Reinforce gender sensitivity in 
development activities. 

20. Greater capacity of local government to engage with 
citizens for more responsive services 
Other Outcomes 
21. Increase donor partnership through IDA-supported 
multi-donor programs 
22. Mainstream gender in IDA supported programs 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4.  Progress Towards Achieving the MDGs 

Millennium Development Goals 

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015 
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)   

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 
   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)    
   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)    
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)   
   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)    

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling 
   Primary school enrollment (net, %) 
   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)    
   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)    
   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24) 

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women 
   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)    
   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)    
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)    

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds 
   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)    
   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)    
   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %) 

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths 
   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)    
   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)    
   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)    

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases 
   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)    
   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)    
   Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)    

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs 
   Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 
   Forest area (% of total land area)    
   Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)    
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)    
   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)    

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development    
   Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)    
   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people) 
   Internet users (per 100 people)    
   Personal computers (per 100 people)    

Education indicators (%)

  Ethiopia 

Ethiopia 

1990 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

1995 
60.5 
45.5 
7.2 
.. 

2000 
55.6 
44.2 
9.2 
42.0 

2008 
39.0 
.. 
9.3 
34.6 

22 
.. 
13 
.. 

68 
.. 
.. 

.. 
14 
10 
34 

.. 
.. 
2 

38 
22 
13 
.. 

65 
41 
2 

204 
122 
38 

179 
107 
38 

151 
92 
52 

.. 
.. 
4 

0.7 
159 
.. 

13 
4 
.. 
.. 
0.1 
1.8 

0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2.4 
229 
15 

20 
5 
14.4 
.. 
0.0 
1.7 

0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 

.. 
6 
8 

2.4 
331 
31 

29 
7 
13.7 
.. 
0.1 
1.8 

0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 

71 
46 
30 
50 

83 
47 
22 

119 
75 
65 

720 
6 
15 

2.1 
378 
28 

42 
11 
13.0 
18.6 
0.1 
2.3 

1.1 
3.9 
0.4 
0.7 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio

Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary 
education

100

75

50

25

0

6

4

2

0

1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Ethiopia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Fixed + mobile subscribers
Internet users

  Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available                                                                          2/25/10 
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG). 

34 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
35 

Annex 5.  Ethiopia at a Glance 

Ethiopia at a glance 

2/25/10  

Sub- 
Saharan 
Africa 

Key Development Indicators  

Low 
income 

Ethiopia  

(2008)   

Population, mid-year (millions)   
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
Urban population (% of total population) 

80.7 
1,104 
2.6 
17 

818 
24,242 
2.5 
36 

973 
19,310 
2.1 
29 

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI per capita (PPP, international $) 

22.4 
280 
870 

885 
1,082 
1,991 

510 
524 
1,407 

GDP growth (%)  
GDP per capita growth (%)  

11.3 
8.5 

5.0 
2.5 

6.4 
4.2 

(most recent estimate, 2003–2008)  

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)  
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)  
Life expectancy at birth (years)  
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)  
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)  

39 
78 
55 
75 
35 

51 
73 
52 
89 
27 

.. 
.. 
59 
78 
28 

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)  
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)  
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)  

50 
23 
97 
85 

71 
54 
103 
93 

72 
55 
102 
95 

Access to an improved water source (% of population)  
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)  

42 
11 

58 
31 

67 
38 

Net Aid Flows  

1980 

1990 

2000 

2008 

a 

(US$ millions) 
Net ODA and official aid 
Top 3 donors (in 2007):  
   United States 
   European Commission  
   United Kingdom  

211 

1,009 

686 

2,422 

19 
32 
4 

50 
109 
35 

130 
69 
11 

372 (cid:31) 
365 
292 

Aid (% of GNI) 
Aid per capita (US$)  

3.4 
6 

8.4 
21 

8.5 
10 

12.6 (cid:31) 
31 

Long-Term Economic Trends  

Consumer prices (annual % change)  
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)  

12.5 
4.3 

5.2 
3.3 

6.2 
6.9 

25.3 
28.4 

(cid:31) 
9.6 (cid:31) 
94 

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)  
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100) 

2.1 
131 

2.1 
151 

8.1 
100 

1980–90 
1990–2000 
2000–08 
      (average annual growth %) 
 3.1 
3.0 
2.2 
3.8 

Population, mid-year (millions) 
GDP (US$ millions)  

35.4 
7,269 

48.3 
12,083 
(% of GDP) 
54.3 
11.1 
4.8 
34.5 

65.5 
8,180 

80.7 
25,585 

2.6 
8.2 

Agriculture  
Industry 
   Manufacturing 
Services 

60.7 
10.6 
4.9 
28.8 

49.9 
12.4 
5.5 
37.8 

44.5 
13.2 
4.8 
42.4 

0.9 
3.7 
3.4 
3.9 

2.6 
4.1 
3.9 
5.2 

6.8 
9.2 
6.7 
9.5 

Household final consumption expenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capital formation  

80.0 
9.8 
14.5 

77.2 
13.2 
12.9 

73.8 
17.9 
20.3 

89.8 
9.8 
20.1 

1.3 
4.0 
4.9 

2.7 
9.0 
6.5 

11.2 
1.0 
10.0 

Exports of goods and services  
Imports of goods and services 
Gross savings 

7.6 
11.9 
10.8 

5.6 
8.8 
11.9 

12.0 
24.0 
16.2 

11.5 
31.2 
15.0 

3.2 
3.2 

7.1 
5.8 

11.2 
16.1 

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.  
a. Aid data are for 2007.    Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).    

10

5

0

5

10

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

0

50

100

150

200

250

1990

1995

2000

2007

Ethiopia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

-20

-10

0

10

20

95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

 
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
36 

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2008 data are preliminary.                                                                                   2/25/10 
 .. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.  
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG). 

Annex 5.  Ethiopia at a Glance (Continued) 

 Ethiopia 

Balance of Payments and Trade 

2000 

2008 

(US$ millions)  
Total merchandise exports (fob) 
Total merchandise imports (cif) 
Net trade in goods and services 

486 
1,611 
-976 

1,462 
6,811 
-5,223 

Current account balance  
   as a % of GDP  

-335 
-4.1 

-1,491 
-5.8 

Workers' remittances and  
   compensation of employees (receipts) 

53 

358 

Reserves, including gold  

349 

1,239 

Central Government Finance  

(% of GDP)   
Current revenue (including grants) 
   Tax revenue  
Current expenditure  

15.7 
9.5 
20.6 

14.5 
9.7 
9.3 

Technology and Infrastructure 

2000 

2008 

Overall surplus/deficit  

-9.4 

-4.2  

Paved roads (% of total)  
Fixed line and mobile phone  
   subscribers (per 100 people)  
High technology exports  
   (% of manufactured exports)  

12.0 

12.8  

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
   Individual 
   Corporate  

35 
30 

35 
30 

0 

5  

0.1 

2.5  

External Debt and Resource Flows  

Environment  

(US$ millions)  
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI) 

5,495 
138 
2,575 

2,882 
111 
1,458 

Agricultural land (% of land area) 
Forest area (% of land area)  
Nationally protected areas (% of land area) 

31 
13.7 
.. 

34  
13.0  
18.6  

Total debt (% of GDP) 
Total debt service (% of exports) 

 67.2 
 13.1 

11.3 
3.6  

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters) 
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters) 

1,767 
5.6 

1,551 
.. 

Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 
Portfolio equity (net inflows 

135 
0 

109  
0 

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)  

0.09 

0.11 

GDP per unit of energy use 
   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

1.8 

2.3 

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

286 

291 

 World Bank Group portfolio  

2000 

2008 

 (US$ millions) 

 IBRD 
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
   Disbursements 
   Principal repayments 
   Interest payments 

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

 IDA 
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
   Disbursements 
   Total debt service 
 IFC (fiscal year)  
   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 
      of which IFC own account  
   Disbursements for IFC own account 
   Portfolio sales, prepayments and  
      repayments for IFC own account  

1,779 
137 
34 

859 
160 
10 

Private Sector Development 
Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita) 
Time required to register property (days) 

 2000 

2008 
16 
29.8  
43  

– 
– 
– 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0  

Ranked as a major constraint to business 
   (% of managers surveyed who agreed) 
      Tax rates 
      Tax administration 

2000 

2008 

0 

0 

 72.2 
59.2 

..  
..  

 MIGA 
   Gross exposure 
   New guarantees 

– 
– 

–  
–  

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP) 
Bank capital to asset ratio (%) 

 .. 
 .. 

..  
..  

0

25

50

75

100

Control of corruption

Rule of law

Regulatory quality

Political stability

Voice and accountability

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

higher values imply better ratings

2008
2000

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2008

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

IBRD, 0

IDA, 859

IMF, 0

Other multi-
lateral, 743

Bilateral, 985

Private, 239

Short-term, 56

 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
   
   
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
Anne x 6. Se le cte d Indicators of Bank Portfolio Pe rformance

As of 5/5/2010

Indicator
Portfo l io Assessment
Number o f Pro jects Under Imp lemen tat ion a
Average Imp lemen tat ion Period (years ) b
Percen t o f Prob lem Pro jects by Number a , c
Percen t o f Prob lem Pro jects by Amoun t a , c
Percen t o f Pro jects at Ris k by Number a , d
Percen t o f Pro jects at Ris k by Amoun t a , d
Dis bu rs emen t Rat io (%) e
Portfo l io Management
CPPR du ring the year (yes /no )
Superv is ion Res ou rces (to tal US$)
Average Superv is ion (US$/p ro ject)

2007

2008

2009

2010

21
2.5
4.8
4.3
9.5
5.8
27.6

  No

3,231
154

28
2.7
10.7
6.1
28.6
30.0
26.7

29
2.9
10.3
4.8
17.2
7.5
49.3

26
3.5
11.5
5.6
19.2
21.5
28.1

No

3,421
122

Yes

3,894
134

No

2,994
115

Memorandum Item
Pro j Eval by OED by Number
Pro j Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions )
% o f OED Pro jects Rated U o r HU by Number
% o f OED Pro jects Rated U o r HU by Amt
Sou rce:  BW

S ince FY 80

Las t Five FYs

66
3,829.4
33.3
22.1

13
1,003.5
23.1
16.3

a.  A s s hown in the Annual Repo rt on Po rtfo lio Perfo rmance (excep t fo r cu rren t FY).
b .  Average age o f p ro jects in the Bank's coun try po rtfo lio .
c.  Percen t o f p ro jects rated U o r HU on developmen t ob ject ives (DO) and /o r imp lemen tat ion p rog res s (IP).
d .  A s defined under the Po rt fo lio Imp rovemen t Prog ram.
e.  Rat io o f d is bu rs emen ts du ring the year to the und is bu rs ed balance o f the Bank's po rtfo lio at the 
     beg inn ing o f the year: Inves tmen t p ro jects on ly .
*   A ll ind icato rs are fo r p ro jects act ive in the Po rt fo lio , with the excep t ion o f Dis bu rs emen t Rat io ,
    wh ich includes all act ive p ro jects as well as p ro jects wh ich exited du ring the fis cal year.

37 

 
 
 
 
           
             
         
         
 
 
 
Annex 7. Summary of Nonlending Services 

As of 5/19/2010 

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 

G, D, B, P 

G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 

G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 

A, C 
A, B, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 
A, B, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 
A, C 
A, B, C 
A, B, C 

A, B, C 

A, C 
A, C 
A, B, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 
A, B, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 

A, B, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 
A, B, C 
A, B, C 
A, C 
A, C 
A, C 
A, C 

Recent completions 

ROSC Accounting &       
Auditing 
Gender Study 
Climate Change 
Regional Growth Study 
Public Finance Review (JBAR) 
Investment Climate 
Health Financing Policy Note 
Education & Nutrition Linkages 
Macro Fiscal Issues Growth 
Public Finance Review-Water 
Investment Climate Assessment 
(ICA) 
Telecom Reform Options 
Public Private Forum 
Rural (ICA) 
Capacity Building TA 
Urban Poverty 
Rural Safety Net 
Financial Sector Review 
Urban Safety Net 
Procurement Reforms 

FY08 
FY08 
FY08 
FY08 
FY08 
FY08 
FY08 
FY08 
FY09 
FY09 

FY09 
FY09 
FY09 
FY09 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 

Underway and Planned 

Public Expenditure Review 2011 
FY11 
Innovation for Development 
FY11 
Land Administration 
FY11 
Climate Change Adaptation 
FY11 
Roads Rural Access Development FY11 
Public Expenditure Review 2012 
FY12 
Tourism Sector Competitiveness 
FY12 
Decentralized Service Delivery 
FY12 
Country Fiduciary Assessment 
FY12 
Regional Growth 
FY12 
Service Trade & Growth 
FY12 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

79 
50 
80 
502 
179 
243 
71 
255 
79 
90 

317 
43 
30 
60 
29 
69 
10 
60 
38 
51 

75 
200 
21 
280 
141 
50 
38 
320 
50 
37 
22 

38 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
39 

Annex 8 .  Key Economic Indicators

Es t imate
2009

Ind icato r

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gros s domes t ic p roducta
   A g ricu ltu re
   Indu s try
   Serv ices

100
47
13
40

100
48
13
39

100
47
13
40

100
51
11
38

100
51
11
39

100
43
13
44

100
43
14
43

100
43
14
43

100
43
14
43

To tal Cons ump t ion
Gros s domes t ic fixed inves tmen t
   Governmen t inves tmen t
   Private inves tmen t

97
24
15
9

98
25
17
8

94
26
19
7

97
23
16
6

96
22
17
6

96
25
17
8

97
25
18
7

96
25
18
8

95
25
17
8

Expo rts (GNFS)b
Impo rts (GNFS)

15
35

14
37

13
32

11
31

11
29

11
33

13
35

14
35

16
36

Gros s domes t ic s av ings
Gros s nat ional s av ings c

3
18

2
16

6
21

3
17

4
17

4
17

3
16

4
18

5
18

Memorandum i tems
Gros s domes t ic p roduct 
(US$ million at cu rren t p rices )
GNI per cap ita (US$, A t las method )

12307

15164

19553

26675

32033

31012

32370

34506

36504

160

190

220

280

340

380

400

400

410

Real annual g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 00 p rices )
   Gros s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
11.8
   Gros s Domes t ic Income
13.4

10.8
12.3

11.5
11.6

10.8
12.0

8.7
9.9

8.1
9.6

7.9
7.8

7.6
7.9

7.6
8.1

Real annual per cap ita g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 00 p rices )
   Gros s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
9.0
   To tal con s ump t ion
17.9
   Private con s ump t ion
19.9

8.0
11.4
12.0

8.6
4.6
5.7

7.9
13.5
14.6

5.9
6.4
8.8

5.4
7.3
4.9

5.3
5.4
5.3

5.0
3.1
2.9

5.0
4.5
4.5

Balance of Payments (US $ )
  Expo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
   Impo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
  Res ou rce balance
  Net cu rren t trans fers
  Cu rren t accoun t balance

1858
847
4367
3633
-2509
1807
-738

2105
1001
5549
4593
-3443
2095
-1386

2489
1188
6268
5128
-3779
2895
-871

3060
1462
8282
6811
-5223
3699
-1491

3381
1448
9241
7727
-5859
4281
-1620

3535
1685
10133
8707
-6598
4310
-2397

4128
1872
11403
9758
-7275
4393
-2991

4905
2120
12028
10211
-7124
4693
-2597

5863
2400
13045
11091
-7181
5086
-2290

  Net p rivate fo reign d irect inves tmen t
  Long -term loan s (net)
    Official
    Private

150
271
375
-104
528
-211

365
80
303
-224
545
397

482
239
337
-98
318
-168

815
704
341
364
-448
420

880
1533
378
1155
-175
-617

1056
1469
435
1034
249
-377

1133
2064
328
1737
63
-269

1208
1514
231
1283
0
-125

1290
1220
120
1100
0
-219

  Other cap ital (n et , incl. erro rs & omm ission s)

  Change in res erves d

Memorandum i tems
Res ou rce balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual g rowth rates ( 2000 p rices )
  Merchand is e expo rts (FOB)
    Primary
    Manu factu res
  Merchand is e impo rts (CIF)

-20.4

-22.7

-19.3

-19.6

-18.3

-21.3

-22.5

-20.6

-19.7

17.6
..
15.6
26.6

4.5
..
-1.5
15.8

10.7
..
-3.4
2.8

0.6
..
-1.5
10.9

-1.0
..
-36.7
22.1

2.8
..
-57.6
14.3

7.5
..
23.2
7.6

10.4
..
7.6
2.7

-10.3
..
7.6
7.3

 
 
 
 
Annex 8.  Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Ind icato r
Ind icato r

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

Es t imate
2009

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

Publ ic finance (as % of GDP at mark et prices )e
  Cu rren t revenues
  Cu rren t expend itu res
  Cu rren t accoun t s u rp lu s (+) o r deficit (-)
  Cap ital expend itu re
  Fo reign financing

17.5
12.4
5.1
10.9
3.7

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth o f M2 (%)
  Private s ecto r cred it g rowth /
  to tal cred it g rowth (%)

Price indices ( 2000 =100 )
  Merchand is e expo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e impo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e terms o f t rade index
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

  Real in teres t rates
  Cons umer p rice index  (% change)
  GDP deflato r (% change)

38.0
19.6
30.1

84.8
108.9
77.8
45.4

6.8
9.9

16.8
11.6
5.2
10.7
2.8

36.1
17.4
42.2

95.8
119.0
80.5
48.1

12.3
11.6

15.8
10.0
5.8
10.7
2.9

33.1
19.7
38.0

102.7
129.2
79.5
50.0

15.8
17.2

14.3
9.2
5.2
9.7
2.6

28.1
22.9
23.5

125.7
154.8
81.2
62.0

25.3
30.5

14.9
8.1
6.8
9.1
2.3

24.9
19.9
62.9

125.7
143.9
87.4
57.8

36.4
24.4

16.0
9.1
6.9
10.4
2.6

25.5
17.1
45.2

142.4
141.8
100.4
..

5.6
6.0

15.1
9.0
6.1
10.8
3.1

25.6
18.3
23.6

147.1
147.7
99.6
..

8.4
9.0

15.3
9.0
6.3
10.9
3.3

26.4
18.4
34.2

150.9
150.5
100.2
..

6.6
6.5

15.7
9.3
6.4
10.5
3.0

27.5
19.0
35.9

190.4
152.4
124.9
..

6.1
6.2

a.   GDP at facto r cos t
b .  "GNFS" deno tes " good s and non facto r s erv ices ."
c.  Includes net un requ ited tran s fers exclud ing o fficial cap ital g ran ts .
d .  Includes u s e o f IMF res ou rces .
e.   Cons o lidated cen t ral governmen t .
f.  "LCU" deno tes " local cu rrency un its ." An increas e in US$/LCU deno tes app reciat ion .

40 

 
 
 
 
Annex 9. Key Social Indicators 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2002-08 

41.0 
3.0 
11.5 
7.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

190 
37 
49 

32.4 
8.6 
41.3 

.. 
2.4 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

12 
6 
.. 

44 
43 
46 

126 
212 

491 
401 
.. 
.. 

57.0 
3.3 
13.9 
6.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

150 
73 
94 

40.0 
7.2 
47.7 

.. 
3.3 

24 
27 
20 

20 
79 
10 

38 
57 
.. 

49 
48 
51 

108 
180 

448 
358 
.. 
.. 

80.7 
2.6 
17.0 
5.3 

.. 
.. 
.. 

280 
190 
92 

29.8 
9.3 
39.4 

2.2 
5.5 

78 
81 
75 

42 
96 
31 

74 
81 
35 

55 
54 
57 

69 
109 

339 
297 
720 
6 

Sub- 
Saharan 
Africa 

819.3 
2.5 
36.4 
5.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

1,077 
127 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2.6 
4.1 

73 
75 
70 

58 
81 
46 

72 
72 
25 

52 
51 
53 

86 
144 

395 
362 
900 
46 

Low- 
income 

976.2 
2.1 
28.7 
4.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

523 
132 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2.3 
3.4 

80 
82 
78 

67 
86 
60 

78 
80 
27 

59 
58 
60 

76 
118 

295 
254 
790 
44 

POPULATION   
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
    Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY 
(% of population) 
National headcount index 
    Urban headcount index 
    Rural headcount index 

INCOME 
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2000=100) 
Food price index (2000=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION 
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS 

Public expenditure 

    Health (% of GDP) 
    Education (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate 
(% of age group) 
    Total 
        Male 
        Female 

Access to an improved water source 
(% of population) 
    Total 
        Urban 
        Rural 

Immunization rate 
(% of children ages 12-23 months) 
    Measles 
    DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth 
(years) 
    Total 
        Male 
        Female 

Mortality 
    Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
    Under 5 (per 1,000) 
    Adult (15-59) 
        Male (per 1,000 population) 
        Female (per 1,000 population) 
    Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one year of age or 
at any time before the survey. 
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 23 April 2010. 

41 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Annex 10 .  Key Exposure Indicators

Ind icato r

2004

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

Es t imated
2009

2008

2010

2011

Pro jected
2012

2013

6204

2273

2620

2882

3137

3462

3790

4021

4141

..

93

299.8
50.4
4.5
83.4

..
53.6

..
..

..
3359

..

..

98.9
15.0
..
66.7

..
..

..
..

..

..

90.6
13.4
..
72.8

..
..

..
..

..

..

82.4
10.8
..
76.8

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
9.8
..
82.5

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
11.2
..
87.6

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
11.7
..
89.1

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
11.7
..
90.2

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
11.3
..
91.1

..
..

..
..

..
553

..
711

..
859

..
1028

..
1296

..
1534

..
1742

..
1888

To tal deb t ou ts tand ing and 
d is bu rs ed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net d is bu rs emen ts (US$m)a

To tal deb t s erv ice (TDS)
(US$m)a

Deb t and deb t s erv ice ind icato rs 
(%)
   TDO/XGSb
   TDO/GDP
   TDS/XGS
   Conces s ional/TDO

IBRD expos u re ind icato rs (%)
   IBRD DS/pub lic DS
   Preferred cred ito r DS/pub lic
   DS (%)c
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d
      Of wh ich p res en t value o f
      guaran tees (US$m)
   Share o f IBRD po rtfo lio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
   Loan s
   Equ ity and quas i-equ ity  /c

MIGA
   M IGA guaran tees (US$m)

a.  Includes pub lic and pub licly guaran teed deb t , p rivate nonguaran teed , us e o f IMF cred its and net s ho rt-
     term cap ital.
b .  "XGS" deno tes expo rts o f goods and s erv ices , includ ing wo rkers ' remit tances .
c. Preferred cred ito rs are defined as IBRD, IDA , the reg ional mu lt ilateral developmen t banks , the IMF, and the
    Bank fo r In ternat ional Set t lemen ts .
d . Includes p res en t value o f guaran tees .
e.  Includes equ ity and quas i-equ ity types o f bo th loan and equ ity ins trumen ts .

42 

 
 
 
 
Annex 11. Operations Portfolio

As Of 9/13/2010

Closed Projects

96

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (A c tive)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (A c tive + Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (A c tive)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (A c tive + Closed)

 1,490.90
 0.00
 2,483.38
 161.74
 3,974.27
 161.74

 1,971.54
 0.00
 1,971.54

Active Projects

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating

Deve lopment 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

Fisca l Year

 ET‐Elect. Access Rural  II SIL (FY07)
ET Productive  Safe ty Ne ts (APL III)
ET‐  Cap. Bui lding for Agric. Se rv (FY06)
ET‐  Ethiopia Nutri tion SIL (FY08)
ET‐  Sustainable  Land Management (FY08)
ET‐APL3‐RSDP Stage  III Proj  (FY07)
ET‐Electrici ty Access (Rural )  Expansion
ET‐Energy Access SIL (FY03)
ET‐GEF Energy Acce ss Prj  (FY06)
ET‐General  Educ Qual i ty Improv. (FY09)
ET‐ Irrigation & Drainage  SIL (FY07)
ET‐Mul ti ‐Se ctoral  HIV/AIDS II (FY07)
ET‐Pastoral  Communi ty Deve lpt  II (FY08)
ET‐Protect. Basic Serv. Phase  II  (FY09)
ET‐Pub Se c Cap Bldg Prj  (FY04)
ET‐RSDP Stage  IV  APL (FY09)
ET‐Road Sec Dev Prgm Ph 2 Supl  2  (FY05)
ET‐Sustainable  Land Mngt SIL (FY08)
ET‐Tana &Be les Int.  Wat Re s Dev Project
ET‐Tourism Deve lop. Project SIL
ET‐Urban Local  Govt Deve lopment (FY08)
ET‐Urban WSS SIL FY07)
ET‐Water Sply & Sani tation SIL (FY04)
ET/N i le  Basin Ini tiative :ET‐SU Interconn
Priv Sec Dev CB

MS
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
MS
S

P101556
P113220
P079275
P106228
P090789
P091077
P097271
P049395
P077380
P106855
P092353
P098031
P108932
P103022
P074020
P106872
P082998
P107139
P096323
P098132
P101474
P101473
P076735
P074011
P050272

Overal l  Re sul t
Source : BW

2008
2010
2006
2008
2008
2007
2006
2003
2006
2009
2007
2007
2008
2009
2004
2009
2005
2008
2008
2009
2008
2007
2004
2008
2005

MS
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
MU
S
S
MU
MS
MS
S

43 

Or igina l Amount in US$ Millions

Difference Between
Expected and Actua l
Disbursements a/

IDA

130
480
54
30

225
133.4
312.7

50
100
30
80
540
150
245
348.2
20
45
35
150
100
180
41.05
24

GRANT

Cance l.

Undisb.

Or ig. Frm Rev'd

9.00

4.93

124.93
356.56
5.66
24.42
7.11
175.97
68.73
224.92
3.18
36.54
69.75
5.08
49.60
47.92
47.22
238.59
135.01
15.02
36.42
31.67
86.08
70.72
100.19
14.86
5.67

13.00

10.00
5.00

20.00

13.00

7.00

110.31

5.81
16.62

65.62
60.89
20.39
3.18
‐14.08
68.47
9.28
12.03
‐9.49
18.50
‐2.61
‐59.65
4.30
13.64
‐1.18
‐13.31
35.29
31.09
13.31
11.92

‐5.53

0.20

‐15.70

7.19

3503.35

13.93

68.00 1,981.83

284.27

‐13.83

 
 
 
 
 
44 

Annex 12. Ethiopia Trust Fund (TF) Portfolio 

Proj. ID 

Project Name 

TF # 

Approved Amt 

Sign Date 

Closing 
Date 

Disbursed Amt 
FY08-10 

Undisbursed Amt 

P050383 

ET Food Security Cofinancing Project 

TF 51169 

5,146,637 

12-Mar-03 

30-Jun-10 

              1,531,008  

2,161,921 

P050383 

Ethiopia Food Security Project 

TF 52696 

15,003,432 

6-Sep-04 

30-Jun-10 

              1,650,699  

8,525,715 

P049395 

ET Women Fuelwood Carriers 

TF 54213 

1,860,650 

12-Aug-05 

31-Aug-10 

                 753,976  

906,674 

P077380 

GEF-ENERGY ACCESS PROJECT 

TF 56092 

4,930,000 

28-Apr-06 

30-Jun-11 

              1,456,202  

3,223,798 

P074015 

Protection of Basic Services 

TF 56885 

177,453,647 

21-Jun-06 

30-Jun-09 

              8,353,647  

0 

P101929 

Managing and Enforcing Intellectual Property Rights: Creating a Driver of 
Growth 

TF 57338 

496,000 

2-Oct-06 

1-Oct-10 

                 288,521  

157,479 

P074015 

Protection of Basic Services 

TF 56942 

87,847,500 

26-Oct-06 

31-Dec-10 

           72,095,163  

5,769,462 

P098428 

Humbo and Soddo Community-Based Natural Regeneration Project 

TF 56939 

189,850 

28-Dec-06 

30-Jun-10 

                 123,858  

65,992 

P074015 

Protection of Basic Services 

TF 57683 

8,025,896 

2-May-07 

30-Jun-09 

              8,025,896  

0 

P098093 

Productive Safety Nets APL II 

TF 58248 

113,846,332 

12-Jun-07 

30-Apr-10 

           92,997,788  

20,848,544 

P079275 

Rural Capacity Building Project 

TF 90084 

9,547,921 

20-Jun-07 

30-Sep-10 

5,142,437 

4,405,483 

P074015 

Protection of Basic Services 

TF 90445 

390,314,870 

22-Jun-07 

30-Jun-09 

         290,814,870  

0 

P091077 

ET-Road Sector Dev. Stage III Proj. (APL3) in support of Govt's RSDP 

TF 56516 

1,542,375 

31-Dec-07 

31-Dec-10 

                 325,704  

1,216,671 

P076735 

Ethiopia Water Supply and Sanitation Project 

TF 91704 

111,675,531 

9-Apr-08 

31-Dec-12 

           25,709,666  

85,965,865 

A. Total grant signed before the CAS but active during the CAS Period 

927,880,640 

509,269,437 

133,247,604 

P090789 

ET-Sustainable Land Management Program 

TF 92320 

9,000,000 

16-Jul-08 

30-Sep-13 

              1,523,426  

7,476,574 

P105651 

Ethiopia Electricity Access Rural Expansion, Phase II - GPOBA 

TF 92600 

6,200,000 

30-Oct-08 

31-Dec-11 

-    

6,200,000 

P105651 

Ethiopia Electricity Access Rural Expansion, Phase II - GPOBA 

TF 92601 

1,800,000 

30-Oct-08 

31-Dec-11 

-    

1,800,000 

P106855 

General Education Quality Improvement Project - APL 1 (GEQIP) 

TF 93227 

70,000,000 

21-Nov-08 

30-Jun-10 

           36,500,000  

33,500,000 

P114843 

PHRD Ethiopia: Cluster Development Program 

TF 93486 

240,000 

16-Feb-09 

3-Nov-11 

                 106,790  

133,210 

P115788 

Development Marketplace for the African Diaspora in Europe Winning Project 

TF 93792 

53,982 

6-Apr-09 

31-Jan-11 

45,073  

8,910 

P114913 

ET: Flood risks prevention in Ethiopia 

TF 93300 

315,000 

25-May-09 

30-Jun-12 

-    

315,000 

P103022 

Ethiopia Protection of Basic Services Program Phase II 

TF 94641 

194,926,392 

19-Jun-09 

31-Dec-11 

         194,926,392  

0 

P106855 

General Education Quality Improvement Project - APL 1 (GEQIP) 

TF 94224 

14,960,000 

24-Jul-09 

13-Jun-13 

           14,960,000  

0 

P106228 

ET-Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition 

TF 93946 

1,810,434 

14-Aug-09 

14-Aug-13 

-    

1,810,434 

P096323 

ET: Tana & Beles Integrated Water Resources Development 

TF 95045 

3,484,679 

31-Aug-09 

30-Sep-13 

              1,000,000  

2,484,679 

P117216 

ET: Forest Carbon Partnership Facility Readiness Grant 

TF 94541 

200,000 

2-Sep-09 

31-Dec-10 

                 100,000  

100,000 

P103022 

Ethiopia Protection of Basic Services Program Phase II  

TF 95106 

14,449,440 

14-Sep-09 

30-Jun-12 

-    

14,449,440 

P098093 

ET:  Productive Safety Nets APL II 

TF 95296 

28,261,351 

21-Oct-09 

30-Jun-10 

           28,261,351  

0 

P115154 

Ethiopia Statistical Capacity Building: Data Systems and Economy 

TF 95746 

167,596 

8-Apr-10 

30-Apr-11 

-    

167,596 

B. Total grant signed during CAS period 
Total A+B 

345,868,874 
1,273,749,514 

277,423,032 
786,692,469 

68,445,842 
201,693,446 

NB 

In addition $21m were provided to cover the Bank -Executed activities during that period. 

 
  
  
  
  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
Annex 13.  IFC Program and Portfolio 

Eth iopia: IFC Inve s tm e nt Ope r at ions Pr ogr am

2008

2009

2010

2011*

Com m itm e nts (US$m )
Gross
Net**

Ne t Com m itm e nts by Se ctor (%)
EQUITY
LOAN
Total

55.00
55.00

100
100

Ne t Com m itm e nts by Inve s tm e nt Ins tr um e nt (%)
Equity
Loan
Total

100
100

5.29
5.29

100

100

100

100

0

0

0

0

*  A s of March 31, 2011
** IFC's Ow n A ccount only

Ethiopia
Comm itted and Disbursed Outstanding Inve stment Portfol io
As of 8/31/2010
(In USD Mil l ions)

FY 
Appr oval Com pany

Loan

Equ ity

Com m itte d

**Quas i 
Equ ity

Dis bur s e d Outs tand ing

*GT /RM

Par t icipant

Loan

Equity

**Quas i 
Equity

*GT /RM

Par t icipant

2008
2010

Dmc
Nyota

Total Por tfo lio:

55
0

55

0
5.05

5.05

0
0

0

0
0

0

0
0

0

0
0

0

0
5.04

5.04

0
0

0

0
0

0

0
0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Ris k Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
