d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  

The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 54690-LB 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

&  

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY  
FOR 
LEBANESE REPUBLIC 
FOR THE PERIOD FY11-FY14 

July 28, 2010 

MNC02 Country Management Unit 
Middle East and North Africa Region 

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed 
outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made 
publicly available in accordance 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS 

Fiscal Year 
January 1 to December 31 

Unit of Currency = Lebanese Pound (LBP) 
1US$ = 1500 LBP (As of July, 2010) 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
Analytical and Advisory Activities 
AFD 
Agence Française de Développement  
AWI 
Arab World Initiative 
ALMPs Active Labor Market Policies and Programs 
BDC 
Business Development Centers 
BdL  
Banque du Liban (Central Bank of Lebanon) 
CAD 
Current Account Deficit 
CAS  
Country Assistance Strategy 
CAS  
Central Administrations for Statistics 
CDR 
Council for Development and Reconstruction 
CGAC  Country Governance and Anti-Corruption (CGAC) 
CHUD Cultural Heritage and Urban Development Project 
COA 
Court of Accounts 
CPI  
Consumer Price Index 
CPPR Country Portfolio Performance Review 
CPS  
Country Partnership Strategy 
DPL  
Development Policy Loan 
EC  
European Commission 
EdL  
Electricité du Liban (Lebanon Electric) 
EOSI 
End-of-Service Indemnity 
EPCA Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance 
ESIA 
Economic and Social Impact Assessment 
ESP  
Economic Social Development Program 
ESW 
Economic Sector Work 
FDI  
Foreign Direct Investment 
FMIP 
First Municipal Infrastructure Project 
FY  
Fiscal Year 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GIT  
Global Income Tax 
GNP 
Gross National Product 
GoL  
Government of Lebanon 
HCP  
Higher Council for Privatization 
IBRD 
Int’l Bank for Reconstruction & Development 
ICA  
Investment Climate Assessment 
ICT  
Information and Communication Technology 
IDA  
International Development Association 
IDF  
Institutional Development Fund 
IFC  
International Finance Corporation 
IMC-SP Inter-Ministerial Committee for Social Policy 
IMF  
International Monetary Fund 
IOF  
Institute of Finance 

ISN 
Interim Strategy Note 
LBP 
Lebanese Pound 
LNG 
Liquefied Natural Gas 
MDGs 
 Millennium Development Goals 
MDTF  Multi Donor Trust Fund 
MEHE  Ministry of Education & Higher Education 
MENA  Middle East and North Africa 
METAC 
IMF-Middle East Technical Assistance Center 
MIC 
 Middle Income Countries 
MIGA 
 Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MOET  Ministry of Economy and Trade 
MOEW  Ministry of Energy and Water 
MOF 
 Ministry of Finance 
MOIM  Ministry of Interior and Municipalities 
MOL 
 Ministry of Labor 
MOSA  Ministry of Social Affairs 
MTEF 
 Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 
NGOs 
Non-Governmental Organizations 
NPTP 
National Poverty Targeting Program 
NSSF 
National Social Security Fund 
PEP-MENA Private Enterprise Partnership for the Middle East & 
North Africa 
Public Expenditure Review 
Public Financial Management 
Prime Minister 
Public-Private Partnership 
Report on Observance of Standards & Codes 
Regional Water Authorities 
Specific Investment Loan 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Statistical Master Plan 
Technical Assistance 
Treasury Bills 
Trust Fund 
Lebanon Trust Fund 
Universal Basic Education 
United Nations Development Program 
United Nations Relief and Work Agency 
Value Added-Tax 
 World Bank Group 
 World Bank Institute 

PER 
PFM 
PM  
PPP 
ROSC 
RWA 
SIL 
SMEs 
SMP 
TA  
TBs 
TF  
TFL 
UBE 
UNDP 
UNRWA 
VAT 
WBG 
WBI 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

A long standing and sustained collaboration between the World Bank Group and the 
Government of Lebanon shaped all stages of development of this Country Partnership Strategy 
(CPS).  The CPS benefited from extensive and thoughtful discussions with government 
representatives and was also enriched by views from other partners in Lebanon – development 
partners, civil society organizations, parliamentarians, political and civil leaders, academics and 
representatives of the private sector – all of whom we warmly thank. 

This Country Partnership Strategy was prepared under the guidance of Hedi Larbi, 
Country Director, by a team led by Demba Ba, Country Manager for the World Bank in Lebanon 
and Thomas Jacobs, Sr. Country Officer for the IFC.  The CPS Core Team included: Sebnem 
Akkaya, Lead Economist; Husam Beides, Sr. Energy Specialist; Mohammed Benouahi, Lead 
Water and Sanitation Specialist; Mouna Couzi, Operations Analyst; Mona El-Chami, Sr. 
Financial Management Specialist; Abdelmoula Ghzala, Lead Infrastructure Specialist; Pilar 
Maisterra, Country Program Coordinator; Robert Maurer, Lead Urban Sector Specialist; Alaa 
Sarhan, Sr. Environmental Economist; Rapti Goonesekere, Sr. Economist; and Haneen Sayed, 
Lead Operations Officer. 

The preparation of this CPS involved contributors from many units of the World Bank 
Group (WBG) particularly members of the Lebanon Country Team, whose country experiences 
and knowledge have also been extremely valuable in shaping the WBG partnership strategy.  
Although it is impossible to name them all, they are all to be thanked and congratulated for their 
excellent collaboration and teamwork.  The following members made especially important 
contributions: Randa Akeel, Gender Specialist; Nada Abou-Risk, Program Assistant; Aseel 
Barghuthi, Junior Professional Associate; Chadi Bou Habib, Economist; Zeina El Khalil, Public 
Information Associate; Lina Fares, Procurement Specialist; Parameswaran Iyer, Sr. Water and 
Sanitation Specialist; Claire Kfouri, Water and Sanitation Specialist; Wael Mansour, Economist; 
Sabah Moussa, Sr. Executive Assistant; Hoveida Nobakht; Principle Operations Officer; Frank 
Sader; Colin Scott, Lead Specialist; Simon Stolp, Sr. Energy Specialist, Andrew Stone, Lead 
Private Sector Development Specialist; Janette Uhlmann, Country Officer; Sophie Warlop, 
Operations Analyst; and Mona Ziade, Communications Officer. 

Vice President 
Director 
Country Manager/Task Manager 

IBRD 
Shamshad Akhtar 
Hedi Larbi 
Demba Ba 

IFC 
Rashad R. Kaldany 
Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Thomas Jacobs  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR FY11-FY14 
LEBANESE REPUBLIC 

CONTENTS  

Executive Summary …………………………………………………………………………………………………..………..i 

I.      COUNTRY CONTEXT ........................................................................................................... .... 1 
A. Political Context .................................................................................................................. . 1 
B. Social Context & Progress towards Millennium Development Goals ................................ . 2 
C. Economic Context ............................................................................................................... . 4 

II.    RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS, AND MACROECONOMIC   
          OUTLOOK……………………………………………………………………………. .......... . 5 
A.  Recent Macroeconomic, Fiscal, and Financial Sector Developments……………… ........ . 5 
B.  Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects……………………………………..…………. 7 

III.  LEBANON’S PRIORITIES AND AGENDA FOR DEVELOPMENT………..……………....10 

IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY…………………………...….....13 
A. Nature of the Partnership……………………………………………………………….......13 
B. Implementation of the ISN and Lessons Learned………………………………………….14 
C. Consultation Process………………………………………………………..…………….. 15 
D. Strategic Objectives of the CPS…………………………………………………………... 16 
E. CPS Principles of Engagement (Two-Tiered Approach)…….…………………………….18 
F. Areas of Engagement …………………………………………………………………..….20 
G. Potential Lending Envelope………………………………………………………….….... 32 

V.   RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION………………………………………….…………….…..….32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR FY11-FY14 
LEBANESE REPUBLIC 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  (Continued) 

BOX 1:        Governance, Anti-Corruption & Service Delivery Challenges within Lebanon’s  
         Complex Political Economy………………………………………………………     18 

TABLES: 

Table 1:  Drivers of Change in Public Debt Ratio: 2007-2013………………………………..      7 
Table 2:  Lebanon’s Medium-Term Macro Outlook…………………………………………..      9 

ANNEXES: 

 Annex 1:  
 Annex 2:   
 Annex 3:   
 Annex 4:  
 Annex 5: 

Results Matrix…………………………………………………………………... 34 
World Bank Portfolio Performance…………………………………………….. 42 
Activities of Development Partners (Ongoing/Future)………………………… 
46 
ISN Completion Note…………………………………………………………… 48 
Standard CPS Annexes 
Annex A2: Lebanon at a Glance ……………………………………………….. 60 
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance  
& Management ………………………………………………… 63 
Annex B3: IBRD Program Summary…………………………………………… 64 
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program……………………………….. 65 
Annex B4: Summary of Non-Lending Services………………………………… 66 
Annex B5: Social Indicators…………………………………………………….. 67 
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators…………………………………………… 68 
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators…………………………………………… 70 
Annex B8: IBRD Operations Portfolio and Grants…………………………….. 71 
Annex B8: IFC Committed & Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio…… 72 

MAP IBRD 33433 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR FY11-FY14 

LEBANESE REPUBLIC 

Executive Summary 

1. 
Lebanon’s economy has repeatedly proved its resilience to external shocks and its 
ability to rebound quickly from crisis if political stability exists. But the need now is to put the 
economy on a path to high, sustainable, and broad-based growth. Sustained high growth is vital 
for Lebanon to improve its fiscal position and continue to move forward to achieve fiscal space 
and debt sustainability, create jobs for the fast-growing educated labor force and support social 
inclusion. Unique features of Lebanon’s confession-based political system and challenging 
geopolitical environment have made it difficult for consecutive governments to implement 
needed reforms, despite a shared understanding of which reforms are critical for growth.  

2. 
Lebanon’s key near-term policy challenge is to maintain a prudent approach to 
economic management. The financial sector has prospered thus far despite the global financial 
turmoil. But with high twin deficits and public debt, Lebanon remains vulnerable to external 
shocks and has limited fiscal space. Given the substantial exposure of commercial banks to the 
public debt, careful fiscal and debt management to maintain the confidence of domestic and 
foreign depositors and investors remains critical. Continued prudent monetary policies are also 
critical, for managing risks and buffering Lebanon from the effects of the global crisis. 

3. 
Over the medium-term, achieving high growth and employment creation requires 
addressing the deeper structural economic determinants of growth and fiscal adjustment. The 
resources currently invested in the government debt are unlikely to be made available for 
productive investments while monetary policy continues to directly influence medium- to long-
term interest rates. And the financial sector still lacks strong incentives to intermediate a large 
share of its liabilities towards productive investments.  

4. 
The Policy Statement of the national unity government (in office since November 2009) 
and the 2010 Budget Law reflect a strong will to put Lebanon back on a steady and 
sustainable political and economic growth path. The Statement and the Budget Law identify 
electricity, water, telecoms, urban transport, local development, environment, public education, 
and social protection as priority focus areas in which reform and investment actions will 
produce tangible results that will revive the country’s middle class, promote equity and fairness, 
widen access to better quality and more affordable health care and education and; provide 
adequate social safety nets for the most vulnerable. Success with these initial actions will create 
favorable social and political space that the Government could use to tackle the deeper and more 
difficult reforms that are needed to sustain development in these sectors and achieve broad-
based growth.  

5. 
The World Bank Group’s (WBG) support to Lebanon over the past decade has focused 
mainly on post-war reconstruction and on macro and fiscal recovery. The partnership has been 
frequently jolted by political and security crises but it has been flexible and resilient, allowing 
frank dialogue. The current IBRD portfolio consists of eight active projects for a total net 
commitment of US$269.8 million, of which US$138.4 million has been disbursed to-date. It has 
supported the reconstruction of critical infrastructure. Project implementation is generally 

i 

 
 
 
 
satisfactory and the disbursement ratio over the last three years has been above the three-year 
average (FY08-FY10) for MENA and for the IBRD portfolio as a whole. IFC has played a key 
complementary role and its committed portfolio has risen from US$38 million at the end of 
FY05 to US$203 million as of June 2010. The donor community views the World Bank Group 
as leading the engagement of Lebanon’s development partners to coordinate activities. 

6. 
Going forward, an effective country partnership strategy must be shaped by political 
reality, able to respond flexibly to support reform when it does take place, and focused on 
economic and fiscal management as well as social stability. Under the CPS for FY11-14, the 
scope and degree of the World Bank Group’s support will be determined by the Government’s 
willingness and ability to undertake reforms in areas that are seen to contribute to growth, fiscal 
stability, and social cohesion.  

7. 
The main objective of the CPS is to support the Government in putting the economy on 
a path to sustained, high, and broad-based economic growth. The Bank Group will continue to 
support the Government with investment lending and analytical and advisory services, through 
the existing loan portfolio, and through a new indicative lending envelope ranging between 
US$375 and US$550 million assuming reasonable pacing and distribution over the four-year 
CPS period.  This lending and technical assistance will be complemented by IFC investments 
and advisory services.  

8. 
In consideration of the country context and drawing from the lessons learned over the 
ISN period, the CPS adopts a two-tiered approach: (i) maintain a Core Program of engagement 
which consists of selected investments in basic services, as well as technical assistance and 
analytical work that will serve to inform and build momentum around key reforms; and (ii) 
stand ready to engage more deeply in additional areas that have been selected because of their 
critical role in supporting Lebanon’s economic growth, fiscal and social stability, as well in 
reinforcing economic and trade relations with the Gulf and the Mashreq. The CPS envisages to 
engage in the areas of fiscal stability and public financial management, competitive business 
environment, economic infrastructure, human capital development and social protection. 

9. 
The core CPS program will be assessed annually to determine the results achieved, and 
the Bank Group will stand ready to engage more deeply in areas where there is traction for 
reform. The criteria for moving to deeper engagement in a given area are: (i) there is sufficient 
agreement within Government and among affected stakeholders on a well articulated policy 
reform agenda; and (ii) the reform will have a positive impact on one or more of the following: 
economic growth, fiscal space, and social inclusion. The Bank would be ready to provide budget 
support through a general or sector-specific development policy loan if Lebanon implements a 
sound macroeconomic framework and introduces a robust reform program that has a positive 
impact on the fiscal situation. 

10. There is a risk that narrow sectarian interests will continue to overshadow national-
level interests and obstruct the implementation of the government’s newly adopted economic 
reform program. This risk could be compounded if macroeconomic stresses develop as a result 
of external shocks. Maintaining the World Bank Group’s analytical and advisory activities to 
build capacity for reforms and to stimulate and inform the debate around policy options should 
help build consensus around the reform program. Combined with continued strong engagement 
by the Bank in the development and implementation of a social protection strategy, these 
activities could provide an instrument to mitigate the risk. 

ii 

 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR FY11-FY14 
LEBANESE REPUBLIC 

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

1. 
Lebanon is a small, high-middle-income country of 4.2 million people with a large 
diaspora of several millions, an area of 10,452 km2, and an average GDP per capita of around 
US$7,000 in 2008. More than 85 percent of the population lives in cities, and about half lives in the 
capital, Beirut. Youth below age 14 represent 25.8 percent of the population, while the active youth 
(age 18-35) account for 31.8 percent of the population. The country has long been known not only 
for its political instability but also for its talent in banking, education, and engineering and for its 
open economy and liberal press. Though it has no natural resources it is one of the few countries in 
the region with ample water resources and plentiful rainfall. Its service-based economy is driven by 
a dynamic private sector and is highly dependent on the Arab Gulf economies with significant 
linkages with the neighboring Mashreq economies in trade, labor, finance and real-estate. These 
strong linkages highlight the potential benefits that Lebanon could obtain from increased regional 
cooperation as promoted by the Arab World Initiative (AWI). 

2. 
The economy has many times proven its resilience to external shocks and its ability to 
quickly rebound from crisis if political stability exists. Yet it is necessary during this Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) period to put the domestic economy on a path to high, sustainable and 
broad-based growth that will create the necessary employment opportunities to meet the needs of a 
fast growing educated labor force, and most importantly to achieve fiscal space and debt 
sustainability. Unique features of the country’s confession-based political system and challenging 
geopolitical environment have made it difficult for consecutive governments to implement reforms, 
despite a shared understanding of which reforms are critical for economic growth. 

A. Political Context 

3. 
Lebanon is a sectarian-based consensual democracy in which political authority is shared 
among confessional groups, with power divided largely between representatives of the Christian 
and Muslim communities.  The Taef Accord, which ended the Civil War in 1990, established a 
system whereby the President, the Prime Minister, and the Speaker of the Parliament share power. 

4. 
The consensual nature of the country’s governance system render policy decision-making 
lengthy and can create deadlock that has, in the past, derailed government’s drive for reform.  
Lebanon also has a unique position in the region, and its domestic politics are complicated by 
relations with external actors. 

5. 
The country’s complex political economy affects the quality of its public institutions of 
policy making as well as its public institutions of services delivery, resulting in often low quality 
services being provided by the public sector.   As a consequence, citizens turn to, sometimes, more 
costly alternative sources of service. 

6. 
Lack of capacity has emerged as another obstacle to reform in most sectors.  In general, the 
service delivery sectors are severely short in resources, especially skilled staff. The performance of 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ministries and their capacity to deliver public services are therefore affected by the current staffing 
policy.  

7. During the implementation period of the World Bank’s Interim Strategy Note (ISN)—July 
2007-June 2009—Lebanon’s political situation was very uncertain. The hostilities in July, 2006 
had caused serious human and physical losses and significant damage to the economy, 
jeopardizing national stability and ushering in a period of uncertainty. The International 
Community responded rapidly, pledging US$7.6 billion in aid at the Paris III Donor Conference in 
January, 2007. But not long after this Conference, and the adoption of the ISN to support 
implementation of the Government’s Paris III reform program, the consensus for reform 
evaporated and Lebanon experienced major political conflict. Political stalemate resulted in the 
closure of Parliament, the withdrawal of the opposition from the Government, and an increase in 
political violence. The resulting instability and insecurity affected activities throughout the 
economy well into 2008. 

8. With the Doha Accords of May 2008, the settlement of Lebanon’s political crisis and the 
ensuing improvement in security resolved much of the uncertainty. The formation of a 
transitional coalition government ushered in a period of hope for a quick return of security and 
political stability that paved the way to legislative elections on June 7, 2009. The polls resulted in a 
victory for the March 14 political coalition, which led to the appointment of parliamentary majority 
leader Saad Hariri as Prime Minister. Prime Minister Hariri formed a “National Unity” 
Government in November 2009, following protracted negotiations with the opposition over the 
distribution of key ministerial posts. 

9. Election debates of the economic platforms of the major political blocs revealed a 
consensus that prudent fiscal policy, responsible debt management, and improved service 
delivery to the people are critical for an inclusive and stable Lebanon. But while all political 
groups in Lebanon agree on the importance and objectives of reforms, they differ on how to 
reform, particularly with respect to the role that private sector should play in service sectors such as 
telecommunications and utilities.  

10. Because of the complexity of the political landscape in Lebanon and the inherent difficulty 
of achieving consensus on reform and its implementation, an effective assistance strategy must 
be shaped by political reality and able to respond flexibly to support reform when it does take 
place. First-best solutions are not often feasible, given the political equilibrium, but any support 
strategy should work towards economic and fiscal management as well as social stability.  In the 
coming period, the scope and degree of the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) financial support will be 
determined by the Government’s willingness and ability to undertake reforms in areas that are seen 
to be contributing to growth, fiscal stability, and social cohesion. 

B. 

Social Context and Progress towards Millennium Development Goals 

11. Regional disparities in living conditions are significant in Lebanon. Poverty is concentrated 
in the suburbs of large cities and in remote rural areas especially in the northern region of Akkar, 
which has been lagging behind the rest of the country; in this region, 80 percent of the population is 
rural and as many as  63 percent of the families are deprived and face serious poverty. Overall, 
nearly 28 percent of the Lebanese population (1 million) are considered to be poor, living on 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
US$4/day (Lebanon’s “upper poverty line”), and 8 percent (300,000 Lebanese) are considered 
extremely poor, living on US$2.4/day (the “lower poverty line”).1 

12. Uneven living standards across Lebanon’s regions reflect the absence of a regionally 
balanced development strategy, coupled with differences in educational attainment and human 
capital. Development efforts since the end of the Civil War have focused on post-conflict urban 
reconstruction, while the northern region, mostly rural, houses 46 percent of the country’s 
extremely poor. In addition, influences from external forces promote suspicions among the 
population, and increase tensions in a country where the central government and state institutions 
are fragile and inefficient, and most citizens turn instead to their religious, tribal, or ethnic 
identities. Among Lebanon’s most vulnerable and excluded groups are the Palestinian refugees, 
some 373,000, spread across 12 camps and other poor urban areas. 

13. Compared with most other middle-income countries, Lebanon achieves relatively good 
health and education outcomes. At around 72 years, life expectancy in Lebanon is comparable 
with that in other middle-income countries. Infant and child mortality rates and the maternal 
mortality rate are below the regional averages for the Middle East and North Africa. Lebanon 
invests heavily in education, committing 13 percent of GDP for this purpose; 60 percent of this 
investment comes from private funds. Secondary school enrollment rates are 13 points above the 
regional average. However, weak institutional capacity and inefficiencies limit Lebanon’s 
prospects of developing higher quality education and health services.  

14. Though Lebanon invests heavily in human capital, it sees its best-trained people migrate 
abroad or face low rates of return domestically. The unemployment rate is estimated at more than 
7.9 percent in 2008. Nearly half the unemployed (48.4 percent) are young people aged 15-24. 
Youth unemployment in Lebanon is estimated to be as high as the average for the Arab region 
(roughly 26 percent), the highest in the world.  

15. Young women have been affected worse than young men. Unemployment is higher among 
women than men, at 9.6 percent compared to 7.7 percent (2004). 2 Though women are as educated 
as men—the ratios of girls to boys in primary, secondary, and tertiary education are 0.97, 1.10, and 
1.16, respectively—and the fertility rate is relatively low—at 2.2 births per woman3—women’s 
labor force participation is low, at 37 percent, compared to the 55 percent average in other upper-
middle-income countries.4  On average, Lebanon’s female workers are more educated than male 
workers, yet they experience wage discrimination, particularly at advanced employment levels, and 
face more challenging working conditions than their male counterparts.5  

16. 
In tracking the world’s progress towards achieving Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) has suggested that Lebanon will 
achieve most of the MDGs by 2015, except for three: (i) halving extreme poverty; (ii) reducing 
child mortality; and (iii) reversing environmental degradation. For all the MDGs however, there 
remain important regional disparities in access, quality, and efficiency. 

1 According to the 2004-2005 Living Conditions and Household Budget Survey.  See “Poverty, Growth and Inequality in 
Lebanon,” UNDP, 2007, and “Poverty, Growth and Income Distribution in Lebanon”; UNDP, August 2008. 
2 UNDP and the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs, The National Survey of Household Living Conditions (2004). 
3 Data are for 2006; World Bank Central Database (August 2008). 
4 World Bank Central Database (August 2008). 
5 “Gender-Based Differences among Entrepreneurs and Workers in Lebanon,” The World Bank, December 2009. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
C. Economic Context 

17. The Lebanese economy is a service-oriented economy that has a long-standing and 
proactive trade tradition. Services and trade sectors account for 60 percent of GDP and 73 percent 
of jobs; both sectors have a significant potential for growth. Led by tourism and financial 
services—which are seen as the backbone of the Lebanese economy—the services sector alone 
account for about 35 percent of GDP. Lebanon receives massive financial transfers and capital 
inflows from abroad—net foreign inflows of services, capital, income and remittances reached 60 
percent of GDP in 2009. Among the underlying reasons is the comparative advantage of the 
Lebanese banking sector which is governed by bank secrecy and exhibited strong resilience to 
adverse external shocks as well as internal political instability.  

18. Lebanon’s growth and job creation performance has been below potential in the face of its 
huge financial resources and overall improvement of key macroeconomic indicators over the last 
decade.  Most of these financial resources are consumed or unproductively invested, hence, 
preventing the extension and modernization of productive capacities, and in turn, economic growth 
and job creation. There has been moderate increase in investment which has been essentially 
directed to the real estate sector, which has accounted for close to 70 percent of total investments 
since 1997. Most of the remaining investments go to metallic industries that provide the 
construction sector with intermediary goods. In turn, these sectors rely mostly on non-Lebanese 
labor. Hence, concentration of investments in these sectors has little impact on the employment of 
Lebanese nationals while channeling productive resources into activities where productivity gains 
are potentially scarcer. Macroeconomic imbalances and related perceived risks (resulting in 
relatively high interest rates), as well as many barriers reducing competitiveness and investment 
opportunities are among the key factors that discourage longer-term productive investments in the 
economy.  

19. Lebanon is recognized for its human capital and the entrepreneurship skills of its citizens; 
however it has traditionally faced significant migration and brain drain. With 54 percent gross 
enrollment rate in tertiary education, Lebanon exceeds by far the 26 and 23 percent rate registered 
respectively for the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region and for Middle-Income 
Countries (MIC).6 However, human capital seems to be undervalued in the domestic labor market. 
Gross private returns to education are low compared to international standards—an estimated 9 
percent for Lebanon against 21 percent worldwide.  This reflects low levels of productive 
investments in sectors that demand skilled labor. Along with political instability, low returns for 
education is a major factor behind the Lebanese brain drain. Migration is traditionally a large 
phenomenon with the Lebanese Diaspora, considered to be one of the largest in the world in terms 
of proportion to resident population. The Lebanese Diaspora has traditionally strong linkages to 
their home country: Lebanon was the 7th largest country in the world in terms of the ratio of 
incoming remittances to GDP in 2008 with 25 percent, making remittances inflows larger than 
Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs). Remittances remained strong in 2009 at 20 percent of GDP. 

20. The hostilities in the summer of 2006 resulted in serious human and physical losses and 
caused a significant damage to the Lebanese economy. Though estimates vary, it is likely that 
total direct damages were around US$2.8 billion, with a further US$700-800 million in indirect 

6 World Bank’s World Development Indicators, 2009. 

4 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
damage.7 Economic performance and employment has been severely affected with a significant 
loss of output from the hostilities in 2006.  

21. These events, however, have amplified the urgency of reform and donor response. In the 
months following the hostilities and while addressing the urgent reconstruction and recovery 
needs, the Government worked to adapt its medium-term economic program to the new 
circumstances and presented it at the Paris III Donor Conference in January, 2007. The 
program made an effort to balance fiscal measures needed for stabilization with structural measures 
needed for higher growth. Donors responded favorably and generously to the program, pledging a 
total of US$7.6 billion assistance, of which 76 percent were signed into agreements and about 52 
percent disbursed by the end of May, 2010. 

22. The reform efforts suffered a significant setback with a prolonged political impasse 
through May 2008, but reconstruction and recovery progressed speedily. While the strong 
recovery helped in containing the fiscal and public debt position, Lebanon’s fiscal deficit before 
grants remains high (9.7 and 8.5 percent of GDP in 2008 and 2009, respectively) and continues to 
feed a very high public debt (148.0 percent of GDP in 2009). The majority of Lebanon’s public 
debt (US$50.7 billion at end-2009) is held by private creditors, particularly by domestic 
commercial banks holding 57 percent of public debt.  The public debt is predominantly short-term 
(about 46 percent is scheduled to mature by the end of 2011, and 21 percent by the end of 2010). It 
is very probable that high interest rates linked to the public debt overhang do not encourage long 
term productive investments. Unless Government financing needs strongly decline, investors 
would continue to prefer to invest in highly remunerative short-maturity bonds. Significant levels 
of new growth and fiscal effort are, in turn, required to stabilize Lebanon’s presently unfavorable 
debt dynamics.  

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS, AND MACROECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK 

A. Recent Macroeconomic, Fiscal, and Financial Sector Developments 

23. Despite the protracted political and security crisis and the adverse external economic 
environment in the aftermath of the 2006 hostilities, the economy recovered at a much faster 
pace than originally envisaged. Real growth rebounded to 7.5 percent in 2007 and 9.3 percent in 
2008.  Preliminary figures for 2009 show a real growth rate of 9.0 percent and estimation for 2010 
is 8.0 percent. Although there was in 2009 some slowdown in foreign trade-in-goods and overall 
transactions8 in the economy, reflecting the adverse impact of the global economic downturn, this 
impact remained much more measured than originally envisaged, leading the Central Bank 
(Banque du Liban- BdL) to revise the real GDP growth projections for 2009 up from 3 percent 
expected early in the year. While the growth performance in 2007 is explained by a low base in 
2006 (when real growth was 0.6 percent), the growth thereafter was supported by sustained strong 
regional demand for Lebanon’s services and large inflows of transfers and capital (services exports 
increased by about 38 percent in 2009 over and above the 44 percent increase registered in 2008, 
and net inflows of services, income, transfers, and capital reached over 60 percent of GDP in 
2009). 

7 Over 1,000 people were killed, 5,000 were injured and close to one million (a quarter of the population) were internally 
displaced. Additionally, brain drain accelerated as up to 200,000 people left the country. 
8 Source BdL – Compensated Checks. 

5 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
24. 
Inflation decelerated in 2009, following the drop in international prices, which has 
brought import costs down. Imported inflation in Lebanon has a strong impact on the Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) since imports of goods amount to about 40 percent of domestic absorption.  The 
deceleration of prices was particularly prominent between April and October when the CPI 
increased by only 2.1 percent on average (y-o-y)—the overall increase in the CPI remained low at 
2.8 percent in 2009 compared to the 10.7 percent average increase in 20089. It should be noted that 
the CPI index does not directly reflect trends in real estate prices, which, following a substantial 
increase in 2008 (about 50 percent on average), remained high in 2009, reflecting strong capital 
inflows, and persistent demand and supply in the sector.  

25. The decline in international prices of commodities is having a positive impact on 
Lebanon’s foreign accounts. The trade-in-goods deficit increased by only 0.8 percent in 2009 (y-
o-y) compared to 41 percent a year earlier, reflecting mainly the deceleration in imports.  Exports 
of services continued to improve in 2009 with tourism arrivals to Lebanon increasing by a 
substantial 39 percent during this period.  As a result, the current account deficit is estimated to 
have declined to 15.5 percent in 2009 (from a high of 18.5 percent in 2008) and continues to be 
easily financed by external inflows. Net foreign inflows of services, transfers, income and capital 
reached US$20.7 billion in 2009, up from US$16.1 billion registered in 2008. Similarly, change in 
net foreign assets reached US$7.9 billion, up from US$3.5 billion a year earlier. The continued 
inflow of capital has helped to bolster the value of the Lebanese Pound (LBP) which is pegged to 
the US dollar.   

26. Lebanon’s financial market developments have been favorable despite the global financial 
turmoil. Deposits and reserves have risen sharply since 2008. The money supply increased by 
US$13.4 billion (39 percent of GDP) in 2009, out of which about 55 percent has been registered in 
the second half of the year. Lending to the private sector remained strong, increasing by 15 percent 
in 2009. This reflects the sharp increase in resources of commercial banks, as well as the increase 
in incentives from BdL to promote lending in local currency. The incentive measures included 
expansion in the sector coverage of the subsidy on interest rates,10 and exemptions on compulsory 
reserves for loans denominated in local currency (LBP), excluding consumer loans and real estate 
lending. Gross foreign currency reserves hit a new high of US$25.7 billion in December, 2009 
(equivalent to about 19 months of imports of goods), up from US$17.1 billion in December, 2008. 
The dynamic of reserves reflect both higher capital inflows and a shift by depositors out of dollars 
into the local currency because of the interest rates advantage.11 Reflecting these developments, the 
dollarization of deposits declined to 64.5 percent by December 2009 from 69.6 percent at end-2008 
(77 percent at end-2007). 

9 Source: Consultation and Research Institute (CRI). 
10 Since 2000, the BdL and the Government initiated schemes to promote lending to private sector investment operations. 
These initiatives include subsidizing interest payments of the borrowers, extending special guarantees to the borrowers, and 
granting exemptions on compulsory reserves of creditors. Initially focusing on projects in agriculture and industry, these 
schemes were gradually expanded to include other sectors, such as ICT, environment/energy efficient projects, tourism and 
housing. Although the special schemes exist also for loans denominated in foreign currencies, they are essentially directed 
toward lending in LBP. All currencies taken together, these schemes are particularly developed in agriculture (84 percent of 
total lending – mostly in LBP), tourism (70 percent), housing (59 percent – all in LBP), and industry (42 percent). Without 
these schemes, some sectors, especially agriculture, would have been crowded out from the credit market. Also, with the sharp 
rise in real-estate prices, these schemes are allowing access to housing by the resident middle-class. 
11 With the sharp decline in the Libor, the spread between deposits in LBP and deposits in foreign currencies widened by 
increasing from 271 basis points (bpt) in December 2007 to 389 bpt in December 2008 and remaining high thereafter at 370 
bpt. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
27. Strong growth and higher revenue collection checked the increase of fiscal deficit and 
public debt ratio, but fiscal deficit remains high. Despite increased expenditures (as a result of 
higher transfers to the Electricité du Liban (EdL), and wage and some non-wage benefits in the 
public sector introduced in 2008 in response to a sharp increase in inflation), strong domestic 
revenue collection helped contain the fiscal deficit (excluding grants) at around 9-10 percent of 
GDP over the last two years. This brought faster improvement in the primary fiscal balance than 
had been expected. These improvements partially checked the growth in debt which is estimated to 
have declined to 148.0 percent in 2009 (see Table 1 below). However, high growth is the single 
most important driver of the fast improvement in the debt ratio since 2007. Interest payments 
remained high at around 11 percent of GDP during this period (about 46 percent of revenues), 
continuing to feed the high public debt. The composition of debt changed between end-2008 and 
December 2009, with an increase in the share of debt denominated in LBP to 58 percent of total 
debt. The average interest rate on foreign currency debt slightly increased to 7.35 percent in 
December 2009, up from 7.24 percent at end-2008 which reflects the exchange before maturity of 
US$1.9 billion worth of debt against new issuances of Eurobonds at higher interest rates12 in early 
2009. However, issuances of Eurobonds since December, 2009 are on rather favorable terms. In 
March 2010, Lebanon issued US$1.2 billion worth of Eurobonds with a 10-year-maturity and a 
coupon rate of 6.375 percent.13 

Table 1: Drivers of Change in Public Debt Ratio: 2007-2013 

129.2
-4.3

157.1
-10.7

2007-Act . 2008-A ct . 2009-Prel.

In Percen t o f GDP
Deb t
Change in Deb t
Con tribu t ion o f:
Primary Balance Includ ing Gran ts
In teres t Paymen ts
Pub lic Secto r Depos its
Nominal GDP Growth Effect
Other Items
Memo Item: Gran ts
-1 .4
-0 .9
Source: Officia l Da ta and World Bank S ta ff Ca lcu la t ion
No tes1 : ( -) sign ind ica tes con tribu t ion to reduct ion in deb t and (+) to increase in deb t
No te2 : BdL erased abou t US$2 .0 b i l l ion o f governmen t deb t in 2007 through re-eva lua t ion o f i ts stock o f go ld .

-3.0
11.1
4.2
-20.9
-0.5

-1.6
9.1
0.0
-11.8
0.0

-0 .3

-1.1
9.8
0.0
-14.1
0.0

-0 .2

-1.7
10.2
0.0
-17.5
0.0

-0 .4

-2.2
11.0
8.4
-27.4
-0.6

167.8
-12.1

-2.4
12.4
0.2
-18.7
-3.6

-0 .4

2010-Es t .

2011-Pro j. 2012-Pro j. 2013-Pro j.

148.0
-9.1

139.0
-9.0

133.6
-5.4

124.3
-5.0

-2.0
8.5
0.0
-11.4
0.0

-0 .3

B. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects  

28. The key near-term policy challenge for Lebanon is maintaining a prudent approach to 
economic management. Lebanon’s financial sector has so far prospered despite the global 
financial turmoil. However, with high twin deficits and public debt, Lebanon remains highly 
vulnerable to confidence and external shocks and has limited fiscal space. Therefore, careful fiscal 
management to maintain confidence of all (domestic and foreign) depositors and investors remains 
critical for Lebanon’s economic prospects, given the substantial exposure of commercial banks to 

12 The exchange was done in three issuances: two in US$ and one in Euro. One issuance in US$ is maturing in 2012 and has an 
interest rate of 7.5 percent.  The other issuance in US$ is maturing in 2017 and has an interest rate of 9 percent. The issuance in 
Euro is also maturing in 2017 with an interest rate of 7.75 percent. 
13 The Eurobond issue was managed by three Lebanese banks and subscribed essentially by domestic investors, including 
banks.  The proceeds of the operation were utilized for the redemption of the US$1.065 billion Eurobonds with a rate of 7.125 
percent due in March, 2010. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
the public debt. A stable political and security environment and continued prudent monetary 
policies are also critical to managing risks – including security risks, both internal and those 
stemming from regional tensions -  and buffering Lebanon from the effects of the global crisis.  

29. Over the medium-term, however, sustaining high growth rates will call for implementation 
of key structural reforms. While fiscal adjustment is a necessary condition to improve Lebanon’s 
long-term growth potential, it is not a sufficient one. Resources that are currently invested with the 
government could be prevented from financing productive investments while monetary policy 
continues to directly influence medium- to long-term interest rates, and the financial sector’s 
incentives to intermediate a large share of its liabilities towards productive investments remain 
weak. Unless Government financing needs strongly decline, investors will prefer to invest in highly 
remunerative short-maturity bonds whose remuneration in US dollars is guaranteed by the 
monetary policy in place since the mid-90s. Improving the performance of the country in terms of 
growth and employment creation, however, requires addressing deeper structural economic causes 
that will help create new growth and facilitate fiscal adjustment. 

30. Bank staff projections for the medium-term (2011-2013) take into account the importance 
of the external economic environment, political stability and evolving medium-term economic 
program expressed in the Government’s Policy Statement. The base-case scenario assumes a 
political environment that is conducive to decision-making, as well as the absence of major military 
action related to regional tensions, and takes account of: (i) an expected gradual increase in oil 
prices (and hence of regional oil wealth) and their impact on foreign inflows and growth; (ii) a 
projected gradual recovery in growth—in the region and world-wide—and its impact on demand 
for Lebanon’s exports of goods and services; (iii) government’s plan to increase public investments 
in key service sectors (in particular, electricity, telecom, water and roads maintenance) over the 
medium-term, financed essentially through a decline in primary surplus while new tax measures 
(including long overdue increased taxation in the real estate sector and slightly higher taxes on 
interest income), would start gradually bringing additional revenues over the longer run; and (iv) 
government’s program to stimulate private investment and growth, including through improved 
service delivery, and enhanced public-private-partnership (PPP). 

31. The above assumptions combined with the current present favorable economic dynamics 
and constructive political environment project an average 6 percent growth over the medium-
term. Available early indicators for the first half of 2010 point to continued good economic 
performance over the near-term. Over the medium-term, the Government’s evolving economic 
program suggests initiation of structural reforms (particularly energy, water, telecom and private 
sector development) that would improve the business/investment environment, competition, the 
entry and operation of Small- and Medium-Enterprises (SMEs), and service delivery, which 
collectively would upgrade, to some degree, the long-term growth potential of the Lebanese 
economy. Many of these reforms (particularly energy and telecom sector reforms) are considered 
urgent by private sector representatives and will raise business confidence considerably. In the 
medium-term, it is also expected that the flow of income transfers, remittances, Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI), and portfolio investments into Lebanon will remain favorable (albeit at rates 
closer to historical averages) due to the gradual rise in oil prices, as well as the positive response of 
domestic private investment to the Banque du Liban incentives summarized above (given higher 
reserves and lower inflation) and overall improved business confidence in Lebanon’s economic 
prospects. These factors would collectively help stimulate growth and reduce interest rate spreads, 
thereby helping offset the negative short-term impact of gradual fiscal consolidation on aggregate 
demand. Based on these factors, we expect real GDP growth to converge to a higher trend growth 

8 

 
 
 
 
of about 6 percent on average in the medium-term along with an improvement in the public debt 
ratio (see Table 1). 

Table 2: Lebanon’s Medium-Term Macro Outlook 

2007-Act. 2008-Act. 2009-P rel. 2010-Est. 2011-P roj. 2012-P roj. 2013-P roj.

Growth & P rices
GDP growth-real
CP I
Public Finance
Pub lic Deb t
Fisca l Ba lance Includ ing Gran ts
Primary Ba lance Incldu ing Gran ts
To ta l Expend itures
Interest Payments
Transfers & Subsidies
Other Current P rimary Expenditures
Public Investment
To ta l Revenues
Foreign Grants
Domestic Revenues
Direct Taxes
Indirect Taxes
Non Tax Revenues
External Sector
Exports of GNFS
Imports of GNFS
Curren t Accoun t Def icit
FDI
Reserves
Memo Items
Average Cost of the debt
P rimary Balance of Stabilisation
Nominal GDP - US$ million
Debt Service to Domestic Revenues
World Bank S ta f f Ca lcu la tions.

7.6%
-3.5%

9.3%
10.4%

9.0%
2.8%

8.0%
4.9%

7.0%
3.6%

6.0%
3.1%

6.0%
3.1%

167 .7% 157 .1% 148 .0% 139 .0% 133 .6% 129 .2% 124 .3%
-9 .3%
-8 .8%
-8 .1%
-8 .5%
-8 .7%
-7 .5%
-6 .5%
3 .1%
2 .2%
3 .0%
1 .7%
1 .1%
1 .6%
2 .0%
33 .9% 33 .1% 32 .9% 32 .9% 32 .8% 31 .6% 30 .6%
12.4%
11.0%
11.1%
10.2%
9.8%
9.1%
8.5%
5.0%
5.5%
4.7%
5.3%
5.2%
4.8%
4.4%
13.8%
14.7%
15.5%
14.7%
14.5%
14.5%
14.4%
2.7%
1.8%
1.6%
2.6%
3.2%
3.3%
3.3%
24 .6% 24 .2% 24 .8% 24 .4% 24 .1% 24 .1% 24 .1%
1.4%
0.9%
0.4%
0.4%
0.2%
0.3%
0.3%
23 .2% 23 .4% 24 .4% 23 .9% 23 .9% 23 .9% 23 .9%
6.0%
6.3%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
11.6%
12.4%
13.4%
13.4%
13.4%
13.4%
13.4%
5.5%
4.7%
4.9%
4.5%
4.5%
4.5%
4.5%

23.0%
24.6%
22.3%
21.7%
21.2%
20.9%
20.7%
48.2%
53.7%
47.0%
46.2%
45.2%
44.7%
43.9%
-11 .2% -18 .5% -15 .5% -15 .4% -15 .2% -15 .1% -14 .8%
8.8%
9.1%
10.8%
10.1%
9.6%
9.1%
8.5%
39.0%
57.0%
74.3%
65.6%
58.9%
53.7%
49.0%

7.7%

25,047
53.7%

7.8%
-16.4%
29,933
47.0%

8.2%
-9.8%
34,528
45.5%

7.8%
-7.3%
39,155
42.6%

7.8%
-4.3%
43,572
41.0%

7.5%
-2.7%
47,802
38.1%

7.2%
-3.0%
52,444
35.6%

32. The twin deficits are expected to slowly improve during the projection period. The current 
account deficit in 2009 was lower at 15.5 percent of GDP (compared to over 18.5 percent of GDP 
in 2008), and it is projected to continue to slightly improve through 2013. Reflecting the 
Government approved plan for improving the performance of the electricity sector, transfers and 
subsidies would decline moderately starting in 2011. In parallel, public investment will be higher to 
address, in particular, supply deficiencies in the electricity and water sectors, and to upgrade 
telecom services and roads. The Government also maintains emphasis on improving the 
effectiveness of expenditure management as a whole. Tax revenues are expected to remain robust 
with the impact of the rise in direct taxes gradually materializing in the longer run. Non-tax 
revenues – essentially transfers from the Telecom sector – are expected to remain constant in 
percent to GDP. Accordingly, 2010 budget expenditures are estimated to remain high at 32.9 
percent of GDP, and the primary surplus before grants is projected to be squeezed down to around 
1 percent of GDP in 2011 before starting to recover in 2012. The ratio of revenues to GDP is 
projected to remain stable and the debt to GDP ratio is expected to continue to gradually improve 
in 2010-2013. 

9 

 
 
 
 
33. On the financing side, Lebanon has recently resumed borrowing in foreign currencies. 
The abundance of liquidity in domestic currency, particularly since the onset of the global 
financial crisis, has led the Government to opt for increasing net financing from domestic 
sources in domestic currency. Indeed, the share of Lebanese Commercial Banks in the debt 
portfolio increased to 56.7 percent in December, 2009 from 54 percent in December, 2008, and the 
share of the Central Bank increased to 13.4 percent from 11.9 percent. The financing from these 
two sources was mainly in domestic currencies. In 2010, the Government has so far continued 
financing the deficit by issuing LBP-denominated Treasury Bills (TBs) and resumed the issuance 
of Foreign Currency-denominated debt. The new Eurobonds issuances are re-equilibrating the 
composition of debt towards the legal ceiling of 50 percent of foreign currency-denominated debt, 
taking advantage of the low interest rates in the international market. In addition, low cost, 
concessional foreign debt financing also remains available subject to accelerated structural reforms, 
with a large portion of Paris III pledges remaining undisbursed (52 percent including funds tied to 
structural reforms).  

34. The costs of divergence from a solid reform route are high. The medium-term reform 
scenario suggests that even with fiscal adjustment (with 1.6 percentage points of GDP lower fiscal 
deficits between 2009 and 2013) and a fairly positive growth response in the medium-term, debt 
will remain high (124 percent of GDP in 2013), largely because of the continued high cost of 
servicing the large debt stock (see Table 2 above). In the event of a weak policy response and a 
deteriorating internal and/or external political environment, and/or unfavorable external shocks, 
Lebanon’s growth potential would remain repressed (on average at around its historical trend rate 
of 3.5 percent for the period 1993-2006) due to a lack of profitable business opportunities, weak 
external competitiveness and low levels of business confidence in economic prospects. Primary 
public spending in terms of GDP would also remain at its historical average, and interest payments 
in terms of GDP would remain high. In such a low growth scenario, the fiscal deficit would remain 
unsustainably high (at double digit levels in terms of GDP), and the debt-to-GDP ratio would grow 
back to the high level experienced just a few years ago. This would inevitably further expose the 
country to a risk of financial disruption, should investors, holding the vast majority of Lebanon’s 
debt, lose confidence in the country’s debt servicing capacity. 

III. LEBANON’S PRIORITIES AND AGENDA FOR DEVELOPMENT 

35. At the Paris III Conference in January 2007, Lebanon presented its “Reconstruction, 
Recovery, and Reform” Program for 2007 to 2011. This medium-term structural reform program 
consisted of six main pillars: (i) economic revival; (ii) social sector reform; (iii) macro-fiscal 
reform; (iv) privatization; (v) recovery and reconstruction; and (vi) budget support. Thirty-eight 
donors and institutions pledged about US$7.6 billion in support of the program (equivalent to one 
third of Lebanon’s GDP). About 52 percent of this amount had been disbursed by end-May 2010.  

36. Though reconstruction and recovery progressed speedily, the apparent consensus on the 
reform agenda quickly dissolved and little, if any, progress was made on reforms. A political 
crisis emerged, lasting for about 18 months and leading to the formation in September, 2008 of a 
transitional government until the parliamentary elections in June, 2009.  

37. The new Government, in office since November 2009, established its program “Progress 
and Development” (ESP) as a cornerstone for its policy statement to Parliament. The ESP 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
embodies the economic and social development platform of the national unity Government and 
reflects a strong will to put Lebanon back on a steady and sustainable political and economic 
growth path. The ESP seeks to: (i) revive the country’s middle class through job creation and better 
distribution of wealth, for example: by broadening ownership of real estate and improving access to 
economic infrastructure; (ii) improve the quality of Lebanese life through better safeguarding the 
environment, widening access to better quality and more affordable health care and education, and 
providing adequate social safety nets for the most vulnerable; and (iii) promote equity and fairness 
through broadly-based growth, narrower regional disparities, reduced gender disparities, reliance 
on the rule of law, and good governance to restore the credibility of state institutions.  

38. To achieve these objectives, the ESP calls for leveraging the framework that Paris III 
provides to implement a national program, including a set of well-targeted structural reforms 
and investments for enabling growth: (i) sound fiscal management that provides a sustainable 
macroeconomic framework while offering fiscal space to offer adequate social and infrastructure 
services and social safety nets for the most vulnerable people; (ii) a modernized, effective, and 
strong public administration; (iii) adequate physical infrastructure, especially for utilities and 
transport; (iv) an appropriate regulation and risk-sharing framework for effective private 
participation in the economy, particularly in telecoms services; and (v) adequate social protection 
services and an education system whose planning and production are matched to the demand for 
skills in the domestic and global labor market. The ESP also recognizes the need to pay special 
attention to the challenges posed by environmental degradation and gender imbalances and to 
leverage existing economic and sector work in these two areas to fast-track reforms.  

39. The Government has identified electricity, water, telecoms, urban transport, local 
development, environment, public education and social protection as priority focus areas in 
which immediate reform and investment actions will produce tangible results toward meeting the 
pressing needs of the population. Success with these initial actions would create favorable social 
and political space that the Government could use to tackle the deeper and more difficult reforms 
that are essential for putting these sectors on a sustainable development path and the economy on a 
sustainable broad-based growth.  

 Electric power: The Cabinet has adopted in June, 2010, a Policy Note and an Action 
Plan to reform the power sector in order to provide continuous and cost-effective 
electric power to all citizens and productive sectors. The Plan seeks to increase in the 
short-term generation capacity by at least 600 MW, as well as implement energy-
efficiency and savings programs, thus preparing the ground for deeper reforms of 
tariff and sector management and governance. The Plan also aims to implement strict 
bill collection measures through the private sector and will encourage energy 
conservation, the use of clean technologies, and renewable energy resources such as 
solar power. 

 Water supply: The Government is seeking to improve access to water and the 
continuity of water supply to fulfill the increasing demand, by improving water 
distribution and conservation and completing the water infrastructure of the Greater 
Beirut Regional Water Authorities. It also seeks to rationalize water consumption and 
to promote the preservation of water resources. With regard to wastewater, the 
Government aims to stop the contamination of groundwater, improve the operation of 
existing treatment sites, and accelerate the construction of new sites to protect the 
natural resources. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 Telecommunications: The Government seeks to modernize the infrastructure and 
regulatory framework so the sector can provide modern and cost-effective 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) services with the aim of 
stimulating private sector led economic growth. It plans to expand the penetration 
rate and to tackle gaps in the quality and range of service through the extension of 
broadband services and private sector participation 
in 
the provision of 
telecommunication services and related business. 

 Urban transport: The Government seeks to improve public transport to facilitate the 
movement of citizens and to reduce transport costs and delays. It will launch a 
national plan for public transport services and establish traffic control centers, install 
more traffic signals, and firm up the punitive measures for traffic violations.  

 Local development:  In response to sustained urbanization the Government recently 
adopted the National Land Use Master Plan which provides the framework for a more 
balanced territorial development promoting social cohesion while building on the fast 
growing tourism sector potential and using the exceptionally rich historical and 
cultural heritage assets of the country for economic development. 

 Environment: The Government envisages actions to encourage the use of clean 
energy and renewable energy, along with adopting sustainable management policies 
for solid waste, wastewater, water, and reforestation programs. 

 Education: The Government objectives are to improve the quality of public 
education by expanding access to early childhood education, reducing dropout and 
repetition rates, enhancing the qualifications and performance of the teaching 
workforce, adopting school-based planning, development and 
improvement, 
establishing a National Qualifications Framework which will link the various 
education levels to the labor market, and introducing quality assurance at the higher 
education level. 

 Social protection: The Government intends to accelerate the implementation of 
reforms that were started under Paris III, the most critical of which are:  the 
introduction of the new pension law, which replaces the ill-functioning End-of 
Service Indemnity (EOSI) system with a defined-contribution, fully-funded pension 
system; improving the  financial sustainability  of the National Social Security Fund 
(NSSF), as well as, the quality and efficiency of its services and operations; and the 
expansion and rationalization of health insurance within a unified framework.  

 Labor Markets: In the area of employment and labor market policies, the 
Government defined an ambitious program which includes developing a framework 
for effective Active Labor Market Policies and Programs (ALMPs), particularly for 
youth and gender inclusion; modernizing labor market policies including related 
regulations; developing income protection mechanisms for workers (such as 
unemployment insurance); and strengthening the Ministry of Labor’s capacity to lead 
the reform process and its implementation. In the area of social safety nets, the 
Government intends to implement a nation-wide program of targeted social assistance 
through the National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP). 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

A. Nature of the Partnership 

40. The World Bank Group and Lebanon have built a strong partnership that has enabled frank 
and substantive discussion about the country’s development challenges, as well as, about the 
political economy and its impact on the Government’s ability to implement reforms. Over the past 
decade the framework for the Bank Group’s support has focused primarily on post-war 
reconstruction and on macro and fiscal recovery. The partnership has been frequently jolted by 
political and security crises linked to the unique features of Lebanon’s political system and 
geographic location. 

41. The experience over the past five years highlights the Bank Group’s ability to be flexible 
and to respond to unanticipated changes in the country’s circumstances and needs. Following 
the 2006 hostilities, the Bank acted quickly to help assess the extent of the damage and the scope of 
Lebanon’s reconstruction needs and to assist in the reconstruction of basic municipal and urban 
infrastructure.  It also played an important role in supporting the fiscal and structural reforms of the 
Government’s Paris III agenda, including through emergency support to the budget.  The ISN set 
out a 15-month transitional framework of technical and financial assistance to support the 
Government’s efforts to create reform momentum, paving the way for broadening and deepening 
these reforms as the political environment stabilized. Through these actions, the Bank also helped 
lay the foundation for an effective and more inclusive social safety net, better public financial 
management, and increased private sector development.   

42. Similarly, IFC was quick to engage with the Bank in supporting the recovery of the 
private sector.  During this period, IFC opened a Country Office in Beirut (co-located with the 
Bank) and significantly scaled-up 
its activities 
in Lebanon. 
 IFC exceeded 
its Paris 
III/Reconstruction pledge of US$250-275 million, having committed almost US$770 million since 
the end of the 2006 conflict and through June 30, 2010.  During this period, IFC’s investment and 
Advisory Services emphasized: (i) increasing access to financial services for SMEs and trade 
finance activities; (ii) easing administrative constraints; (iii) promoting improved corporate 
governance; and (iv) improving competitiveness and facilitating greater private investments.  
Coordination between the Bank and IFC has continued to strengthen, leading to this first joint CPS 
for Lebanon. 

43. Because of the continuous frank dialogue that the Bank has enjoyed with Lebanon over 
the last decade, as well as its track record in responding effectively to Lebanon’s requests for 
assistance, the WBG is now well placed to engage the GoL in a partnership that seeks to achieve 
sustainable, broad-based, high economic growth, which is central to moving the Lebanese economy 
from the current high-risk equilibrium to a more sustainable fiscal and debt equilibrium. This CPS 
also recognizes that the Lebanese economy is among the most linked with the Mashreq and GCC 
economies; and hence the Bank Group will support the GoL in adopting a proactive regional 
integration approach to addressing some of its key development challenges in areas such as: 
electricity, trade, labor, and finance, while remaining cognizant of the challenges posed by the geo-
political environment in the region, especially with regard to security.  

44. Recognizing that women’s economic activity can play an important role in Lebanon’s 
productivity and economic growth, and given the multidimensional factors that affect the choices 
that they make, the WBG will pursue a gender-integrated approach, including monitoring of key 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
gender indicators in selected areas of WBG intervention (human capital development and social 
protection; business environment and SMEs; and infrastructure).  

B. Implementation of the ISN and Lessons Learned 

45. The ISN was prepared in the aftermath of the summer 2006 hostilities and the ensuing 
political impasse which had rendered some of the CAS (approved in December, 2005) 
assumptions and projections untenable.  The ISN was designed to support the Government’s 
medium-term structural reform program - Paris III - discussed at the International Donor 
Conference in January, 2007.  However, implementing this ambitious program required broad 
political support and consensus on key reforms, which proved to be short-lived as a political crisis 
emerged, lasting about 18 months and leading to the formation of a care-taker government until the 
parliamentary elections of June, 2009.   As such, while the ISN priorities were fully aligned with 
Lebanon’s own priorities, the design of the strategy was generally appropriate to the challenging 
country circumstances, and the quality of the portfolio has shown considerable improvement over 
the period, implementation of the reform program itself has been slow. 

46. The portfolio currently consists of eight active Bank projects for a total net commitment of 
US$269.8 million, of which US$138.4 million has been disbursed to-date. These projects have 
been financed by a mix of IBRD (US$209.7 million) and the Lebanon Trust Fund (US$60 million).  
The latter was created with a transfer from IBRD net income in September 2006, following the 
summer 2006 hostilities.  In addition, Lebanon has been able to access a variety of existing Bank-
administered trust funds, including Institutional Development fund grants, Development Grant 
Facility grants, Cities Alliance grants, Persistent Organic Pollutants and grants from the State and 
Peace-Building Fund.14 The current portfolio includes seven of these grants, totaling US$3.4 
million. The portfolio has supported the post-war reconstruction of critical infrastructure 
(especially in the areas of water supply and sanitation, urban transportation, and urban 
development) and the strengthening of capacity in public institutions in need of reform (in 
electricity, social protection, and fiscal management).  It is worth noting that trust funds have 
played a central role in the World Bank’s support to Lebanon and have been instrumental in the 
preparation of structural reforms under the ISN and Paris III.  This support was also bundled with 
IFC investments to facilitate bank lending to SMEs affected by the conflict through advisory 
support and risk guarantees. Trust funds have also been used to support the reconstruction of the 
Nahr El-Bared camp and its adjacent communities.  In addition to the US$2 million grant from the 
Development Grant Facility, which is financing small-scale infrastructure projects and services for 
the communities surrounding Nahr El-Bared, the Bank has set-up a Multi-Donor Trust Fund 
(MDTF) which channels donor contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency 
(UNRWA) for the reconstruction packages for the old camp and has been fully disbursed.  

47. Project implementation is generally satisfactory.  With an average disbursement ratio of 
27percent over the last three years (FY08-FY10), Lebanon’s portfolio has performed better in this 
regard than MENA (21percent disbursement ratio) and the IBRD portfolio as a whole (25percent 
disbursement ratio). While all projects are expected to achieve their development objectives, the 
sustainability of the outcomes will continue to depend on the implementation of sector reforms and 
sufficient expenditure on maintenance.  

14 For a complete list of Trust Funds, see Annex 2. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
48. The Bank has also produced and disseminated a number of pieces of analytical work and 
just-in-time policy notes that have shaped policy debates and provided policy advice and 
analytical underpinning for reform, namely in electric power, water, education, agriculture, 
broadband deployment strategy, pensions, labor markets, investment climate, gender, and 
environmental management (see Annex B4 for the complete list). 

49. 
IFC’s program in Lebanon has grown significantly over recent years, with the committed 
portfolio increasing from only US$38 million at the end of FY05 to US$203 million through June 
2010. IFC has played a key complementary role to IBRD in Lebanon, having committed almost 
US$770 million since August 2006, as part of the WBG response to Paris III. More than US$580 
million of this was provided in trade finance through guarantees provided to Lebanese banks under 
IFC’s Global Trade Finance Program.  IFC commitments, via a variety of equity, debt, and 
guarantee instruments, included more than US$150 million for local banks to lend to smaller 
businesses.  This was facilitated by a US$15 million grant from IBRD that, in part, was used to 
support risk participation agreements by IFC to encourage bank lending to the SME sector. In 
2010, IFC invested US$100 million in equity in Byblos Bank to help in its local and regional 
expansion.  Building on its achievements during the ISN period and in line with the renewed 
commitment to the Arab World Initiative, IFC aims to support the regional expansion of Lebanese 
real sector firms, while continuing to support increased access to finance for small- and medium-
enterprises. A focus on equity transactions, the energy sector, and the environment are expected to 
be core to IFC’s program during the period of the CPS. 

50. Reflecting back on the ISN implementation period, a number of key lessons can be drawn 
around the need for realism and flexibility in the Bank Group’s support to Lebanon.   Specifically: 
(i) the complexity of the political environment for decision making in Lebanon should not be 
underestimated; (ii) it is helpful to establish a flexible framework of activities that can be scaled up 
or down according to progress made on the reform program; (iii) it is important to set realistic 
objectives; and (iv) simple project design and the use of adaptable instruments are necessary to be 
able to respond flexibly to challenges and changing priorities.  

C. Consultation Process 

51. Together with the IFC, the Bank embarked on broad consultations at the start of the CPS 
process, seeking to achieve a wide consensus from Lebanon’s highly politicized and diverse 
stakeholders. The consultations involved: (i) rival political groups, including parliamentarians; (ii) 
public institutions; (iii) the donor community; (iv) the private sector; and (v) NGOs, academicians, 
and representatives of the civil society at large. These consultations helped to consolidate the focus 
and scope of the CPS draft. They also reinforced the Bank Group’s growing image in Lebanon as a 
“Knowledge Bank,” judging from the participants’ feedback, and garnered wide support for the 
institution’s Access to Information Policy. 

52. Political parties and public officials show a reasonable level of agreement on the reform 
priorities outlined in the GoL’s priority Action Plan, but they differ over the implementation 
options. Their differences are clearly shaped by political interests. 

53. Lebanon’s private sector sees the need to improve the business environment to encourage 
investment and job creation and curb brain drain. Some key complaints of the private sector 
include the country’s inadequate infrastructure and the weak enforcement of laws, especially 

15 

 
 
 
 
  
 
commercial laws, which undermines investor confidence. More support for SMEs is needed as a 
way to reduce the migration of skills. 

54. The civil society organizations display a clear lack of confidence in the state and its 
institutions under the existing consensual power-sharing formula. They voiced strong support for 
a Bank role in facilitating agreement on some of the less controversial reforms, such as in the 
electricity and water sectors, and cautioned against an ambitious strategy that would be undermined 
by the prevailing political economy. 

55. The donor community views the Bank as leading the engagement of Lebanon’s 
development partners to coordinate activities. The political economy issues and the historical 
context of the policy reform challenges should be further discussed within the donor community 
given Lebanon’s unique political equilibrium.  

D. Strategic Objectives of the CPS  

56. The main objective of the CPS is to support the GoL in putting the Lebanese economy on a 
path to sustained, high and broad-based economic growth which is critical for Lebanon to 
continue to improve its fiscal and debt sustainability; create employment; provide adequate 
infrastructure and social services and support social inclusion.  

57. Achieving growth and employment creation requires addressing deeper, structural, 
economic determinants of growth and fiscal adjustment. To this effect, the shared strategy 
between the Government of Lebanon and the World Bank Group consists of focusing CPS support 
on a set of well-targeted and reinforced structural reforms and investments, which will create the 
following enablers of high economic growth:  

i. Economic management that furthers fiscal and macroeconomic stability;  
ii. An improved business environment with appropriate regulation and risk sharing 
frameworks for effective and increased private investments in the real economy; 
iii. Adequate provision of cost-effective infrastructure services, especially in: electricity, 
water and transport, with adequate regard to local development, environment, and 
competitiveness of factor costs; and 
iv. A public education system for which production and quality meet domestic and 
global labor market demand, as well as, an expanded and effective social protection 
system for the population at large, including robust labor market policies and 
programs targeting vulnerable youth and women.  

58. Recognizing the dependence of the Lebanese economy on the region’s economies and the 
potential benefit of deeper economic integration, the CPS will include support to promote 
economic integration through a number of potential regional projects, including: cross-border trade 
facilitation and infrastructure to reduce trade transaction costs and increase competitiveness; energy 
interconnection and a regulatory framework for a regional energy market; and the harmonization of 
business regulations in the region to promote private sector investment, capital flows and regional 
competitiveness.   

59. Furthermore, both the GoL and the WBG acknowledge that the frail application of 
principles of good governance remains one of the key challenges that restrain the potential for 
growth in the public and private sectors.  Lebanon has credible and well established institutions on 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the demand side of good governance (a free press, a strong civil society, parliament, academic 
think tanks, etc.).  The country, on the other hand, suffers a shortage of public institutions capable 
of formulating good public policy and of producing and delivering public goods.  This has led to 
lack of transparency and accountability in the public sector as well as difficulty in enforcing laws, 
regulations and judicial decisions.   As a result, public sector institutions are avoided by much of 
the population when possible, and parallel mechanisms have emerged to fill the gap in service 
delivery; the public no longer expects quality services from public institutions and has ceased to 
hold the government accountable for the failure to deliver.  The CPS supports the GoL’s strategy 
for improved governance throughout the four areas of engagement, specifically, public finance 
management reform, business environment reform, corporate governance reform of EdL and 
Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale (CNSS). Should the Government initiate a more 
comprehensive program, beyond what it is already undertaking under the sector reform programs, 
the WBG will provide the knowledge and financial services it needs to implement a comprehensive 
good governance program. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
Box 1:  Governance, Anti-Corruption and Service Delivery Challenges within 
Lebanon’s Complex Political Economy 

Lebanon is faced with substantial governance challenges and a complex political economy which not only 
affects the quality of governance but can also limit the impact of development assistance. The Bank 
undertook a Country Governance and Anti-Corruption analysis (CGAC), a Social Impact Analysis of the 
Electricity and Water sectors, and a review of Lebanon’s political economy to identify governance-related 
risks on a sectoral level as well as entry points to mitigate these risks.  
Towards this end, governance stocktaking notes were prepared in three sectoral areas: electricity, water, 
and social protection.  The studies provided evidence that the political interests and the socioeconomic 
interests of dominant political and economic groups often converge and influence public decision-making, 
resulting in low-quality services being provided by the public sector. Power generation, water and social 
protection have been particularly vulnerable to this dynamic.  
The Social Impact Analysis of the Electricity and Water sector provided evidence on how different 
households, specifically the poor, were severely affected by governance weaknesses. It demonstrated that 
the malfunctioning of these sectors contributed to poverty because the financial burden of expensive and 
ineffective water and electricity services, coupled by insufficient supply, has been carried by the 
consumers.  
The political economy analysis suggested on a general level that reform practices that might seem ideal 
from a technical point of view may not be feasible in Lebanon’s historical and institutional setting and 
therefore require flexible adjustments of the reforms. Moreover, reform will be difficult unless it is 
balanced among all stakeholders and supported through broadly based communication and participation 
across sectarian lines.  
The preparation of the CPS has been informed by the existing analysis and applies flexibility to customize 
the Bank Group’s engagement strategy to the political realities of Lebanon.  The strategy focuses support 
on areas where the policy and institutional environment are conducive to effective engagement and 
development results and stands ready to respond to opportunities in areas where development initiative is 
either politically not feasible or technically not ready.  In addition, the CPS promotes stronger 
accountability and enhanced transparency by emphasizing reliance on domestic accountability mechanisms 
such as: 1) strengthening of internal audit and controls within line ministries; 2) promoting the inclusion of 
social accountability and complaints-handling measures within projects; and 3) sharpening the terms of 
reference of external audits to be more focused on detecting fraud and corruption. Also related to the 
governance agenda are the efforts to improve accountability and transparency in the private sector (private 
sector accounting and auditing standards and professional accreditation).  

Sources:  Lebanon Country Governance and Anti-Corruption (CGAC) Process, November 2008; Understanding Resilience: the Skills Needed and the Costs Incurred, 
Political Economy of the Lebanese System 1985-2006; June 2009; Lebanon-Social Impact Analysis, Electricity and Water Sector, March 2009. 

E. CPS Principles of Engagement (Two-Tiered Approach) 

60. Because of Lebanon’s complex political economy, it is difficult to foresee where reforms 
are most likely to take place. However, it is possible, through well selected World Bank Group 
ESW, TA, and Advisory Services, targeted investments and close policy dialogue, to develop 
solutions that will help move the reform agenda forward.  In consideration of the country context 
and drawing from the lessons learned over the ISN period, it is proposed to adopt a two-tiered 
approach: (i) maintain a Core Program of engagement which consists of selected investments in 
basic services, as well as technical assistance and analytical work that will serve to inform and 
build momentum around key reforms; and (ii) stand ready to engage more deeply in additional 

18 

 
 
 
areas where there is traction for reform. Selectivity has been applied in determining the areas of 
intervention of the CPS, that is, where the reform is anticipated to strengthen growth potential, 
increase fiscal stability and enhance social equity. Progress on implementation of the Core Program 
will be assessed on a frequent basis (annually) to determine the results achieved, and the GoL and 
Bank Group will jointly agree on areas for possible scale-up of WBG engagement. These 
consultations will provide the framework and the basis for moving from Tier I to Tier II.  

Tier I- Core Program  

61. Under the Core Program, the Bank Group will continue to support the Government 
through the existing portfolio, which includes Specific Investment Loans (SILs) and Trust Funds 
(TFs) in energy, water, transport, municipal and urban development, social protection, and fiscal 
management, as well as IFC’s investment and Advisory Services (see Annex 2: World Bank 
Portfolio Performance). Going forward, new activities will be added to the Core Program on a 
selective basis with a view to strengthening the momentum for key reforms that are needed for 
growth, fiscal stability and social inclusion.  These new activities can take the form of selected 
knowledge services (ESW, just-in-time technical assistance and IFC Advisory Services) or targeted 
investment support in critical areas identified as binding constraints to growth. 

62. 
In addition, because fiscal and debt sustainability is central to sustained high growth, the 
Core Program will focus on providing technical assistance in public finance management and fiscal 
consolidation as well as in statistical capacity building. The Core Program will also include 
technical assistance to enhance employment and labor market policies with particular focus on 
policies that aim to improve women’s access to job opportunities. Advisory Services and 
investments will be provided in support of regional integration and business environment in 
partnership with IFC.  IFC will pursue private sector investments and Advisory Services with a 
focus on priority areas such as sustainable energy, development of SMEs, and private provision of 
health, education and infrastructure services. 

Criteria for Moving to Tier II 

63. The criteria for moving from the Core Program to the second tier in a given area are: (i) 
there is sufficient agreement within the Government and among affected stakeholders on a well- 
articulated policy reform agenda; and (ii) the reform has a positive impact on one or more of the 
following areas: economic growth, fiscal space, and social inclusion. The second tier could bring to 
bear policy-based lending by the Bank, provided that there exists a sound macroeconomic 
framework and a robust reform program that has a positive impact on the fiscal situation.  

64. During the life of the CPS, the WBG and the GoL will evaluate progress made by the GoL 
in the implementation of its reform agenda and determine the area(s) in which results have been 
achieved and where there is enough traction to deepen engagement. It is understood that the 
assistance strategy could move into the second tier in one or more sectors while remaining in the 
Core Program in other areas. The areas of engagement in the Core Program are presented below 
along with current and planned WBG instruments of support and anticipated program outcomes, as 
agreed with the GoL, and shown in the Results Matrix in Annex 1. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Areas of Engagement  

65. Building on the Bank’s experience and dialogue with the Government during the last three 
years, the following areas have been selected because of their critical role in supporting Lebanon’s 
economic growth, fiscal and social stability, as well reinforcing economic and trade relations with 
the Gulf and the Mashreq.  

Fiscal Stability and Public Financial Management 

66. Lebanon’s fiscal and public debt positions create major risks to macro-fiscal sustainability 
and to prospects for high growth. Debt and, hence, the debt service burden are high, depleting the 
fiscal space that is needed for public investments in lagging economic infrastructure and social 
services. To achieve enough fiscal adjustment to generate a sizable primary surplus with a 
beneficial impact on efficiency and growth will require a combination of the following:  

 

Improving the management of the electric power sector to reduce costs, improve 
revenue collection, promote energy efficiency, and thus reduce subsidies (about US$1.2 
billion), while increasing supply and strengthening the performance of existing systems 
through adequate investment;  

 Reforming the public sector pension system to restore its financial viability and raise 
the productivity of the public labor force without increasing real government spending 
(such reforms would also improve equity over the medium run);  

 

Increasing the equity and efficiency of the tax system, for example by improving 
taxation of real-estate property and capital gains on real estate transactions and 
considering measures that make for better burden sharing across socioeconomic groups; 
and  

 Dynamic debt management, through additional measures such as selective asset swaps 
when possible, and foreign assistance—linked to a program of structural and fiscal 
reforms—to smooth the burden of fiscal adjustment. 

67. 
In addition, clear linkages need to be made between public resource management and the 
Government’s macroeconomic objectives, and better alignment is needed between expenditure and 
planning.  The annual budgeting process is marred by variability and uncertainty, and both 
transparency and monitoring functions are in need of strengthening. 

68. The steps that have been taken by the GoL over the past two years could be expanded into a 
sustained program of fiscal consolidation and debt management. Bearing in mind the country’s 
complex political economy, some of the above reform options could be designed and implemented 
rapidly under the Core Program, whereas other reforms will require Lebanon to make fundamental 
choices regarding the future role and responsibilities of the State, and thus, may require a longer 
timeframe for maturation, decision, and implementation. Any of the reforms outlined above in the 
areas of expenditure management and/or revenue enhancement will improve efficiency in the use 
of public resources and create fiscal space. As such, they are expected to increase productive public 
investment and the availability of public services, leading to growth and better social outcomes. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69. 
In the area of public financial management, the GoL has made significant progress in 
implementing reforms.  Nevertheless, there remain three areas where progress has been slow and 
where better efficiency and accountability are needed to ensure effective fiduciary risk mitigation, 
not only for Bank-financed investments, but also for the GoL’s own resources.   Addressing these 
issues would pave the way for using country systems to support Bank-financed operations.  Priority 
areas include: (i) consolidating the budget by establishing a unified budget framework that 
accounts for public sector financial activities, including foreign-financed projects and Council for 
Development and Reconstruction (CDR) projects and presents consolidated audited financial 
statements; (ii) strengthening internal controls by amending the Public Accounting Law and 
establishing an internal audit function at the Ministry of Finance; (iii) strengthening external audit 
by reforming the Court of Accounts (COA) to address the issues of independence and the 
amendment of the mandate to cover exclusively the external audit function; and (iv) revising the 
current public procurement laws and setting in motion a number of activities that will facilitate 
effective implementation of the law (e.g. updating standard bidding documents, training staff, and 
establishing a dispute resolution mechanism). 

70. Capacity building and implementation support for public finance management and fiscal 
consolidation is a key element of the Core Program. The main goals of this engagement are to 
improve budget preparation and the comprehensiveness of the budget, with an emphasis on 
integrating the current and capital budget; placing the annual budget in a multi-year perspective; 
strengthening budget execution with a focus on the treasury management function; and 
strengthening debt management; along with the creation of a specialized Debt Management 
Department in the Ministry of Finance. The Bank is providing technical assistance—funded 
through a grant under the Lebanon Trust Fund—to facilitate this work (Fiscal Management Reform 
Implementation Support Project). The implementation of this project, which is being closely 
coordinated with related support from the IMF Middle East Technical Assistance Center (METAC) 
and forthcoming European Commission (EC) assistance, is expected to gain pace and bring results 
over the next two years. In the 2010 budget circular, the Government has laid the ground and 
provided a three years medium-term framework for the preparation of the 2010 to 2012 budgets. 

71. Statistical capacity building to enhance the quality of policy and decision making is 
another key element of the Core Program. A Statistical Master Plan has been recently prepared by 
GoL with technical support from the World Bank. The Plan provides for setting up the regulatory 
and institutional framework as well as building the national capacity for production, analysis, and 
dissemination of economic and social data. Its implementation is critical to creating a system that 
can produce the timely and relevant data needed by both policy makers and civil society. The Bank 
will continue to support these efforts in coordination with other development partners using trust 
fund resources. 

72. The GoL recognizes that the importance of gender statistics is an important factor in 
highlighting and mainstreaming gender issues in its economic planning, policy-making and 
development. Therefore, the GoL’s Statistical Capacity Building Program includes a gender 
statistics component with gender-specific activities. These include: (i) a comprehensive review of 
recent and accessible research that sheds light on gender equality and gender equity issues in 
Lebanon; (ii) mainstreaming gender coverage in the questionnaires and surveys to be carried out by 
the Central Administrations for Statistics (CAS); and (iii) ensuring that the CAS mandate includes 
the provision of gender relevant statistics and harmonization and coordination of gender statistical 
work in Lebanon. The World Bank, in coordination with other development partners (UNDP, EC, 
USAID, and Agence Franҫaise de Developpement (AFD) will provide coordinated financial 
support and technical assistance to the CAS in implementing these activities.  

21 

 
 
 
 
Competitive Business Environment 

73. The ability of Lebanon’s private sector to generate growth and employment is severely 
constrained by the high costs of doing business and by the inequitable and unpredictable 
application of policy. Key binding constraints to private-sector led economic growth arise from: (i) 
uncompetitive infrastructure pricing and unreliability, such as in telecommunications and 
electricity; (ii) high cost of doing business due to outdated commercial laws, vague and non-
transparent regulations, discretionary bureaucratic interpretation, and weak contract enforcement; 
(iii) insufficient domestic and regional trade facilitation; (iv) rigid labor and social security 
regulations restricting flexibility in the domestic and regional labor market;  and (v) the absence of 
a regulatory framework for Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs).  While Lebanon has a sophisticated 
financial system, further improvements in the financial sector could increase Lebanon’s 
competitive edge.  For instance, access to credit remains limited and costly, and the right to use 
moveable property for collateral is not well established.  Corruption is another hindrance to 
developing a more vibrant private sector in Lebanon. In addition, reliable and transparent corporate 
financial reporting is needed to build investor confidence and support a strong business climate, 
with consequent positive impacts on competitiveness and economic growth.  Small- and Medium- 
Enterprise (SME) are playing an increasing role in catalyzing economic growth, as important 
sources of job creation, and the ability of an SME to produce high-quality, transparent and 
comparable financial statements is often a determining factor for access to credit.  All of the above-
mentioned issues create a perception of high-risk for new business entrants, discourage new 
investments, and hamper competitiveness. These difficulties and many others are reflected in 
Lebanon’s rank of 108th out of 183 economies in the “Ease of Doing Business Index” for 2010.  

74. 
In the capital market, Lebanon has thus far fallen short of improving regulations and 
pursuing structural policies that optimize the impact of foreign inflows on the productive 
capacity of the domestic economy. Capital inflows are invested in a narrow scope of sectors, 
including the banking and real estate sectors. In addition, as is the case in most small open 
economies, the large capital inflows are causing a contraction of sectors producing traded goods 
and causing a corresponding increase in relative prices. In advancing its financial market, Lebanon 
can build the capacity of the Beirut Stock Exchange and promote investment banking; this can 
increase opportunities for investors and provide new sources of funding for entrepreneurs and the 
business community at large.  

75. Furthermore, findings from a 2008 World Bank Report on gender highlights that gender 
inequities exist in the private sector in Lebanon.15 While on average, female workers are more 
educated than male workers, females experience wage discrimination, and SMEs owned by women 
find it harder to access finance and face greater challenges circumventing the many regulatory 
processes than do their male counterparts.  As a result, female entrepreneurship is relatively low in 
Lebanon.  As part of its program for improving the business environment, which calls for 
increasing the number of financial tools available to SMEs and bringing business support services 
up to international best practices, the GoL intends to pursue targeted initiatives to level the playing 
field for women-owned/operated SMEs. These gender-targeted initiatives will be supported by 
World Bank Group activities which will explore: (i) a financial guarantee/risk sharing product to 
support women-owned SMEs; (ii) a gender-integrated approach within an assessment of SME 
access to finance in the governorates surrounding the Beirut area; (iii) a gender-disaggregated list 
of baseline indicators for the monitoring of performance and graduation of women-versus male-

15 Gender-Based Differences among Entrepreneurs and Workers in Lebanon, The World Bank, 2008. 

22 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
owned SMEs from Business Development Centers (BDCs); and (iv) the development of gender-
relevant training and business support initiatives within the broader SME business support 
program.  IFC Advisory Services aims to provide support to financial institutions to help them 
target women-owned businesses specifically. 

76. To help the GoL tackle the challenges in the business environment, the World Bank Group 
will support the GoL to: (i) improve government regulations and policy to facilitate private sector 
dynamism, in particular for SMEs; (ii) develop and implement a new competition law and build the 
capacity of a dedicated authority to phase out exclusive agency agreements and enforce regulations 
that foster competition and create a level playing field for private sector; (ii) remove the 
impediments to independent power producers and public-private partnerships by modifying certain 
provisions of the Code of Commerce; (iii) facilitate lending through collateral that would 
strengthen SMEs’ access to finance; and (iv) promote the modernization of the accounting and 
reporting architecture through capacity building workshops and training of SMEs on international 
reporting standards. This agenda has been prepared with the support of the Bank Group’s policy 
dialogue and analytic work and is also linked to enabling private investment and to other priority 
sectors such as power and telecommunications, water, and public financial management. On 
financial development, the WBG will help the GoL articulate clear policy objectives and strategy 
during the CPS period with Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA), such as selected Reports on 
Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs), including a bank governance assessment, and an 
FSAP Update, when the government is ready for such diagnostic work.  The Bank will also partner 
with the Lebanese Accounting Association to strengthen the professional accountancy body and to 
support accountancy reforms. 

77. Given the potential of the telecommunications sector in stimulating private sector 
investment and contributing to growth, the CPS will support the GoL’s objective to structure the 
telecommunications sector in a way that introduces competition, improves capacity and quality 
of services, reduces cost to consumers while maintaining the flow of critically needed revenue 
into the national budget. The  GoL is developing a new reform strategy for the sector consisting 
of: (i) defining and establishing a strategic and policy framework for the restructuring and 
development of the sector that maximizes its contribution to economic growth and generates 
sufficient fiscal revenues for the treasury; (ii) aligning the existing institutions and operators to the 
framework by restructuring them to operate on a commercial basis; and (iii) gradually bringing in 
market forces through private participation in investments and in provision of all telecom services 
to drive down the cost of services in line with global trends. This new strategy, once finalized, will 
require an agreement within government on the path and the pace of implementation. Under the 
Core Program of the CPS, the World Bank Group will continue providing advice to finalize the 
development of the telecommunication sector strategy.  An Institutional Development Fund Grant 
will be mobilized to finance capacity building to the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority. In 
addition, IFC Advisory and Investment products could be leveraged to the extent the private sector 
becomes part of the GoL’s strategy for telecom reform. 

Economic Infrastructure  

78. Access to reliable and cost-effective infrastructure services remains a major constraint on 
growth and social development in Lebanon. The unreliability of infrastructure services, combined 
with differences in availability across the country, hinders competitiveness of Lebanese industry, 
constrains economic growth and increases regional disparities. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
79. Lebanon also stands to gain from the regional integration of its infrastructure networks, 
namely the transportation network and, the electricity network. The integration of the 
transportation network would promote an efficient transfer of merchandise and persons and would 
be a critical element in facilitating regional trade, especially with the growing markets of Syria and 
Iraq. In the electricity and gas sectors, by connecting to the regional network, Lebanon would be 
able to overcome shortage problems caused by an inefficient and ineffective electricity sector once 
increased supply becomes available.  

 Electricity Sector 

80. Economic growth and fiscal stability in Lebanon are unattainable without major reform 
and investment in the electric power sector. Currently the sector cannot supply the electricity 
needed by households and businesses. Massive subsidies are required (amounting to 4 percent of 
GDP in 2009) to cover insufficient revenues, because overall the performance of the sector is very 
poor: tariffs are set far too low for cost recovery, governance of the sector is inadequate, and 
Electricité du Liban (EdL) performs poorly, both operationally and financially, with high technical 
and financial losses. Investments in new generation capacity have lagged far behind growing 
electricity demand. Reducing the fiscal burden of the sector on public finances, mobilizing 
resources to meet energy investment needs, and restructuring EdL into a commercially viable 
utility will be among the most important policy and structural reform challenges the Government 
will have to undertake. Also, of importance in the GoL’s strategy in addressing the above 
challenges is the role of energy conservation and of securing supplies of alternatives to expensive 
fuel oil. Specific recommendations for reforming the power sector have been extensively discussed 
at various levels of government, but in the past, lack of political decision and consensus over 
sequencing of priorities has meant that little implementation has taken place. 

81. The Bank Group aims to support the GoL’s action plan for development of the electricity 
sector. The GoL, building on previous studies, has adopted in June 2010, an electricity sector 
policy note, including a reform action plan aimed at improving the performance of the sector and 
laying the foundation for a financially self-sustained sector in the medium- to long-term: This plan 
includes a set of well articulated short, medium and long-term measures aimed at: (i) improving 
sector governance by effectively corporatizing EdL’s management of the sector according to 
commercial principles and building its managerial capacity to improve the technical and financial 
performance of the sector; (ii) reducing the fiscal burden by revising the electricity tariff structure 
and setting rates that will over time put the sector on a sustainable path; (iii) increasing the supply 
of electricity-- additional 600 MW in the short-term and 900 MW in the medium-term; (iv) 
reducing the cost of generation through investments in low fuel cost generation, rehabilitation of 
transmission and distribution networks and contracting distribution, billing and collection to private 
sector; (v) promoting renewables and increasing demand efficiency and energy savings; and (vi) 
promoting all forms of Public-Private Partnerships to facilitate the modernization of the sector. 

82. Under the Core Program, the Bank Group will support the GoL’s efforts to increase 
efficiency and better manage the sector while helping to leverage other donors’ investments in 
generation and transmission capacity. Through ongoing technical assistance and policy dialogue, 
the Bank will help advance reforms in the management of the sector while preparing an investment 
loan to rehabilitate the transmission and distribution systems to ensure that investment in additional 
generation capacity is well used.  The Bank will also help the GoL mobilize concessional financing 
from donors that have already committed and/or expressed interest in the sector. The Bank is 
working with the GoL to help it finalize its strategic development plan for the electricity sector 
along with a time-bound implementation plan in order to expedite endorsement by the GoL cabinet.  

24 

 
 
 
 
 
Finally, the Bank plans to provide technical assistance and financing support for implementation of 
sustainable energy efficiency and demand-side management programs as well as alternative energy 
such as Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) and renewables.  In parallel, IFC will explore investment and 
advisory opportunities to facilitate greater lending by financial institutions (especially banks) to 
enable them to finance the investments of their clients in sustainable energy, including energy 
efficient systems and renewable energy.  IFC Advisory Services and investment would 
complement the Bank’s activities, in line with the GoL’s emerging strategy related to the role of 
the private sector, especially in the area of PPPs.   

83. Support to regional energy integration will be provided to help Lebanon strengthen the 
interconnection of its power grid with the Mashreq countries, benefit from a regional gas supply 
(either through pipeline or Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) when deemed feasible, and participate in 
the development of a regional energy market in the medium- to long-term. The WBG will use the 
framework of the AWI to mobilize additional resources for investment and to roll-out 
complementary instruments such as MIGA guarantees and IFC Advisory Services and investments, 
including the use of PPP schemes. 

 Water Sector 

84. Despite Lebanon’s relatively ample water resources, its water supply and sanitation sector 
has not kept pace with demand and lags far behind the standards associated with the country’s 
level of economic development. The annual cost of inadequate public water supply is estimated at 
US$470 million (2 percent of GDP in 2008), of which household spending on private water supply 
is estimated at US$308 million. Despite relatively high connection rates, the continuity of water 
supply is low and reaches as little as three hours a day in the Beirut-Mount Lebanon region which 
houses about 40 percent of the Lebanese population. It is estimated that the seasonal imbalance of 
water resources will lead to chronic water shortages by as early as 2020 if no measures are taken to 
improve efficiency and to increase storage capacity. Wastewater collection coverage averages 58 
percent and wastewater treatment facilities are few and small. Discharge of wastewater has 
polluted water resources and the use of raw wastewater is increasingly leading to soil pollution and 
health hazards. Environmental degradation caused by the discharge of untreated wastewater costs 
Lebanon about one percent of GDP a year.  

85. Several government actions are needed to address the irregularity of water supply and the 
environmental threat posed by untreated waste. First, investments are needed to reconstruct, 
rehabilitate, and expand water supply and wastewater networks, treatment plants, storage, and 
transfer facilities. To this end, an integrated water sector policy and strategy will help identify and 
prioritize programs and activities in the sector. Second, Lebanon’s Regional Water Authorities 
(RWAs) need technical, financial, and managerial autonomy so they can improve operations and 
maintenance, raise cost-recovery levels, and build internal capacity. Third, efforts need to be made 
to enable the expansion of private sector participation in the sector.  

86. Wastewater collection and treatment services need to be extended, and discharges need to 
be subject to tighter control.  Wastewater services, which fall legally under the jurisdiction of the 
RWSs, are de facto provided and financed by the Ministry of Water and Energy, Municipalities, 
NGOs, donors, and small private sector operators.  Regional Water Authorities have yet to take full 
responsibility for wastewater collection and treatment, and the unfinished reform agenda has 
contributed to institutional uncertainty and fragmentation of functions.  The discharge of 
wastewater and the use of raw wastewater need to be more strongly monitored and controlled by 
the government. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
87. The Bank will support the Government in water supply along a number of lines. In the 
Core Program, through financing of the Greater Beirut Water Supply Project, the Bank plans to 
target the provision of additional potable water to Greater Beirut. This Project aims to provide 
clean water to around 1.5 million people in the Greater Beirut Region. Under this operation, the 
GoL expects to complete the restructuring of the sector, build the management capacity of the 
Ministry, and help the RWAs develop and implement a new tariff structure and farm out billing 
and collection. The Bank will also support the preparation of an Integrated Water Sector Policy and 
Strategy to prioritize and sequence the needed investments in the sector for consideration and 
decisions by the GoL.  

 Transport 

88. Transport has become a major constraint on economic and social activities in Greater 
Beirut. Institutional capacity to oversee urban transport services is nominal, and regulations to 
ensure minimum levels of quality and safety are rarely enforced. With almost no formal public 
urban transport system, the more than 2 million Beirut residents rely on cars to meet their transport 
needs. Estimates indicate that public transport carries about 30 percent of daily passenger 
movements/trips throughout Lebanon. Services are provided by the informal sector, mainly by 
shared taxis, which are privately owned and operated, primarily by single-vehicle owners providing 
both intra- and inter-city transport. Private sector operators provide dependable bus and taxi 
services. Major investments since 2006 have improved the urban transport infrastructure. The key 
challenges the GoL will face in improving urban mobility will be enforcing traffic rules and 
regulations, promoting private sector investments in urban transport services, planning for and 
adequately managing road assets, and mobilizing enough funding to carry out regular road 
maintenance and properly address road safety issues. 

89. Under the Core Program, the Bank will continue through the existing Urban Transport 
Development Project (UTDP) to provide the GoL financial and AAA support to establish a basic 
institutional framework and to complete the critical investments needed to maximize efficiency of 
existing urban transport infrastructure in the City of Beirut and the Greater Beirut area. Moreover, 
the Bank will support the government with technical assistance to address the remaining challenges 
under the UTDP Project, namely: securing the effective performance of the installed traffic 
management system, implementation of the Traffic Police Action Plan and, completion of the 
preparatory studies for an integrated public transport system. The Core Program will also lay the 
foundation for potential World Bank financial support for an integrated Public Transport System in 
Beirut (Trans-Beirut).  This will include completion of the restructuring of the existing Public 
Transport Authority, addressing the legacy of existing service taxi enfranchisement, and 
identification of a mechanism for the financial sustainability of a public transport system.  IFC will 
also explore opportunities to support private sector investment in this sector. 

90. With regard to trade, excess costs, time-intensive port clearances and land border crossings 
reduce Lebanon’s competitiveness. The average cost to bring a container from Beirut port to the 
city is more than US$600 and there is an average of a week before imported goods are available for 
use. Asycuda World (AW), a web-based system for submitting and assessing customs declarations 
is being introduced to address part of this issue. Major benefits will only be gained through the 
coordinated implementation of AW by the Mashreq Countries and by better coordination of 
Lebanon’s own import inspections procedures. Lebanon’s principal foreign trade is in services and, 
until recently, there has been little interest in facilitating export trade in goods. This approach has 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
shifted in light of the new initiative to position Tripoli as a regional trade hub. More than 70 
percent of Lebanon’s international trade passes through the port of Beirut and is linked to three 
trade corridors: two East-West to Iraq and one North-South from the EU to the Gulf. Lebanon’s 
connection to these corridors is part of the GoL’s regional integration and economic growth 
strategy.  In this regard, the Core Program could include a regional project to facilitate cross border 
trade for Mashreq countries; this effort would lead to improved transport infrastructure more 
efficient and fluid logistics chains within the sub-region, including border crossings and missing 
infrastructure links in the case of Lebanon.  IFC will explore opportunities to expand its successful 
Global Trade Finance Program which provides guarantees to selected Lebanese banks involved in 
trade and related activities for SMEs. 

 Environment and Waste Management 

91. Lebanon needs to reverse the degradation trend of its natural resources to preserve and 
capitalize on the benefits of the country’s environmental domain.  There is strong competition for 
land in Lebanon, and the absence of a more efficient land use planning system has resulted in 
increased pollution and environmental degradation, which threatens the resource-based sources of 
economic growth, such as agriculture and tourism. Lebanon made significant strides in its efforts to 
address environmental degradation, but is still facing major issues including: (a) air pollution in 
Lebanon’s urban centers; (b) water quality degradation and a gradual move towards a water 
balance deficit by 2020; (c) insufficient wastewater network; (d) poor municipal solid waste 
management; (e) limited land and biodiversity resources; and (f) high urban pressure on the coast 
line. For example, municipal solid waste is a persistent issue, given that Lebanon generates a total 
of 1.4 million tons/year of which 800,000 tons/year are collected from Greater Beirut and Mount 
Lebanon and transferred to the Naameh Sanitary Landfill, which was established in 1998 to take 3 
million tons for the following ten years. At present, the quantity of waste has reached more than 8 
million tons. In the cities, there is only one controlled waste dump in Tripoli and one sanitary 
landfill to serve the Municipalities of Zahle, which was financed by the World Bank. All the other 
cities dispose their waste in open dumps, river basins and valleys. 

92. Under the Core Program, technical assistance will be provided to support the preparation 
of the Government’s action plan for the establishment of an integrated and affordable municipal 
solid waste management system throughout the country. More specifically, the Bank through 
AAA will support: (i) enhancing institutional and legal framework for the solid waste sector; (ii) 
improving financial performance of the sector (on both cost and revenue sides), including cost 
effectiveness of private and public services and cost recovery system; and (iii) enhancing social 
and environmental performance of the sector. The Bank will also support Lebanon in accessing the 
carbon market and in promoting Clean Development Mechanism operation in solid waste sector, 
and hence generating additional revenues for the sector while contributing to climate change 
mitigation.   Using trust funds and building on the 2010-CEA, the Bank will support the GoL in 
improving environmental governance, more specifically with regard to the predictability of the 
regulatory 
and 
institutional 
framework, 
the 
improvement of 
the 
enforcement of 
environmental regulations, the harmonization of the environmental assessment system, and the 
disclosure of environmental information which are all important constraints to private sector 
investment.  In parallel, IFC will explore advisory opportunities to promote cleaner production 
processes and technologies. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Local Economic Development  
93. The GoL’s objectives aim at clarifying the responsibility of local governments, enhancing 
the status of the elected authorities, streamlining the functioning of the municipal council, and 
modernizing the administrative and financial procedures. To this effect, the GoL is preparing a new 
Decentralization Law.  In addition, several major reforms are also under consideration to improve 
and consolidate the municipalities’ finances: (i) local tax system reform to give more weight to the 
property tax which takes into account the real contributive capability of a particular area; (ii) 
pioneering modern municipal management systems to gradually strengthen the decentralization 
process (i.e., budget process, accounting system, computerization, etc.); and (iii) the revision of the 
Independent Municipal Fund management practices to improve the predictability of the transfers 
and facilitate the financing of local investments.  In terms of financing options for municipalities, 
IFC could leverage its global experience with sub-national finance to support improved and 
extended public services at the local level on the basis of non sovereign, commercial financing with 
a view to expanding financing options for municipalities and eligible state-owned enterprises. 

94. The GoL considers tourism development not only as a key economic priority (earning 20 
percent of the country's GDP prior to the civil war as indicated by the Ministry of Tourism), but 
also as an essential vehicle to promote local development, in close collaboration with the local 
government and the private sector.  By leveraging its full potential, tourism can serve as a catalyst 
for reviving regional economies, creating local job opportunities, favoring backward-forward 
linkages to local communities, generating income alternatives, and raising municipal revenues.  
This is especially useful to dispel the evident regional disparities between the northern and 
southern parts of the country and the area around the coasts and Beirut.  

95. Under the Core Program, the Bank will provide TA to help the GoL develop the municipal 
sector and promote local development. This TA will cover the following areas: (i) institutional 
level: the effective application of new management guidelines, after the adoption of the new 
Decentralization Law; (ii) spatial management: better coherence of city projects with the national 
land use planning strategy, and the development of a long-term integrated regional development 
program; (iii) management capacity: awareness building among the elected representatives with 
regard to land-related issues, the modernization of the territorial civil service, the dynamic 
management and training of human resources, the introduction of modern management tools, and 
the more systematic involvement of civil society in development plans; (iv) financial-level: the 
increased mobilization of local resources, the identification of new revenue streams, and the use of 
loans as part of the overall financing of urban needs; and (v) community-driven development: 
investments that will create jobs, income opportunities, leverage local assets thereby increasing 
economic empowerment in communities and reducing regional disparities. 

96. Building on the achievements of the Cultural Heritage and Urban Development Project 
(CHUD), as well as the First Municipal Infrastructure Project (FMIP), under the Core Program 
the Bank plans to provide a Sector Investment Loan (SIL) for local community development, 
which would bring together the main policies and reforms to address the key institutional and 
financial challenges described above and help reduce regional disparities.  It would also be an 
important instrument to better equip cities to participate actively in delivering on the country’s 
broad-based economic growth strategy, while also mobilizing the additional financing to increase 
the much needed urban infrastructure and improve cities’ competitiveness. Promoting the country’s 
unique cultural and historical assets through a well-managed local development program is also 
key. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
Human Capital Development and Social Protection 

 Education 

97. The quality of education outcomes in Lebanon is inconsistent with the level of investment, 
as the internal efficiency of public education is low. Lebanon has a pupil/teacher ratio of 17:1 at 
the primary level and 8:1 at the secondary level; dropout and repetition rates have been persistently 
high; and the number of investment years required to produce a 9th grade completer is very high. 
Also, the distribution of physical facilities has been highly politicized, resulting in over-capacity in 
some areas and under-capacity in others. The oversupply and misallocation of teaching and 
administrative staff is acute, causing salaries and wages to constitute 87 percent of the Ministry of 
Education and Higher Education’s total spending.  

98. However, despite the oversupply of teachers, the teaching force is under qualified with only 4 
percent of public school teachers holding a specialized degree and more than half possessing less 
than a university level education.  There is little or no in-service training offered to new teachers, 
and the quality standards for hiring new teachers is weak.   

99. While gross enrollment rates at the primary level are above the regional average (at 
72percent), the share of these students enrolled in public Kindergartens represents only 20percent 
of total enrollment.  The public Kindergartens are not distributed according to local needs, nor do 
the teachers have the necessary qualifications.  In addition, infrastructure and equipment is sub-
standard in many of the Kindergartens located in disadvantaged areas. 

100. Finally, financing of the education sector is highly fragmented and inefficient, and leads to 
inequities. Government budget statistics do not allow resource allocation to be analyzed by level of 
education, region, learning outcomes, or socioeconomic groups of beneficiaries. In higher 
education, quality standards, quality assessment mechanisms, and accreditation processes are 
virtually absent. In coming years, the GoL needs to embark on a second phase of education sector 
reforms to address these key challenges. 

101. As part of the Core Program, the Bank plans to provide support to the GoL’s education 
quality enhancement program in the form of a Sector Investment Loan which would: (i) increase 
the enrollment rate of children 3 to 5 years of age in public schools, improving their school 
readiness and equal opportunity at the start of general education; (ii) enhance the quality of 
teaching and learning; and (iii) lay the groundwork for improving the interface between the general 
education, technical/vocational education, and higher education streams, and for better aligning the 
education system with the requirements of the labor market.  IFC will explore possibilities of 
developing student lending programs delivered through the banking sector, targeting low- and 
middle-income students, drawing on the experiences of its student loan programs in other countries 
in the MENA region. 

102. The GoL also intends to lay the groundwork for medium-term reforms in higher education. 
Based on the prevailing political economy, the GoL is also giving priority to addressing the 
challenges facing higher education particularly the lack of quality assurance and accreditation 
mechanisms. The Bank will support the GoL in this choice and in building a partnership through 
either technical assistance or a subsequent investment loan targeted to reforms in the higher 
education sector.  

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pensions, Health Insurance, Social Safety Nets and Labor Markets 
103. Lebanon’s social protection system consists of a fragmented and low-coverage social 
security (pension) system, multiple health insurance schemes, limited and badly-targeted social 
safety net programs, and distorted labor markets. The pension system has low coverage and high 
fiscal costs and entails very different treatment for workers in the public sector, the military, and 
the private sector. The pension schemes for the civil service and military, run by the Ministry of 
Finance, cover just 6 percent of the labor force and cost 2.7 percent of GDP a year (of which 2.2 
percent account for military pensions); the current implicit pension debt represents between 50-60 
percent of GDP. By contrast, the End-of-Service-Indemnity (EOSI) scheme for private sector 
workers, run by the National Social Security Fund (NSSF), covers 30 percent of the labor force and 
has annual expenditures of 0.8 percent of GDP. The EOSI runs a surplus and has reserves of about 
12.6 percent of GDP. Even so, as an end-of-service-indemnity scheme, it does not provide its 
beneficiaries adequate protection in old age. While in the private sector the implicit rates of return 
on contributions and targeted replacement rates are low and inadequate, in the public sector they 
are significant and unaffordable, resulting in inequitable treatment of workers across plans and 
insufficient income protection during old age.  

104. With regard to the gender dimension, the government recognizes that the high incidence of 
migration among men has consequently created a higher incidence of female-headed 
households thereby increasing the proportion of women among the most vulnerable in the 
population. In view of this, the government intends to ensure that its national targeting system 
incorporates a gender dimension in better targeting government subsidies to vulnerable women. 
The Bank will continue to provide technical assistance under the Emergency Social Protection 
Implementation Support Project II (ESPISP II) and a new TA for the roll-out of the new targeting 
system. 

105. Much technical and financial assistance has been deployed over the past three years to 
address the key challenges facing NSSF: its inadequate governance, weak administrative systems, 
and design problems with the three programs that it manages—end-of-service indemnity, health 
insurance (maternity and sickness fund), and family allowances. 

106. Lebanon needs a comprehensive framework for health insurance and social protection. 
Despite a large number of public insurers and private insurance companies, less than 50 percent of 
the population enjoys formal health insurance coverage. Out-of-pocket household spending, as a 
result, accounts for more than 60 percent of total health expenditures. Such health financing 
arrangements give households inadequate financial protection from the costs of ill-health. Seven 
public institutions offer health insurance programs, implicitly or explicitly.16 There is little 
coordination between their policies, and in the case of the Ministry of Health and the NSSF the 
mandates regarding population coverage and the use of public subsidies have not been clearly 
defined.  

107. The problem of employment creation in Lebanon is acute and is related to the nature and 
level of growth, the investment climate, labor market policies, skills creation, and social 
protection policies. During the last decade there has been virtually no net employment creation, 
with those jobs that have been created being mostly in the informal sector and lacking social 
security coverage. The unemployment rate has increased (7.8 percent in 2004 to 8.9 percent in 

16 The National Social Security Fund (NSSF), the Ministry of Public Health, the Fund for Civil Servants, the Fund for the 
Military, the Fund for Teachers, and two funds for Security Forces. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2007) and is more prevalent among females. Youth unemployment is at a regional high (26 
percent). Labor mobility between civil service and private sectors, and also within the private 
sector is discouraged by inadequate portability of social security benefits. Active labor market 
policies and programs are inadequate to address issues of unemployability, job search or 
entrepreneurship. Over the next 10 years, the Lebanese economy would need to create more than 5 
times the number of jobs it is currently creating in order to absorb the new labor market entrants.  

108. In doing so, special attention will be given to the gender dimension in light of the fact that 
women’s employment stands at 37 percent. To provide women with greater access to quality 
employment, Lebanon could benefit from a review of the labor code in terms of addressing areas 
that may constitute discouraging factors to women’s employment. In the context of the World Bank 
MILES (Macroeconomics, Investment Climate, Labor Market Institutions, Education and Social 
Protection) framework, an employee-employer survey will be supplemented with a module on 
gender to collect and analyze data on challenges of informality and job security for women in 
Lebanon, for which a gender report will be produced as an input to the government framework. 
Moreover, the Bank will provide technical assistance support and capacity-building to review and 
amend the labor code with special attention to gender inclusion.17 IFC will explore opportunities to 
promote greater access to finance opportunities for women-owned businesses through the financial 
sector, in close cooperation with the Bank.  

109. Formal social safety net programs are weak, fragmented, and inadequate to play an 
effective role in time of economic need. The few programs that exist (housing, education, and 
heating-fuel subsidies) are not well targeted, so their poverty impact is questionable. The Ministry 
of Social Affairs (MOSA) is the main public provider of social safety net programs with an annual 
budget of only US$60 million, of which 70 percent is distributed to NGOs and welfare 
associations. Though many community and local development programs exist, and are primarily 
supported by donors, there is little harmonization or coordination among them. With one million 
Lebanese living on no more than US$4/day, and 300,000 living on US$2.4/day or less18, and with 
the evidence of widening regional disparities, the GoL needs to consider a larger and more 
effective role for social safety nets.  

110. In social insurance and labor markets, the Ministry of Labor (MOL) has defined a 
program of reform, the key elements of which include: (i) introducing and implementing the new 
pension system for private workers; (ii) developing effective active labor market policies and 
program (ALMPs) which include redefining the role and structure of the National Employment 
Office; (iii) modernizing labor market policies including related regulations; (iv) furthering reforms 
in the National Social Security Fund (NSSF); (v) developing income protection mechanisms for 
workers; and (vi) strengthening the MOL’s capacity to lead the reform process and its 
implementation. The GoL intends to proceed with the full roll out and implementation of the 
National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP) and will develop and adopt a health insurance 
framework to provide organizing principles for any plans to expand and rationalize health 
insurance coverage. Each area of the above program will pay particular attention to the gender 

17 The Lebanese labor law has undergone a number of revisions since it was issued in 1946, a period during which Lebanon 
also signed various international and regional labor agreements.  In this context, and in order to better adapt to international 
and regional changes in labor legislation, the Minister of Labor signed a proposed revision of the labor law in early 2010.  The 
proposal was forwarded to the Cabinet in May 2010, and is expected to be approved by the end of 2010.  With respect to the 
gender related aspects of the law, the revisions propose a longer maternity leave (10 weeks), establish a one hour daily break 
for breast-feeding women, and apply exceptions on certain types of firm from regulations against women working night shifts 
and mandating certain types of firms to establish individual or collective child-care facilities. 
18 Source: “Poverty, Growth and Income Distribution in Lebanon”; UNDP, August 2008. 

31 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
characteristics of the Lebanese domestic labor market, for the purpose of enhancing gender 
inclusion and social protection. 

111. Under the Tier I Program, the Bank will continue providing implementation support 
through the existing portfolio, namely ESPISP II and the multi-sector analytical program of 
MILES. In addition, if requested, the Bank could provide a technical assistance loan to further 
support the implementation of the above government program.   

G. Potential Lending Envelope 

112. During the CPS period (FY11-14), the indicative lending envelope will range between 
US$375 and US$550 million assuming reasonable pacing and distribution over the four-year CPS 
period. The actual lending envelope will depend on a number of factors, some that are country-
specific and others that are related to IBRD’s overall financial capacity. The size and timing of 
actual commitments will depend in particular on the mix of Investment Loans and Development 
Policy Loans.  The higher end of the range assumes that the program is primarily concentrated on 
investment lending and that it is somewhat evenly distributed throughout the CPS period. Under 
the Core Program, in addition to the ongoing portfolio, only investment lending and AAA is 
envisioned. The Tier II Program assumes implementation of reforms in one or more of the priority 
sectors along with a sound macro-economic framework, which will set the stage for budget support 
through a general or sector-specific development policy loan.  

V. RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION 

113. Among the main risks in Lebanon is stop and go reform implementation. The 
Government’s reform program emphasizes growth and fiscal deficit reduction to reduce the public 
debt.  While initiating the necessary structural, sectoral and social reforms is in most cases at the 
Government’s discretion, advancing their implementation requires legislative approval and greater 
consensus building within the Lebanese public. The past policy track record does not provide much 
comfort in this area: the prolonged period of weak and slow reform implementation and lack of 
fiscal adjustment is largely responsible for the high fiscal and current account imbalances and 
volatile growth performance, despite the fact that the issues and remedies were well identified.  
There is therefore a significant risk that narrow sectarian interests will continue to overshadow 
national-level interests and obstruct again the implementation of the newly adopted economic 
reform program. This risk could be compounded should macro-economic stresses develop, as a 
result of external shocks (resulting from volatility in oil prices, surge in commodity prices, as well 
as insufficient growth in the main partner regions). Maintaining the Bank’s effort to build future 
capacity for reforms through analytical and advisory activities could help enhance consensus 
around the reform program, which combined with continued strong engagement by the Bank in the 
development and implementation of a social protection strategy, could provide a mitigation 
instrument. 

114. There are important external financial risks inherent in Lebanon’s dependence on foreign 
capital inflows. Financial management has been helped by large inflows of foreign capital from the 
Lebanese diaspora and from Arab investors that have fed the capacity of the economy and the 
banking sector to absorb large sovereign debt. For the scheme to continue, confidence of both 
domestic and foreign depositors and investors is key. Past episodes have shown that confidence is 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
highly sensitive to political developments.19 In addition, a change in international financial 
prospects resulting in increased international interest rates would reduce the spread between 
interest rates in Lebanon and the rest of the world.  This would reduce capital inflow to Lebanon, 
the alternative being a rise in domestic interest rates with detrimental consequences on Banks’ 
profits and on the budget balance.  By maintaining fiscal discipline, the Government would be able 
to mitigate this risk by compensating for the decline in the spread through a reduction in sovereign 
risk. 

115. Systemic corruption and governance-related risks are high. Lebanon’s public sector has 
become a major source of political rents, aided by the weak rule of law and lack of law 
enforcement, especially when offenders are politically protected. The political will to address these 
obstacles remains constrained by sectarian interests. The CPS addresses governance problems 
through promoting stronger accountability. Since this generally requires parallel bottom-up and 
top-down approaches and coordination among various stakeholders, discussion about “feasible” 
and “good enough” governance reforms to meet key development objectives is to be continued. 
During the implementation of the CPS, the Bank will seek to deepen dialogue around feasible 
governance arrangements that are compatible with Lebanon’s political economy. The Country 
Management Unit has commissioned a country governance and anti-corruption analysis to identify 
governance-related risks, as well as entry points to mitigate these risks against the background of 
Lebanon’s complex political environment. Increasingly, it has been recognized that reform 
practices that might seem ideal technically may not be feasible in Lebanon’s historical and 
institutional setting.  

116. Building capacity in the public sector remains important to address governance challenges. 
Civil service reform per se is unlikely to be feasible. However, combined with building awareness 
to prepare the ground for reforms, a targeted engagement in building capacity within sectors and 
involving civil society in monitoring performance has potential for success. 

117. Addressing governance challenges will require broadly-based communication and 
participation across sectarian lines. One key measure is to enhance transparency through broader 
public dialogue including with the media and stakeholders. This approach is likely to help build 
awareness about the negative socioeconomic impact of current conditions. Analysis of 
stakeholders’ positions has shown that reform will be difficult unless it is balanced among all 
communities. Awareness of these issues allows a search for creative solutions to problems that are 
often not technical in nature. The Bank through active engagement with the media, academia, and 
local opinion leaders, will continue to support an informed debate around development issues and 
the trade-offs that are involved in policy choices. 

118. The fragile political environment in Lebanon and the tense regional security environment 
could also pose important risks.  Internally, the inter- and intra-sectarian divisions could restart, 
easily provoking an escalation of tensions.  Social unrest, security shocks and political missteps 
may draw the country into political crisis and policy paralysis, and could badly hit investors and 
depositors’ confidence.  Lebanon is also exposed to a number of regional political and security 
risks, such as the Arab-Israeli conflict and wider regional tensions. 

19 For example, in Spring 2002 when regional and local developments necessitated massive bilateral donor support at the Paris 
II Conference; in 2005 in the aftermath of the assassination of former PM Hariri; and in 2006 during and after the July 
hostilities and ahead of the Paris III Conference.  In each of these episodes, quick and substantial balance-of-payments and/or 
budget support from friendly governments, combined with the dexterity of the Lebanese monetary authorities and the high 
cohesion of the banking community, eventually succeeded in reassuring investors. 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes to Which the CPS 
Expects to Contribute 

Milestones and Progress 
Indicators 

ANNEX 1: RESULTS MATRIX 

STRATEGIC GOAL 1: Growth & Fiscal Sustainability  

1.1 Fiscal Space 

Debt and debt-servicing 
burden is reduced 

Fiscal and public debt 
positions create major risks to 
macro-fiscal sustainability and 
prospects for high growth. 

Bank Group 
Interventions and 
Partners  

EFMIS, Developing Capacity 
Building Tools for Sustainable 
Governance (IDF Grant), 
Policy Notes, and Technical 
Assistance 

UNDP, EU, France 

Macro-Fiscal analysis and 
modeling function further 
developed, fully operational 
and periodically updated 

A High Level Committee 
(HLC) has been established. 

MoU between MoF and BdL 
has been agreed on and the 
HLC has had its first meeting. 

 The conceptual framework and 
implementation plan for the 
introduction of the MTEF has 
been developed by the MoF.  

EFMIS, Policy Notes 

UNDP, IMF/METAC, EU, 
France 

 Guidelines and basic 
procedures for public 
investment programming of a 
periodicity equal to that of the 

Create enabling conditions for 
management of fiscal balance by: 

 

Improving macroeconomic 
programming and policy analysis 
to guide revenue and expenditure 
choices and to facilitate 
integration of planning and 
budgeting functions; 
 Publishing and implementing a 
medium-term debt management 
strategy; 
 Establishing formal coordination 
mechanisms between MoF and 
BdL to improve debt 
management.  

Budget preparation process is better 
aligned with government policies and 
provides stronger basis for expenditure 
control and strategic resource 
allocation by:  
 
Introducing a multi-year budget 
planning process (MTEF) 
(baseline: incremental annual 
budget planning) 
 Regularizing preparation of the 
public investment program and 

34 

1.2 Public Financial Management 

Improve efficiency and 
quality of Public 
Expenditure 

Absence of a clear macro-
framework, budget, MTEF, 
and alignment between 
expenditure and planning 

Absence of a planning tool for 
effective resource management 

 
 
 
 
 
synchronizing it with that of the 
budget cycle 

aggregate MTEF are defined. 

Basic procedures for 
estimation of recurrent costs 
are developed.  

1.3 Statistical Capacity Building 

Increased evidence-
based policy making 

Lack of resources and 
autonomy of the Central 
Administration for Statistics 
(CAS) results in a weak and 
fragmented statistical system. 

Enhanced capacity of Central 
Administration of Statistics (CAS) and 
clarification of roles and 
responsibilities to carry out and 
analyze key surveys.  

Government 
endorses 
the 
Statistical Master Plan (SMP). 

Statistical Capacity Building 
TA 

Review of the statistical legal 
framework completed.  

UNDP, ILO, EU 

Indicator:  Household survey and 
poverty work totally carried out by 
CAS according to international 
standards. 

Series of training programs for 
survey, data analysis and 
poverty assessment completed.  

On-the job support provided to 
at least 4 senior technical staff 
of CAS. 

2.1  Business Environment  

STRATEGIC GOAL 2: Competitive Business Environment 

Streamline and simplify 
legal and regulatory 
framework for 
businesses 

Outdated commercial 
regulations and discretionary 
bureaucratic application of 
rules, particularly for SMEs. 

Improvement in some key aspect of 
the legal and regulatory framework to 
facilitate company creation, operation, 
access to credit and/or exit 
(administrative procedures, 
commercial and company law, 
commercial and/or collateral registries, 
etc.) 

Establishment of inter-
ministerial commission and its 
secretariat for monitoring 
reform process. 
Adoption of Action Plan with 
World Bank Technical 
Assistance prioritized list of 
reform projects. 

Enhanced capacity of public 
administration to implement business 
environment reform.  

IFC Advisory Services for 
Secured Lending, Alternative 
Dispute Mechanisms and 
PPPs 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2  Access to Finance for SMEs and Women Entrepreneurs

Increase number of 
financial tools/schemes 
available to SMEs and 
women-owned SMEs 
and streamline business 
support services across 
Lebanon. 

Outreach of finance and 
financial guarantees to SMEs 
(particularly outside Beirut) 
falls below potential and 
demand. 

Business Support Centers 
(BDCs) do not provide 
consistent level of support to 
SMEs across Lebanon (in 
addressing business regulatory 
constraints). 

Development of financial tools for 
SMEs and women-owned SMEs. 

Improved delivery of services by 
BDCs (such as gender-targeted 
workshops) in supporting capacity of 
SMEs, particularly in business 
management and 
processing/navigation of regulatory 
processes. 

2.3 Trade & Regional Integration 

Minimize trade related 
restrictions 

Trade finance for private sector 
firms is limited due to counter-
party and country risks. 

2.4 Telecommunications 

Introduce competition, 
improve capacity and 
quality of services, and 
reduce cost to 
consumers. 

Limited availability of ICT 
services; low quality of fixed 
line services; mobile 
penetration below potential. 

High prices of 
telecommunications services. 

Access by private sector to trade 
financing improved. 

Indicator: At least a 10% increase in 
trade finance volume provided by 
banks to the private sector.  

Development of a strategy for reform 
of the telecommunications sector with 
complementary tools to manage the 
fiscal transition, with a view to 
establishing a long term sustainable 
fiscal base for the sector. 

Enhanced capacity of the 
Telecommunications Regulatory 
Authority (TRA). 

36 

WB Technical Assistance 

IFC Advisory Services  

A comprehensive assessment 
and an M&E framework for 
financing outreach and tools to 
SMEs is completed, 
identifying underserved areas.  

One workshop to increase 
outreach by financial 
institutions to women-owned 
SMEs 

A review of BDCs is 
completed including an M&E 
framework to monitor 
graduating enterprises and 
women entrepreneurs. 

Number of banks participating 
in Global Trade Finance 
Program increases from 3 in 
2010 to 6 in 2013. 

IFC Investment 

IFC Advisory Services 

Assessment of different policy 
options to reform the telecoms 
sector, with 
an 
eye 
to 
managing the resulting fiscal 
transition, and establishing a 
sustainable fiscal base for the 
sector.  

TA for telecommunications 
strategy. 

 IDF Grant to support 
implementation of 
telecommunications strategy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Goal 3:  Economic Infrastructure (Electricity, Water, Transport, Environment & Waste Management, Local Development) 
3.1 Electricity 

Increase supply of 
reliable electricity and 
reduce drain on 
government budget 

3.2 Water  

Poor operational and financial 
performance of EdL. 

Improved operational performance of 
EdL. 

Indicator: Network losses reduced 
from a baseline of 37% in 2010.  

Unreliable and costly 
electricity services due to 
insufficient generation 
capacity.  

Large subsidies to sector from 
national budget due to 
insufficient revenues from 
tariff. 

Preparation and approval of a 
plan for EdL performance 
improvement  

Improved demand 
management and distribution 
network performance through 
implementation of demand 
management and loss reduction 
programs  

WB Technical Assistance  

WB Investment 
Loan/GEF/WB Technical 
Assistance 

Increase reliability of 
water supply, develop 
comprehensive water 
resources management 
plan. 

Fragmentation and weak 
technical, financial and 
managerial capacity of 
Regional Water Authorities 
(RWAs). 

Inadequate water and 
wastewater planning supply, 
storage, treatment, and 
distribution capacity.  

Outdated and inadequate water 
resource management strategy 
and planning. 

Access to and reliability of potable 
water is increased in the Greater Beirut 
Region.  

Beirut Mount Lebanon Water 
Authority (BMLWA) and Bekaa 
Regional Water Authority (BRWA) 
have a strengthened management 
capacity 

Indicators: Additional 250,000 m3/d of 
potable water is provided to the 
Greater Beirut Region by end-2014; 
Supply hours during lean season 
increased three-fold by end-2014.   

The GoL has a national water resource 
management strategy and plan.  
Indicator: A NWRMS has been 
adopted by government.  

37 

Beka’a Regional Water 
Authority 

Full-time managing director 
for Bekaa Regional Water 
Authority appointed by August 
2011. 

Business plan developed by 
December 2011.  

Wastewater management plan 
developed for Bekaa Valley by 
May 2011. 

World Bank assisted ongoing 
investment:  Baalbeck Water 
and Wastewater Project 

World Bank assisted ongoing 
investment (grant):  West 
Bekaa Emergency Water 
Supply Project 

Greater Beirut Water Supply 
($200 million loan) 
investment project- with $140 
million counterpart financing 
from the Beirut Mount 
Lebanon Water Authority  

Beirut Mount Lebanon 
Water Authority 

Acceptable commercial billing 
and accounting standards 
implemented by December 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2012. 

Water resource management 
study completed by December 
2011.  

3.3 Transport  

Improve efficiency of 
existing urban transport 
infrastructure in the 
Greater Beirut Area 

Severe traffic congestion as a 
result of limited road network 
capacity.  

Lack of parking management 
and shortage of parking spaces. 

Limited capacity and poor 
quality of public transport 
system services. 

Efficiency of existing urban transport 
infrastructure and traffic management 
in the city of Beirut and Greater Beirut 
Area is improved.  

Indicators:  
 Travel time on selected main 
urban roads reduced by 25% 
(baseline 2010). 

 

Increased regulation of on-street 
parking in selected zones. 

 Formulation of an integrated 
urban transport strategy for the 
Greater Beirut Area. 

Traffic Management 
Organization (TMO) with 
Intelligent Transport System 
(ITS) capabilities is 
established.  

Installation of about 580 pay-
and-display multi-space 
parking meters; TA and 
training to build capacity for 
parking management.  

Transport feasibility studies 
completed 

Ongoing Urban Transport 
Development Project  

TA to MoTPW 

Agence Française de  
Dévelopment (AFD) 

3.4 Environment & Waste Management 

Municipal Solid Waste 
Management 

3.5 Local Development 

Weak legal and institutional 
framework including lack of 
defined roles and 
responsibilities, poor strategic 
planning and very modest 
managerial and technical 
capacities. 

Sector strategic objectives and priority 
needs well defined together with an 
effective national planning framework 
and implementation arrangements are 
in place. 

National MSW Plan with 
quantitative targets in terms of 
service delivery and quality 
prepared and initiated by 2012. 

Ongoing World Bank CEA 
with municipal solid waste as 
one on the main covered 
topics. 

 Promote balanced and 
sustainable territorial 

Outdated municipal finance 
framework. 

Improved transparency and 
predictability of inter-governmental 
fiscal transfers 

Use of the standard accounting 
and financial management 
practices is systematized in 

Implementation of the 
ongoing FMIP project (Grant 
financing), Municipal Finance 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
development  

Indicator: Intergovernmental transfers 
are settled on a quarterly basis to all 
municipalities.  

municipalities. 

TA. 

Weak management capacity of 
municipal sector at central 
government level.  

Transparency is increased in the 
municipal sector due to the 
implementation of a modern M&E 
system.  

Large and growing disparity in 
living standards across regions 

A Regional Development Master Plan 
is adopted. 

Historic and cultural assets are 
adequately preserved and managed 
with a view to create tourism revenue 
opportunities for local communities. 

Functional Municipal 
Observatory is established to 
collect data on local tax 
revenues and transfers from 
central government. 

Establishment of Regional 
Development Board. 

Increased rehabilitation 
activities in historic urban 
cores in compliance with 
approved regulations 
recognizing the centrality of 
their cultural heritage to their 
economic and social 
development. 

STRATEGIC GOAL 4: Human Capital Development and Social Protection 

Ongoing CHUD Investment 
Project, Additional Financing, 
AAA, CEA 

Partners: AfD, EU, UNDP, 
Italy, Germany, US, Kuwait 
Fund. 

4.1 Education  

Improve quality 
teaching and learning in 
general public education  

Children entering primary 
public schools are not ready 
cognitively and non-
cognitively due to low pre-
school enrollment and low 
quality pre-school education.  

Education Reform for Quality 
Schools Project (ERQSP) SIL 
($35 m under preparation) 

110 renovated preschool 
facilities in public schools in 
disadvantaged areas by end-
2013. 

EU, USAID, AFD 

Improved school readiness among first 
graders in disadvantaged communities 

Indicators:   

 Number of 3-5 year olds enrolled 
in public preschools in rural and 
suburban areas has increased by 
10% between 2010 and 2013.  

 

20% improvement in scores of 
participating schools in ECERS 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Qualification of teachers is low 
and there are no incentives to 
participate in professional 
development. 

Management of the public 
education system is centralized 
with limited school level 
empowerment.   

4.2 Social Protection and Social Safety Nets

Adequate social 
protection for the 
elderly, sick, and 
unemployed. 

The National Social Security 
Fund (NSSF) is in financial 
deficit, and the quality and 
efficiency of its services and 
operations are low.  

(Early Childhood Environment 
Rating Scale).  

Public School teachers have upgraded 
skills and performance levels to meet 
national objectives. 

Indicator: 40% of teachers have 
received certification under the new 
Teacher Career and Professional 
Development Framework.   

Training of at least 1000 KG 
teachers in public schools in 
new ECE curriculum by end-
2013. 

Adoption by Parliament of 
System of Professional 
Standards for Teachers. 

Public Schools are empowered to plan 
and manage their improvement and 
development.  

20% of schools with school 
improvement plans approved 
and under implementation.  

Education Reform for Quality 
Schools Project (ERQSP) SIL 
($35 m under preparation) 

EU, USAID, AFD 

NSSF Board approves plan for 
equilibration of Maternity and 
Sickness Fund. 

Government annually reduces 
its arrears with NSSF. 

Emergency Social Protection 
Implementation Support 
Project II (ESPISP II) – under 
implementation 

Indicator: At least 30% of schools with 
active School Councils by end-2013. 

Improved administration, delivery and 
financial sustainability and targeting of 
social services through 
implementation of new systems and 
adoption of new policies in the NSSF, 
MoL, MoPH, MoSA, PCM, and 
MEHE.  

Indicators:  
 Reduction in annual deficits of the 
Maternity and Sickness Fund and 
the Family Allowance Fund. 

 An in-patient electronic claiming 
system (NAPS)  

 

is operating in all hospitals 
nationwide.  

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labor market policies and 
programs not functioning 
effectively  

Improve living 
standards of the poorest 
and most vulnerable 
parts of the Lebanese 
population. 

Impact of formal social safety 
net programs on poverty is 
minimal. 

Untargeted, weak, fragmented, 
social safety net programs. 

Facilitate employment through 
effective active labor market policies 
and programs, such as development of 
more efficient employment services 
(public or private).  
Indicator: Necessary systems and 
regulation needed for the effective 
operation of employment offices in the 
private sector in place.  

The National Poverty Targeting 
Program (NPTP) for social safety nets 
is implemented, operational and in full 
use, based on a targeting mechanism 
that uses transparent and scientific 
criteria that assess households’ 
eligibility. 

Framework for active labor 
market policies and programs 
adopted by Ministry of Labor 

MILES (AAA) 

Employment and Labor 
Markets Technical Assistance 
(SIL) 

Establishment of a database on 
poor and vulnerable 
populations using proxy-means 
testing targeting mechanism. 

Nation-wide public relations 
campaign on the NPTP 
implemented. 

Emergency Social Protection 
Implementation Support 
Project II (ESPISP II) 

CIDA 

Italian Cooperation 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 2: WORLD BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE 

1. There are eight active projects for a total net commitment of US$269.8 million (including 
IBRD and Lebanon Trust Fund resources) of which US$138.4 million has been disbursed to-
date (July 5, 2010). Project implementation is generally satisfactory, and all projects are 
expected to achieve their development objectives. However, four projects are currently at risk 
in the portfolio, mainly due to slow disbursement and effectiveness delays. The Bank is 
planning to engage in yearly participatory Country Portfolio Performance Reviews with the 
Government to review portfolio implementation and ensure effective and satisfactory 
completion of projects. The disbursement ratio over the last three years has been above the 
three-year average (FY08-FY10) for MENA and for the IBRD portfolio as a whole; however, 
in FY10 it was 14.9 percent which was below the MNA and Bank average of 19.2 percent 
and 26.4 percent respectively. 

2. In September 2006, the World Bank's Board of Governors approved a grant of US$70 
million for a Lebanon Trust Fund (TFL) to support the Government's reconstruction efforts 
following the July/August 2006 hostilities. The resources came in the form of a grant from 
the Bank’s surplus. The TFL financing is assisting in municipal and water infrastructure 
rehabilitation, supporting reform implementation in the energy and social sectors, and 
improving the allocation and use of public financial resources. US$15 million was allocated 
to IFC to scale up its Risk Sharing Facility to Lebanese banks by providing a first loss grant 
(US$14 million) and technical assistance (US$1 million) to expand the coverage of Kafalat 
(the Lebanese SME guarantee agency) and to support other organizations that finance SMEs. 

3. The Bank’s portfolio was restructured in FY05 to strengthen project implementation. 
Portfolio performance 
improved considerably 
thereafter. However, 
the 
two month 
implementation interruption caused by the 2006 hostilities resulted in a delay of five to six 
months for all the projects in the portfolio. Once project implementation resumed, close 
supervision by the project teams (Government and Bank) resulted in improved performance 
and reduced delays. Following the hostilities, the Bank adopted country financing parameters 
for Lebanon which provided a new framework for cost sharing arrangements and greatly 
improved the speed of implementation at a time of crisis. To ease the financial burden on the 
Government, all Loan Agreements were amended in August 2006 to allow for 100 percent 
financing and to eliminate counterpart contributions for a period of one year, until August 
2007. PIUs quickly focused on remobilizing contractors to re-start the interrupted works. 
Unallocated project funds were redirected towards emerging priority needs to relieve 
hardship in local communities. To date, the Bank may still finance up to 100 percent of the 
project costs based on merit and justification, applying the parameters with due diligence on 
a project by project basis. This has increased the flexibility of use for Bank loan proceeds, 
reduced the transaction costs to the country and the Bank, and is expected to enable easier 
harmonization of donor procedures around country systems.  

4. The portfolio financial management (FM) performance is overall satisfactory. This was 
confirmed during the 2009 portfolio review and it will be updated for the coming 
participatory Country Portfolio Performance Review. The strengths of the portfolio FM 
performance include: adequate staffing, reliable and timely reporting, smooth funds flow, 
adequate controls, and clean audit reports. However, the portfolio has an unsatisfactory audit 
timeliness rate due to: (i) delay in receiving projects’ audit reports, audited financial 

42 

 
 
 
statements, and management letters; and (ii) to lack of assets management systems.  In terms 
of the audit issue, it is being addressed by early selection of auditors with whom the Bank is 
conducting frequent informative and planning meetings to ensure delivery of timely 
acceptable reports. As to the assets system, the projects are being required to maintain an 
updated list of assets that is validated through having beneficiaries confirm existence and 
functionality status and through performing physical inspection. During the CPS period, 
these areas will continue to be monitored closely to ensure proper compliance. 

5. Every project is born with two exogenous “flags,” signaling risks associated with the 
macro-economic environment and poor outcome track record of completed projects.20 While 
the number of project-specific risk flags initially increased in the wake of the hostilities, the 
average number of flags per project is now below that of June 2006. 

6. Nonetheless, a number of systemic obstacles to implementation, applicable to all projects 
in the portfolio, remain. The public procurement system still relies on a law from the 1960s 
and is in urgent need of reform21. While efforts have been taken by the Council for 
Development and Reconstruction (CDR)—the main implementation agency for Bank funded 
operations—to streamline the process, the tendering process still takes up to four months. 
Concerns regarding the sustainability of institutional development components also remain, 
due to the difficulties in attracting quality civil servants and consultants to the public sector, 
associated with the GoL’s freeze on new hiring. These issues and others will be addressed in 
the context of the GoL’s reform program. 

7. Experience has shown that capacity building components tend to be ignored until late in 
project life. This results in the need to extend projects to complete these components 
satisfactorily. This tendency will be addressed early on in future operations by the project 
teams. 

8. In addition to the investment portfolio, Lebanon has been able to access a variety of 
existing Bank-administered trust funds, including Institutional Development Fund grants, 
Development grant Facility grants, Cities Alliance grants, Persistent Organic Pollutants Trust 
Fund grants and grants from the State and Peace-Building Fund.22  The current portfolio 
includes seven of these grants, totaling US$3.4 million.  The portfolio has supported the post-
war reconstruction of critical infrastructure (especially in the areas of water supply and 
sanitation, urban transportation, and urban development) and the strengthening of capacity in 
public institutions in need of reform (in electricity, social protection, and fiscal management).  
It is worth noting that trust funds have played a central role in the World Bank’s support to 
Lebanon and have been instrumental in the preparation of structural reforms under the ISN 
and Paris III.   This support was also bundled with IFC investments to facilitate bank lending 
to SMEs affected by the conflict through Advisory support and risk guarantees.  Trust funds 
have also been used to support the reconstruction of the Nahr El-Bared camp and its adjacent 
communities.  In addition to the US$2 million grant from the Development Grant Facility 
which is financing small-scale infrastructure projects and services for the communities 
surrounding Nahr El-Bared, the Bank has set up a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) which 

20 The flags are Country Environment and Country Record. The first is based on a composite indicator of a country’s 
weak macro management. The second is based on an independent evaluation of samples of completed project (selected 
by the Independent Evaluations Group), where net commitments associated with unsatisfactory projects represent more 
than 40 percent of commitments for completed projects over the previous five years. 
21 A new public procurement draft law is awaiting the approval of the Council of Ministers. 
22 For a complete list of Trust Funds, see Table next page. 

43 

 
                                                 
channels donor contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) for 
the reconstruction of the camp.23  To-date, the MDTF has financed rubble removal and 
reconstruction packages for the old camp and has been fully disbursed. 

9. Active Trust Funds Table 

Fund 

TF Name 

TF Prog. 
Src 

Closing 
Date 

Percent 
Disbursed 

Grant Amt 
(USD) 

TF056820 

TF091513 Nahr El-Bared Emergency Recovery Project  
IDF-Lebanon: Supporting the Judiciary System in the 
Enforcement of Environmental Legislation 
IDF Grant for Developing Capacity Building Tools for 
TF090548 
Sustainable Governance 
TF093850 Emergency Fiscal Management Reform Implementation 
Support Project (EFMIS-TA) 
TF058084 Emergency Power Sector Reform Capacity Reinforcement 
Project 
TF092582 Second Emergency Social Protection Implementation 
Support Project - ESPISP II 
TF058085 West Beka’a Emergency Water Supply Project 
TF057505 First Municipal Infrastructure Project (FMIP) – Additional 
Financing 
TF092011 Cities Alliance - Al Fayhaa Sustainable Development 
Strategy 
TF093689 Conflict-Affected Areas of  North Lebanon: Nahr El-Bared 
Camp (UNRWA) 
TF096155 Nahr El-Bared (Secretariat Costs) 
TF091523 POPs Canadian TF: Inventory & Removal of POPs Materials 
Project Supervision 
TF091522 POPs Canadian TF: 2 Inventory & Removal of POPs 
Materials  
Recovery and Reconstruction of the Nahr El-Bared 
Palestinian Refugee Camp and Conflict Affected areas of 
North Lebanon 
TF092049 MENA Region-Specific Guidelines for Integrated Prevention 
and Care for Key Vulnerable Groups  

TF095205 

DGF 

12/31/2010 

IDF 

IDF 

LTF 

LTF 

LTF 

LTF 

LTF 

7/5/2010 

8/14/2010 

9/30/2011 

12/31/2010 

3/31/2012 

11/20/2011 

6/30/2011 

CITIES 

7/31/2010 

MNA-FS 

12/31/2013 

MNA-FS 

2/28/2014 

46.89 

80.28 

75.76 

10.24 

65.83 

8.32 

16.62 

53.68 

72.42 

100 

5 

12/31/2010 

95.34 

12/31/2010 

POPS 

POPS 

SPBF 

12/31/2010 

GAIDS 

04/30/2010 

4.5 

100 

76 

TOTAL 

10. The Bank has also produced and disseminated a number of Economic and Sector Work 
pieces and just-in-time policy notes aimed at shaping policy debates and providing analytical 
underpinnings for reform, namely in pensions, labor markets, investment climate, gender and 
environmental degradation. The Bank is providing technical assistance to support the 

23 To-date Spain, Norway and Finland have contributed a total of US$9.78 million to the MDTF. 

44 

2,025,000 

327,000 

338,000 

4,000,000 

5,000,000 

6,000,000 

15,000,000 

30,000,000 

345,190 

7,975,000 

490,075 

24,875 

248,748 

90,000 

83,511

71,947,399

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
implementation of electricity sector reforms by evaluating fuel options (LNG, CNG and 
coal), and is providing advice to the Telecommunication Regulatory Authority. Other 
noteworthy analytical work includes the Social Impact Analysis for Electricity and Water 
Sectors, the Public Expenditure Reviews for the Energy and Water Sectors, and the Policy 
Note for Regional Development of the North. The Bank is also providing capacity building 
activities to: (i) the Central Administration for Statistics to complement the ongoing advisory 
assistance to implement the Statistical Master Plan and reform the legal framework of the 
statistical system; (ii) the National Social Security Fund to assist its management to 
undertake the needed reforms and train the NSSF staff in all basic skills for a modern social 
security institution; and (iii) local development in five of the biggest growth centers (Cities of 
Tripoli, Jounieh, Saida, Sour and Ba’albeck) to further stimulate their economic development 
potential and drive regional economic growth. 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 

ANNEX 3 

Areas of Engagement

EC

AFD KFW

Fre nch 
Gov t.

Italy

EIB

Japan 
(JB IC) USAID KFAED AFESD SFD KSA OFID ADFD IDB

China FAO OHCHR UNFPA UNESCO

ILO

UNICEF

UNRWA

Fiscal Ad justment, Economic 
and Public FM (€ /$ M)
 Public Administration

$31 

$0.15 

$2 

 Data Collection/Statistics

$0.80 

$0.40 

$1.80 

 Growth (job creation, local 
dev., private sector)
 Support to Reforms
Economic Infrastructure (€/$ 
M)
 Energy

€ 56

$8.40 

€ 52

$152 

 Water Supply & Sanitation

€ 5

€ 40

€ 22

€ 20

€ 124.80 € 200

$40 

$45.50 $112.50 

$194 

$11 

$27 

$134.50 

$0.27 

$1.30 

 Telecommunications

 Infrastructure/Transport

€ 30 (+ € 10 
for studies) 

€ 7.90

€ 60

$73 

$209 

$74 

$135 

$25 

$10 

$201 

 Environment

€ 2.30

$2.60 

$0.10 

 Agriculture/Farming

€ 4.50

$7.50 

$2.89 

 Nahr el Bared

€ 27.80

€ 5

$6 

$130.8 (Reconst. & 
Relief Recov.)

 Other

Demining    
€ 11

$3 

Conflict 
Prevention 
$0.9

Imp. Refugee Living 
Cond. CII $7.2
P rotection $0.5

Business Environment (€ /$ M)

 Investment Climate

 Support to SMEs

€ 15

€ 2

€ 100

$1.60 

$87 

 Governance

€ 4

$17.70 

 Other

Justice /Law 
€ 30

$33.90 

TCP   
$5.6

Loca l Development (€/$ M)

 Cultural Heritage & Urban 
Development
 Municipal Infrastructure

€ 9

€ 12.20

$5.75 

$0.77 

$28.75 

 Tourism
Develop ing Human Cap ita l        
(€ /$ M)

 Health

€ 4

€ 6.70

$89.80 

$0.21 

$4.90 

Reg. $14.3
P rojects $0.6
Reg. $36.3
P rojects $4.2

 Education

€ 44

$20.00 

$53.50 

$25 

$18.50 

$66 

$0.78 

$0.88 

 Community Dev./Job 
Creation
 Support to Civil 
Society/NGOs

€ 6.70

$14 

€ 3

$26.35 

 Youth

€ 0.40

$0.04 

$0.20 

 Other

$0.99 

Human 
Rights 
$0.06

Gender 
$3

Gender $0.65  
Soc. Supp. 
$0.065

Child Labor 
$0.8 and 
Gender 
$0.35

Child 
P rotection 
$1.7

Relief & Social 
Services $4.5
Supp. & Operational 
Serv. $6.9

ACTIVITIES OF DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS (Ongoing/Future)

 
 
 
ANNEX 3: Development Partners Table (Continued) 

Abbreviations: 
ADFD = Abu Dhabi Fund for Development 
AFD = Agence Française de Développement 
AFESD = Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
EC = European Commission 
EIB = European Investment Bank 
FAO = Food and Agriculture Organization 
IDB = Islamic Development Fund 
JBIC = Japan Bank for International Cooperation  
KFAED = Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development 
KFW = Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau 
OFID = OPIC Fund for International Development 
OHCHR = Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
SFD = Saudi Fund for Development 
UNESCO = United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UNFPA = United Nations Population Fund 
UNICEF = United Nations Children’s Fund 
UNRWA = United Nations Relief and Works Agency 
USAID = United States Agency for International Development 

47 

 
 
 
ANNEX 4: PROGRESS UNDER THE ISN (FY2008-2009) AND LESSONS LEARNED 

Date of CAS:   

July 9, 2007 

Progress Report:  
Period covered by ISN:  

None required 
July 1, 2007 – October 30, 2008 

Introduction 

1. 

This document evaluates the achievement of the objectives of the FY08-09 Interim Strategy 
Note (ISN) dated July 9, 2007 (Report 39779-LB). The document assesses the effectiveness of the 
ISN in aligning its objectives with Lebanon’s strategic goals, keeping in mind the country’s 
circumstances; and highlights the lessons learned over the period to inform the new Country 
Partnership Strategy.  

Context of the ISN 

2. 

The ISN was prepared in the aftermath of the summer 2006 hostilities and the ensuing 
political impasse which had rendered some of the CAS (approved in December 2005) assumptions 
and projections untenable. The move to an ISN reflects the recognition that greater focus and 
flexibility are required. The period covered by the ISN was only 15 months in appreciation of the 
uncertain economic and political situation in Lebanon and taking into account the elections that were 
scheduled for the Fall of 2007, after which the Bank had planned to initiate a new CAS by October 
2008.  

3. 

The ISN was designed to support the Government’s medium-term structural reform program 
– Paris III – discussed at the International Donor Conference in January 2007. Paris III focused on 
structural reforms, including fiscal adjustment to reverse Lebanon’s unfavorable debt dynamics, 
reforms to enhance growth by strengthening the business environment and competitiveness and 
social sector reforms. The ISN set out a transitional framework of technical and financial assistance 
to contribute to the Government’s efforts to establish reform momentum.  

4. 

Implementing this ambitious Paris III program required broad political support and consensus 
on key reforms, such as energy sector reforms which were critical for improved fiscal/debt 
sustainability and growth prospects, and social sector reform to benefit the poor and vulnerable and 
contribute to fiscal improvement in the medium term. However, the broad political support expected 
at the time of the ISN preparation was short-lived and a political crisis emerged which lasted about 
18 months and lead to the formation of a care-taker government until the parliamentary elections of 
June 2009. 

Overview of ISN Relevance 

5. 

The ISN program priorities were fully aligned with Lebanon’s own priorities and 
development objectives. The ISN focused on providing assistance to the GoL to advance the 
implementation of key reforms spelled out in Paris III and pave the way for their broadening and 
deepening as the political environment would stabilize. The ISN correctly recognized that Lebanon 
was facing a period of high uncertainty. The ISN, therefore, proposed a short-term transitional 
support to the GoL and the areas of focus, particularly under pillar 1, were selected because they 
could have the highest impact on medium-term public expenditure and social reform and were 
deemed to enjoy broad political support.  

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 

The ISN was, in substance, highly relevant and rightly aligned with the GoL strategy and was 
structured around three pillars that should have been mutually reinforcing, and focused on: (1) 
governance, economic management and growth support; (2) human capital development and poverty 
reduction; and (3) resource and environmental management. The ISN was not results-based and there 
were no specific targets outside the project results framework. Thus, it is difficult to judge progress 
in meeting ISN objectives in many areas.  

7. 

The suggested lending and non-lending assistance was relevant and consistent with the 
strategy. The major focus of the lending program was two consecutive Development Policy 
Operations to support the implementation of the Government’s reform program (Paris III) and 
projects financed by the Lebanon Trust Fund. The planned AAA was expected to inform the budget 
planning exercise and the refinement of medium-term sector reform actions and address public 
management and poverty assessment.  

8. 

The ISN focused on a set of early actions and outcomes needed to kick start and achieve the 
Paris III program objectives over time, and was prepared on the basis of the apparent consensus of all 
parties on the critical reforms needed to improve the fiscal/debt sustainability and growth prospects 
in the medium to long term. The strategy clearly recognized that the period covered was uncertain, 
but nevertheless proved to be ambitious and complex. The political situation in Lebanon continued to 
be tense as of 2007 and the apparent consensus on the reform agenda quickly dissolved. Some of the 
major risks identified in the ISN materialized and the government program the ISN was designed to 
support proved to be too ambitious.  

Identified Risks 

9. 

The ISN identified four key risks, all of which were considered to be high. First, the political 
and security risks. The ISN noted that in the short run the fragile political environment in Lebanon 
and the tense regional security environment posed the most important risks. Second, the ISN 
identified public debt and financial crisis risks. The main risk of macroeconomic and financial 
instability lies in the size of the fiscal imbalance and the spiraling public debt dynamic. The ISN also 
identifies external financial risks given Lebanon’s dependence on foreign capital inflows from the 
Lebanese diaspora and Arab investors. Third is the risk of stalled reform program. The ISN cites the 
risk of narrow sectarian interests overshadowing the national-level interests, which could be 
compounded as macro-economic stresses develop, given Lebanon’s poor past policy reform track 
record. Fourth was portfolio risks that are rooted in the macro-economy, institutional processes and 
capacity constraints. To partially mitigate the risks, the ISN focused WBG’s financial assistance on 
fiscally and socially rewarding elements of the reform program; emphasized timely implementation 
of the macroeconomic stabilization measures and intensified efforts to build the capacity for reforms. 

Overview of ISN Implementation 

10. 

The implementation of the ISN objectives was supported by an IBRD lending envelope of 
US$170 million for two DPLs in support of Paris III. The first DPL was approved in August 2007. 
However, the Government failed to demonstrate significant progress in implementing Paris III, and 
the DPL’s performance triggers, particularly on a program for electricity sector restructuring. The 
second DPL was, therefore, never completed. Instead of a second DPL, the Board approved 
additional financing for the Urban Transport project for US$69.7 million. The ISN had envisaged 
two additional projects financed by the Lebanon Trust Fund and both were approved in FY09 for a 
total commitment of US$10 million focusing on providing additional technical assistance on social 
protection reform and fiscal management.  

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 

Out of the 12 projects active during the ISN period up to June 2009 (6 IBRD loans, 6 grants 
from the Lebanon Trust Fund, of which one was WBG executed, and one DPL), 2 IBRD projects 
(Community Development Project and First Municipal Infrastructure Project) closed as well as the 
WBG-executed project from the TFL. The Community Development Project was rated “moderately 
satisfactory” on overall outcome of the project and on WBG performance, due to the difficult 
political environment and institutional framework that was present during project implementation. 
The First Municipal Infrastructure Project closed achieving all of its development objectives and was 
rated “satisfactory” on outcomes, WBG and Borrower performance.  

12. 

The general quality of the projects that remained open during the ISN period was good, 
however some projects continued to suffer from procurement, disbursement and effectiveness delays. 
One IDF grant closed (National HIV/AIDS Monitoring and Evaluation) and one PCF Grant 
(Establishment of Mechanisms for National Reconstruction) closed during the period under 
consideration, yielding satisfactory results. There were no apparent safeguard issues in the portfolio 
under the ISN period. In order to ease the financial burden on the Government, all Loan Agreements 
were amended in August 2006 to allow for 100 percent financing and eliminate counterpart 
contributions for a period of one year, until August 2007. The new WBG policy (OP/BP6.0) 
simplified procedures and reduced the transaction costs imposed on the Government of Lebanon. To 
date, the WBG may still finance up to 100 percent of the project costs based on merit and 
justification, applying the parameters with due diligence on a project by project basis. This has 
increased the flexibility of use for WBG loan proceeds, reduced the transaction costs to the country 
and the WBG, and is expected to enable easier harmonization of donor procedures around country 
systems. The policy rests on three guiding principles: (i) expenditures financed from the WBG loan 
proceeds are productive; (ii) the impact of operations financed under such loans on the borrowing 
country’s fiscal sustainability is acceptable; and (iii) oversight arrangements on the use of WBG 
funds are acceptable. 

13. 

The five proposed diagnostic activities were completed, but only one was delivered on time 
and four were delivered with slight delay. The energy and water Poverty and Social Impact Analysis 
was deemed more appropriate than the traditional Poverty Assessment planned in the ISN to analyze 
the distributional impacts of the proposed structural reforms (that would affect access to, quality and 
cost of service) and mitigation measures. This diagnostic work together with the three Public 
Expenditure Reviews provided the GoL with meaningful information and analysis to implement 
reforms. One of the five activities should have been labeled as technical assistance as it was designed 
to provide technical assistance to the GoL in addressing some the findings and recommendations of 
the Economic and Social Impact Assessment undertaken following the summer-2006 hostilities. 

14. 

The ISN had planned for non-lending technical assistance to complement WBG support to 
Paris III and focused on two critical areas: building the capacity of the Central Administration for 
Statistics on poverty analysis and social statistics, which is ongoing; and TA on financial sector 
assessment and public debt management  

15. While the ISN had not proposed any specific intervention to assist with the recovery and 
reconstruction of the Nahr El-Bared Camp and the conflict affected areas in the North of Lebanon, at 
the request of the Government, the WBG prepared an in-depth analysis of the impact and a 
reconstruction strategy, financed by post conflict grants, to underpin the activities to be supported by 
a small multi-donor trust fund managed by the WBG. The US$10 million multi-donor trust fund was 
set up in 2008 to pass donor contributions for the reconstruction and recovery of Nahr El-Bared and 
Beddawi camps to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near 
East. To-date, the removal of rubble in the first reconstruction areas has been completed but work 
temporarily halted awaiting resolution of questions on how to deal with antiquities discovered at the 
site.  

50 

 
 
 
 
 
16. 

An ISN with a limited (15 month) duration was deemed appropriate for guiding WBG Group 
strategy. However, the program envisaged for such a short period of time was too heavy to ensure 
successful timely completion. The political impasse discussed above extended the period of the ISN 
period to cover the full fiscal year 2009. This allowed for the completion of all the activities 
envisaged.  

Overview of Achievement by Pillar 

Pillar 1 - Governance, Economic Management and Growth Support. To achieve this pillar’s 
objective, the ISN planned for two consecutive Development Policy Loans (DPL); projects financed 
by the Lebanon Trust Fund focusing on building the capacity to prepare and implement reforms in 
the electricity and social sectors; the public expenditure reviews in three sectors; assistance in 
advancing public financial management reforms; and a poverty assessment. 

17. 

The DPLs were the centerpieces of the ISN. The first DPL, the Reform Implementation DPL 
I (RIDPL), was prepared on the basis of the apparent consensus of all parties on the reforms needed 
to reduce the budgetary burden of the power sector, modernize the business environment and 
telecommunications sector, and reform social protection. The program was designed to respond to 
significant structural issues in the Lebanese economy which have a significant impact on the budget 
deficit, a significant cause of macroeconomic imbalance and instability.  

18. 

The focus of the program was justified since covering its deficit absorbs 20 percent of the 
Government revenues. The design of the program focused on short-term actions having a clear 
impact on advancing sector governance reforms and financial viability, and on actions aimed at 
enticing the private sector to provide management skills and financing to the power sector. These 
priorities were suitably selected to achieve the maximum impact in the short term and to prepare for 
further improvements in the medium term as the sector reform program was implemented. 

19. 

The project closed with an unsatisfactory rating with four of the five indicators not achieved 
and the fifth one only partially achieved. The main factors which affected the implementation of the 
reform program supported by the RIDPL were the political events in Lebanon following the approval 
of the RIDPL. This further complicated the intertwinement of sector reforms with the realities of 
Lebanon’s political economy. Lebanon’s political economy allocating considerable amount of 
subsidies and redistribution of public sector services as well as the lack of agreement on the 
objectives of sector reform have impeded progress on implementing reform measures, especially in 
the electricity sector. The main reasons for the failure to implement reform are not technical, since 
the sectors have benefited from a wealth of engineering and technical assessment reports providing 
recommendations for sector improvement and an agenda for sector reform. The situation in Lebanon 
continued however to be tense with demonstrations by the opposition paralyzing parts of Beirut for 
months, sporadic political violence and assassinations, the postponement of Presidential elections, 
the suspension of parliamentary sessions, and a long process leading to formation of an interim 
government with its main mandate to prepare new parliamentary elections. This volatility in the 
political conditions in Lebanon paralyzed government decisions necessary to advance reforms 
supported by the RIDPL. 

20. 

The WBG had recognized the fragile political environment during the preparation of the 
RIDPL and the ambitious reforms included in Paris III program, but took a calculated risk and 
decided to support continued involvement in Lebanon as it felt that the WBG needed to stay firmly 
engaged with the process initiated at the Paris III Conference. The WBG decided to take a calculated 
risk and proceed with the RIDPL, believing that there was a window of opportunity which, in the 
end, did not materialize. However, it the potentially negative impact of the fragile political 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment on implementation of the reforms included in the RIDPL. The lesson learned is that it 
may be more effective to have a series of DPLs (or a multiple tranche DPL) that set less ambitious 
incremental targets. Without a strong consensus on those specifics amongst the key political actors, 
forward movement proves elusive. 

21. While progress in implementing structural reforms has been slow due to the reasons 
mentioned above, the technical work progressed well, largely supported by WBG advisory and 
technical assistance work and the TA projects financed by the Lebanon Trust Fund. Three 
PERs were completed for the energy, water, and agriculture sectors together with the poverty and 
social impact analysis, providing the Government with solid studies on which to build and implement 
the reforms, if the political will were to materialize. 

 

In the telecommunications sector, some encouraging steps have been taken, but the 
privatization of the sector has been postponed. Political difficulties and increasing budget 
deficit have led to the postponement of the auction of the two mobile companies from 2007 
to 2008. However, the Ministry of Telecom has taken several measures aiming to reduce the 
cost of telecommunications and to enhance the client base of the sector. These measures 
include: (a) reducing the subscription fee to the cell-phone lines; (b) reducing the fee for a 
prepaid card; (c) awarding the management contracts for the two cellular phones networks to 
two private companies for one year renewable; (d) increasing investments in the 
infrastructure of the sector in order to raise the capacity of the network; and (e) launching 
auctions on 32 distinguished cell-phone numbers which brought US$2.5 million to the 
Government. 

 With WBG support, technical work for social sectors is also progressing, especially at the 
Ministry of Social Affairs where the Government is focusing on: (a) elimination of 
duplication in service delivery and program implementation among core ministries; (b) 
reform and restructuring of the Ministry of Social Affairs by identifying weaknesses in its 
mandate, structure and programs; and (c) establishment of a targeting mechanism (see more 
details on the achievements under Pillar 2). The Government had launched an initiative to 
strengthen the governance and administration. The first Phase of the Administrative and IT 
Master Plan was completed and all branches of the NSSF started the automated work. (I 
would suggest that we use the achievement und 

 The Ministry of Finance has drafted laws to reform tax procedures and the GIT legislation, 
while taking steps to improve its budget formulation and debt management. The key 
measures taken and implemented by the MoF include: (a) the construction of a 
comprehensive database, enabling timely issuance of tax schedules and reducing tax arrears; 
(b) the creation of a Cash Management Unit; and (c) the implementation of debt management 
Law. However, the increase in VAT and some other tax policy measures expected to be 
adopted under the Paris III program to enhance the budgetary revenues have been postponed.  

 

In the electricity sector, some initial measures have been taken in the power sector where 
work is progressing on the corporatization plan for EdL, although with serious delays. 

Pillar 2: Developing Human Capital and Mitigating the Poverty Effects of Transition 

22. 

To achieve this pillar’s objective, the ISN planned for the second DPL to focus largely on the 
implementation of the Government’s comprehensive Social Action Plan developed as part of its 
medium-term reform program. Technical assistance was programmed funded by the Lebanon Trust 
Fund to complement the DPL and accompany the reform in its implementation phase. The ISN 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
planned to continue WBG support in the education support with the ongoing IBRD project and 
support the reform in education finance, reorganize the management of the public education system 
and develop a nationally agreed upon education sector strategy to achieve better outcomes. 

23. 

As mentioned above, the lack of progress on the reforms supported by the first DPL 
prevented the finalization and approval of the second DPL which was expected to focus on three 
social clusters. However, two technical assistance projects financed by the Lebanon Trust Fund and 
AAA have supported the following achievements: 

 

 Approval by Cabinet of a Policy Statement adopting the principle of (proxy-means 
testing) targeting for its social assistance/safety net programs. 
 Successful implementation of the pilot of the new targeting mechanism and 
commenced preparation of the national roll-out. 
 Cabinet approval of a US$20 million conditional cash transfer program to keep poor 
students from dropping out due to financial difficulties (targeting public schools). 
Joint Parliamentary Committee approval of new draft law converting current end-of-
service-indemnity scheme for private workers 
into a fully-funded defined 
contribution pension system. 
 Completed development of the hospital electronics claims processing system in the 
NSSF and piloted in two hospitals which will greatly improve efficiency of the 
system once rolled out. 
 Developed reform options to reestablish financial sustainability of the health 
insurance branch in the NSSF, which was sent to the Board for approval. 
 Establishment of an Inter-ministerial Committee for Social Policy to coordinate 
social policy. 

24. 

In education, the ongoing project places a primary focus on building the institutional 
capacity, knowledge base, analytical tools, and readiness to implement education sector reform, as 
opposed to engaging in the reform process itself. The following was achieved under the project: 

 Development of a National Education Sector Strategy following a wide process of 
consultation. The strategy is being utilized as the basic document guiding the strategic 
directions of the next five year. An Education Sector Development Prospectus and Matrix 
was subsequently developed with medium term priorities activities, outputs, and output 
indicators associated with these priorities.  
 Formulating a Medium Term Expenditure Framework and a Program Based Budget for 
the period 2009-2011, as a shadow budget, based on the comprehensive financing study 
and the National Strategy completed under the project.  
 Approximately 450 school principals have undergone a professional development 
program to improve leadership, motivational, and management skills, and formulated 
school development plans.  
 Completed the automation of the General Science stream of the official examination, and 
administered it in June 2009. 

25. 

In health, the WBG provided technical assistance to the Government to develop instruments 
for and undertake integrated bio-behavioral surveys of high risk groups. The IDF Grant enhanced 
national capacity to ensure effective tracking of the HIV prevalence among the high risk groups and 
prevent the spread of HIV. The WBG initiated a study to assess health equity using an available 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
household survey dataset. The study indicated a higher incidence of catastrophic health payments 
among households in the lower income quintiles and in the poorer regions of the country.  

26. 

In social development, the WBG supported poor and disadvantaged communities, and 
specific vulnerable groups through the implementation of the Community Development Project 
(closed in 2008); and promoted a fruitful cooperation between civil society organizations, NGOs, 
CDR, sector ministries and municipalities to restore a feeling of trust in the Government and its 
ability to spend the money well. Under the project, 326 sub-projects were completed. 

 113 subprojects targeted farmers and helped increase the productivity of their agricultural 
land, crops and livestock through vocational training on issues pertaining to better land 
and crop management. 
 Under the Youth Thematic Program, youth groups received training in life skills 
activities, followed by youth counseling sessions and referral systems. The project also 
offered training that targeted children enrolled and dropped out from school to increase 
their academic skills and encourage them to remain in school. 
 Under the Disability Thematic Program, a disability prevalence study was completed to 
raise awareness of disability programs in schools. Teachers in 10 schools received 
training on inclusive education techniques.  
 Women-specific courses were completed, aimed at empowering women legally and 
socially through education by increasing their knowledge and awareness, acquiring an 
income-generating skill, or developing their artistic skills.  
 The capacity of NGOs/CSOs was improved with the upgrade of their proposal writing, 
financial management and procurement skills. 
In 2007, a decree was signed by the Prime Minister creating the Inter-ministerial 
Committee for Social Policy which is important to ensure that the innovative approaches 
to gender, youth, and disability are included in the Social Strategy. 

 

Pillar 3: Resource and Environmental Management 

27. 

To improve the management of water resources, the WBG proposed to undertake analytical 
and advisory services to help the Government implement actions specified in the Government’s 
strategy.  

28. 

The World WBG has played an active role in the development and implementation of the 
Government’s strategy for an improved water sector. The results of the 2004 Sector Policy Note and 
2006 Economic and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) have largely driven the Government’s agenda 
moving forward. The WBG provided in-depth analysis to support the GoL’s reform in the sector with 
a public expenditure review which complemented the poverty and social impact analysis. The 
findings of the reports are that Lebanon’s overarching challenge will be to establish trust with 
consumers while simultaneously improving performance. Major investments in each sector targeting 
infrastructure, management and human resources will need to take place while increasing revenue 
from consumers who have little faith in the system and want to see concrete results or credible 
action. In substance, the PER proposed a policy matrix recommending: 

 

 

Improving continuity of supply to achieve 24/7 across the country, while in parallel, 
increasing volumes of wastewater collected and treated; 
Improving efficiency in the water sector can generate sufficient resources to close the 
investment gap in WSS. This is particularly important, considering Lebanon’s limited fiscal 
space. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Improving sector efficiency through investment prioritization; implementation of Law 221; 
utility management; and information management. 

29. 

The WBG recommendations have not been implemented to-date because of the political 
situation described above. A PER discussion was held on October 2, 2009 with relevant stakeholders 
(Government donors and civil society). The Government has requested additional support as it moves 
forward with the implementation of the medium term framework.  

30. 

The WBG is also providing financial support to the ongoing Ba'albeck Water and 
Wastewater Project designed to connect people to water supply and wastewater services, installing 
meters, improving sanitation conditions, strengthening the capacity of the newly created Beka’a 
Regional Water Authority, and have the private sector operate and maintain the infrastructure 
facilities in the Ba’albeck area. The project has been instrumental in improving the coverage of 
potable water and providing better access to water supply and sanitary services. Through this project, 
the World WBG is working with the Government in furthering the reform agenda, focusing on the 
introduction of an adequate tariff scheme and the involvement of the private sector in the operations 
and maintenance (O&M) of networks and facilities. To-date, the infrastructure components have 
been completed, and on the institutional aspect, most of the by-laws (of the water sector law) were 
issued, but the whole reform agenda needs to be launched within the framework of the recently 
agreed action plans and reform strategies. 

31. 

The ongoing Beka’a Emergency Water Supply Project is designed to alleviate the precarious 
conditions of the long-neglected water supply systems in West Beka’a, which were been further 
aggravated by the 2006 war. To-date, 95percent of the project is committed and implementation has 
just started. The WBG is working with the Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED) 
in cofinancing this project, with KFAED contributing US$37 million to complete the program's 
financing plan. 

32. 

Under Pillar 3, the WBG had also planned to stay engaged in the environment sector in the 
areas of environmental degradation and technical support to the Ministries of Environment and 
justice to improve the enforcement of environmental regulation. To-date, drafts of the chapters of the 
reference book on Noise, Solid waste, Soil, Agriculture, Transportation, Air pollution, Biodiversity 
and Tourism sectors are finalized and the analysis of environmental law courses offered at 
international universities and international judicial institutes completed. A major achievement lies in 
the Judicial Training Institute's decision to introduce a course on environmental law expected to be 
launched in 2010. 

33. 

An agriculture sector public expenditure review note was finalized in June and suggests that 
Lebanon may want to pursue a two phase agriculture sector strategy that first focuses on fresh fruit 
and vegetables and agro-processing for domestic and Gulf country markets, eventually followed by 
entry into European markets. In order to implement such a strategy, the Ministry of Agriculture needs 
to align its functions around services it will provide, the most important of which are related to 
various dimensions of food quality and safety. In order to finance this, the GoL may consider 
reforming agriculture subsidy programs and reallocating the savings to raise capital spending. This 
would be facilitated by investing in critical areas including logistics, food quality and safety and 
research and development. In the longer-term it requires institutional reform that involves 
consolidating Lebanon’s fragmented agriculture expenditures under a single institution that supports 
a single strategy. The report was sent to GOL in June 2009 for their review and comments. A 
workshop to discuss the findings of the PER is planned for November 2009 with relevant 
stakeholders. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio Assessment 

34. 

Implementation of ongoing projects and proactive supervision has contributed 
to 
achievement of project objectives in most instances. The portfolio of projects under implementation 
during the ISN period showed considerable improvements following the July/August 2006 hostilities, 
as a result of a concerted effort by project management units, supported by WBG staff. Indeed, the 
Government’s increased attention to sector priorities and the delivery of results to the population 
gave WBG staff the opportunity to discuss with counterparts ways to reassess the various 
components of their projects and address problematic areas with renewed determination. As a result, 
the portfolio became in better health than it was before the hostilities, and portfolio implementation 
progress was rated Satisfactory. Today, Project implementation is generally satisfactory and all 
projects are expected to achieve their development objectives. A portfolio review was completed 
with the Minister of Finance on April 21, 2009, to assess project implementation bottlenecks. The 
WBG is also planning to engage in a participatory Country Portfolio Performance Review with the 
new government to review portfolio implementation and ensure effective and satisfactory completion 
of projects. The average disbursement ratio for Lebanon in FY08 stood at 29.7 percent, well above 
the FY08 MNA and WBG averages of 21.6 percent and 21.3 percent respectively. The disbursement 
ratio for Lebanon in FY09 stood at 36.1 percent, well above the MNA and the Bank averages of 20.7 
percent and 25.8 percent respectively. 

Validity of the Choice of Instruments 

35. 

The ISN rightly selected DPLs as the best financial instrument to support the Government’s 
program. In fact, the political stalemate would have made it impossible for any investment lending 
operation to become effective because Parliamentary approval is required for investment lending. 
The ISN envisaged two policy-based lending operations to advance reforms that were likely to have 
an impact on macroeconomic and fiscal balances over time. The DPLs were sequenced to limit 
exposure in case of deterioration in the political, economic or security situation. Lack of progress on 
the reforms supported by the first DPL prevented the finalization of the second one. Therefore, of the 
US$175 million envisaged for development policy lending, only US$100 million was approved. 
Instead of a DPL, additional financing for the ongoing Urban Transport Project was approved for 
US$69.7 million.  

36. 

The ISN also envisaged two TA projects to be financed by the remaining funds of Lebanon 
Trust Fund. The investment income earned on the trust fund allowed the WBG to grant a second 
capacity building project to support the implementation of social protection reform, which was 
particularly important to keep the momentum in light of the absence of the second DPL.  

37. 

The delivery of first DPL operation has been timely, and in line with the ISN, but the 
technical assistance operations were delivered with delays pointing out to the over-optimism of the 
ISN program. 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Planned and Actual Lending (FY08-09) 

IBRD 
Reform Implementation DPL I 
Reform Implementation DPL II 
Urban Transport Project 
Supplemental 
Lebanon Trust Fund 
Social Protection Reform 
Implementation Support 
Social Protection Reform 
Implementation Support II 
Emergency Fiscal Management 
Reform 
Other Grants 
Inventory of POPs material 
Small Grants Program to NGOs 
Carbon Finance 

Project 
ID 

Proposed 
FY 

Approval 
FY 

Proposed 
Amount 
US$M 

Approved 
Amount 
US$M 

P094288 
P105823 
P034038 

2008 
2008 
Unplanned 

2008 
Dropped 
2009 

100 
75 
- 

P106489 

2008 

P 111849 

- 

P 111602 

2008 

P108112 

2008 

2008 

2008 

2009 

2009 

2008 

Dropped 

1 

- 

4 

- 

- 

100 
- 
69.7 

1 

6 

4 

0.22 

- 

38. 

The ISN focused the Bank’s advisory and technical assistance on building the capacity for 
reforms, engaging with the Government on the development and implementation of reforms, and 
assisting the implementation of the reform program. During the ISN period, the WBG delivered 
several important advisory reports, including a poverty and social impact analysis, and three Public 
Expenditure Reviews (in energy, water and agriculture). Most major reports have been publicly 
disclosed and disseminated in broad consultations with the Government, Parliament, Private Sector 
and Civil Society at large. Lebanon’s relatively free and cosmopolitan media also helped in the 
dissemination of these reports in wide coverage, prompting public debate across the political and 
social spectrum. The sequencing of analytical and technical assistance services enabled the WBG to 
provide strategic and well-targeted assistance. The series of studies completed in FY08 and FY09 
have provided support to the Government in identifying options for reforms and building its capacity 
to develop and implement the reform.  

39. 

The WBG also prepared a gender assessment exploring the working environment for females 
and the conditions as well as, barriers that women entrepreneurs face in the business and investment 
environment. Wide dissemination of the report has taken place with representatives from the 
Government, civil society and academia. The report has been publicly disclosed upon the 
Government’s agreement. 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Planned and Actual Analytical and Advisory Work (FY08-09) 

Diagnostics 
Electricity Sector PER  
Water Sector PER 
Agriculture Sector PER (TA) 
Economic and Social Impact Assessment Follow-up TA 
Poverty & Social Impact Analysis 
Technical Assistance 
TA on Financial Sector Assessment/Public Debt Management 
Capacity Building on Poverty Analysis and Social Statistics with 
the Central Administration of Statistics 
Broadband Strategy and Capacity Building 

Management of the Risks 

Product ID 

Proposed FY Delivery 
Status 

P105314 
P110556 
P098755 

P089777 

P113206 

2007-08 
2007-08 
2008 
2008 
2008 

Ongoing 
Ongoing 

P116146 

- 

Actual FY08 
Actual FY09 
Actual FY09 
Ongoing 
Actual FY09 

Ongoing 
Ongoing 

FY09 

40. 

The identification of risks unfortunately proved to be prophetic, with internal political 
instability leading to the Government’s inability to implement the Paris III reforms. The second risk 
only partly materialized and Lebanon’s financial sector prospered in 2009 despite the global financial 
turmoil, with strong capital flows and domestic private investment. However, Lebanon’s continued 
high debt calls for a prudent approach to near-term economic management and Lebanon has limited 
fiscal space. In the face of the political impasse on the reform program, the Bank focused, as 
identified in the ISN as mitigation measures, on building the capacity for reform and ensuring that 
the projects in the portfolio achieve their development objectives. 

Main Lessons for CPS Design and Implementation 

41. 

The ISN was designed and implemented in a challenging country context. In this context, the 
design of the CPS was generally appropriate. It set up a flexible, demand-driven arrangement around 
the Government’s Program. The following important lessons can be drawn: 

 The complexity of the political environment for decision making in Lebanon should not 
be underestimated. In Lebanon, the confessional system of governance and the resulting 
diffusion of political authority make such reforms subject to collective action, and such 
collective action is, for the same reasons, far from guaranteed. 
 Establish a flexible framework of activities that can be scaled up or down according to 
progress made on the reform program and be realistic about the program that can be 
implemented during the allocated time period.  
 
Focus lending in sectors where consensus on reform has developed and provide non-
lending analytical and advisory work to sectors where broad-based consensus remains 
to be consolidated.  
Establish a strategic and cohesive program of Bank activities that is not wholly 
dependent upon one counterpart or one instrument. 
Maintain a core set of Economic and Sector work (ESW) and diagnostic products as a 
basis for scaling up or developing new activities. 
Be prepared to scale down or disengage if the momentum for reform has disappeared 
and switch to a technical assistance/knowledge-based partnership. 

 

 

 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Set realistic objectives, and avoid objectives that are unrealistic in the country context 
even if they are ideologically noble or current. Expectations of impact of Bank support 
should be commensurate with the limited amount of assistance provided. Significant time is 
required for reaching a consensus on sensitive reforms after decades of mismanagement and 
internal conflicts, and the weak capacity in government administration. 
 Designing simpler projects and using adaptable instruments are even more important 
in today’s context to flexibly respond to challenges and changing priorities. The 
Government's implementation capacities still face the challenge of simplifying its procedures 
to expedite project implementation. 

59 

 
 
 
60 

ANNEX A2 

Lebanon at a glance

7/13/10

M. East
& North
Af rica

Upper
midd le
income

Key Developmen t Ind i cators

Lebanon

( 2009)

Popu lation, mid-year (mi l l ions)
Surf ace area (thousand sq. km)
Popu lation growth (%)
Urban popu lation (% of total popu lation)

4.2
10
0.7
89

325
8,778
1.8
57

949
47,176
0.9
75

GNI (Atlas method, US$ b i l l ions)
GNI per cap ita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per cap ita (PPP, international $)

34.0
8,060
11,750

1,053
3,237
7,350

7,454
7,852
12,214

GDP growth (%)
GDP per cap i ta growth (%)

9.0
8.2

5.5
3.7

4.2
3.3

(most recen t es timate, 2003–2009)

Poverty headcoun t ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcoun t ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
L if e expectancy at b irth (years)
Inf an t mortal i ty (per 1,000 l ive b irths)
Ch i ld malnutri tion (% of ch i ldren under 5)

..
..
..
..
..

4
17
71
29
12

..
..
71
19
4

Adu lt l iteracy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adu lt l iteracy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrol lment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrol lment, f emale (% of age group)

93
86
105
99

82
65
107
104

95
92
112
109

Access to an improved water source (% of popu lation)
Access to improved san itation f aci l i ties (% of popu lation)

..
..

88
74

94
82

Net Aid F lows

1980

1990

2000

2009 a

(US$ mi l l ions)
Net ODA and of f icial aid
T op 3 donors (in 2008):
   France
   Un i ted States
   European Commission

237

252

199

1,076

16
3
5

26
12
29

31
32
36

306
210
122

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per cap i ta (US$)

..
91

2.6
80

1.1
53

3.5
257

L ong - T erm E conom ic T rends

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP imp l ici t def lator (annual % change)

..
..

-99.7
97.4

-0.8
-2.1

2.8
5.8

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
T erms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

695.1
92

1,507.5
100

1,507.5
101

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–09
      (average annual growth %)
1.9
1.8
..
7.5

Popu lation, mid-year (mi l l ions)
GDP (US$ mi l l ions)

2.6
..

3.2
4,690
 (% of GDP)
7.3
25.5
14.4
67.2

3.8
17,260

4.2
34,528

1.2
4.6

Agricu lture
Industry
   Manuf acturing
Services

..
..
..
..

7.1
22.8
13.0
70.1

5.3
16.5
8.8
78.2

..
..
..
..

4.9
3.1
4.3
4.3

1.4
4.4
2.2
4.3

Household f inal consump tion expend iture
General gov' t f inal consumption expend itu re
Gross cap i tal f ormation 

..
..
..

124.5
14.0
29.3

84.1
17.3
20.4

79.0
15.5
30.2

..
..
..

6.6
13.2
8.5

5.8
-12.9
6.6

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

12.5
79.9
-10.5

14.2
35.9
-1.2

22.3
47.0
93.7

..
..

24.1
11.8

10.2
6.3

Note: Figures in i tal ics are f or years other than those specif ied. 2009 data are prel iminary. Group data are through 2008. .. ind icates data are not avai lab le.
a. Aid data are f or 2008.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

6

4

2

0

2

4

6

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

pe rcen t o f to ta l popu la tion

Age distribution, 2008

Ma le

Fema le

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1990

1995

2000

2007

Lebanon

M iddle East & Nor th Afr ica

Under-5 mortality ra te (per 1,000)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10

95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

Grow th of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 

Lebanon

Bal an ce of P aymen ts and T rad e

2000

2009

(US$ mi l l ions)
T otal merchand ise exports (f ob )
T otal merchand ise imports (cif )
Net trade in goods and services

1,050
5,988
-3,738

4,410
15,116
-8,545

Cu rrent account balance
   as a % of GDP

-3,718
-21.5

-5,363
-15.5

W orkers' remittances and
   compensation of emp loyees (receipts)

1,582

7,180

Reserves, includ ing gold

8,273

35,722

Cen tral Governmen t F in an ce

(% of GDP)
Cu rrent revenue (includ ing grants)
   T ax revenue
Cu rrent expend itu re

18.6
14.6
38.9

24.8
19.5
31.3

T echnolog y and In f rastru ctu re

2000

2008

Overal l surp lus/def icit

-23.4

-8.1

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed l ine and mob i le phone
   subscribers (per 100 peop le)
High technology exports
   (% of manuf actured exports)

84.9

..

Highest marg inal tax rate (%)
   Ind ividual
   Corporate

..
..

..
..

35

52

2.3

0.3

E xtern al Deb t and Resou rce F lows

E n vi ronmen t

(US$ mi l l ions)
T otal debt outstand ing and d isbursed
T otal debt service
Debt rel ief (HIPC, MDRI)

3,968
680
–

33,935
830
–

Agricu l tural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
National ly protected areas (% of land area)

58
..
..

67
..
..

T otal debt (% of GDP)
T otal debt service (% of exports)

23.0
24.5

98.3
6.5

Freshwater resources per cap ita (cu . meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (b i l l ion cub ic meters)

1,231
1.4

1,145
1.3

Foreign d irect investment (net inf lows)
Portf ol io equ ity (net in f lows)

..
..

..
..

CO2 emissions per cap ita (mt)

4.1

3.7

GDP per un it of energy use
   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oi l equ ivalent)

6.6

10.5

Energy use per cap ita (kg of oi l equ ivalent)

1,307

959

 W orld Ban k G roup portf ol io

2000

2008

 (US$ mi l l ions)

 IBRD
   T otal deb t outstand ing and d isbursed
   Disbursements
   Principal repayments
   Interest payments

311
42
17
14

458
40
116
20

 IDA
   T otal deb t outstand ing and d isbursed
   Disbursements
   T otal deb t service

–
0
–

0
0
0

P r i vate S ec tor Developmen t

2000

2009

T ime requ ired to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per cap i ta)
T ime requ ired to reg ister p roperty (days)

–
–
–

9
78.2
25

IFC (f iscal year)
   T otal d isbursed and ou tstand ing portf ol io
      of wh ich IFC own account
   Disbursements f or IFC own account
   Portf ol io sales, prepayments and
      repaymen ts f or IFC own account

218
127
20

99
99
35

Ranked as a major constraint to business
   (% of managers surveyed who ag reed)
      Access to/cost of f inancing
      Electricity

2000

2008

25

4

..
..

16.5
12.5

 MIGA
   Gross exposure
   New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Stock market cap ital ization (% of GDP)
Bank cap ital to asset ratio (%)

9.2
6.4

32.2
7.8

Note: Figures in ital ics are f or years other than those specif ied.  2008 data are prel iminary.
.. ind icates data are not avai lab le.  – ind icates observation is not app l icab le.

7/13/10

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Con tro l o f co rrup tion

Ru le o f law

Regu la to ry qua lity

Po litica l stab ility

Vo ice and accoun tability

Coun try's pe rcen t ile rank (0 -100 )

higher values imply better ratings

2008

2000

Governance indica tors, 2000 and 2008

Source: Kaufm ann-Kraay -M as t ruzzi, World Bank

IDA, 0IMF, 117 Other mul ti -
Shor t- term , 0
IBRD , 458
lateral , 624

Bi lateral , 2,713

Pr ivate, 7,439

Composition of tota l ex ternal debt, 2008

US$ millions

 
 
Millennium Development Goals

Lebanon

W ith selec ted targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown , +/- 2 years)  

Goa l 1: ha lve the rates f or extreme p overty and maln u tr i tion
   Poverty headcoun t ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of popu lation)   
   Poverty headcoun t ratio at national poverty l ine (% of popu lation)   
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qun iti le (%)  
   Prevalence of malnu trition (% of ch i ldren under 5)   

Goa l 2: en su re that ch i ld ren are ab le to comp l ete p rimary school ing
   Primary school enrol lmen t (net, %)
   Primary comp letion rate (% of relevant age group)   
   Secondary school enrol lmen t (gross, %)   
   Youth l iteracy rate (% of peop le ages 15-24)

Goa l 3: el imi nate gender d i sp ar i ty i n education and empower women
   Ratio of g irls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   
   Women emp loyed in the nonagricu ltural sector (% of nonagricu ltural emp loymen t)   
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parl iamen t (%)   

Goa l 4: red uce u nd er- 5 morta l i ty b y two- th i rd s
   Under-5 mortal ity rate (per 1,000)   
   In fant mortal i ty rate (per 1,000 l ive b irths)   
   Measles immun ization (proportion of one-year olds immun ized , %)

Goa l 5: red uce maternal morta l i ty b y th ree- f ou rth s
   Maternal mortal i ty ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 l ive b irths)   
   Births attended by ski l led heal th staf f (% of total )   
   Contracep tive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   

Goa l 6: ha l t and beg in to reverse th e sp read of HIV /AIDS an d other maj or d iseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of popu lation ages 15-49)   
   Incidence of tubercu losis (per 100,000 peop le)   
   Tubercu losis cases detected under DOTS (%)   

Goa l 7: ha lve th e p roportion of peop le wi th ou t sustain ab le access to b as ic needs
   Access to an improved water source (% of popu lation)
   Access to improved san i tation faci l i ties (% of popu lation)
   Forest area (% of total land area)   
   National ly protected areas (% of total land area)   
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per cap i ta)   
   GDP per un it of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oi l equ ivalen t)   

Goa l 8: deve lop a g l ob al p artnersh ip f or developmen t   
   Telephone main l ines (per 100 peop le)   
   Mob i le phone subscribers (per 100 peop le)
   In ternet users (per 100 peop le)   
   Personal computers (per 100 peop le)   

Lebanon

1995
..
..
..
3.0

2000
..
..
..
..

76
..
66
..

..
..
..

34
30
85

..
89
..

0.1
..
..

..
..
..
..
3.9
7.0

12.9
3.4
0.1
1.4

90
..
..
..

..
..
..

32
28
90

150
..
..

0.1
..
..

100
..
..
..
4.1
6.6

15.3
19.7
8.0
4.6

2008
..
..
..
..

..
87
82
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

0.1
..
..

..
..
..
..
3.7
10.5

17.9
34.0
22.5
10.2

1990
..
..
..
..

..
..
62
..

..
..
..

37
32
61

..
..
..

0.1
..
..

..
..
..
..
3.1
7.5

13.3
0.0
0.0
..

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Pr imary net enrol lment ratio

Ratio of g ir ls to boys in pr imary & secondary 
education ( ..)

100

75

50

25

0

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Lebanon

M iddle East & Nor th Afr ica

Fixed + mobile subscr ibers

Internet users

Note: Figures in i tal ics are for years other than those specif ied .  .. ind icates data are not avai lab le.

7/13/10

Development Economics, Developmen t Data Group (DECDG).

62 

 
 
Annex B2  
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

(As of July 5, 2010) 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2007

2008

2009 

2010 

9
4.0
11.1
13.0
44.4
19.0
24.9

9
4.3
11.1
13.8
44.4
20.1
29.7

10 
4.0 
10.0 
1.6 
50.0 
22.0 
36.1 

8 
4.6 
25.0 
4.1 
50.0 
31.9 
14.9 

                    Yes  
                    454 
                      50 

            No 
           859 
             78 

   Yes 
   804 
     73 

    No 
   980 
109  

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by 
Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

     Since FY 80 
17
733.6

    Last Five FYs 
          3
190.5

47.1
  66.7
31.5          63.0 

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b. Average age of projects in the Bank’s country portfolio. 
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation 
progress (IP). 
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at 
the beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 

*  All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio with the exception of Disbursement 
Ratio, which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal 
year. 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B3  

IBRD Program Summary 
 (As of July 5, 2010) 

Tentative IBRD Base-Case Lending Program a 

Fiscal 
year 

Project ID 

2011 
2011 
2011 

2012 

Greater Beirut Water Supply 
Education Reform for Quality Schools 
 Cultural Heritage and Urban Development 
– Additional Financing 
 Energy Sector Investment Project  

TOTAL 

Strategic 
Rewards 
(H/M/L) b 
H 
H 

H 
H 

US$(M) 

200.0
35.0

20.0
  20.0 c

275.0  

Implementation 
Risks (H/M/L) b 

M
M

L
M

a. 
b. 

c. 

This table presents the proposed program for FY11-FY12 
For each project, the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be High (H), Moderate (M), 
or Low (L) 
The actual amount will depend on the Government’s needs once the sector investment program has been 
adopted. 

64 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B3  

IFC Investment Operations Program 

(as of June 30, 2010) 

Commitments (US$m) 
               Gross 
               Net** 

   2007 

2008 

2009 

2010* 

165.7
165.7

225.6
225.6

184.5
184.5

192.0 
192.0 

Net Commitments by Sector (%) 
CGF 
CGM 
Total 

87.9
12.1
100

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Equity 
3.9
Guarantee 
42.6
Loan 
53.4
Quasi equity*** 
0
Total 
100

*  As of June 30, 2010 
**  IFC’s Own Account only 
***  Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types 

93.4
6.6
100

0
86.7
6.6
6.6
100

100
0
100

0
100
0
0
100

100 

0 

100 

52.0 
48.0 

0 
0 

100 

65 

 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B4  

Summary of Non-Lending Services 
(As of July 5, 2010) 

Product 

Completion 
FY 

Cost  
(US$000)

Audience a/ 

Objective b/ 

Recent Completions 

Electricity Sector Expenditure Review 

Capital Market Supervision 
Poverty Assessment: Poverty and Social Impact 
Analysis 
Improve HIV/AIDS Programming in Lebanon  

Public Expenditure Review for Water 

Gender Assessment 
Capacity Building to Central Administration for 
Statistics (Programmatic TA) – Part I 
LPDC Nahr El Barid Reconstruction and 
Recovery 
CDM TA for Lebanon 

Broadband Strategy and Capacity Building 

Agriculture TA 
Capacity Building to Central Administration for 
Statistics – Part II 
Underway 

Private Sector Development TA 

Support to Implementation of Electricity Sector 

Labor Markets and Migration 

Country Environmental Analysis 
Broadband Policy for ICT-Enabled Economic 
Growth 
Challenges of Informality for Women 

Tourism and Growth Potential Study 

Planned 

Water Sector Strategy 

2008 

2008 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2009 

2010 

2010 

2010 

2011 

2011 

2011 

2011 

2011 

2011 

Capacity Building to Central Administration for 
Statistics – Part III 
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

2011 

70.2 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

0.0 

Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

281.3 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

13.0 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

222.2 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

208.6 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

99.8 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

80.4 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
20.8 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
47.6 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

76.6 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

87.01 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

120.8 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

267.7 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

219.9 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

220.2 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

156.7 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

18.0 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

53.9 Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

Government/Bank Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

0.0 

0.0 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B5 

Lebanon Social Indicators

Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2003-09

M. Ea st
& North
Africa

Uppe r-
m iddle -
income

POPULATION  
Total populat ion, mid-year (millions )
    Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban populat ion (% of populat ion)
Total fert ility rate (b irths per woman)
POVERTY
(% of populat ion)
Nat ional headcount index
    Urban headcount index
    Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowes t quint ile (% of income or consumpt ion)
Highes t quint ile (% of income or consumpt ion)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Publ ic e x pe nditure
    Health (% of GDP)
    Educat ion (% of GNI)
Ne t prima ry school enrol lme nt ra te
(% of age group)
    Total
        Male
        Female
Acce ss to an improved w a te r source
(% of populat ion)
    Total
        Urban
        Rural
Immuniza tion ra te
(% of children ages 12-23 months )
    Meas les
    DPT
Child malnutrit ion (% under 5 years )
Life e xpe ctancy a t birth
(years )
    Total
        Male
        Female
Morta l ity
    Infant (per 1,000 live b irths )
    Under 5 (per 1,000)
    Adult (15-59)
        Male (per 1,000 populat ion)
        Female (per 1,000 populat ion)
    Maternal (per 100,000 live b irths )
B irths at tended by sk illed health s taff (% )

2.9
1.7
79.4
3.6

. .
. .
. .

. .
168
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

23
17
. .

66
64
68

38
44

241
181
. .
. .

3.5
1.9
85.0
2.7

. .
. .
. .

3,200
85
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
2.6

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

85
93
. .

69
68
71

30
34

210
150
. .
. .

4.2
1.1
88.9
. .

. .
. .
. .

8,060
112
-365

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .
. .

. .
. .

. .
. .
. .
. .

325.2
1.8
57.3
2.7

. .
. .
. .

3,237
124
. .

. .
. .
. .

2.8
5.2

91
94
89

88
95
81

86
89
12

71
69
73

29
34

158
106
200
80

949.3
0.8
74.8
2.0

. .
. .
. .

7,852
121
. .

. .
. .
. .

3.5
4.6

94
94
93

94
98
82

93
92
4

71
68
75

19
23

211
127
110
95

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB sys tem.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunizat ion: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vacc inat ions before one
year of age or at any t ime before the survey .

07/13/10

67 

 
 
Indicator
Nati onal accounts (as % of GDP )
Gross domestic producta
   Agriculture
   Industry
   Services

To tal Consumption
Gross domes tic fixed investment
   Government investment
   Private inves tment

100
6
21
73

99
22
3
20

100
7
20
73

98
23
3
20

100
7
22
71

97
27
3
24

21839

22437

25057

6200

23
48
3
17

21
42
2
12

21
43
1
5

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc
Memorandum items
Gross domes tic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$ , Atlas me thod)
5660
5670
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 02 prices)
   Gross domestic product at marke t pric
0 .9
0 .7
7 .6
   Gross Domestic Income
-0 .3
0 .7
7 .2
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 02 prices)
   Gross domestic product at marke t pric
-0 .5
-0 .4
6 .7
   To tal consumption
-3 .1
-1 .6
9 .9
   Private consumption
0 .0
3 .2
15 .1
Bal ance of Payments (US$ mi l l i ons)
  Exports (GNFS)b
      Merchandise FOB
   Imports (GNFS)b
      Merchandise FOB
  Resource balance
  Ne t current transfers
  Current account balance
  Ne t private foreign direc t investment
  Long-term loans (ne t)
    Offic ial
    Private

4675
2629
9312
8625
-4637
1063
-3761
1908
2529
-55
2584
40
-716

4769
2686
9456
8880
-4687
1969
-2535
1800
6130
-100
6231
-2635
-2760

5767
3527
12075
11197
-6308
2769
-2798
1883
5310
1672
3638
-2338
-2056

100
7
21
72

99
30
2
27

25
54
1
11

100
5
17
78

95
30
2
29

22
47
5
15

100
5
16
78

94
30
3
28

22
46
6
15

100
5
15
80

94
30
3
27

21
45
6
15

100
5
14
81

94
30
3
27

21
45
6
15

100
5
14
81

93
30
3
27

21
44
7
15

29933

34528

39155

43572

47802

52444

6980

8020

9090

10110

11070

12060

9 .3
8 .8

8 .5
8 .7
8 .8

7350
4403
16089
15018
-8739
2360
-5941
2620
5635
543
5091
1149
-3462

9 .0
10 .3

8 .2
5 .3
4 .8

7688
4410
16234
15116
-8545
2332
-5363
3678
-120
-60
-59
9608
-7804

8 .0
7 .9

7 .2
7 .5
7 .8

7 .0
6 .9

6 .2
6 .5
6 .5

6 .0
5 .9

5 .3
5 .5
5 .6

6 .0
5 .9

5 .3
5 .0
5 .0

8484
9227
9996
10869
4766
5097
5430
5822
18095
19713
21374
23008
16864
18386
19960
21501
-9611 -10485 -11378 -12139
2731
3020
3330
3546
-6034
-6637
-7225
-7757
3916
4139
4268
4414
-10
317
398
-122
-78
-145
-157
-171
68
462
555
49
2724
2923
3402
4416
-597
-743
-843
-951

                                                   Page 1 of 2 
ANNEX B6                                       

Lebanon - Key Economic Indicators

2005

Ac tual     
2006
2007

Estimate
2009

2010

P ro jected
2011
2012

2008

2013

  Other capital (net , incl. erro rs & ommis s ion s )

  Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP )
Real annual growth rates ( YR02 prices)
  Merchandise exports (FOB)
    Primary
    Manufac tures
  Merchandise imports (CIF)

-21 .2

-20 .9

-25 .2

-29 .2

-24 .7

-24 .5

-24 .1

-23 .8

-23 .1

8 .5
8 .1
8 .8
-1 .8

-2 .6
-7 .3
0 .3
-4 .1

23 .7
26 .7
22 .0
16 .7

11 .4
20 .6
5 .9
19 .8

-6 .5
-11 .9
-2 .9
5 .8

5 .8
10 .0
3 .3
8 .5

6 .0
10 .0
3 .5
7 .8

6 .3
10 .0
3 .7
8 .0

(Con tinued)

6 .6
10 .0
4 .2
7 .0

68 

 
 
ANNEX B6                          

Lebanon - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

   Page 2 of 2 

Indicator

Actual     
2006
2007

Estimate
2009

2010

Pro jec ted
2011
2012

2008

2005

Publ i c fi nance (as % of GDP at market pri ces)e
  Current revenues
22 .5
  Current expenditures
29 .4
  Current account surplus (+) or defic it (
-6 .9
  Capital expenditure
2 .1
  Foreign financ ing
0 .1

24 .6
32 .8
-8 .2
2 .8
4 .3

24 .6
31 .2
-6 .6
2 .7
5 .5

24 .2
31 .2
-7 .0
1 .8
-1 .0

24 .8
31 .3
-6 .5
1 .6
0 .1

24 .4
30 .3
-5 .9
2 .6
0 .0

24 .1
29 .5
-5 .4
3 .2
0 .7

24 .1
28 .4
-4 .3
3 .3
0 .8

Monetary i ndi cators
  M2 /GDP
  Growth o f M2 (%)
  Private sec to r credit growth /
  to tal credit growth (%)

Pri ce i ndi ces( YR02 =100)
  Merchandise export price index
  Merchandise import price index
  Merchandise terms of trade index
  Real exchange rate (US$ /LCU)f

  Real interest rates
  Consumer price index  (% change)
  GDP deflator (% change)

269 .5
3 .5
16 .0

279 .0
6 .4
22 .6

277 .1
10 .9
62 .4

267 .8
15 .5
72 .1

285 .7
23 .1
74 .3

285 .7
13 .4
74 .0

294 .1
14 .6
78 .7

303 .0
13 .0
81 .8

100 .0
100 .0
100 .0
273 .4

104 .9
104 .9
100 .0
267 .4

111 .4
113 .1
98 .5
278 .1

124 .8
128 .9
96 .9
286 .4

133 .8
114 .0
117 .3
326 .1

136 .6
117 .3
116 .5
325 .6

137 .8
118 .6
116 .2
332 .5

138 .1
119 .2
115 .8
339 .9

-2 .2
-0 .7

-3 .6
2 .1

-3 .5
3 .8

10 .4
9 .3

2 .8
5 .8

4 .9
5 .0

3 .6
4 .0

3 .1
3 .5

a.   GDP at facto r cost
b.  "GNFS" deno tes "goods and nonfacto r services."
c .  Includes ne t unrequited transfers exc luding official capital grants .
d.  Includes use o f IMF resources.
e .   Conso lidated central government.
f.  "LCU" deno tes "local currency units." An increase in US$ /LCU deno tes appreciation.

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B7 

Lebanon - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

Actual     
2006
2007

Estimated
2009

2008

2005

2010

2011

P ro jected
2012

2013

To tal debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

9592

10359

11460

11351

33935

29724

33093

37153

41367

Ne t disbursements (US$m)a

297

767

1179

-76

-120

-10

317

398

-122

To tal debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators 
(%)
   TDO/XGSb
   TDO/GDP
   TDS/XGS
   Concess ional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
   IBRD DS/public DS
   P referred creditor DS/public
   DS (%)c
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d
      Of which present value of
      guarantees (US$m)
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
   Loans
   Equity and quasi-equity  /c

MIGA
   MIGA guarantees (US$m)

1791

1635

1345

1465

830

816

1326

2229

2389

129 .9
43 .9
24 .3
0 .0

114 .5
46 .2
18 .1
0 .0

3 .7
7 .8

0 .7
446

8 .0
11 .1

1 .2
403

99 .3
45 .7
11 .7
0 .0

6 .6
16 .2

0 .6
529

92 .5
37 .9
11 .9
0 .0

10 .0
15 .6

1 .1
458

264 .7
98 .3
6 .5
0 .0

210 .6
75 .9
5 .8
0 .0

209 .4
76 .0
8 .4
0 .0

217 .2
77 .7
13 .0
0 .0

223 .8
78 .9
12 .9
0 .0

7 .1
18 .9

0 .4
434

8 .7
20 .4

0 .5
394

5 .0
11 .8

0 .4
474

3 .5
6 .7

0 .4
422

2 .6
5 .1

0 .3
369

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

8 .0
0 .0

10 .6
0 .0

159 .2
6 .5

210 .6
15 .0

184 .5
0 .0

92 .0
100 .0

100 .0
0 .0

115 .0
10 .0

115 .0
10 .0

a.  Includes public and public ly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
     term capital.
b.  "XGS" deno tes exports of goods and services, including workers ' remittances .
c . Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks , the IMF, and the
    Bank for International Settlements.
d. Inc ludes present value of guarantees.
e .  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments .

70 

 
 
ANNEX B8 – LEBANON 

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 
(As of July 5, 2010) 

20 

Closed Projects 
IBRD/IDA  
Total Disbursed (Active) 
     of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
     of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
     of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

Active Projects 

 113.44 
   24.07 
   332.2 
 430.65 
445.64 
454.72 
  95.79 
    2.01 
  97.80 

Project ID 

P074042 
P103885 
P050529 
P111849 
P111602 
P104774 
P103875 
P034038 
Overall Result 

Project Name 

LB - Ba’albeck Water and Watewater 
LB - Beka’a Emergency Water Supply 
LB - Cultural Heritage and Urban Development 
LB - ESPISP 2 
LB - Emergency Fiscal Management Reform 
LB - Emergency Power Reform Capacity Reinf. 
LB - Municipal Infrastructure 
LB - Urban Transport Development Project 

Last PSR  

Supervision 
Rating 

DO 

IP 

MS 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 
MS 
MU MU 
S 
S 
MU MS 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Fiscal 
Year 

2002 
2007 
2003 
2009 
2009 
2007 
2007 
2002 

Difference Between 
Expected and Actual 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Disbursements a/ 

IBRD 

IDA 

Grants 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

43.53 

31.50 

134.7 
209.73 

15.00 

6.00 
4.00 
5.00 
30.01 

 0.01 

60.01 

0.01 

14.34 
12.45 
11.47 
5.20 
3.50 
1.58 
12.83 
70.0 
131.35 

14.34 
12.45 
11.47 
1.55 
0.67 
1.58 
12.74 
0.28 
55.08 

Frm 
Rev'd 

14.34 
 -0.05 

0.43 
26.51 
41.22 

a/ intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal. 

71 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 
(As of June 30, 2010) 

ANNEX B8  

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM

Partici  
pant 

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM

Partici  
pant 

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

2007 
2010 
2007 
2010 

2010 
2008 
2010 
2007 
2010 
2005 

Admic 
BLC Bank 
Blom 
Bank Beirut II 
Banque Libano 
Fransabank 
Butec holdings 
Byblos bank 
Cl sal 
Fransabank 
SIS Adma 

0
0
21
0

0
0
0
9.2
6.46
2.83

4.60
0
0
0

0
0
85.71
0
0
0

Total Portfolio: 

39.49

90.31

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products. 
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

0
0
0
0

0
15
0
0
0
0

15

0
0.13
0
32.28

10.57
0
0
7.5
7.68
0

58.16

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0
0
21
0

0
0
0
9.2
6.46
2.83

4.60
0
0
0

0
0
85.71
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
15
0
0
0
0

0
0.13
0
32.28

10.57
0
0
3.19
3.39
0

39.49

90.31

15.0

49.56

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

72 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
73 

 
 
 
