Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 20521 MOZ

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

Public Disclosure Authorized

ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

June 14, 2000
Africa Region

The last Country Assistance Strategy was datedNovember 21, 1997
Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Metical (Mt)
US $1 = 15,717Mt (as of April 2000)

AAA
AMSCO
APDF
APL
CAR
CAS
CDF
DPT
EMPSO
ESAF
ESSP
ESW
FDI
FIAS
FRELIMO
GDP
GEF
IIPC
IDA
IlC
IMF
JSA
M&E
MIGA
NGO
NPV
PARPA
OED
PER
PODE
PRGF
PROAGRI
PRSP
RENAMO
SADC
SME
SWAP
TA
UN
UNAIDS
UNDP
WBI

Vice Presidents:
Director:
Task Manager:

Abbreviations and Acronyms
Analytic and Advisory Activities
Africa Management Services Company
Africa Project Development Facility
Adjustable Project Loan
Country Assistance Review
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus
Economic Management and Private Sector Operation
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Education Sector Strategic Program
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Frente de Libertac,o de Mocambique
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Expenditure Review
Enterprise Development Programn
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Programa Nacional Para o Desenvolvimento Agricola
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Resistencia Nacional de Mo,ambique
Southern African Development Community
Small- and Medium-sized Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations AIDS Program
United Nations Development Programme
World Bank Institute
IDA
Callisto Madavo
Michael Sarris
Jehan Arulpragasam

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Cesare Calari
James Emery

FOROmF

L USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLEOF CONTENTS
Executive Summary

i

Introduction

1
1

I. Social, Political, and Economic Context
_

1
2
4
6
7

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Historical and Political Context
Poverty, Social Context and Issues
Economic Context and Issues
Governance
Medium-TermEconomic Outlook and External Environment

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Developing the Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy
The Context for Developing this CAS
Performancc Under the Previous CAS
Portfolio Management
Lessons Learned
Strategic Orientation

8
8
9
10
12
13

III. Mozambique's Development Agenda and the Bank Group's CAS

15

II.

A. Increasing Economic Opportunitiesthrough Private Sector Led Growth
1. Strengthening the Private Sector Environmentand the Financial Sector
2. Developing Infrastructure
3. Promoting Rural Developmentand Agriculture
4. Ensuring Sound Environmental Management
5. Promoting Innovation, Competitivenessand Employment
B. Improving Governance and Empowerment_
1. Reforming the Public Sector
2. Improving the Rule of Law __________________
C. Increasing Human Capabilities
1. Preventing and Reducing the Impact of HIV/AIDS
2. Improving Health
3. Improving Education
4. Social Protection

16
16
17
19
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24

IV. The Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy: Implementation
A. AlternativeScenarios for the Lending Program and Non-LendingServices_
_
B. DevelopmentPartnerships
C. Program Monitoring and Evaluation
D. Risks and Risk Management

25
25
27
28
28

Conclusion

29

18

This documenthas a restricteddistnbutionand may be used by recipientsonly in the
perfonnmiceof their officialduties. Itscontentsmay not otherwisebe disclosedwithout
WorldBank authorizaion.

MOZAMBIQUE
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents

TEXT TABLES
Table 1
Table 2

Mozambique: Social Indicators
Outcomes Under the Last CAS

TEXT BOXES
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5
Box 6

HIV/AIDS in Mozambique
Sources of Mozambique's Recent Growth
Mozambique's Program of Liberalization and Economic Reform
Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPs) and Development Partnerships in
Mozambique
Mozambique: Country Assistance Review (CAR) 1998
CAS Non-lending Activities

ANNEXES

Annex D:
Annex E:

Mozambique at a Glance
Mozambique: Summaryof Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003, by Case
Mozambique: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
Mozambique: Bank Group Program Summary
Mozambique: IFC and MIGA Program, FY97-00
Mozambique: Summary of Non-lending Services
Mozambique: Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Mozambique: Key Economic Indicators
Mozambique: Key Exposure Indicators
Mozambique: Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Mozambique: Statementof IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Mozambique: Country Assistance Strategy Matrix FYO1-03
Mozambique: CAS Summaryof Development Priorities
Mozambique: The Government's Program, its Poverty Reduction Strategy and
the CAS
Mozambique: CAS Consultations
Mozambique: A Frameworkfor DevelopmentPartnership

Map:

Mozambique

Annex A2:
Annex B 1:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex B10:
Annex C:

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
EXECUTrWE
SUMMARY
The last World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Mozambique,covering fiscal years
1998 through 2000, was discussed by the World Bank Board in December 1997. The World
Bank Group CAS presented herewith covers the fiscal years 2001 to 2003. It supports the
Government of Mozambique's Five-Year Program and its interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP). In April 2000, the interim PRSP, which includedthe Government's Action Plan
for the Reduction ofAbsolute Poverty ( PARPA), was consideredby the World Bank Board to be
an adequate framework for the enhanced FHPCInitiative decision point and a sound basis for the
future development of a full PRSP, scheduled for completion in March 2001. Mozambique
reached the completion point under the originalHIPC framework in June 1999.
Mozambique has made enormous strides since the end of the war in 1992,when it was still
heavily reliant on food aid and its economy was centrally planned. Today the country is at peace,
a market economy is in place, and substantialprogress has been made on a challenging reform
agenda, all leading to a growth rate among the highest in the world. Even so, thc lives of most
Mozambicanscontinue to be characterized by poverty, illiteracy,and disease, in a country which
continues to be one of the poorest in the world.
The challenge for Mozambiquetoday - and the focus of the Government's program and emerging
poverty reduction strategy - is to sustain broad-based, private sector led growth and ensure that
its benefits are broadly distributed and reach the poor. For the implementation of an effective
anti-poverty strategy, institutions, norms and attitudes need to change so that govemance is
improved and people are empoweredto initiate and control the actions that affect their lives.
Public sector capacity to deliver basic services and enforce a consistentlegal and regulatory
framework supportive of private sector developmentremains limited; physical infrastructure is
inadequate; and the financial sector is still developing. The domestic private sector also faces
significant challenges in acquiring the skills, experience, and innovationneeded to exploit new
sources of growth and to compete successfullyin the world economy. Despite progress on many
fronts, more needs to be done to increase private sector skills, productivity, and competitiveness;
to strengthen and diversify foreign direct investment;to integrate under-served areas with high
growth potential into the national economy; to continueto improve economic management; and
to create economic opportunitiesfor all, includingthe poor. Action is also needed to control
HIV/AIDS, which now constitutes the greatest single threat to development.
Preparations of this CAS involved extensive consultationswith a wide variety of groups,
including government officials, donors, NGOs, trade unions, religious leaders, academics,
joumalists, the private sector, and the rural poor. These groups largely agreed that the highest
priorities on Mozambique's developmentagenda over the next few years should be to improve
the quality of human resources (especially linked to labor needs), expand capacity in public
administration, increase support to rural development,better assist the private sector, expand
infrastructure (including roads, electricityand telecommunications),and improve health care.

-

ii

-

These are long-term goals with short-term implicationsfor Mozambique's policies and public
spending choices and for this CAS.
Poverty reduction is the overall goal of the Govemment and of the Bank Group in Mozambique.
In supporting the Government's program,the CAS is designed to help (i) increase economic
opportunities, (ii) improve governance and empowerment, and (iii) improve human capabilities.
These are the pillars of the Government's new Five Year Program (2000-2004)and of this CAS.
A key objective of this CAS is to improve the focus, effectiveness,and monitoring of poverty
reduction efforts, especially by helping the Governmentto operationalize its poverty reduction
strategy. Most new IDA lending, as well as IFC investmentsand advisory services, will focus on
increasing economic opportunitieswhich, through growth promotion and participation, is likely
to have the greatest impact on reducing poverty, even in the short-term. IDA lending will
contribute to developing infrastructure (particularlyin the rural areas), improvingthe
environment for private sector activities, and promoting investment,innovation, competitiveness
and employment. In support of this agenda IFC will provide advisory assistance, capacity
building, and financing to develop private infrastructure,build the financial sector, and support
small and medium-scale enterprises (SMEs), as well as foreign investors, in developing key
sectors where Mozambique is competitive. New IDA lending under this CAS will also be
directed to improvinggovernanceand empowerment,as limited administrative capacity and
effectiveness is currentlya primary constraint to reform, growth, and development. Operationsin
this area will focus on improving public sector managementand capacity as well as strengthening
the Government's decentralizationefforts; this will promote empowermentas well as the
effectiveness of programs addressing poverty reduction. Support will also be given to improving
the legal and judicial system, with a view to facilitating private sector led growth. New IDA
lending in support of improving human capabilities will be limited, because there already is
substantial IDA support from ongoing programs (particularly in delivering basic health and
education) as well as from planned Bank analytical services. IFC will support private providers
of health and education services. The Bank will also provide supportto the Government's new
program to fight HIV/AIDS.
Lending under the base case over FYO1-03 will range up to the indicative IDA allocation of
US$540 million but is likely to be below this allocation as a consequenceof IDA's strategic
decision to match lending with the country's absorptivecapacity and the availability of grant
funds from other donors. Lending under the high case will range up to US$655 million and is
contingent primarily on increased absorptive capacity, implementationof related public sector
reforms, and progress in implementingthe poverty reduction strategy. The low case, which
would result from significant deteriorationin governance, economicmanagement, or
implementation of the poverty reduction strategy, would involve lending at about one-third of the
indicative IDA allocation. The Bank Group's business strategypresented in this CAS is
complementedby an extensive complement of advisory and analytical activities to Mozambique.
Triggers include performance with respect to the portfolio, the poverty reduction strategy, the
public sector reform program, the FIV/AIDS program, and various economic reforms (including
demonopolization of the energy, transport, and telecommunication sectors for the high case, and
policy reversals in the areas of privatization,the financial sector, and trade policy for the low
case). IFC's investments,with a current portfolio of about US$150 million, are expected to
increase substantially over the CAS period, so that Mozambiquewill remain one of the
Corporation's largest portfolios in Africa.
Mozambique is a high-rewardcountry, but the strategy also carries several medium-termrisks.
There is a political risk that the opposition's dissatisfactionwith the 1999 election results,
drawing on a feeling among some groups of civil society that popular participation in decision-

- iii

-

making is unduly limited, could lead to political paralysis and possibly civil strife. The
perception that growth is not sufficientlybenefiting most people, or not sufficientlybenefiting
Mozambican businesses and workers, could result in protectionistand distortive regulations and a
more general backsliding on reform. The growth of HIV/AIDS could substantially increase
poverty. Efforts to improve public sector capacity may not yield results quickly enough to
improve absorptive capacity and program implementation. Adverse developments in neighboring
countries, which are increasinglylinked to Mozambique,can dampen growth prospects. In
addition, climatic variations and natural disasters can adversely affect agriculturalproductivity
and growth and limit poverty reduction. The Bank recognizesthese risks and is working to
mitigate them. To this end, it is supportingdecentralizationand good governance, supportingthe
participatory development of a poverty reduction strategy, improvingawareness of Government
work on poverty reduction and its achievements,and better disseminating analytical work on the
Bank's own poverty-reductionactivities, the impact of policy choices, and the benefits of
strategic thinking on competitiveness. The Bank is also supportingimplementation of the
Government's HIV/AIDS Plan to help limit the spread of the disease. Trade diversification and
active participation in regional organizationswill help mitigate the risk that regional crises will
impede Mozambique's growth; and effortsto identify, reduce and transfer risks associated with
hydro-meteorologicalhazards should provide better protection against natural disasters.
The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
-

Is the World Bank Group's proposed supportto the Government's evolving poverty reduction
strategy appropriate and adequate?

*

Is the evolving division of labor appropriate amongthe Government,the Bank and
Mozambique's other external partners?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
INTRODUCTION
1
Mozambiquehas made tremendous strides in the past few years. A sound economic
reform program has been implemented,with substantialsupport from external partners. The
transition from war to peace and from a central planning system to a market economy is reaping
results. Mozambique's growth rate has acceleratedand last year was among the highest in the
world. Heavilyreliant on food aid just a decade ago, the country now produces almost enough
food to feed itself. Mozambiqueranks first arnong 20 countries on the "optimism index" in a
survey of business people active in Africa.
2.
But alongsidethis good news are daunting challenges which face the nation, its people,
and its partners. Mozambiqueis still one of the poorest countries in the world. Poverty,
isolation, illiteracy, and disease characterizethe everydaylife of most Mozambicans,who often
feel that the benefits of growth are not reaching them. The country is also vulnerable to floods
and droughts. Most recently, in February and March 2000, devastatingfloods killed 700 people,
displaced 250,000 and put about two million people into severe economicdifficulties.
Mozambique's growth and poverty reduction strategy is based on environmentallysustainable
and inclusiveprivate sector growth. But the public administrationremains weak, despite
significant reform and improvement,and it continues to face challenges of capacity and resources
to deliver basic infrastructure and services and to properly enforce a consistentlegal and
regulatory framework essentialfor private sector development. The emerging domestic private
sector needs access to infrastructureand financing, and must also acquire the skills, experience,
and innovation required to exploit new sources of growth and to compete successfullyin the new
world economy. Finally, Mozambique's young democracyremains fragile, and underlying
political tensions continueto task nation building and threaten national stability.
3.
The challenge facing Mozambiquetoday is how to sustain growth and reduce poverty.
Many important economicreforms have been completed, but others are needed to increase private
sector skills, productivity, and competitivenessand create economicopportunities for all,
including the poor. Infrastructurehas been built to support servicedelivery and the growth of
markets, but more needs to be done to integrateunder-served areas with high growth potential.
Institutions as well as norms and attitudes need to change so that governanceis improved and
people are empoweredto initiate and control the actions that affect their lives. These are longterm goals with short-termimplications for Mozambiqueand for this CAS. Increasing economic
opportunities,enhancing governance and improvinghuman capabilitiesare key actions for
reducing poverty in Mozambique,and this CAS outlines the Bank Group's contributionto this
enormous endeavor.

I. SOCIAL,POLITICAL,ANDECONOMIC
CONTEXT
A. Historical and Political Context
4.
Since the end of the civil war, Mozambicanshave made tremendous progress in
reformingtheir country. The transition from a socialist commandeconomy to a democratic
market economy is largely complete. The Frente de Liberta9qode Mo9ambique (Frelimo),

- 2which governed Mozambique during the war, retained control of govermnent through national
elections in 1994 and 1999,transforming itself in the process from a socialist to a market-oriented
democratic party. The main opposition party, Resistencia Nacional de Mofambique (Renamo),
which came close to winning the December 1999 elections, has generally supported
Mozambique's political and economic transition, though there continues to be political tension.
Government policies are under intense scrutiny and often the subject of contentious public debate.
B. Poverty, Social Context and Issues
5.
Per capita income in Mozambique,at $230 in 1999, is below the average for sub-Saharan
Africa ($480) and the low income group ($520). The Human Development Index, an index of
income, education and life expectancy, ranks Mozambique 169thout of 174 countries. Key social
indicators for Mozambique continue to be below the averages of Sub-Saharan Africa and those of
low-income countries as a whole (see Table 1).
Table1.: Mozambique:SocialIndicators
Mozambique SubSaharanAfrica
GNPper capita(atlasmethod,US$)
230
480
Poverty: nationalheadcountindex
69
Life expectancy(at birth,years)
47
51
Infantmortality(per 1,000livebirths)
134
91
Childmalnutrition(% of childrenunder5)
41
Accessto safewater (% of population)
24
47
Illiteracy(% of populationage 15+)
60
42
Grossprimaryenrollment
71
77
Male
79
84
Female
60
69
HIV/AIDSprevalencerate
14.5
7

LowIncome
520
63
69
74

32
108

113
103

6.
A 1996-97 Household Survey on Living Conditions,the first integrated survey
undertaken nationally, shows that poverty is pervasive. About seven in ten Mozambicans
reported consumption below the national poverty line (US$0.40 per day). One-third of the
population is considered to be 'ultra poor', with consumption expenditure 60 percent or less of
the poverty line.
7.
About 80 percent of Mozambique's poor live in rural areas; about 70 percent of the rural
population is poor; and over 90 percent of rural adults work in agriculture. There is significant
regional variation in poverty. Sofala, Tete, and Inhambanehave the highest poverty incidences,
but 40 percent of the poor live in densely populated Nampula and Zambezia. Rural households,
poor or non-poor, typically have low access to services. In 1996-97, the mean distance of rural
households to a market was 16 km and to a health center 29 km. Poor households are also larger
and have higher dependency ratios than the non-poor. Nearly all rural households have land, but
land per capita is higher for the non-poor, chiefly because household size is lower. In urban
areas, the non-poor tend to be wage-laborers employed in commerce, services, and the public
sector, whereas the poor declare themselves to be self-employed or unemployed.
8.
Widespread poverty is reflected in Mozambique's social indicators (see Table 1). The
poor and ultra-poor tend to miss more days of work from illness than the non-poor, and are less
likely to seek treatment. Lack of health care, hygiene, and access to safe water and sanitation
allows preventable disease to flourish. Malaria, measles, diarrhea, and acute respiratory
infections remain leading killers of children. HlV/AIDS, having already infected about 14.5
percent of the adult population, has serious implications for Mozambique's development

-3prospects (see Box 1). Though poverty explains some of the differencesin health and education
outcomes, these differencescorrelate more closely with gender and rural-urban divisions.
Box 1.: HIIV/AIDSin Mozambique
The civil war ended in 1992, but the war againstAIDS continues, and now constitutes the greatest
single threat to Mozambique 's development. In Africa most carriersof the AIDS virus will die of
AIDS-related illness within ten years. In Mozambique, as elsewhere, the HIV prevalence rate is
rising exponentially, and has already reached about 14.5percent in the adult population. The virus
is no longer localized in high-risk groups but affects the wholepopulation. The overallpicture is
bleak Health services are beginningto be overloadedwith AlDS-related cases, diverting resources
away from other serious illnesses. As a result, hard-wongains in life expectancy and infant and child
mortality are being reversed AIDS-related deaths are now projected to make as many as 800,000
Mozambican children orphansby 2002. Moreover, adults die ofAIDS-related illnesses such as
tuberculosis during what should be their mostproductive years. Multi-country evidence suggests that
at HIV prevalence rates of 15percent, GDP growth per capita is reduced by about 0.8 percent per
annum, and at 25 percent, as in Zimbabwe,growth per capita is reduced by 1.5 percent. In
Botswana,for example, despite rapid growth, HIV/AIDS has broughtpoverty back to levels last seen
ten years ago. Mozambique is vulnerable to similar reversals. Action is needed now, at all levels of
society, to prevent and control the spread of IIV

9.
Food insecurity, prevalent duringthe war, continues to contribute to malnutrition.
Though Mozambiquehas nearly achieved food self-sufficiency,the average rural household still
suffers through a pre-harvesthungry period of several months per year, and malnutrition remains
widespread. In 1996-97,with 64 percent of Mozambicanslivingin food-insecure households, 43
percent of children were stunted and 6 percent wasted. Even though the degree of market
participation has increased since 1993,in 1996only half of all agriculturalhouseholds sold any
part of their output.
10.
Mozambican girls and women continueto do less well than boys and men. The maternal
mortality rate, at 1,100, is high. There is poor accessto health services in general and poor
quality of services directed specificallyto women. Literacy rates among women (particularly in
rural areas) are much lower than among men, with negative implications for agricultural
productivity and child health and nutrition. While access to educationis increasing, the gross
primary enrollment rate among females (60 percent) is still much lower than among males (79
percent). One in five households is headed by a female; these households have less adult labor
and consequently cultivate less land, and they participate less frequently in paid employment.
Although remittances from absent family membersmake these households on average no worseoff than male headed households, households without remittancesare typically worse-off.
Households with male adults working elsewhereare also more at risk of HIV/AIDS. Family law
in Mozambiquealso discriminates against women. A married woman has limited rights to make
independent economicdecisions or enjoy full ownershipof assets, and a widow's rights to
inheritance are secondary to males in the family. Finally,domestic violence against women is a
hidden issue, which requires a legal response. To addressthese issues, the Government,in
coordination with civil society, is implementingthe National Post-BeijingPlan of Action
(NBPA), and key sector ministries have included gender in their sector plans.
11.
The national poverty assessment, recent analyticalwork, and the interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)highlight important policy implications for a poverty reduction
strategy based on an analysis of the determinantsof poverty:

- 4*
*

*
*

Accelerate economicgrowth, particularlyin agnrcultureand rural areas.
Improve educational levels, particularlyamong girls and women.
Improve the productivity of small-holder agriculture,through simple technology and input
improvements.
Generate off-farm employmentopportunities.
Increase the market integration of small-holderhouseholds, mainly through increasing
infrastructure,

C. Economic Context and Issues
12.
Economic Performance and Policies. Mozambique's recent economicperformance,
buoyed by good agricultural seasons, has been impressive,though it represents a recovery from
very low base levels. GDP growth averaged 5.5 percent annuallybetween 1987 and 1996 and 11
percent annually between 1997 and 1999. Inflationdropped sharply from almost 50 percent in
1996 to low single digits today. At the same time, investor confidence has grown. Between 1996
and 1998, consumptiongrew by an average of 9 percent annually, and investmentby 13 percent
annually. Merchandiseexports increased by 42 percent from 1996to 1998 as a result of increased
export volumes and higher commodityprices for prawns, cashews and cotton. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) has also increased, and, as a result of large investment associated with the
Mozal aluminum smelter, it reached US$213 million in 1998. At about 3.3 percent of GDP over
1996-98, FDI is high relative both to the size of the economy and to other African countries.
TIheseare indicationsthat foreign investor confidenceis growing rapidly and FDI sources are
becoming more diverse.
Box 2.: Sources of Mozambique's Recent Growth
Mozambique 's economic growth has been led by smallholderagriculture. Value added in the agriculture
and livestock sector grew at more than 9 percent peryear after 1996,fueled by expansion in land under
cultivation. Agricultural growth has beenparticularly strong in the north and center. The services sector
has also grown well, at 6 percent per annum on average, buoyed by revival in transport,tourism, and the
financial sector. Slower to recover have been large-scalecommercial agricultureand industry. Many
companies have gone throughprotracted privatization and restructuringprocesses and have suffered
market losses. However, afirm survey undertaken in 1997showed that manufacturing, concentratedin a
few sectors (food, drinks, and tobacco;chemicals; and minerals),experienced robust growth of almost 40
percent annually between 1995 and 1997. In terms of sales growth,firms outside Maputo appear to be
growing as rapidly asfirms in the capital, despite lower quality infrastructure. This growth is mostly due
to increased capacity utilization, which averaged about 50 percent (comparedto 10 to 30 percent in 1989),
rather than expansion. Employment levels in aggregate have remainedstable. A ll three types offirms
surveyed (privatefirms founded before 1991, new entrants, and privatizedfirms) had strong average
growth rates in sales, but employmentgrowth inprivatizedfirms had stagnated or declined It is the new
entrants that have been creating most of the newjobs in manufacturing;newfirms recorded a 6 percent
average rate of employmentgrowthfrom 1992 through 1997.

13.
Mozambique's strong performance has been, and continues to be, supported by
substantial foreign assistance. Since 1986,the Governmenthas received US$8 billion in external
aid, or almost US$600 million per annum (currently about 17percent of GDP). In recent years,
50 percent of government spending and 75 percent of public investments were financed by
external aid. These aid flows allowed Mozambiqueto maintain consumptionlevels while
increasingpublic investments needed to expand the economy in a post-war period where financial
demands for reconstructionexceeded potential revenues from a debilitated economy. High levels
of aid have allowed Mozambiqueto focus its fiscal policy on stimulating growth while reducing
domestic financial imbalances only gradually. From 1987to 1998,expendituresincreased by
four percent annually, with revenues growing slightly more.

-514.
A sound program of economicreform and management- based on privatization,
financial sector reform, investment promotion, trade and price liberalization,sound
macroeconomicmanagement and substantialpublic investment- has underpinned Mozambique's
ongoing economictransformationand growth record (see Box 3). While Mozambique's recent
accomplishmentshave been impressive, this success is fragile: the local private sector has
limited market experience and has yet to find avenues for sustainedgrowth; the financial sector
remains inefficient with limited ability to finance investment; employmentcreation needs to be
accelerated; public sector institutionsare weak, including in their capacity to enforce and regulate
the new market economy; the country remainsdependent on aid and vulnerable to external and
weather-relatedshocks; and the reform program is subject to protectionist sentiment within
segments of civil society, particularlyin urban areas.
andEconomicRefortn
Programof Liberalization
Box 3.: Mozambique's
Privatization:Governmenthas restructuredorprivatizedover 1,200 companies.
Financialsectorreform:The Governmentcreateda centralbank;adoptedregulationson licensing,
capitaladequacy,and exposurelimits;and soldthe twostate-ownedbanks. Theprivatefinancialsector
nowincludeselevenbanks,a leasingcompany,andseven otherfinancialinstitutions.
Investmentpromotion. TheGovernmentestablisheda progressiveinvestmentregime,promotedfreetrade
zonesto encouragemanufacturedexports,transformedthe InvestmentPromotionCenterfrom a regulatory
red tapeforinvestors.
to a promotionagency,and reducedadministrative
Soundmacroeconomic
management:Monetarycontrol,and the saleof the twostatebanks,brought
macroeconomic
stability.In 1996,the Governmenttransferredcustomsmanagementto a private
company;in 1999it introduceda valueaddedtax (VAT);and it is now implementinga newbudget
expenditure
framework(MATEF).
frameworklawand a rollingmedium-term
Exchange,trade,andprice reforms:Mozambiquetodayhasone of the mostopentraderegimesin
southernAfrica. Theexchangerateregimehasbeenliberalizedand importlicensesabolished Prices
havebeenliberalizedexceptfor afew consumergoods.
Publicexpenditure:Gradualfiscal adjustmentin a contextof improvedrevenuesand sustainedaidhas
enabledMozambiqueto increasespendingonroads,healthand education.Today55percentof the 27,000
kmroadnetworkis in goodorfair condition,and only 10percentsometimesimpassable,comparedto 10
and 30percentrespectivelyin 1992. From1994to 1998,the Governmentnearlydoubledits shareof
currentexpenditureon health(from10 to 18percent)andeducation(from5 to I 0percent). Healthcare
has improvedasover 300first-levelfacilitieshavebeenrehabilitatedorconstructed,oftenin remoterural
areas,and aboutninein ten reliablycarryessentialdrugsandmedicalsupplies.In addition,over 3,000
lowerprimaryschoolshavebeenrehabilitatedor constructedoverthe 1990s,doublingthe numberthat
existedat the endof the war.
15.
Economic Prospects: Mozambiquebenefits from a variety of agroecologicaland other
natural resources which, if sustainably managed, provide a good basis for growth. Agricultural
growth is key to ensuring that growth translates directly into poverty reduction. Short and
medium term prospects for agriculturalgrowth are good: only 15 percent of arable land is
currently cultivated. Other sources can also be exploited. The 2,700 km coastal zone has many
unique habitats, offering opportunitiesfor wildlife and tourism developments. Large perennial
rivers offer significantprospects for irrigating agriculture and developinghydroelectric power.
Substantialgas and coal reserves have been found, and prospecting continues for petroleum and
mining. Tourism, mining, agroprocessing,and light manufacturingcan generate significant
employment. Attracting foreign investment will be important to this effort. Large investments
exploiting the transportation corridors or exportingenergy (gas, coal or electricity) or energyintensive manufactured products (iron, steel and aluminum) are under active considerationby
large international companies. Here the challengewill be to develop linkages, especially to the
growing service sector, to maximize the benefits for the poor; this is likely to occur primarily
through spin-off effects, such as employeetraining, connected infrastructuredevelopments,and
improved Governmenttax revenuesthat can subsequentlybe channeled into poverty-reducing

-6activities. Substantial and permanent poverty reduction will also require sustainedgrowth in
value added and in jobs created within the Mozambicaneconomy. To grow, over the medium- to
long-term Mozambican firms will need to become increasinglycompetitive in evolving world
markets, capitalizingon knowledgeand innovation.
D. Governance
16.
Mozambiquehas consolidatedsome gains in governance in recent years. An active
multiparty parliamentdebates national policy; freedom of the press is respected; and core labor
standards, which include the rights to free associationand collectivebargaining and prohibit
discrimination,are protected in the labor law. National elections were held in December 1999 as
planned, and though the opposition initially denounced the results as fraudulent,the elections
were declared free and fair by international observers.
17.
Red tape and associated corruptioncontinueto impede business. A 1996 study by IFC
and the Foreign Investment Advisory Service of the Bank Group (FIAS) detailed the
administrativered tape facing investors. An inter-ministerialworking group establishedto
address those problems has since achieved significantimprovements;however, obstacles remain.
A recent firm-level survey found that governanceproblems - primarily relatedto onerous
regulations, weak enforcement,and bureaucratic burden - were the most important problems
faced by businesses. Excessivebureaucracyand poor enforcementrelated to a weakjudiciary
branch create incentive and opportunityfor corruption. This is exacerbated by low levels of pay
amnongpublic sector staff, who may therefore seek additional sourcesof income, as well as low
levels of training, which hinder their ability to efficientlyadminister government systems. Firns
acknowledgethat, at least in customs,progress has been made in this regard through introducing
private management. With regard to public sector accountability,the AdministrativeTribunal
(the supreme audit body) is constitutionallyindependentbut, like the Inspector General (the
Government's internal auditor), lacks the resources to be an effective monitor. Reform and
capacity building efforts in the areas of budget management,accounting, and auditing are aiming
to address the areas of economicgovernance, and implementationof a recent budget law has
resulted in some improvementsin the transparency and management of the budgetary process.
18.
Taking a broader view of the governancearea, the Governmentis refocusing its activities
on the core areas of public sector responsibilityand moving from being a direct provider of
services to a facilitator in areas where private initiativeis likely to improve efficiency. The
Govermmenthas started to decentralizepublic functions,most notably in 1998 by establishing 33
municipal governments, to improve public services by bringing political accountability down to
the local level. It is also deconcentratingdecision-makingresponsibilityto make government
bodies more responsiveto local needs. It has undertakencivil service reform, decompressing
salaries in 1998,implementinga revised career stream and remunerationsystem in 1999,and
initiating various capacity-buildingprograms. The emphasisnow is on broadening and
deepening the reforms required to manage a market economy. This is necessarily a medium and
long term agenda.
Much remains to be done. Changesin institutionscontinueto lag legislative changes,
19.
and changes in the norms and attitudes of civil servantslag further. Although the civil service is
learning that its role in a market economy is to assist the private sector in every way that it can
without impeding competition, its capacity to fulfil this role is constrainedby low education,
limited private sector experience, and low morale resulting from poor wages and the uncertainty
that reforn inevitablyengenders. The size of Mozambique's civil service relative to population
is low by African standards; hence the state is thinly spread and has difficulty in delivering
services and enforcing legislationin every district. Ancillary functions remain weak (e.g. there

-7are only 500 legal practitioners and no internationallycertified accountantsin the country).
Continuedweakness in the public sector and an expansion in corruption could compromise
economic growth and constrain service deliveryby creating bureaucraticbottlenecks, deterring
private investment, and undermining public confidencein the reform process. Thus, improving
governance is an important part of Mozambique's poverty reduction strategy.
E. Medium-TermEconomic Outlook and External Environment
20.
Medium-TermEconomic Outlook: Sustainingthe current level of broad-based
economicgrowth while, simultaneously,keeping inflation low and improvingthe deliveryof
social services, are central elements of the Government's strategyto reduce poverty in the
mediumterm. Although the growth target for 2000 has been revised down as a result of the recent
floods, prospects remain sound that Govermmentcan achieve its objectives of annual GDP growth
rates in excess of 7 percent and inflation rates below 5 to 7 percent over the medium-term(20012003), assuming no further adverse exogenousshocks and continued satisfactory implementation
of the reform program (Annex B6). Achievingthese growth objectives is expected to reduce the
national poverty headcount index from 69 percent in 1997 to about 60 percent in 2004, as
targeted in the Government's interim PRSP. Successwill require Government to continue to
maintain a prudent monetary and fiscal stance, improve the environment for the expansion of
private sector activitiesand investment, and foster the developmentof a strong export base
through liberal investment and trade policies. Domestic fiscal balances will gradually be reduced,
but improvementsin revenues in the context of a growing economy,together with sustained
external aid, will permit continued expendituresin support of poverty reduction efforts. While
external aid will remain necessary, Mozambiqueshould be able to reduce its aid depenidencyin
the coming years. Under this base case economicscenario, it is expectedthat small-holder
agriculture will expand, large-scalecommercial agriculture will begin to revive, and
manufacturingwill grow across all sectors and in non-traditionalareas, increasing employment.
At the same time, deeper regulatory reform should encourage further investment in energy,
transportation, and telecommunications;and megaprojects such as Mozal should remain on track
to begin productive activities, further increasing and diversifyingthe export base. Mozambique's
medium-termprospects, while favorable, are subjectto risks;these are discussed in paragraph 79.
21.
ExternalDebt, Debt Sustainability, and the HIPC Initiative: In December 1998
Mozambique's external public debt totaled about US$6 billion (US$2.7 billion in net present
value (NPV) terms). Of this, 49 percent was owedto Paris Club bilateral creditors, 37 percent to
multilateral creditors (of which 55 percent was owed to IDA), and 14 percent to non-Paris Club
and commercialcreditors. Debt service payments amounted to about 20 percent of export
earnings on average. The NPV of debt-to-exportratio was 538 at end-1998. In June 1999,
Mozambiquereached the HIPC completion point and received debt relief amountingto about
US$3.7 billion (US$1,716billion in NPV terms), with IDA granting relief amounting to US$975
million (US$381 million in NPV terms). EnhancedHIPC debt relief, which Mozambique is
expectedto obtain at the completion point in 2001 (the decision point was reached in April 2000),
will amount to about US$254 million more in NPV terms, bringingthe cumulativeassistance
under the HIPC Initiativeto US$ 1.97 billion in NPV terms and lowering the NPV of debt-toexport ratio to 150 and the debt service-to-exportratio to below 5 percent from 2002 onward. In
NPV terms, the debt remaining after relief is about one-fourth of the US$2.7 billion that would
have been owed without HIPC Initiativeassistance. This will substantiallyimprove
Mozambique's external viability and sustainabilityand, as debt service savings are directedto
poverty reduction, it will also bring benefits to the poor.
22.
External Financing: Continuedand stable support in the form of bilateral and
multilateral grants and credits, with debt relief, will be importantin enabling Mozambiqueto

-8meet its medium-termdevelopmentobjectives. At an internationaldonors' conference in Rome
in May 2000, Mozambique's extemal partners pledged US$453 millionto finance the costs of
emergency reconstructionfollowingthe severe floods in Februaryand March. Financingneeds
for the Government's new five-yearprogram will be discussedat a Consultative Group meeting
planned for June 2000. Reliance on aid flows is projected to declinegradually over the next
decade, as strong economicgrowth and increased levels of private sector financing diminish aid's
share of GDP and of the budget.
23.
Regional Context: Though its economy is more inwardly oriented than its neighbors',
Mozambique's dependenceon regionaltrade and investment flows is high, and developments in
the region can significantly influencethe pace and sustainabilityof its development. Trade flows
with South Africa are the most important, representing 15 percent of total exports and 53 percent
of imports in 1997. Mozarnbiquein December 1999 ratifiedthe SADC trade protocol, which
aims to gradually establish a regional free trade area. Mozambiqueis also likely to join a regional
trade guarantee facility covering Eastern and SouthernAfrica. With political stability and greater
investor confidence,Mozambiquehas also become an attractive destination for SouthAfrican and
more recently other regional investors, such as Mauritius.
24.
Regionalcooperation is slowly emerging in energy, transportation,and water resource
management. FDI concentratedaround the Maputo corridor, and rail and port rehabilitation in
the Beira and Nampula corridors, will increase economicinterdependencebetween Mozambique
and its westerly neighbors. Energy reservesnear Cahora Bassa and planned megaprojects based
on coal and hydroelectricitycan result in further integration as the energy is sold directly to
foreign markets (particularly SouthAfrica and Zimbabwe). Mozambiqueis a central member of
the South African Power Pool, as a key supplier of electricityand owner of the main trunk
transmission line, and interconnection with Malawi and Tanzania is currently under
consideration. Regionalapproaches to water resource managementare also needed. Since the
1970s, upstream riparians have diverted much of the yield of several cross-borderrivers for
irrigation and other uses, creating a need for Mozambiqueto negotiate a more equitable water
distributionto satisfyits own requirements. Regional cooperationon watershed management and
hydrologic and climatic monitoring is also essential for natural disaster mitigation
I.

DEVELOPING
THE BANKGROUP'SCOUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY

A. The Context for Developing this CAS
Mozambiquestands at an importantjuncture in its development. Its first elected post-war
25.
Governmenthas completed its term and much of the economicreform agenda, set out in its fiveyear plan, has been completed. Over the period in whichthis CAS was developed, the new
Government formulated and presented to the National Assembly a new five-year Government
Program (2000-2004),focused on the reduction of poverty, and published its accompanying
Action Planfor the Reduction ofAbsolute Poverty (PARPA) as part of its interimPRSP. The
PARPA is expectedto evolve, through extensive consultation,into a full PRSP. (See Annex C).
26.
This CAS is designed to support the Governmentprogram and the emerging national
dialogue on Mozambiquc's priorities for poverty reduction. It was developedthrough an
extensive consultativeprocess, fully described in Annex D. The CAS process was designed to
initiate a wider Government-leddialogue to forge a common long-term vision and development
framework for Mozambique. There is an emerging consensus regarding the importance of
defining the country's developmentagenda, increasinggovernment ownership, and fostering
strong partnershipsamong government, donors, civil society, and the private sector. These are
some of the principles of the ComprehensiveDevelopmentFramework(CDF), and they are

-9critical to achieving Mozambique's poverty reduction goals. They have been discussed with
Mozambique's key developmentpartners with a view to jointly articulatingGovernment
priorities and mapping out the current developmentactivitiesof the Govemment, donors, NGOs
and the private sector (see Annex E) so as to improve coordination and coverage of the country's
developmentagenda in the future. Further steps in this process will build on Mozambique's
accumulated experience with four ongoing sector wide approaches (SWAPs)to strengthen
existing partnerships (Box 4).
Box 4.: SectorWideApproaches(SWAPs)and DevelopmentPartnershipsin Mozambique
A SWAPis an agreementbetweenthe Governmnent
and its development
partnersconcerningsector
policiesand strategies,resourceprojectionsto supportstrategyimplementation,
and common
managementarrangementsusingnationaladministrative
systemsto thefullest extentpossible.
Implementation
of IDA-supported
projectsin health,education,agricultureand roadshas been,or
soonwill be, integratedintoSWAPs. Withfourteenor moredonorsrepresentedin eachSWAP,most
largedonorshavemovedawayfrom supportingdiscretefree-standingprojectsin thesesectors. This
has resultedin greaterorganizationand complementarity
in eachsector,lesserdemandson
Governmentcapacity,andimprovedfiscalmanagement(as the approachenablesthe Governmentto
incorporateallfundingfor eachsectorintothe nationalbudget).Moreover,by consolidating
accounting,auditingand monitoringprocedures,SWAPs allowdonorsto distancethemselves
from
day-to-dayoperationalissuesand enhanceGovernmentleadership,transparencyand accountability.
IDAhas beenheavilyinvolvedin developingSWAPs,includingin identifyingsectorstrategiesand
appropriateprocurement,disbursement,managementand monitoringsystems.Joiningforces behinda
commonstrategyhasbeenrelativelyeasy. Themaindifficultieshaveresultedfromthe SWAP's heavy
relianceon relativelyweaknationaladministrative
systemsandfromthe centralizingeffectof a single
nationalfundingsystem. To improveperformance,currenteffortsarefocused onstrengthening
financialmanagementcapabilitiesfor sectoralministriesin Maputoand theprovinces.Decentralized
planningmechanisms,combinedwithgreater,predictableand consistentfundingfor sectoral
programs,are beingusedto drivetheprovincialagendaand increaseregionalresponsiveness.
AlthoughMozambiqueis not a CDFpilot country,SWAPsgive effectiveoperationalimplementation,
at
the sectorallevel,to the CDFprinciplesof sharedvision,Governmentownership,andpartnership.
Thisapproachhas workedparticularlywellin expandinginfrastructure.Withabout US$475million
or 55percentof theIDAportfolioprogrammedin SWAPssectors,theBank has madea large
investmentin thisapproach,whichis alreadyprovidingreturns.
B. Performance Under the Previous CAS
27.
The previous CAS defined three strategic priorities: promoting rapid broad-based
private-sector-led growth; building capacity and developing human resources; and strengthening
development partnerships. Throughoutthe CAS period the Bank operated broadly in the base
case, with new lending concentratedon infrastructure and on sector programs in water,
agriculture and education. Lending, at US$521million, was slightly above the projected base
case total of US$480 million. Although two projectswere postponed due to implementation
delays in predecessor projects, the resulting decline in lending was more than offset by increased
lending in other operationsincluding an adjustment operation, which was delivered as an IDA
grant in the form of FHPC interim assistance,and an unprogrammedflood emergency recovery
project. IFC's portfolio increased substantiallyto about US$150 million; it is now among the
largest IFC portfolios in Africa. IFC invested US$120 million in the Mozal aluminum smelter,
the Corporation's largest single committed investment anywherein the world, and played a key
role in mobilizing other commercial finance for this US$1.3 billionproject. MIGA also supported
Mozal with a US$40 million guarantee, and is working on a possible US$75 million guaranteeto
support investments on power transmission lines to Mozal. IFC supportedthe establishmentof a

- 10-

foreign bank that has established a wide branch network, created an investment banking affiliate,
and brought new levels of service and competition to the sector. Other IFC investments, including
SMEs, were concentrated in agribusiness, which helped re-establishcommercial agriculture in
rural areas, and in tourism. Overall, under the previous CAS, progress was made against stated
development objectives and most country performance indicators and benchmarks were met,
though sometimes with delay (see Table 2), generally resulting from capacity problems.
28.
The Government's program, coupled with continued stability, good weather for several
years, and support from external partners, is contributingto welfare gains in Mozambique. There
is no definitive data on income/expendituretrends at the household level and many service
delivery indicators are monitored with a lag. Yet all available data point to continued
improvements. Since 1994, per capita consumption has grown by about 6.4 percent per annum,
and per capita agricultural GDP by about 8.4 percent per annum, while cereals production by
smallholders has doubled. Survey data suggest that poverty in the provincial capitals fell from 73
percent in 1992/93 to 65 percent in 1996/97. Access and coverage of education and health
services has improved. Between 1996 and 1998, an index measuring health service delivery per
person increased by 38 percent; DPT immunization rose from 63 percent to 77 percent;
geographical disparities in service delivery fell; and quality indicators (such as the proportion of
health units with basic drugs and trained personnel) improved. Over this period, the gross
primary enrolment rate increased from 62 percent to 71 percent, and the number of students in
primary schools from 1.6 million to 2.1 million.

C. Portfolio Management
29.
As of May 1, 2000, there were 15 projects in the portfolio totaling US$813 million,
compared to 18 projects totaling about US$840 million at the start of the last CAS (November
1997). About 38 percent of this portfolio has been disbursed, and the disbursement ratio is now
about 20 percent, at about the same level as at the beginning of the last CAS. Disbursement lags
have fallen, with earlier delays partly resulting from increased Bank involvement in relatively
slow disbursing SWAPs. Portfolio performance has improved dramatically and is still improving.
At present, there are no problem projects and no projects at risk, compared to one problem project
and six projects at risk in early 1998. Improvement in risk indicators has resulted in large part
through proactive portfolio management and the removal, through continued progress on
economic policies, of the economic management risk, which applied to all IDA-assisted projects
in Mozambique at the beginning of the last CAS.
30.
Efforts continue to be made to improve portfolio management. There is closer
coordination with the principal donors through the SWAPs. IDA lending is being limited to fit
the Government's absorptive capacity. Portfolio management has been devolved to the Country
Office to ensure that emerging issues are promptly and satisfactorily resolved. Monitoring now
includes both a formnalannual review to check portfolio status and review progress (next
scheduled for June 2000) and weekly meetings between the Resident Representative and the
Governor of the Central Bank. The Country Office has recruited a tinancial management
specialist and local project officers now cover most sectors, permitting more realistic project
preparation that is sensitive to local conditions as well as closer monitoring of project
implementation and quicker resolution of emerging problems. Local staff are also being trained
in procurement and disbursement procedures with a view to accelerating implementation. Within
Government, progress in public sector reform is addressing capacity constraints. In addition,
technical assistance in accounting and budget execution, to be strengthened under the new CAS,
is improving financial management, and public procurement issues are to be addressed through
diagnostic work on the public sector. A financial assessment and procurement review will also be
an integral part of the work to be done under a public expenditure review in FY01.

-

11-

Table-2.: OutcomesUnder the Last CAS
Perforrmance.Indicators -|
AXP,Mttebroad-base4d:p,iv&-sedotp
IXj:-r* Maintainreal growthof non-energyGDPat an annual
rate of at least5%.
* Maintainsingledigitinflation.
* Valueaddedtax inplaceby mid-I998.
* HIPCcompletionpointreachedby mid-1999.
* AgriculturalSWAP(PROAGRI)implemented
by 1999.
* Satisfactoryprogresson ROCSprogram,including
maintenanceof 15,000kmof roadby2000.
* Comprehensive
restructuring
plan for CFM,the national
railway,includingprivateconcessioning
of allthree
portsandrailwaylinesby end-1998.
*

Outcome
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Liberalization
of telecommunications
sector
commencingin 1998.
Privatemanagement
contractsinplacefor fivemajor
urbanwatercompamies
by 1999.
Saleby 1999of all companiescurrentlyonthe
privatizationrollsunderthe privatization
program.

*

Roleof the Centerfor InvestmentPromotion(CPI)
modifiedto enhanceits investmentpromotionfunctions.
* CommercialCoderevisedby mid-2000.
* Newlandlawpassedin 1997.Regulatoryframeworkto
be implemented.
a, BAidIdCOWa*anddevelophummmresdarces
* BudgetaryFrameworkLawimplemented;budgetary
scenariosforthe medium-termdeveloped;rulesand
proceduresfor budgetaryexecutionsinplified.
* Localelectionsheld in 1998in 23 citiesand 10towns.
* Increasehealthcoverageunderthe HealthSector
RecoveryProgramfrom40% ofthe populationcurrently
to 60%in theyear2000;increaseDPTvaccination
coveragefrom55%to 80%.
.
Improvedhealthoutcomes;significantreductionsin
maternaland infantmortalityrates.
* Increasededucationcoverage;primaryschool
admissionsrateup to 80-86%by 2000(from75%in
1996).Specialprogramsimplemented
for girlsand
provinceswithlowestcoverage.
* Improvementeducationqualityindicators:repetitionand
drop-outratesin primaryeducationto fallto 14-17%
and 10-12%(downfrom24%and 14%respectively).
* Nationalpovertyassessmentandpovertyactionplan
completedby end-1998.
C SrentIkenpartnepships
* IDAportfolio managementresponsibility to be
delegatedto ResidentRepresentative
by end FY98.
* IncreasedGovernmentcommitmentto and ownershipof
reformprogram.
* SWAPsin roads,education,health,andagricultureby

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

Non-energyGDPgrew 11.3%in 1997,92% in
1998and 9.3%in 1999.
Achieved:inflation1.5%in 1999.
Valueaddedtax was introducedin June 1999.
HIPCcompletionpointreachedinJune 1999.
PROAGRIimplementedinAugust1999.
ROCSprogresssatisfactory,3,800kmroads
rehabilitatedand 15,000kmbeingmaintained.
In progress:CFMwill concessionmainportsand
railwaysystems;fivemainportterninal
concessionsalreadyoperationaland severalsmall
concessions/leases
havebeenawarded.
Cellphonemarketto be liberalizedin northand
center;TDMseeking30%strategicequitypartner.
Watercompaniesservingthe fivemajorcitieswere
leasedto the privatesectorin September1999.
90 largeenterprisesand over1,100smalland
mediumenterprisesprivatizedor restructured;
majoritypublicshareretainedin 33 companies.
Achieved.
In progress.
Regulationsfor the LandLawof 1997were
approvedin December1998.

______________

*

*
*
*

Lawadoptedin September1998.Medium-term
expenditure
frameworkelaboratedfor 1998-99
budget.
Electionsheld in June1998.
In progress:healthcoveragerose from40/oin 1995
to 50%in early1999;vaccinationcoveragerose
from63%in 1997to 77%in 1998.
Infantmortalityrate fell from 162to 134overthe
1990s.

*

Primaryadmissionrateincreasedto 79%in 1999.
Specialprogramsfor improvingfemaleaccessto
educationimplemented.

*

Repetitionratestillat 24%butdropoutrate
decreasedto 8.4%in 1998.

*

Povertyassessmentpublishedin December1998;
actionplanpublishedin April1999.

*

Achieved.

*

Governmentministersacknowledged
increased
ownershipduringCASconsultations.
Achieved.

*

1999.

*

Strengthenpartnerships.

*

DonethroughConsultativeGroup,Development
PartnersGroupmeetings,as wellas meetingson
SWAPsand topicalissues(HIPC,PRSPprocess,
UNDAF,and HIV/AIDS).

- 12 D. Lessons Learned
31.
As the CAS consultationsconfirmed (see Annex D), the key challenge for Mozambique
and for this CAS is sustaining rapid poverty-reducinggrowth and acceleratingthe delivery of
tangible economicand social benefitsto the poor, particularly in rural areas. Participants in the
CAS consultationsacknowledgedthat much has been accomplishedrecently, including
maintaining peace and stability; increasing food security; constructing roads, schools, and clinics;
consolidating democratic freedoms;reducing inflation; and developinga more vibrant market
economy. At the same time, they also expressed concern about the sustainabilityof growth and
the participation of the poor in the benefits of growth, reinforcingmany of the issues raised by the
Bank's ongoing analytical work on Mozambique's growth prospects:
* The ability of the Governmentto absorb aid, to implementpolicies, and to do so
accountablyand transparently, is weak, particularlyin understaffedremote regions.
* Investment in primary health care and educationneeds to increase, especially in rural areas.
* The single most important investment area for growth and poverty reduction remains
infrastructure. Investment in roads, energy,water, and telecommunicationswill need to be
directed to the rural areas to reduce poverty, integrate the nation, and bring densely
populated areas with high agriculturalpotential into the market network.
Mozambicansagree that reform is necessary for growth, but disagree about the scope and
substance of reform. Some favor further liberalization,particularlyin key cross-cutting
sectors (energy and telecommunications)and regulatoryareas (visas, customs, licensing,
land law, and labor law). Others, feeling that domestic firms cannot adjust so quickly to
international competition, are calling for subsidies or increasedprotection.
* The rule of law is critical to Mozambique's development. A weak legal and judicial
administration needs to be strengthened,to serve an expandingand increasingly complex
business environment, stimulate investment, and secure individual rights.
e Many Mozambicans feel that they lack the skills required to benefit from or contribute to
growth. Many Mozambicanbusinesses seem to be trapped in low-growth traditional
industries. The few that are innovative,competitive,and high-growth frequently hire
foreign labor into technical and managerialposts. Hence, many Mozambicans sense an
urgent need to improve skills through higher education, vocationaltraining, and other
strategies to enhance knowledge transfer.
 Many Mozambicansfeel that they are not sufficientlyempowered to participate in the
developmentprocess or consulted in the decisions that affect them.
but many recognizethat it has
* Most Mozambicansdo not speak openly of HIWV/AIDS,
emerged as a major threat to their security and well-being and that it can easily reverse
hard-won social and economic gains.
32.
The CAS consultations,the 1999 Client Survey,the 1998OED Country Assistance
Review (see Box 5), and IFC experience indicatewhat worked well and what worked less well in
Bank Group operationsduring the previous CAS periods. What worked well: The Bank has done
well in working with the Government, which is constrained by limited capacity, to effectively
sequence reform efforts in response to evolvingdevelopmentpriorities over the past years. The
Bank continues to demonstratecomparative advantage in delivering analytical inputs to guide
policy dialogue. In particular, client and partners value the Bank's work on economic
management,both for its technical competence and its sharing of international experience. The
Bank is also able to leverage financial assistanceby capitalizing on partnerships with bilateral and
multilateral donors, and it has taken important first steps in widening partnership and
consultationsto include civil society and the private sector.

-

13 -

Box 5: Mozambique: CountryAssistance Review (CAR) 1998
The 1998 CountryAssistanceReview was completed as the 1997 CASwas beingfinalized. The CAR
concluded that the Bank played a critical role inMozambique 's recoveryprocess by helping to assess
problems and opportunities, design the evolvingpolicy agenda, and mobilize IDA and other resources,
therebyproviding financial, administrativeand analytical contributionsto Mozambique 's transition
process. The CAR noted that partners continue to look to the Bank to deliver advisory and analytical
services for sectoral and thematicprograms and to provide leadership in the dialogue on economic
management and sector strategies, particularly in the area of economicgovernance (e.g.fiscal
management, public sector reform, trade policy and financial sector development). The CAR also found
that the availability of grantfinancing in some sectors, and the Government's preference not to incur debt,
may limit the scopeforIDA financing. Developmenteffectiveness has also been limited by weaknesses in
aid coordination and excessivefocus on traditional investmentand technical assistance projects rather
than results-basedsectorwide programs.
On the basis of thesefindings, the CAR recommended that the Bank be more selective and cede leadership
to other donors where they have a comparative advantage or substantialfinancial presence; use country
dialogue and aid coordination mechanisms to nurture policy reform and capacity building; enhance
partnerships among donors and civil society to improve resultsfor sector programs; support Mozambican
authorities' increased leadership in development and aid coordination;and increase the responsiveness
and effectiveness of Bank assistance byfurther decentralizingauthority to thefield. These
recommendations have begun to be observed in the Bank's practices over the last CASperiod and are also
reflected in the current CAS.
33.
What worked less well: While many recognize Bank efforts to share information, develop
common understandings, and improve coordination, the Bank needs to be more systematic and
inclusive in reaching out to civil society and the private sector and in disseminating its analytical
work. The link between the Bank's policy and lending program and poverty reduction, as well as
the Bank's important role in many of the social sectors, is poorly understood. Although the
Bank's analytical products are valued, the Bank needs to do more in this area, and it needs to
better follow-through in applying upstream ESW to inform project identification and improve
quality of entry. At times, the scale and complexity of Bank projects have not been appropriately
tailored to match government's implementation capacity. Simpler project design, involving more
local expertise, could result in higher levels of client ownership and participation and in more
flexible project structures that would better allow for effective mid-course corrections.
Given the
escalating HIV/AIDS crisis and its likely repercussions on the entire development effort, the
Bank should have acted sooner and been more systematic in joining the battle against this
pandemic. The fact that IFC's objective of financing SME investments with local sponsors has
only been partially met also indicates a need for the Bank Group to do more to develop the local
private sector. Finally, with respect to infrastructure, the recent flood emergency has indicated a
need to improve Bank evaluation of hazard exposure, to reassess or develop standards, and to
help the Government incorporate appropriate measures for reducing or transferring the risks of
future loss or damage.
E. Strategic Orientation
34.
Bank support will aim to improve the effectiveness of Mozambique's overall poverty
reduction effort, taking into account the special needs for partnership in a country with weak
capacity and substantial access to grant financing. The orientation of this support recognizes a
dual role for the Bank: one as a catalyzing, strategic, and analytical partner to the Governnent's
development efforts, and the other as a financing partner. In the first role, the Bank will continue
to draw on its comparative advantage - as recognized in the CAR, ICRs, and the Client Survey in aid coordination and in analytical services, especially in sector analysis and policy and
programn design. In particular, the Bank will continue to assist the Govemment in the critically

- 14important tasks of selectingthe areas where reform is strategicallyneeded, formulating and
sequencing appropriate programs, and coordinating developmentassistance. This is particularly
needed in the Mozambican context where public sector capacity to undertake these tasks is
limited. In its financing role, the Bank will be more selective, recognizing where other partners
have a comparative advantage in project implementationand are able to provide grant financing.
For example, IDA will provide no financing in telecommunications; limited financing in the
environment sector; and secondary financing behind other lead donors in the education and
agriculture sectors. Moreover, even in sectors where the Bank leads, IDA financing will continue
to constitute only a share of total sectoral financing (e.g., up to or about a fifth of total financing
in the health and roads sectors).
35.
The focus of the ongoing program and the previous CAS are in accordance with the
strategic principles presented above. The lessons learned during the previous CAS and the CAS
consultations imply that the focus of the ongoing program has been appropriate and effective.
These efforts should be continued, but they will now need to be deepened in certain areas.
Specifically the Bank will need to:
a

*

*

Redouble efforts to accelerate growth, diversify its sources, and increase economic
opportunitiesfor the poor, particularlyin rural areas. To this end, investments in
transportation will continue, together with deeper regulatory reform and private participation
with IFC support in the key cross-cutting sectors of energy and telecommunications. Efforts
to promote pro-poor rural developmentand agricultural growth will need to be strengthened.
Further improvementsare needed in the basic enabling enviromnent, in the performance of
the financial sector, and in the developmentof SMEs.
Continue to support service delivery to improve human capabilities, with emphasis on
improving quality while continuing service expansion in basic health and education. The
Bank will also need to continue to provide advice in the area of social protection, including
to reduce vulnerabilitythrough improving the Government's capacity for disaster prevention
and mitigation.
Continue to improve our developmenteffectiveness through enhanced partnerships,
particularly among the donors and civil society. To this end, working with Government and
donors in supporting the PRSP and possibly a CDF provides a means to defining joint
priorities, assessing comparative advantages, and making strategic selections within
strengthened development partnerships.

36.
With this CAS, the Bank Group will also strategicallyaddress newly binding constraints
in Mozamubique
and new imperatives among Mozambicans. These are areas that require action,
particularly in the developmentand design of new programs. As such, the Bank can apply its
comparative advantage in a timely manner, especiallyto provide analytical inputs, support
program design, and act as an aid coordinator. Specifically, the Bank Group will need to:
*

Improve the focus, effectiveness, and monitoring of poverty reduction efforts. The
Government's commitment to design and implement a Poverty Reduction Strategy, as noted
in the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the interim PRSP, provides a basis for the Bank, with
other partners, to support its work in poverty analysis, policy formulation, and monitoring
progress against objectives.
* Increase emphasis on improving governance. Good governance and the rule of law are
critical for private sector led growth, and advantageous for the poor. Capacity constraints
urgently need to be addressed so that they do not stall Mozambique's ability to grow.
* Increaseemphasis on preventing HIV/AIDS. Having learned from global experience that
HIV/AIDS negates growth and poverty reduction, and seeing that the epidemic is reaching

- 15 -

*

crisis proportions in Mozambique,the Bank will make the fight against HIV/AIDS a critical
component of its work in the country.
Increase emphasis on promoting innovation, competitiveness,and employment. Skills
shortages are constraining growth and employment and undermining support for reform by
constraining the participation of Mozambicansin growth opportunities. There is a need for
Mozambican workers to improve their skills through technical, vocational, and higher
education and for Mozambican firms to address the challenges of competing in a global
economy that rewards high-quality innovation.
AGENDAANDTBE BANKGRouP's CAS
III. MOZAMBIQUE'SDEVELOPMENT

The Government aims to promote growth to reduce poverty and improve the well-being
37.
of the Mozambican people. Its medium-termdevelopment strategy (as stated in its Five-Year
Government Program (2000-2004)) and its emerging Poverty Reduction Strategy (as stated in its
interim PRSP) include efforts to increase economic opportunities by generating povertyreducing and employment-creatinggrowth through the private sector; improve governance and
empowerment, through a more effective public sector, improved rule of law, and greater
transparency and accountability; and improve human capabilities. Annex C outlinesthese
documents and their link to the CAS.
Poverty reduction is the overall goal of the Bank Group in Mozambique and there are no
38.
major disagreementsbetween the Bank and the Government on Mozambique's development
objectives and strategies. Differences do exist sometimes on the specific instruments or scope
and timing of reform. The Government favors protection in certain industries and restrictions in
the labor market. The Bank Group would like the Governmentto lower trade taxes and
surcharges and to proceed more quickly in demonopolizing sectors such as air transport and
telecommunications. The Bank also thinks that tax exemptions or other types of fiscal incentives
for internationally financed megaprojects or regional development schemes generally prove to be
more costly (in relation to benefits) and should be avoided where possible. These issues have
been the subject of continuing dialogue, and their debate has contributed to the increasingly
candid and open relationship between the Government and the Bank. The Bank is providing
technical and analytical inputs to inform the debate. In addition, the Bank is also supporting the
Government's efforts in developing the full PRSP, an integral part of which would be the broader
participation of civil society in discussing such issues and evaluatingtrade-offs.
The three pillars of this CAS are supported by new lending as well as a strong existing
39.
lending program. (See Annex B9). Most new IDA and IFC activities will focus on increasing
economic opportunity which, through growth promotion, is likely to have the maximum impact in
reducing poverty in Mozambique even in the short-term. Ongoing work in this area will be
consolidated with a view to ensuring that the benefits of growth are distributed as broadly as
possible. This CAS will also direct increased IDA support to improving governance and
empowerment, as limited administrative capacity and effectiveness is currently a primary and
binding constraint to reform, growth, and development. Finally, this CAS will continue to
support improving human capabilities, with limited new lending but substantial ongoing
programs and continued strong analytical products. To the extent that other partners have a
strong presence and comparative advantage and are willing to finance activities on a grant basis,
the Bank will scale back IDA's financing contribution. The Bank will structure new lending to
maximize synergies and complementarities and maintain an overall focus on promoting povertyreducing private-sector-led growth; IFC will provide direct support to the private sector to help
generate that growth.

- 16A. Increasing Economic Opportunitiesthrough Private Sector Led Growth
40.
To promote growth and poverty reduction in Mozambique,the Government aims to
create an environment which will enable the private sector to expand its activities and generate
employment, especially among the rural poor. In the interim PRSP, the Government aims to
achieve real GDP growth of 7 to 10 percent per annum and limit inflation to 5 to 7 percent per
annum, thereby reducing the poverty headcount index to 60 percent in 2004 from 69 percent in
1997. Whereas growth and inflation targets may be compromisedin 2000 because of the flood
emergency, they could be achieved in general by strengtheningthe private sector environment
and financial sector, investing in infrastructure, promotingagriculture and rural development,
ensuring sound environmental management, and improving innovation and competitiveness to
promote employment.
1.

Strengthening the Private Sector Environment and the Financial Sector

41.
Issues and Governmentstrategy: Macroeconomic stability has been achieved and needs
to be maintained: low inflation provides a stable environment for private sector growth and
benefits the poor. This will require continued financial discipline. A key outstanding issue is
reducing fiscal imbalances, which the Government hopes to achieve gradually through
expenditure efficiency, FHPC debt relief, and increased revenues (accrued by broadening the tax
base, simplifyingtax structures, and limiting exemptions). Continued external aid will permit
fiscal adjustment to be gradual and allow for expansion in spending on key poverty-reducing
programs. Another issue is expenditure control, which the Government will address with reforms
in accounting and budget execution. To help develop a more diversified export base, liberal
trade and investment policies will need to be strengthened, while addressing other constraints in
infrastructure, access to finance, and business capacity. To remove red tape, simplify the business
environment, and ensure the fair and efficient operation of newly privatized companies, the
Government will also undertake legal and regulatory reform. To this end, a new Commercial
Code and new urban land use regulations are being prepared, while regulations in the energy,
transportation, and telecommunications sectors are being revised to encourage entry, private
participation and competition. The Government will continue to strengthen its capacities of
poverty analysis, policy-formulation,and monitoringto improve the impact of policy on poverty
reduction.
42.
In thefinancial sector, further work is required to effectively mobilize savings so as to
finance growth and to improve supervision of the expanding private financial sector. Despite
improvements in regulation, privatization, and the entry of new banks, access to financial services
remains limited in rural areas and among the poor, real interest rates and lending margins remain
high, and medium and long term finance is limited. Governmentpolicies are aimed at
encouraging lowering financial intermediationcosts by enhancing competition, including
encouraging the development of non-bank financial intermediaries,as well as by addressing
systemic problems that constrain the financial sector, such as the poor enforceability of contracts,
lack of accounting standards, and legal obstacles to effective use of collateral. The Central Bank
aims to enhance pro-active supervision of the banking system to ensure financial stability.
43.
Bank Group support: The Bank will continue actively to support areas of economic
management, as this answers to its comparative advantage. The Bank will provide policy advice
to the Government for improving fiscal management and strengthening the poverty focus of its
programs, most notably through assisting in preparing and implementing the PRSP, and will help
Mozambique to attain debt relief under the enhanced HIPC framework. A public expenditure
review (PER) will be undertaken to identify spending strategies for reducing poverty, and there
will be studies of the linkages between economicgrowth and poverty reduction as well as of

- 17 targets for effective public service delivery. In addition to analytical contributions, in support of
the PRSP, Bank projects and studies will contribute to strengtheningpoverty analysis as well as
systems of poverty and program monitoring and statistical strengthening. An IDA proposed
Economic Management and Private Sector adjustment operation (EMPSO), as well as TA to
be included under a new public sector operation, will focus on private sector development and on
improving fiscal management (accounting,executing expenditures,developing consolidated
accounts, and reforming the pension system). The Bank, possibly with participation from FIAS,
will also support further work on improving and simplifyingthe regulatory framework, including
in the labor market, through a new study on constraints to private sector development. In addition
to ongoing work in the water and transportation sectors, the Bank Group will support improving
the regulatory and legal frameworks in the energy and mining sectors. Bank and IFC support to
the annual private sector conferences will continue. IFC is expanding its financing and advisory
support for SMEs, and will continue its focus on agribusiness to raise rural incomes. As the
investment environment improves, MIGA will support the Investment Promotion Center and
make guarantees available to attract increased foreign investment.
In the financial sector, the Bank will complete a diagnostic study and continue to provide
44.
advice to improve banking supervision and financial intermediation, particularly by analyzing the
causes of high interest rates, by advising on financial sector efficiencyand implementation of
contract law, and by strengtheningbank supervisionin accord with the Basle Core Principles. The
Bank Group will continueto work with the IMF to assist the Government in monitoring the
stability of the financial sector, particularlyin the wake of the recent floods. To promote
competition in the banking sector, IFC will seek to expand its involvement with additional equity
investments, term resources, and institution building. IFC will work to spur increased
competition and intermediation through the establishment of new non-bank financial institutions,
particularly in leasing, insurance, housing finance, and microfinance, which will help increase
access to financial services for the poor. IFC will also provide advisory and technical assistance
on regulatory and institutional issues.
2.

Developing Infrastructure

Issues and Government strategy: To promote growth, generate off-farm jobs, and
45.
increase rural access to markets, the Govemment is upgrading infrastructure, particularly in areas
of high growth potential and population density. In the short-term, the Govemment is prioritizing
the rehabilitation of critical infrastructure damagedby the February 2000 floods with a view to
improving siting and construction standards so as to reduce damage from such events in the
future. Over the medium- to long-term, the key issues addressed by the Government's roads
program include incomplete road systems, limited funding for maintenance, and limited
involvement of national contractors in road construction. Work on the three major port-andrailway systems aims to reduce transport costs, expand traffic, and increase eamings to ensure
sustainability. Government actions include concessioning operations to the private sector,
restructuring Caminhos de Ferro de MoVambique(CFM), and establishing an appropriate
regulatory framework. In energy, the principal issues are expanding household access and
sustainably exploiting resources for maximum macroeconomic and development impacts while
ensuring sound environmental management. To these ends, the Government is undertaking
structural and pricing reforms to encourage expanded private sector provision of electricity as
well as defining strategies for exporting energy and energy-intensiveproducts. In
telecommunications, monopolization remains the key issue, but the Government is now opening
the cellular market to free entry and seeking a private sector equity partner for the state
telecommunications company as first steps towards liberalization. It is also trying to expand
entry into the international telecommunications market and improve access to services such as

- 18 satellite connectivity and the internet. To improve the quality, reliability and sustainability of
urban water services, in September 1999the Government placed water services in five major
cities under private management supervised by a new regulatory agency. It is also taking
measures to increase access to safe water in rural areas and small towns, aiming to raise rural
access from 12 percent in 1998to 40 percent by 2004. Improving household access to markets,
energy, and safe water are key aims of the Government's strategy to reduce poverty, lower
household costs, improve the productivity and welfare of women and girls (who are responsible
for collecting water and fuel wood), and also improve the welfare of children (who benefit from
greater time allocated to child care).
46.
Bank Group support: The Bank Group has considerable experience and comparative
advantage in infrastructure and will remain active, in partnership with the major bilateral donors
and alongside private investors. A proposed Roads and Bridges (APL) project (FY01) will help
rehabilitate trunk roads and bridges, support rural road rehabilitation and maintenance, develop
institutional capacity for managing the network, reduce vulnerability of transport infrastructure to
flood and storm hazards, and increasethe participation of local contractors in implementing
works. The recently approved Railways and Ports Restructuringproject will help to restructure
CFM, develop a policy and regulatory framework, and place port and railway management in
private hands. IDA will also continueto provide policy advice on the development of the
transport corridors. An Energy Reform project will provide TA for structural and pricing
reforms; test financing and delivery options for electrificationin small towns; and promote the
sustainable urban use of traditional fuels. IDA will also assist in developing strategies for
exporting energy and energy-intensive products and establishing a market-based regulatory
framework for the gas and power subsectors. IFC, together with IDA and MIGA, will selectively
review megaprojects for their viability and potential support from the Bank Group; IFC will
examine further financing of Mozal for its expansion. In telecommunications, IDA will help to
assess the new law and support a national policy workshop; IFC has been in discussions with the
national telecommunications company to support its privatization. The national water program
will be supported in three ways: National Water Development (NWD) I will continue to focus on
reforming rural water supply and sanitation and managing regional and national water resources;
NWD II will continue to support concessioning of urban water services; and a new Municipal
Developmentproject will help to strengthen the ability of Mozambique's 33 new municipalities
to provide basic urban services, including sanitation and drainage. IFC is also seeking
opportunities to finance private infrastructure projects across sectors, with other potential projects
in industrial park development and investments arising from the development of the transport
corridors. IFC will also sponsor a workshop on best practice in private participation in
infrastructure at the request of the government.
3.

Promoting Rural Development and Agriculture

47.
Issues and Governmentstrategy: As most of the poor are subsistence farmers,
promoting agricultural growth and rural development is critical to reducing poverty over the short
to medium term. Key issues include improving access to land, increasing productivity, expanding
off-farm employment,facilitating rural trade, arresting land degradation, and improving
management of climate variability and extremes. To address these issues, the Government's rural
development strategy includes adopting and enforcing land tenure regulations, developing rural
roads, and creating rural market incentives. The agriculture SWAP, PROAGRI, supports
agricultural extension services, with a special focus on reaching female farmers to disseminate
information on farming practices and gender-specific legislation, and is establishing a regulatory
framework (for land markets, land tenure, and forest and wildlife management)that will promote
an efficient and environmentally sustainableuse of resources.

- 19 -

Bank Group support: The Bank will remain active in this area. The IDA-supported
48.
Agricultural Sector Public Expenditure Program, a 15-year APL in its first phase, supports
PROAGRI to strengthen the institutions needed to provide a core set of services in agriculture
and natural resource management. A Rural Action project will bring resources down to the
community level and strengthen the capacity of local authorities through supporting small-scale
community-driven investments in rural infrastructureand services. The Roads and Bridges
project will support efforts to rehabilitate and maintain rural feeder roads. New lending,
combined with large existing programs in health, education, and water, contribute to IDA's
significant support to improving infrastructure and service delivery in rural areas. IFC's SME
program is concentrating in agribusiness and tourism to expand opportunities for rural
development and off-farm employment. Finally, a rural developmentstudy underway, which
focuses on key elements in the state's role in facilitating rural development, will inform the PRSP
and enhance the design of Bank operations.
4.

Ensuring Sound EnvironmentalManagement

Issues and Government strategy: Agriculture, fisheries, mining and tourism-activities
49.
based on exploiting the environment-contribute about 45 percent of GDP and 70 percent of total
exports. Ensuringthat resource exploitation is sustainable is critical to long-term prospects for
growth and poverty reduction. Although Governmentpolicy in this area is fluid and capacity
limited, there is general movement towards integrating environmental aspects into all major
policies and strategies, implementing programs for environmental management, and subjecting
major economic activities to environmental impact studies. The Government will also participate
in regional efforts to manage the environment, particularlyin tourism, transportation, and water
and wildlife conservation. Over the past five years, the Government has adopted an Environment
Framework Law, a new Land Law, and a new Forestry and Wildlife Law. At present, key
Government objectives include increasing capacity to ensure that regulations are properly
implemented, formulating cross-sectoral approaches, and encouraging environmentally and
socially sustainable private sector investment.
Bank Group support: IDA will support a study aiming to identify critical environmental
50.
pressures, including climatic hazards, and appropriate responses, in a context of rapid growth and
weak institutions. With GEF support, and in partnership with the private sector, IDA is helping
to develop a framework for forestry and wildlife managementthrough the Transfrontier
Conservation Areas project and will test and refine mechanisms to promote environmentallyand
socially sustainable developmentthrough the proposed Coastal and Marine Biodiversity
Management Project accompanyingthis CAS. The Transfrontierproject will also address issues
of watershed management that will mitigate flood risk. Through its presence on the Maputo
Corridor working groups for environment, tourism, and biodiversity, the Bank will continue to
provide advice on environmental management as well as supportto the development of a
Strategic Environmental Management Frameworkfor the corridor. IDA's sectoral programs
(particularly health, PROAGRI, National Water I, and Municipal Development) will also provide
support. In addition, a Natural Resources Managementproject will develop an environmental
information system as well as build capacity within Government to enforce environmental
regulations and address mining-relatedenvironmental challenges. Through the projects it
finances, IFC will bring Bank Group environmental standards to the private sector, including
financial intermediaries' assessment of environmental risk.

- 20 5.

Promoting Innovation, Competitivenessand Employment

51.
Issues and Governmentstrategy: Creating on- and off-farm employment is a key
objective of the Govemment's poverty reduction strategy. This requires a response both to build
the capacity and competitivenessof Mozambican firms so they expand and create jobs, as well as
to enhance skills in the workforce and professions to fill the technical positions in an expanding
local economy. To sustain growth and employmentat levels high enough to reduce poverty
permanently, Mozambican firms will need to adopt new technologies and individuals to develop
new skills, so that Mozanmbicanbusinesses will become increasingly able to compete in external
markets. To do so requires exposureto competition and competitive practices, access to
information, increased capacity, and financing. In addition, the shortage of skilled personnel is
constraining growth and limiting the distribution of its benefits among Mozambicans. To address
this problem, the Government in January 2000 created a new Ministry of Higher Education,
Science and Technology to focus on higher education, technical and vocational training as part of
its growth and employment strategy. The Government is also developing a strategy aimed at
improving opportunities for Mozambicansto participate in the labor market by strengthening the
quality and improvingthe relevance to market demand of vocational and higher education, while
strengtheningthe sustainabilityof these institutions and programs through fostering appropriate
private-public partnerships in financing and service provision. Special efforts are aimed at
promoting employment among women by targeting them for delivery of small and medium
enterprise credits, tool kits, and training for informal sector employment. With NGOs, the
Government is also supporting women's associations that assist women household heads with
weak economic capacity.
52.
Bank Group support: The Bank will study labor costs, market policies and regulations
to complement Government efforts to develop a strategy for higher education and vocational
training. While the Bank is already supporting a large and fully-subscribed basic education
program (see paragraph 63), under this CAS IDA will also support a Skills Development project
focusing on tertiary, technical and vocational education and aiming to infuse, in Mozambique's
labor market, the skills, practices, and attitudes required to create value-adding knowledge and
innovation in production. The project, like the strategy upon which it will be based, is to be
developed through a strategic partnership among Government,academic institutions, and the
private sector. It will support comprehensive reform in the sector to enable the most effective
delivery of the training and skills being demanded in the context of Mozambique's evolving labor
market. IFC will support private education, focusing on the tertiary level, and has an initial
project under development for a technical college. IDA's recently approved Enterprise
Development project (PODE), as well as technical assistance and policy advice in the areas of
private sector development and competitiveness, will expose local entrepreneurs to best-practice
business techniques, management systems, and technological innovations and support knowledge
transfer by promoting inter-company linkages. IDA is also prepared to provide small credits to
support Mozambique's participation in the Regional Trade Facility (a facility permitting
entrepreneurs to insure productive activities against political risk) as well as consultancy-led
assistance to improve the competitivenessof one or more major Mozambican industries. IFC
support facilities, including the Africa Project Development Facility (APDF) and the Africa
Management Services Company (AMSCO) will be expanded to provide assistance to the local
private sector, complementingthe PODE. Throughthese facilities and outreach efforts, IFC will
seek to involve more Mozambican businesspeople as sponsors in the SME projects it finances,
and expand the number of those investments. AMSCO will provide training and capacity building
for local firms, as well as management assistance. In addition, WBI's World Links program is
introducing information technology and communication infrastructure into secondary schools
outside of Maputo to improve student and teacher familiarity with this new technology: over the
next few years, the program will be expanded to cover up to 100 schools.

- 21 B. Improving Governance and Empowerment
This CAS will support effortsto develop a public administration that is responsive to its
53.
constituents and that effectively supports the country's poverty-reductionefforts. Limited
administrative capacity and effectiveness is currently one of the primary constraints to growth,
development, implementation of reform, and service delivery to the poor. Government efforts
have been aimed at bolstering the civil service, reformingthe institutional framework, including
decentralization and deconcentration,and simplifying and increasing the transparency of
administrative procedures and improving accountability. Under the governance pillar, the Bank
will not be involved in providing support in the areas of peace, public safety, and personal and
human rights, given the Bank's lack of comparative advantage and the support of other
development partners in these areas.
1.

Reforming the Public Sector

Issues and Governmentstrategy: Public administration until very recently was highly
54.
centralized in Mozambique. Quality is also a concern: 80 percent of staff have no more than a 6'h
grade education and only 3 percent have higher degrees. To attract and retain qualified staff, the
Government has decompressed salaries and instituted a new career stream system; it will also
implement a medium-term pay policy and merit-based reward system, as well as a training
program to reorient existing staff. In 1998,the Government's decentralization program created
33 elected autonomous municipalities and devolvedto them the responsibility for urban
management within their jurisdictions. The Government intends to increase the number of
municipalities with each election cycle, and gradually transfer responsibility for other services. It
is also exploring ways to deconcentrate responsibilityfor local development to provincial
authorities and to encourage developmentplanning at the district level. Further reforms, being
developed by an interministerial group supported by a technical group, will develop a more
results- and service-orientedpublic sector by redefiningthe sector's role and restructuring it
accordingly. The Govermmentwill continue its efforts to improve budget and expenditure
management and control to ensurethat resource allocations are in accordance with national
poverty-reducingpriorities. Upon reelection, Mozambique's Presidenthas reiterated
Govemment's commitment to fight corruption; Mozambique is one of the eleven countries which
drafted and approved the 25 Principles to Combat Corruption under the auspices of the Global
Coalition for Africa.
Bank Group support Supportto the public sector reform program is threefold, with an
55.
emphasis on capacity building, including at the local level. First, the Bank will provide support
to the technical group and initiate a Public Sector and Legal Reform project to assist the
Govemment in implementing reforms in system-wide areas such as wages, decentralization,
financial and personnel management. A public sector study, including an assessment of
govemance and of public procurement, will provide the diagnostic underpinnings for design of a
program of reform. Second, given decentralization's role in improving service delivery while
also empowering citizens, including the rural poor, this will be a principal focus of new Bank
lending. IDA's Municipal Developmentproject will assist in developing a framework for fiscal,
financial and human resource managementfor the new municipalities and include a capacitybuilding component linked to the new National Institute for Public Administration, which will
play a key role in wider public sector reform. IDA's Rural Action project will use small-scale
community-driven rural infrastructure investments to strengthenthe capacity of communities and
local governments to plan and manage local infrastructure and services. Through WBI's panAfrican Municipal Development Program and AFRICITIES conference series, the Bank is also
strengthening capacity in the areas of inter-govemmentalfiscal relations and financial
management as well as community participation in local govemment. Third, to help the

- 22 Government improve economic management as well as transparency and accountability in its
budget system, the Economic Management and Private Sector operationwill help to strengthen
budgetary execution, accounting, and auditing. The Bank will also continue to provide policy
advice in support of reforms in customs administration. In the area of corporate governance, the
Public Sector and Legal Reform project will help to strengthen capacity in accounting and
establish a professional accountants group. IFC (throughAMSCO) is providing training to
selected firms in the area of corporate governance, and strengthening capacity in accounting in
the private sector.
2.

Improving the Rule of Law

56.
Issues and Government strategy: In Mozambique, the legal and judicial system is
outdated, inefficient and poorly equipped to ensure the rule of law. Dissemination and
enforcement of current laws is poor, particularlyoutside the main cities, and weakness in the
legal sector is impeding progress in other sectors as well as the development of the private sector.
Commercial law, family law, and the criminal code are critically in need of reform. These are all
on the Government's agenda. A strategic plan for the justice system should be completed in
2000, and a legal reform commission has been established. The plan is expected to address key
legislative reforms, capacity-buildingneeds, and institutional reform in the Ministry of Justice,
Supreme Court, Attorney General's Office and Administrative Tribunal. To increase capacity, a
Center for Judicial Studies and Training is being opened and efforts are being made to
disseminate legal texts throughout the country to legal professionals. The Government has
prioritized the adoption of legislation that will foster private sector activity, and work is
continuing on revising the Commercial Code. To help secure women's rights, the Government is
expected to revise the Penal Code to include provisions for prosecuting domestic and sexual
violence and Family and Succession Laws to guarantee women's rights to succession and to
independent economic activity. The Government is also working with NGOs to combat violence
against women, and female officers are being recruited into the police force.
57.
Bank Group support. The Bank's Legal Sector Capacity Building project has supported
the training of legal professionals, strengtheningof the Faculty of Law, developing legal code
reform, and disseminating knowledge of the law. The Bank is also supporting revision of the
Commercial Code. After the Government finalizes its strategic plan, the Bank expects to renew
its support in this area. An assessment of the legal and judicial sector will be undertaken. It will
direct the development of a legal component in the Public Sector and Legal Reform project,
which will aim at improving the legal environment and judicial system with a view to promoting
private sector growth. IDA's work in the judicial sector will be undertaken in coordination with
other external partners, some of whom have extensive previous involvement in this sector, and
IDA's financial support to the sector will be scaled accordingly.
C. Increasing Human Capabilities
58.
The short-term urgency of improving low living standards and the longer term objectives
of improving human capabilities, increasing growth, and reducing poverty motivate the Bank's
continued support of efforts to improve human capabilities. Most of the Bank's financial support
under this pillar, chiefly in the area of primary health and primary education, will continue to be
delivered through ongoing operations.

- 23 1.

Preventing and Reducing the Impact of HI WIAIDS

59.
Issues and Government strategy: About one in seven adult Mozambicans carries the
AIDS virus, which is now the largest single threat to Mozambique's prospects (see Box 1). To
date, resources directed to the fight against HIV/AIDS has not reflected the magnitude of the risk
that it poses to the nation's developmenteffort (as is evident in Annex E). In September 1999the
Government adopted a National Strategic Plan (2000-2002) for Fighting STDs/H1V/AIDSat a
national workshop presided by the President. The Plan aims to provide essential services to
prevent infection and reduce the impact of AIDS, targeting some 1.6 million people with highrisk sex partners as well as 15,000 people and their families living with HIV/AIDS along the
main transport corridors. Given the cross-cutting developmental implications of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, the Government has recognizedthat effective HlV/AIDS prevention, care, and control
strategies require a multisectoral and gender-sensitiveresponse. To this end an Interministerial
Committeefor AIDS, involving eight ministries, is being created to have general oversight
responsibilities for implementingthe National Plan, and a National AIDS Commission is being
established with more direct national management responsibilities.
60.
Bank Group support: The existing IDA portfolio and pipeline are being reviewed and
revised to include appropriate HIV/AIDS prevention and care activities wherever possible. The
ongoing Enterprise Development project and the roads program already include components with
this objective. Through an IDF grant, IDA is supportingthe establishment of the National AIDS
Commission,which will define objectives and strategies in priority areas for HIV/AIDS
prevention and control; integrate these strategies into government sectoral plans; and establish
workplans, budgets, management, and monitoring mechanisms for their implementation. The
Bank also supports UTNAIDSand, in its capacity as an aid coordinator, will play an active role in
increasing HIV/AIDS awareness in Mozambique. Because Mozambique and some of its external
partners are expected to finance the US$40 million National Strategic Plan through grants, no
IDA operation in support of this Plan is currently anticipated. However, IDA is prepared to
expedite new lending should any financing gap emerge.
2.

Improving Health

Issues and Governmentstrategy: Despite increased Government spending, health
61.
outcomes continueto be poor and health resources inequitably distributed, with per capita
spending on health being four to five times greater in Maputo city than in Zambezia and
Nampula. The Govermment'shealth program aims to improve access and quality, particularly in
rural areas, with a view to reducing morbidity and mortality and increasing economic
productivity. The program is oriented toward primary care, which will benefit the poor, and
targets reductions in infant, child, and maternal mortality and increases in DPT coverage. It also
focuses on improving health service coverage in rural areas. The program includes capacity
building and training of traditional birth attendants in rural areas with a view to reducing levels of
maternal mortality, consolidating preventative programs for women's health, and reviewing staff
recruitmentmethods and training to incorporate gender concerns. The Government is now
formulatinga new sector strategy in consultationwith its partners, who will be reorganizing their
support to the sector in the form of an expanded SWAP.
Bank Group support: The Governmenthas asked the Bank to help facilitate the
62.
transition from a sector program to a full SWAP and coordinate donor support of the new
strategy. The Bank will continue to support the sector through its existing Health Sector
Recovery program (HSRP), which aims to increase access to health services through improved
service delivery and institutional development. IDA will also develop a new Health (SWAP)
credit to support the new program, but because many external partners are channeling grant

- 24 money into this sector, new lending is likely to be limited. The Bank is also prepared to support
the Government's Roll Back Malaria campaign with advisory services and financial support. IFC
will support the expansion of private medical services.
3.

Improving Education

63.
Issues and Governmentstrategy: Improving access and quality, particularly for primary
education, remain key objectives. In launching its Education Sector Strategic Program (ESSP) in
1998, the Govemment placed education at the center of its efforts to boost economic and social
development. The fully subscribed program of over US$700 million aims to improve quality
(through increasing teacher training, improving learning materials, and revising the curriculum)
and access (through constructing classrooms and improving internal efficiency);it also aims to
strengthen institutional capacity for management, policy development, monitoring and evaluation.
To mitigate regional and rural-urban disparities, the Government is further decentralizing
education management and shifting budget allocations. In the effort to reduce the gender gap in
schools, provinces with highest gender disparities have been targeted, and a program is in place to
sensitize communities and reform curricula and texts to demonstrate the issues and benefits of
girls' education. To improve adult education, literacy programs, which target women and include
courses on domestic violence, women's rights, and land access, are being provided outside
schools.
64.
Bank Group support: The Bank assisted, with 18 other partners, in developing the
education sector program and will continue to support its implementation with the ongoing ESSP
project, focused on strengthening quality, access, and institutional capacity. The Bank is also
assisting the Government in an ongoing study to explore alternative models for financing the
education sector and it will initiate a Skills Development project under this CAS (see paragraph
52). IFC support for private education will be expanded.
4.

Social Protection

65.
Issues and Government strategy: The Government's Integrated Program of Social
Action, Employment and Youth includes safety net programs to protect the vulnerable and the
chronically poor, and training and job-creating programs to assist the able-bodied poor; social
assistance and psycho-social rehabilitation are also covered. Currentlytargeted groups include
female heads of households, malnourished pregnant women, the elderly disabled, and the
chronically ill. The PARPA calls for improving the quality of social protection programs which
will require assessing appropriate targeting, eligibility criteria, and coverage levels as a step to
developing programs for marginalized groups currently not covered. Pension schemes are also a
matter of Government interest; to ensure the sustainabilityand efficacy of these schemes, the
Government is developing regulations for private schemes and undertaking a study on the main
national schemes. In restructuring and resizing public institutions, such as customs and the
railways, the Government is putting into place programs that will support the transition of
workers to other productive activities, including through retraining. Disaster mitigation and
management form part of the Government's social protection programs. Three government
agencies, the National Water Directorate, the National MeteorologicalInstitute, and the National
Institute for Disaster Management share direct responsibility for anticipating hazard events to
prevent and prepare for disasters; existing capacity to perform these functions is to be
strengthened, including with respect to local, regional and sectoral linkages. The advancement of
women is also a stated objective of the new Government, and responsibility for gender issues was
recently given to the Ministry of Social Action and Women.

- 25 66.
Bank Group support Given the substantial scope for grant financing in the area of
social protection, the Bank's support here will be principally in the form of analytical work and
policy advice. In particular, the Bank will provide informal policy advice on social protection
and safety net issues as part of its overall assistance to the Government in developing its Poverty
Reduction Strategy. WBI will also play a role in providing training and capacity building in this
area. Through the Railways and Ports Restructuring project, support is to be provided for the
retraining and redeployment of workers resulting from the restructuring of CFM. In addition, the
Bank will assist the Government in undertaking diagnostic work on its pension system through
this project and will provide further support in this area, if required, through the next programmed
adjustment operation. The Bank will also provide informal policy advice and technical assistance
in the area of institutional capacity building for disaster prevention and preparedness. In addition
to related measures being implemented through the Bank's National Water Development Project
(NWD1), should the need arise, a small, free-standingtechnical assistance operation will be
considered to support efforts in disaster prevention, preparedness, and management.

IV.

THE BANKGROUP'S COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY:IMPLEMENTATION

A. Alternative Scenarios for the Lending Program and Non-Lending Services

67.
The Base Case: Base case lending over the three-year CAS period (FY0I-FY03) would
range from US$455 million up to the IDA authorized lending envelope of US$540 million. (See
Annex BH). Lending levels in the base case are likely to be below the authorized envelope to take
into account the country's absorptive capacity, the availability of grant funds from other donors,
the Government's debt management strategy, and a recognition that in Mozambique's current
political environment some time is needed to ensure adequate public information and debate
about new reforms. Adjustment lending (the US$100 million Economic Management and Private
Sector operation programmed for FY02) would decline relativeto the previous CAS and
represent about one-fifth of total lending. The base case lending program (described in Section
III above) aims to help Mozambique sustain high, broad-based and inclusive growth, and to
ensure that the benefits of growth are equitably distributed, particularly to the poor. Capitalizing
on the Bank's comparative advantage, a substantial non-lending work-program is designed to
contribute to developing the PRSP and to provide analytical foundations for the design of
Government programs as well as the Bank's lending program (see Box 6). The number and
volume of IFC investments, which will depend on demand from private investors, is expected to
expand significantly during the CAS period given the expansion of infrastructure, and the
potential for further large projects.
68.
The triggers for the proposed base case lending program will be monitored on an ongoing
basis by the Bank's Country Team and will include:
*
*

*
*

Formulation by end 2001 and implementation thereafter of a comprehensive public sector
reform and governance program, that includes specific government actions to improve
public sector capacity and fiscal management and to contain and reduce corruption.
Substantial adherence to the agreed timetable for developing a poverty reduction strategy
paper (PRSP) with monitorable indicators through a consultative process; and subsequent
satisfactory implementation of the PRSP, including satisfactory progress in achieving
targets under programs in health, education, water, and roads.
Substantial progress in implementing the National Strategic Plan to Fight
STDs/HIV/AIDS.
Continued satisfactory portfolio performance, including continued high disbursement
ratio (around 20 percent) and low percentage of problem projects (around 10 percent or
less).

- 26 -

69.
The High Case. The high case will materialize principally on the basis of an increase in
absorptive capacity. Absorptive capacity would be improvedthrough progress in reforming
public administration, strengtheningpublic and private sector governance and capacity, and
expanding skills and knowledge, thereby also improving portfolio performance. Under the high
case scenario, economic growth would be close to or in excess of seven percent per annum for
2001 and beyond, based on successful and timely implementation of Government programs as
well as increased investor confidence and private investment. This would result in continued
expansion of the agricultural, manufacturing, and tourism sectors, as well as faster growth in
exports, including from megaprojects.
70.
With strong growth, improving social indicators, and improved participation through
decentralization, political support for the reform program would
Box 6: CASNon-lendingActiies
broaden and reforms in the energy, transport, and
telecommunications sectors would be accelerated. The Energy
PublicSector ReformStudy
Reform project would be advanced into FY01, and, if
* PublicExpenditureReview
deregulation of the energy sector is substantially completed in the
next two years, an Energy Development project (not in the base
. LegalandJudicialStudy
* Povertyand GrowthLinkages
case lending program) would be brought into FY03. If public
* Constraintsto PrivateSector
sector reform accelerates, and there is substantial adherence to
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Development
sector
* Environment:CriticalPressures
agreed pay reform, training systems, and career stream systems,
work on the Public Sector Reform Strategy and on the Legal and
Judicial study would be expedited, permittingthe Public Sector
PolicyAdviceand TA
and Legal Reform project to be advanced into FY02. With
* PRSPSupport
a Enhanced HIPC Initiative
IDS
HIaV/A
E
relevant sectoral progress and adequate upstream AAA, the
* PrivateSector/Competitiveness
second phase of support to the Health SWAP could be advanced
into FY02 and a second adjustment operation, to be focused on
Advice
* MaputoCorridorAdvice
private sector development, could be brought into the current
*
DisasteriPreventonand
CAS period. Lending volumes under the Rural Action and
Adviceand TA
Energy Reform projects would be increased. Depending on a
number of factors, including overall economic performance, the
* RegionalEnergyand
MegaprojectsAdvice
degree of political consensus, the pace of reforms in the various
. FinancialSectorAdvice
sectors, the extent of Bank preparedness as demonstrated in
relevant and high-quality upstream ESW, and Government
* GlobalDistanceLearning
Network;SchoolnetWorldLinks
capacity-and willingness-to absorb higher levels of
for Development;
Municipal
indebtedness, lending could increase up to US$655 million in the
Development/AFRICITIES
(WBI)
high case.
IFC

71.
Triggers for the high case would include all
for the base case plus:
*

*
*

all indicators

*

assistance tofinancial
Technical
indcators
stitutions

*
:

FIAS workon investmentred tape
Advisory assistance to SA'Es

Infrastoctureadvisorywork
Formulation by end 2000, as well as satisfactory and
Megaprojectsadvice
accelerated implementationthereafter, of a
comprehensive public sector reform and governance
program, including progress specificallyin actions to improve public sector capacity and
fiscal management.
A full PRSP endorsed by the Bank's Executive Directors, together with a record of
timely and substantial implementation,achieving or exceeding key targets on or ahead of
schedule.
Significant progress toward demonopolization of the energy, transport, and
telecommunications sectors.

- 27 Strong portfolio performance (with the share of problem projects remaining below 10
percent and disbursement ratios exceeding 20 percent).
72.
The Low Case. The low case scenario for Mozambiquewould result if political
instability led to government paralysis or to civil strife, or if Mozambique were to become
entangled in regional conflicts, or if governanceproblems severely impede the delivery of
services and the continuation of economic reform efforts. Other possible triggers of the low case
include a major crisis in the financial sector; substantial shifts in economic policy towards
reasserting state control over productive activities; or major distortions in price, trade, or
exchange policies that impede the developmentof markets. Whatever the cause, the low case
would likely be characterized by recession, increasing and ultimately high inflation, decreased
investor confidence, and an extended and pronounced decline in balance of payments support.
This in time would result in real declines in social sector spendingand a reversal of gains in
social indicators.
Triggers for the low case include:

73.

Significant deviation from poverty-reducingpolicies outlined in the agreed PRSP
(including reductions in the share of spending allocated to priority poverty-alleviating
activities such as primary education and primary health care).
* Significant reversals in economic reform policies, especially related to overall
macroeconomic management, the financial sector, privatization and trade policy, leading
to a more closed and centrally-controlledeconomic environment.
Civil strife, war, or governance practices which cause the external development partners
a
to significantly reduce their level of support for an extended period.
* Significant deterioration in portfolio performance (with problem projects significantly
greater than 10 percent and disbursement ratio significantly less than 20 percent for an
extended period of time).
*

In the low case, new IDA lending will be constrainedto US$170 million over the CAS
74.
period. Beyond a self-standing emergency operations in health, IDA will proceed only with the
Roads and Bridges project, the Municipal Development project, and a scaled-down Rural Action
project aimed at improving governance and basic service delivery in urban and rural areas. The
Roads and Bridges project would experience delays in achieving effectiveness due to slower than
expected completion of the existing roads project. In the low case, non-lending work would also
be scaled back and reoriented to assess the Government's commitment to its poverty reduction
strategy and to advise the Govermnent on managing the economy. Completion of the proposed
Public Expenditure Review and the PRSP would remain important in this context.
B. Development Partnerships
Mozambique receives almost US$600 million in aid each year, making aid coordination a
75.
key concern. The bilateral donors are most active in infrastructure, rural development and
agriculture, health, and education (see Annex B9 and Annex E). Politicalgovernance, peace,
social protection and human rights-areas where the Bank is not active-also receive strong
bilateral support. Multilateral activity covers many areas, including political governance. Under
the Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the UN system is concentrating on
governance, health and education, empowermentand the environment. The European Union has
been active in infrastructure, civil service reform, agriculture, health and education; and the
African Development Bank, besides providing balance of payments support, has been active in
infrastructure, education and the environment. There is also significant NGO involvement in the

- 28 social sectors and private sector involvementin infrastructure (e.g. upgrading the N4 road link
between the port of Maputo and South Africa).
76.
A large part of the Bank's work in Mozambiqueconsists in developing and participating
in development partnerships. Short-term aid coordination is one area of priority. In addition to
the Consultative Group Meetings, which the Bank chairs, there are also monthly meetings of
Heads of Mission and Heads of Development in Maputo, chaired by the UNDP. Mozambique's
external partners look to the Bank for briefings, coordination, economic policy guidance, and
sectoral leadership. Regular consultative meetings are held by the Country Office with the NGO
Working Group, which is being expanded to include academic institutions. The Bank will
continue to play an important role in assisting Government to coordinate aid in the delivery of
support to Mozambique's overall and sectoral reform programs. Continued coordination through
the SWAPs and further work on the PRSP will help to consolidate the partnership and enhance
Government leadership and accountability.
77.
A second area of priority concerns partnership within the Bank Group and with the IMF.
Joint Bank and Fund work on the HIPC Initiativeand PFPs has already brought the two
institutions closer together. Ongoing work on the PRSP and the Enhanced HIPC Initiativewill
further consolidatethis close relationship. Within the Bank Group, the Country Team structure
has encouraged sharing informationand improvingcoordination. IDA and the IFC work together
closely. This CAS is an IDA-IFC product and IDA and IFC are housed jointly in the World Bank
Group's office in Maputo. Improvementsin the economy are likely to increase demand for MIGA
guarantees. With the Bank Group's new emphases on governance, innovation, competitiveness,
and knowledge management, there will be an increased role for WBI in delivering the Bank's
strategy. WBI is also expected to play a role in the Bank Group's delivery of policy advice and
training to assist Mozambique in formulating and implementing its Poverty Reduction Strategy.
C. Program Monitoring and Evaluation
78.
The Bank will monitor its program utilizing the indicators outlined in the program matrix
(see Annex B9). These indicators and targets will be revised and updated to link more directly
with the indicators in the full PRSP once it is completed, including a revision of sectoral targets,
as necessary, to fully account for the impact of the floods. Critical systems for overall program
monitoring and evaluation will be the M&E systems associated with SWAPs as well as several
household surveys to be undertaken regularly by the Government. The Bank, in joint missions
with the Fund, will monitor program implementationand performance under the PRSP and HIPC.
In addition, another OED Country Assistance Review is expected to be undertaken prior to the
next CAS to evaluate the overall program, and Client Surveys will continue to be undertaken to
gauge responsivenessto client needs. The portfolio will be managed closely by the Country
Office with annual portfolio reviews held with Government (see paragraph 30) and the Country
Team will continue to use the ICR process, and OED reviews, as important inputs in improving
the portfolio and its management.
D. Risks and Risk Management
79.
Mozambiquecontinues to be a medium-risk high-rewardcountry. The program faces six
major risks over the next few years. First, there is the political risk that the opposition's
dissatisfaction with the 1999 election results and limited participation in government may lead to
political paralysis and possibly civil strife, drawing on dissatisfaction among some groups of civil
society that believe that popular participation in decision-makingis unduly limited. Second, the
widespread perception that growth is not sufficiently benefiting most people, or not sufficiently

-

29 -

benefiting Mozambican businesses and workers, could result in protectionist and distortive
regulations on trade, labor, and capital as well as more general backsliding on reform. This
would slow growth and employment creation, increase poverty, and concurrently reduce
Mozambique's external financing prospects, particularly from foreign investment. Third,
HIV/AIDS, if unchecked, could substantially increase poverty and compromise or reverse
Mozambique's development, even in the short term. Fourth, despite efforts to strengthen public
administration, capacity, and governance, gains in these areas may not materialize quickly
enough to improve absorptive capacity and program implementation,particularly where this
concerns assisting private sector initiative. Fifth, Mozambique's economic prospects are
increasingly linked to those of the sub-region, such that adverse economic developments in
neighboring countries, particularly South Africa and Zimbabwe, will dampen prospects for
Mozambique. Sixth, Mozambique is extremely vulnerable to climatic variations, including
drought and floods, that can adversely affect agriculturalproductivity and growth, water
supplies, health, economic development, and progress towards alleviating poverty.
80.
The Bank Group recognizes these risks and, where possible, will work to mitigate them.
This CAS aims chiefly to increase the impact of growth throughout the country, and especially
among the poor. With added emphasis on decentralization,IDA will work to ensure that
development processes and institutions are more inclusive, increasing popular participation in the
program. The Bank will support the PRSP process, which will include Govermment-led
consultations to inform the design of policy while also improving awareness of Government work
on poverty reduction and its achievements. The Bank Group will also improve dissemination of
its analytical work, such as its ongoing growth prospects paper, to raise awareness of its povertyreduction activities, the impact of policy choices, and the benefits of strategic thinking on
competitiveness. The Government's National HIV/AIDS Plan is a critical step toward limiting
the spread of the disease, and the Bank will be playing an important role in supporting that
program, including galvanizing increased resources and offering new lending, if necessary, to
step-up the program. The Bank will also help to improve public sector administration and
govemance. Where capacity and institutional constraints in strategic areas compromise growth
and poverty reduction, altemative institutional arrangements will be explored (e.g. as occurred in
temporarily contracting customs to the private sector).With regard to the potential for regional
crises, the Country Team is working closely with Country Teams for the rest of Southern Africa
to understand and to support efforts to mitigate regional crises and their spill-over effects.
Mozambique's gradual diversification of trade with other countries in the region and the world,
along with its active participation in regional organizations, will also mitigate this risk. Finally,
the Bank will support Mozambique's efforts at the local, national and regional levels to identify,
reduce and transfer risks associated with hydro-meteorologicalhazards.
CONCLUSION
81.
Mozambique is an extremely poor country which, unlike many other impoverished
countries, has significant and real potential for growth and poverty reduction in the relative near
term. Just as important, its Governmenthas to date shown serious commitment to the objectives
of poverty reduction, manifested by a sound reform program and, most recently, by its interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. The country's potential, coupled with its commitment and
programs, are yielding results. Yet there are daunting challenges and risks to be confronted if
Mozambique's potential is to be realized. The Bank has played an important role in supporting
Mozambique's impressive progress over the past decade. Selectingthe right development
constraints to address at the right time - in an environment of significant commitment but limited
capacity - has, in large part, been key to the success of the Government and of the Bank in
Mozambique. This CAS proposes that the Bank Group, with some shifts in focus, continue its
strong support to Mozambique over the next three years. Increasing economic opportunities,

- 30 enhancing governance,and improvinghuman capabilitiesare all part of the long-term agenda for
poverty reduction in Mozambique. With its programunder this CAS, the Bank Group proposes
to continueits partnership with the Goverrnent and all of its developmentpartners in this
endeavor.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
June 14, 2000

Peter L. Woicke

- 31 Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Mozambique at a glance

519=

SubSaharan
Africa
Mozambique

LowIncome

17.3
230
4.0

628
480
304

3,515
520
1,844

Population(%)
Laborforc. (1)

2.2
2.4

2.6
2.6

1.7
1.9

Moat recentesUmate(latet yir available, 1913.99)
Poverty(16ofpopulaDonbelownationalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation(X oftotalpopulaton)
Lie expectancyat birth (years)
Infarnmortalfty(per 1,000live irths)
Childmalnutrition(X of ch/ldronunder5)
Accessto safewater(X of populafion)
age /5+)
Ililteracy(X ofpopu/aidon
Grossprimaryenrollment(%of schol-age populabon)
Male
Female

69
38
47
134
41
24
60
71
79

POVERTYand SOCIAL
199f
Population,mid-year(millions)
USS)
GNPpercapta (Aglasmetlhod,
GNP(Atdasmethod,USSbillions)

diamond
Development
LfWe
expectancy

Averageannuatgrowth, 1993-99
Gross
primary

GNP
per

enrollment

capRta
31
63
69

60

33
51
91
*47
42
77
84
69

74
32
108
113
103

1978

19S6

199t

199t

GDP(US$billions)
Grossdomesticinvestment/GOP
Exportsof goodsand services/GDP
Grossdomestcsavings/GDP
Grossnational saving/GDP1/

..

2.1
15.1
8,1
-14.1

-5.e

3.9
20.4
11.7
1.7
0.8

4.2
35.5
13.4
11.0
12.8

l/
Currervtaccountbalance/GOP
21
Interestpaymentspaidafterrescheduling/GDP
Total debtafterrescheduling/GDP
21
Total debt serviceafterrescheduling/expwts
Presentvalueof debt after
3/4/
reschedulinglexports

,.

..
..

31.4
1.2
200.7
21.6

-20.5
1,5
204,1
29.0

-31.7
1.5
102.2
28.0

..

..

538.0

202.0

Accessto safewater

.

Mozambique
Low-incomegroup

TRENDS
KEYECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERM

..
..
..
..

..

Economicratlos
Trade

Domestic
Investment
.aIg

Indebtedness
(avefageannualgrowth)
GDP
GNPpercapita
and services
Exportsof goods

20044

1T1748 19i9-9W

19S8

1999

5.7
3.6
14.2

12.0
9.3
6.6

9.0
6.4
8.3

7.5
5.1
26,0

1978

1988

1998

1999

..
..
..

42.9
25.4

,,

31.7

34.3
20.8
10.5
44.9

31.6
24.1
12.6
44.3

..
..

103.6
10.5
37.3

89.0
9.3
30.5

78.8
10.2
37.9

197848 1989-99

1998

1999

..
..
..

4.2
8.0
16.4
5.7

7.0
22.9
7.5
9.9

5.4
12.6
16.0
7.9

-3.6
-4.1
2.2
-5.7
-3.1

3.2
-5.1
11.5
2.2

11.8
32.2
29.4
24.2
11.8

8.7
9.3
83.9
55.3
8.6

-2.2
-5.0
-11.5

Mozambique
Low-incomegroup
1

STRUCTURE
of the ECONOMY
(X of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Importsofgoodsand services

(averageannualgrowth)
Agricutture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovernmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Grossnationalproduck

,

..

5.9

Growthratesof output and investmnt (%l
100
a
so
40
20

-20 -

94

9

ff

sa

97

-GDI

0

go

GDP

Growthratesof exportsand Imports(%)
60
40
20

so

97

go

-40

Exports

a-Imports

1

Note: 1999dataare preliminaryestimates. GNPpercapitaAtlas methodfor 1999is not offical.
1/ Excludingcapitalofiicialgrants.
2/ Indudingprivatedebt.
3/ Excludingprivatedebt.
4/ As percentofthreeyear movingaverageofexportsof goodsand non-factorservices.
average.If data are missing,the diamond
Thediamondsshowfour keyindicatorsin the country(in bold)comparedwith Is Income-group
will be incomplete.

99

Annex A2

- 32 -

Page 2 of 2

Mozambique
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE

Domesticprices

1978

1988

1998

1999

Inflation (%)

8

(%change)
Consumerprices
Implidt GDP deflator

58.5
48.3

..
..

Government finance
(% of GDP,includescurrent grants)
Current revenue
Currentbudget balance
Overallsurplus/deficit

0.6
3.8

2.0
5.2

s0
40
20

o_
..
..

15.9
2.3
-11.0

15.7
4.3
-6.5

17.6
5.4

1978

1988

1998

1999

..

103
27
44
0
658

248
41
73
14
868

260
35
75
20
1,346

..

De
s5
GDPdeflator

94

-

a9

ss
CPI

97

o

-6.2

TRADE
(USSmillions)
Total exports(fob)
Cashew
Prawn
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)

49
16
Total imports

(cio

Food

..

32

..

.

84211

Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Importpriceindex (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

Export and Import levels(US$millions)
1,500
1400
1200

1,000
8~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~00
Goo

39

400

307

.

99
82

95
88

97
89

..

120

108

108

0
93

94

9

3Exports

99

99

f

!]lmports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
1976

1988

1998

1999

(USSmillions)
Exportsof goods and services
Importsof goodsand services
Resourcebalance

.
..

,

188
730
-542

534
1,075
-540

559
1,579
-1,020

Net income
Net current transfers

..
.

-115
0

-256
0

-303
0

-20

Currentaccount balance

..

-657

-796

-1,322

.30

682
-25

858
-62

1,375
-53

-45

Financingitems (net)
Changesin net reserves
memo:
Reservesinduding gold (US$ millions)
Conversionrate (DEC,locacWUS$)

33.0

190
524.6

.

Currentaccountbalanceto GOPratio(5'.)
_
- -r
0so S7 s 99
-5 93 94 so
.10
-25

669
625
11,850.3 12,691.0

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
1978

1988

1998

1999 1/

(US$ millions)
Total debtoutstandingand disbursed1/
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

4,201
0
127

7,947
0
1,338

4,260
0
702

Total debt servicepaid 1/
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

56
0
5

165
0
12

156
0
16

..

377
121
-3
5

313
275
43
213

428
191
344
392

a_
Compositionof net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors2/
Privatecreditors
Foreigndirectinvestment
Portfolioequity

Compositionof total debt, 1998(US$millions)

B 1,338
F:1,975
/

c:204
0:556

0
0
..

*.

E:3,865

Worid Bank program
Commitments3/

0

75

186

176

A-IBRD

Disbursements 3/

0

44

134

218

Principalrepayments

0

4

3

6

B - IDA
C - IMF

Netflows

0

40

131

212

Interestpayments
Nettransfers

0
0

1
39

9
122

11
201

E-Bilateral
D - Othermultlateral

F - Private
G - Short-term

1

1

5/9/00
1/After reschedulingin Naplesterms. Reflectsdebt forgivenessunderoriginal HIPC Initiative.
2/ ExcludingIMF and induding debt relief on current payments.
3/ Includesthe US$ 150 milliongrant underthe EconomicManagementReformOperationprovidedas HIPC Initiativeinterimassistance.

- 33 Annex BI
Page 1 of 1

CAS Lending Scenarios
Summary of Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003,by Case

Lending
FY
2001

Low case

High case

MunicipalDevelopment(US$30m)

Roadsand Bridges(US$80m)
MunicipalDevelopment(USS30m)
Natural ResourceManagement(US$1Om)

Roadsand Bridges(US$S80m)
MunicipalDevelopment(US$30m)
Natural ResourceManagement(US$10m)
EconomicManagementand PrivateSectorEMPSO I- (US$1OOm)
EnergyReform(US$30m)

Rural Action(USS20m)

EconomicManagementand PrivateSectorEMPSOI- (USSlOOm)
EnergyReform(US$20m)
RuralAction(US$40m)

Rural Action(USS70m)

SkillsDevelopment(USS80m)
Health (US$40m)
PublicSectorand LegalReform(US$55m)

EMPSO II (US$100m)
EnergyDevelopment(US$60m)

2002
Roadsand Bridges(USSSOm)

2003

Base case

Health(US$40m)

Public Sectorand LegalReform(US$55m)
Skills Development(US$SOm)
Health (USS40m)

Nonlending
Activity
2000 to
2003

Support
to PRSP
EnhancedHIPC
PublicSectorReformStudy
EnvironmentCriticalPressures
PublicExpenditureReview
Legaland JudicialStudy
Povertyand GrowthLinkages
Constraintsto PrivateSector
HIV/A.DS
DisasterMitigationand Management
SupportGlobalDistanceLearning
Network(WBI)
SupportSchoonetWorldLinks for
Development(WBI)

Low case

Base and high case

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
.
yes

yes
yes

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

MaputoCorridorAdvice

.

yes

PrivateSectorCompetitivenessAdvice

yes

yes

yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

MunicipalDevelopmentProgramsand
AFRICITIESpilots(WBI)
FinancialSectorAdvice
RegionalEnergyand MegaProjects
Advice

RegionalTrade
EnviromentalFrameworkAssessment
PrivateSector ConferenceTA
CountryAssistanceStrategy

- 34 Annex B2

Page 1 of 1

Selected Indicatorsof Bank PortfolioPerformanceand Management
Indicator
Porfolio Assessment
Numnberof Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b

1997

1998

1999

2000

18.0
4.8

15.0
5.1

13.0
4.5

15.0
4.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Number 4 c
Percent of Problem Projectsby Amount 4c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amountad
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Total SupervisionResources ('000 US$)
Average Supervision('000 US$/project)

16.7
12.1
38.9
32.1

0.0
0.0
6.7
2.7

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

19.4

18.5

22.9

15.6

yes
2504.1
139.1

yes
2049.6
136.6

yes
1509.6
116.1

yes
1680.0
112.0

Since FY 80
17
974.3
17.6
8.8

Last Five FYs
13
734.8
23.1
11.7

MemorandumItem
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OEDby Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: investment projects only.

- 35 -

AnnexB3
Page1 of 2

Bank Group ProgramSummary

Proposed1BRD/IDABase-Case Lending Programa
Fiscalyear

Project

Strategic
Rateb b
(HIM/L)

Implementation
mRisks nfHIILn
Risks (H,M/L) b

2001

Roads and Bridges APL
MunicipalDevelopment
Natural Resource Management
Total

80
30
10
120

H
H
M

M
M
M

2002

Energy Reform
Economic Managementand Private
Sector Operation
Rural Action
Total

20

H

M

100
40
160

H
H

M
H

SkillsDevelopment
Health SWAP
Public Sector and Legal Reform
Total

80
40
55
175

H
H
H

M
M
H

TOTAL

455

2003

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. (H) indicates high, (M), moderate; and (L), low.

- 36 -

Annex B3

Page 2 of 2
EFC and MIGA Program,FY 1997-2000
1997

1998

1999

2000

123.7

0.5

11.1

3.1

0.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
97.0

55.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
45.0

0.0
92.0
6.0
2.0
0.0

81.0
19.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

47.0
0.0
53.0
0.0

45.0
55.0
0.0
0.0

100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

19.0
81.0
0.0
0.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

40.0
1.0
40.0
1.0

2.8
2.0
42.8
3.0

0.0
0.0
42.8
3.0

Agribusiness,Manufacturing and Tourism
Manufacturing
Tourism

0.0
0.0

100.0
0.0

0.0
100.0

0.0
0.0

Total

0.0

100.0

100.0

0.0

rFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)
Finantial services
Food and agro-business
Hotels and tourism
Infrastructure
Manufacturing

Total
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees approved (US$m)
Number of guarantees approved
MIGA outstanding guarantees (US$m)
Number of guarantees outstanding

Sector (%)

- 37 Annex B4
Page 1 of I

Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

CompletionFY

Cost(US$000)

Audience'

Objective'

Recent completions

PFP

FY99

70

Government,Bank,Donors,Public

Policyonentation

HIPCCompletionPoint

FY99

90

Governimenit,
Bank, Donors,Public

PolicyorienLtation

EnhancedHIPCDecisionPoint

FY00

90

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyonentation

InterimPRSPSupport

FY00

70

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation

FloodEmergency/Damage
Assessment

FY00

75

Bank, Donors,Public
Government,

Policyorientation;problemsolving

GrovthProspects

FY00

55

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

CountryAssistanceStrategy

FY00

230

GovernmentBank,Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving,
public debate
Policyorientation;publicdebate

FinancialSectorStudy

FY00

157

Government,Bank

Policyorientation

Rural DevelopmentStrategy

FYO0

115

Government,Bank,Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate

Annual

340

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

Underway

Planned

Formal
PRSP Support
EnhancedHIPCCompletionPoint

FY01

85

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyonentation, problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;publicdebate

Public SectorReformStudy

FY01

155

Govermment,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;publicdebate

PublicExpenditureReview

FY01

IS0

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

EnvironmentCriticalPressures

FY02

200

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

Constraintsto Pnvate SectorDevelopment

FY02

170

Government,Bank,Donors,Public

LegalandJudicial Study

FY02

150

Government,Bank,Donors

Policyorientation;problemsolvmg;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate

Povertyand GrowthLinkages

FY03

150

Government,Bank,Donors

Policyorientation;problemsolving

CountryAssistanceStrategy

FY03

230

Government,Bank,Donors,Public

Policyorientation;publicdebate

onfonnal
(PolicyadviceandTA)
PrivateSectorCompetitiveness

Ongoing

150

Govemment,Bank,Donors,Public

PrivateSectorConferenceTA

Ongoing

30

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

FinancialSectorAdvice

Ongoing

120

Government,Bank

Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policy orientation;problemsolving

RegionalEnergyandMegaProjectsAdvice

Ongoing

150

Govermment,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

MaputoCorridor

Ongoing

80

Government,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

RegionalTrade

Ongoing

85

Govemrnent,Bank,Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

FY01

90

Goveniment,Bank,Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

Ongoing

50

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

Ongoing

IDF

Govenianent,
Bank,Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate

Environmental
FrameworkAssessment
DisasterMitigationand Management
QOitr

HI\VIAIDS

a. Govrmunent, donor, Batik, public dissernination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

- 38 -

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Latest single year

Same region
Sub-

POPULATION
Total population,mid-year(millions)
Groth rate(% annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(% of population)
Totalfertilityrate(birthsperwoman)

1970-75

198W60

1992-48

Saharan
Africa

10.5
2.2
8.6
6.5

13.5
2.3
19.4
6.5

16.9
2.1
38.0
5.3

612.4
2.2
33.0
5.4

2,035.6
1.7
31.0
3.1

..

69.4
62.0
71.3

POVERTY
(%ofpopulation)
Nationalheadcountindex
Urban headcountindex
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
GOP per capita basedon PPP
Telephonemainlines(per 1,000 people)

Lowincome

250

230
877
4

480
1,566
16

520

32

SOCIALINDICATORS
Illiteracyrate
(% of population 15 years of age and above)
71

60

42

Male
Female
Gross primaryenrollment rate
Total
Male
Female

56
86

43
75

34
50

62

71
79
60

77
84
69

108
113
103

RepetHtonrate
Accessto sate water
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunizationrate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT

33

25

9
82
2

24
44
12

47
74
32

74

39
29

70
61

58
53

80
82

Total

Childmalnutrtion (% under 5 years)
..

6

..

41

42

44

47

41
44

43
46

..

168
281

133
223

498
382

468
361
-

Wasted
Stunting

Life expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

Mortality
Infant(per thousandlive births)
Under5 (per thousandlive births)
Adult(168.9)
Male(per 1,000 population)
Female(per 1,000 population)
Maternal(per 100,000 live births)
HIV4-ADS
Sero-prevalenceof adult HIV infection(per 100K)

51

63

49
52

62
64

134
201

91
147

69
92

400
354
1,100

432
383

235
208

14.5

7

..

al Refersto 1999.
1999 World DevelopmentIndicatorsCD-ROM,World Bank;African DevelopmentIndicators2000, World Bank;and, AfricaBriefings, World Bank.

- 39 AnnexB6
Page l of 3
Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

30

38

38

35

34

32

32

30

29

28

Industry

23

19

19

19

21

24

25

26

26

27

Services

47

43

43

46

45

44

43

44

45

45

114

102

102

98

98

89

90

91

88

87

20

23

19

19

20

35

35

22

19

20

14

12

10

11

9

11

15

13

10

I1

6

11

9

8

11

25

20

9

9

9

Total Consumption
Gross domeatic fixed investment
Govemmentinvestment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
-xports(GNFS?

14

15

15

13

12

13

14

18

24

23

Imports (GNFS)

48

40

36

30

30

38

38

31

32

30

Grossdomesticsavingp

-14

-2

-2

2

2

11

10

9

12

13

-7

-2

-3

2

1

13

11

7

9

11

2267

2392

2842

3438

3893

4169

4317

4543

5024

5514

140

140

160

180

210

230

250

250

260

280

Grossdomcsticproduoctatmarket pnces

7.5

4.3

7.1

11.3

12.0

9.0

5.4

7.9

8.2

7.4

Gross Domeatic Income

2.3

6.7

6.3

11.9

12.9

14.1

4.3

7.5

7.3

8.0

Grossnationalsavings'

Memorandum items
Grossdomesticproduct
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod)

Real armual grovwihrates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)

Real annual per capita growth rates (O/6,oalculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices

5.1

2.0

4.7

8.9

9.5

6.8

3.5

5.5

5.8

5.0

Total consumption

-10.5

-8.0

4.3

6.0

10.8

6.5

0.8

3.3

1.3

3.8

Private consumption

-10.9

-4.5

4.7

5.9

9.4

6.5

-0.8

4.7

2.8

3.6

(Continued)

- 40 -

Annex B6
Page 2 of 3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports(GNFS)b
MerchandiseFOB
Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise CIF

355

407

479

509

534

559

585

832

1202

164

174

226

230

248

260

285

511

840

885

1018

899

955

938

1075

1579

1653

1396

1590

1663

1282

881

727

783

760

868

1346

1317

1092

1226

1299

Resource balance

-662

-492

-475

-429

-540

-1020

-1068

-564

-388

381

Unrequiredofficialtransfers(grants)

565

339

225

313

313

428

508

335

350

350

Current account balance after grants

-300

-338

-422

-298

-483

-895

-845

-500

-387

-355

Net private foreign direct investment

35

45

73

64

213

392

104

80

101

122

Long-term loans (net)

-24

19

175

116

57

242

190

-86

-175

-184

Official

145

-29

100

49

17

-113

-95

-120

-132

-119

Private

-169

48

76

67

40

355

285

34

-43

-65

341

333

333

232

275

313

462

456

410

398

-52

-60

-159

-115

-62

-53

89

50

50

19

-29.2

-20.6

-16.7

-12.5

-13.9

-24.5

-24.7

-12.4

-7.7

-6.9

Merchandise exports (FOB)

23.4

-2.9

31.0

1.7

13.0

2.4

7.2

95.2

73.1

1.3

Merchandise imports (CIF)

3.0

-25.3

8.2

5.7

19.3

52.0

-4.3

-17.5

10.7

4.5

Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions and dcbt
relief)
Change in reserVeSd

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)

(Continued)

-

41

-

AnnexB6
Page 3 of3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
CurrnAtrevenues

17.8

15.0

13.8

16.0

15.7

17.6

17.6

16.0

15.3

15.3

Currentexpenditures

14.7

10.3

9.6

10.8

11.4

12.3

13.5

12.1

10.8

10.9

3.0

4.7

4.2

5.3

4.3

5.4

4.1

3.9

4.5

4.4

Capital expenditure

15.8

14.0

11.5

13.2

10.6

11.7

15.6

12.7

10.3

10.4

Foreign financing

13.7

10.0

8.5

10.8

8.8

6.5

9.9

7.4

7.3

7.2

M2'GDP

23.7

23.1

18.6

18.7

18.9

21.6

21.4

21.4

21.4

21.4

Growth ofM2(%/.)

57.6

54.7

21.1

24.4

17.6

30.9

15.4

13.3

13.6

13.6

Cunentaceountsurplus(+)ordeficit(.)

Monetary indicators

Price indices( 1995 =100)
Merchandiseexportpriceindex

87.6

95.9

95.0

95.0

90.7

92.8

95.0

87.1

82.7

86.1

Merohandiseimportpriceindex

121.6

134.3

133.7

122.8

117.7

120.0

122.6

123.2

125.1

126.8

Merchandisetermsoftradeindex

72.1

71.4

71.1

77.3

77.1

77.3

77.5

70.7

66.1

67.9

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

52.2

49.9

57.3

62.4

64.3

64.3

66.8

68.9

68.4

67.8

Conaumerpriceindex

63.1

54.4

44.6

6.4

0.6

2.0

9.5

5.0

5.0

5.0

59.4

52.0

40.9

11.1

3.8

5.2

10.2

5.7

5.0

5.0

(%/ochange)

GDPdeflator(%change)

a. GDP at factor cost.
b. "GNFS" denotes 'goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f "LCU' denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$1LCU denotes appreciation.

- 42 Annex B7
Page 1 of 1
Mozambique - Key Exposure Indicators

Debtoutstandingand
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
ofwhich: Public

8689

9129

7731

7730

7947

4260

4106

4179

4174

4149

6968

7360

5885

5818

5972

1928

1480

1501

1527

1550

Netdisbursements(US$m)a

156

4

162

138

70

254

334

-79

-126

-158

Totaldebtservicepaid(TDS)(US$mn)a
ofwhich: Public

117
117

128
12S

139
135

106
90

155
104

156
86

176
50

179
48

222
51

2541.2
54

2447.1

2243.8

1612.9

1519.6

1487.1

761.9

701.8

502.5

347.2

1962.2
383.3
307.4

1808.9
381.6
307.6

1227.8
272.1
207.1

1143.6
224.8
169.2

1117.5
204.1
153.4

344.9
102.2
46.2

252.9
95.1
34.3

180.5
92.0
33.0

127.0 120.89
83.1 75.241
30.4 28.109

TDS/XGSb

33.0

31.3

28.9

20.7

29.0

28.0

30.1

21.5

18.4

19.828

ofwhich: Public TDS/XGSb

33.0

31.3

28.2

17.6

20.0

15.3

9.1

5.8

4.2

4.2

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IDATDO(US$m)
IDATDS((US$m)
IDATDS/PublicDS

714.0
4.2
3.6

890.0
6.1
4.8

1015.0
7.3
5.4

1162.0
9.4
10.5

1338.0
12.0
11.5

702.0
16.5
12.7

865.0
9.5
19.0

990.0
10.6
22.0

1164.0
11.5
22.6

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

5.1
0.0

3.3
5.0

7.4
32.8

19.4
28.5

Debt and debt service indicators'
(%/0)
TDO/XGSb
ofwhich: Public TDO/XGS b
TDO/GDP
ofwhich: Public TDO/GDP

IFC (US$m) '
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity

a. After rescheduling and HIPC Iniciative relief including debt forgiveness. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt,
non-guaranteed use of IMF credits and short term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and non-factor services.
c. Refers to disbursements from previous July I to June 30 of year where data is shown. Data for 1997 refers to disbursements from
1992 to June 30, 1997. Data for 2000 refers to disbursemernts from Julyl, 1999 to March 30, 2000.

323.58

1285.1
14.0
25.9

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Closed
Projects

17

Last PSR
SupervisionRating

Board
Date
Year
1992
1993
1993
1993
1994
1994
1994
1996
1998
1999
1999
1999
2000
2000
2000

Active Projects
P001781 Agr. Serv.Rehab.
P001797 CapacityBuilding
P001810 Legal& Public SectorCapacityBuilding
P001796 RuralRehabilitation
P001804 2nd.Road and Costal
P001811 FinancialSectorCapacity
P001780 GasEngeneering
P001792 HealthSectorRecovery
P039015 NationalWater I
P001799 AgriculturalSectorExpenditureProgram
P001786 EducationSectorStrategicProgram(ESSP)
P052240 NationalWaterII
P049874 EnterpriseDevelopment
P042039 Railwayand PortRestructuring
P070432 FloodEmergencyRecoveryProject(FERP)
Total

Obiectives
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

OriuinalAmount in US$ Millions
on

=
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

IBRD
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

IDA CanceL Undisb.
6.8
12.5
35.0
8.2
0.0
48.6
0.5
3.0
15.5
1.7
0.0
20.0
60.4
0.0
188.0
2.2
0.0
9.0
8.6
0.0
30.0
61.1
0.0
98.7
31.5
0.0
36.0
28.7
0.0
30.0
67.5
0.0
71.0
74.5
0.0
75.0
25.8
0.0
26.0
99.2
0.0
100.0
29.8
0.0
30.0
812.8

15.5

506.4

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements (
Orig. Frm Rev'd
3.0
18.3
0.0
9.7
0.8
3.5
0.8
1.5
0.0
55.5
0.0
2.0
0.0
8.6
0.0
58.9
0.0
6.1
0.0
6.8
0.0
7.1
0.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
179.3

4.6

- 44 Annex B8
Page 2 of 2
Mozambique
Statementof IFC's
Held andDisbursedPortfolio
As of 3/31/00
(In US DollarsMillions)
Held
FY Appn Company
1995 AEF Bonar
1996 AEF Cahora Bassa
1997 Agriino

Disbursed

Partic
Partic
Loan
Equity Quasi
Loan
Equity Quasi
0.26
0
0
0
0.26
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.18
0
0
0
0.18
0
1.86
0
0
0
1.86
0
0
0

7.50

0

0

0

7.50

0

D

0

0.30

0

0

0

0.30

0

0

2.35

0

0

0

2.35

0

0

3

1997 MOZAL

55.00

0

65.00

0

27.0

0

58.50

0

1999 Maragra Sugar

10.30

0

0

0

0

0

0

03

1992 PolanaHotel

1.40

0

0

0

1.40

0

0

0)

1997 SEFCPZ

1.00

0

0

0

1.00

0

0

0

1997 SEFCTOX

0.73

0

0

0

0.73

0

0

0

2000 SEF Cabo Caju

0.58

0

0

0

0.30

0

0

0

1998 SEF Joao Jamal

0.24

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1999 SEFROBEIRA

0.21

0

0

0

0.21

0

0

0

74.1

7.8

65.0

0.0

35.3

7.8

58.5

0.(

1996/00 BIM

1998 BIM-INV
1996 Caju Mocita

Total Portfolio:

ApprovalsPendingCommitment
Loan
1997 AEF Afristem

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.6

0

0

0

10.0

0

0

0

1999 SEF CTN

0.7

0

0

0

1999 SEFExtramac

0.4

0

0

0

11.7

0

0

0

1996 BIM

Total Pending Commitment:

Annex B9
Page I of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program

Development
Objectives

L. INCREASING
S1VXXMEJf,ldJg * Growthaveragedmore
than 10% in past 3 years;
HEPRlKATE
inflationdownfrom 48% in
SECTOR
ENVIRONMENTr 1996to low singledigits.
*
About 1,200
THE
AMD
companiesrestructuredor
FINANCAL
privatized.
SFCrt?R
* Soundprospectsfor
growth - esp. in agriculture
manufacturing,tourism,
services,energy, mining.
* Sharp increasesin FDI
and more interestexpressed
by investors.
* Fiscal sustainabilityan
issue: economyand budget
heavily aid dependent;
fiscal revenueslow; and
debt level remainshigh.
* Economyhas high
operatingcost dueto poor
infrastructure, bureaucratic

Other Donors

ECONOMICOPPORTUNITY

Povertyheadcountindex
reducedto 60% by 2004, from
70% in 1996/97.
Annual real GDPgrowthof
*
7% to 10% and inflationof 5% to
7%, for the period2001-2003.
Fiscal deficitbeforegrants
*

Reducefiscal imbalances
by increasingrevenues: finish
customsreform,strengthen
VAT,limittax and customs
exemptions,and improve
internaltax administration.
* Aim governmentprograms

*

(esp. in infrastructure)at
improvinggrowth andpoverty
reductionthroughstimulating
prvate sector developmentand
.
* Improveinstitutionaland
regulatoryenvironmentfor
privatesector development.
Developand implement
*
regulatoryframeworkenabling
effectivedemonopolizationin
key sectors(e.g. transport,
energy).
telecommunications,
* Continueliberalizationof

withinannuallimitsestablished
under PRGF arrangementwith the
IMF.
*
Reductionin extemaldebt in
NPVterms to the equivalentof
150percentof exports(at end1998data) by achieving
completionpoint underEnhanced
HIPC framework.

*

Bank Group Instruments

SelectedBank(underlined)
and Government
Performance Indicators

Government
Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

Matrix (FYOI-03)

IDA
Lendine:
PrivateSector O (FY02)
*
*

NaturalResource (FY01)
EnergyReform(FY02)

Public Sectorand Legal
project(FY03)
Reformn
Portfolio:
* EconomicManagement
ReformOperation(EMRO)
*

Private Enterprise
DevelopmentProject (PODE)
FinancialSectorCap. Bldg.
*
* Flood EmergencyRecovery
Program(FERP)
Non-Lendine:
* PER and IncidenceAnalysis
* Legal and JudicialStudy
*

trade regime to stimulate private

sector development.
bottlenecks,inadequate
institutionalandregulatory
frameworks.
* Demonopolizationof
key sectorsneededto lower

*

*

Povertyand GrowthLinks
PRSP Support
EnhancedHIPC Initiative
Financial Sector(informal)

costs and improve services.

*

Private Sector

*
*

CompetitivenessAdvice
* Constraintsto PSD Study
* RegionalTrade (informal)
* RegionalEnergyand Mega
Projectsadvice

Performanceindicatorsto be reviewedand revisedas necessaryfollowingformulationof full PRSP, scheduledfor completionin March 2001.

BilateralDonors:Austria;
Denmark;France (AFD);Italy;
Netherlands;Norway; Sweden;
UK; USAID
MultilateralDonors:ADB; EC;
UNIDO

Annex B9
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis
0

Government
Str
ctions

0

0 :00

00

Privatefinancialsector
includesI11banks, a leasing
AND772W
company,and 7 other
Fftelb'C=
JAL 0
financialinstitutions.
* Regulationsadopted
on licensing,capital
(CoNr.
- '0
adequacy,and exposure
limits.

Matrix (FY01-03)

:nk
SelectedB

(underlined):

a

Maintainingthe stabilityof
the financialsystem;improving
fnancial oversightthrough
enhancedandproactive
supervision.
* Assessmentof causesof
high intermediationcosts witha
viewto reducingcosts.
*

Other Donors

r

andGovernment

;0: f t fX F~~~~erfor:mance
lnLdica:torsX:;0;;0

00171K
PI Vh
02
SKCIPR00 i0t ;j03 *

Page 2 of 12

$

t0

:f

00:f

;0f0

0t

IFC
Expansionof IFC Project
Finance
*
Financingandadvisory
servicesfor megaprojects
* SME financing/advisory
services
*

*

FIAS advisoryserviceson

administrativered tape
* Equityinvestments,term
resourcesand technicalassistance
to banks
* Investmentsin new nonbank financialintermediaries,
includingmicrofinance,leasing,
insurance,and housingfinance
* Advisoryassistanceon
regulatoryand financialsector
issues
MIGA
*
Guaranteesfor foreign
investors
* Investmentmarketing
_______________ __ _________
_________
____ _____________
_________
_____assistance___ _________
_________
PInce_to_CPI
_to________assiC
* Broadeningthe financial
* High intermediation
costs, including
systemto increaserange of
inefficienciesin some
productsandservicesavailable
banksand limited
and lowerthe cost of capital
competitionfor bankable
throughcompetition.
credits,contributingto high
lendingrates.
* Accessto cTedit
limitedoutsidemain cities,
esp. in rural areas.
* Poor accounting
standards,contract
enforcement.

assistanc
toCPI

MIGA:
Stratev: MIGAseeks to strengthenMozambique'sprivatesector
by supportingprojectswith high developmentimpactand those
investmentintermediarieschargedwith attractingforeigndirect
investment.

IFC:
Strate: IFC is seekingopportunitiesacrossaolsectors,with emphasisplacedonfinancing and advisoryassistancein
infrastructure;term resources,equityand institutionbuildingin thefinancial sector;supportto well-conceivedlarge
scale resourcedevelopmentprojects;andfinancing,management,and technicalassistanceto SMEs. SME supporthas
beenconcentratedin the agribusinessand tourismsectors.

Portfolio:MIGA's portfolioconsists of three guaranteecontracts
in the manufacturingand tourismsectors with a US$42.8m Gross
Exposure,of which MIGA's Net Exposureis US$30.8m. MIGAis
also workingon a possible US$75 m powerproject.

Portfolio:
.- C 's Mozambiqueportfolio is dominatedby MozalAluminum;with othermainstreaminvestmentsin the
investments
PolanaHotel,Bancode Investimentosde Mozambique,MaragraSugar, CajuMocita,Agrimo;and SAME
in BonarSociedadPesqueriaLtd., CahoraBassaFisheries,CompanhiaAgro-Pecuariade MozambiqueLda.,
Companhiade Pescasda ZambeziaLda., Complexide Xai-Xai,Joao Jamal, Cabo Caiju,and ROBEIRA.

InvestmentMarketinaServices:MIGIMwill continueitssupport of
the InvestmentPromotionCenterand the WorldBank-funded
technicalprogram overthe next threeyears.

Pipeline: Projectsin developmentincludeprivatizationof the nationaltelecommunicationscompany,industralpark
developmentin Maputo,other investmentsarisingfrom the developmentof the three transportcorridors,termfinance
to the bankingsector,equity in leasingand microfinanceinstitutions,and a range of SME investmentsin agribusiness,
tourism,servicesand manufacturing.

Annex B9

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE

Page 3 of 12

Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Government
Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

Development
Objectives

Selected Bank(underlined)
and Government

Bank Group Instrumnents

Other Donors

.PerforianceTndicators
IDA
Lend iru:

Roads
DEpnVop
Network poor but
IWFRASTRVCWRJS*
improving; many densely
populated and productive
areas not connected,
* Road management and
maintenance very weak and
underfunded.
*
National road
construction industry weak.

*

tourism; improve North-South
transport routes.
*
Improve sustainability of

Meet annual targets on
.
kilometers under routine and
periodic maintenance (tarets to_
be determined).
*
Establish Road Board that is
independent of ANE.
*
Financing and allocation

road rehabilitation.
*
Improve road maintenance.

functions (under road fund)
separated from manacement of

*

a
Increase private sector
involvement in road
maintenance.

contracts and supervision of
construction and maintenance.
Reduce proportion of
.

Improve institutional
*
framework for sustained,
efficient, and transparent road
management

impassable roads to 6% in 2003
(from 10% in 1998).
*
Reduce proportion of roads
in poor conditions to 26% in 2003
(from 32% in 1998).

*
Expand links to agricultural
areas; secure access to ports;
upgrade intemational corridors;
improve coastal network for

ROCS 11
Non-Lendinv:
.
Maputo Corridor (informal
policy advice)
.

*
Regulatory framework
inadequate.
* Main ports and rail
lines under concessioning
agreements.

PRSP Support

IDA
Portfolio
Implement fourfold
strategy. i) involve private
sector, through concessioning,
leasing equipment, joint ventures
and BOT arrangements; ii)
restructure CFM; iii) strengthen
Ministry of Transport and
Communications; iv) provide
appropriate regulatory
framework
*

.
Traffic from the neiahboring
countries to exceed 10 million
tons (oort) and 7 million tons
(railways) by year 2002.
*
Concessions for all three
main port and rail systems fully
operationalized hy end 2001.

Multilateral Donors: ADB;
BADEA; EC; IFAD; Islamic
Development Bank; OPED;

-

Railways and Ports
*
Rail and port network
largest in SSA after South
Africa; significant potential
for foreign exchange and
employment.
*
Railway performance
1/3 of pre-war level;
infrastructure damaged.
.
*
CFM over-staffed and
institutionally weak.

Roads and Bridges (FY01)
Portfolio:

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;
Ireland;
Japan;
FranceKuwait
(CFD);Fund;
Norway;
Kf1W;
Portugal; South Africa; Sweden;
Switzerland; UK; USAID

Railway and Port
Restructuring
*

IFC
Financing for private
concessionaires
Advisory assistance on
Avsr
sltneo
.
privatization/concessioning
*
Workshop on intemnational
*

practice in private provision of
infrastructure

Bilateral Donors: France (MCF);
Italy; Spain; USAID

Annex B9

DevelopmentDiagnosis

:

Olijeetives

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FYO1-03)
Gov: rnment
SeleeBank(underlined)
Bank GroupInstruments
andGcovernment
Strateyetions
Per(ormanceIndicators*
IDA
Lendine

Energy

DEVLOIN

hucruliEnergy
(CONI.)

X

*

Energy Reform (FY02)
Portfolio

*
Establish autonomous
licensing and regulatory systems
for energy investments,
Sc.
megaprojects.
*
Implement national

*
Design and implement
framework for expansion of
electricity access. includin
regionally differentiated tariffs
and separation of generation.
transmission, and distribution
tarffs
*
Increase revenues from

*

Gas Engineering
Non-Lendine

investment plan for communitybased biofuel supply

electricity exports (from US$ 36.2
million in 1998).

IFC
*
Financing for private
providers
prvds
*
Advisory assistance on
privatization

*
Power grids limited to
cities,

*
Undertake power sector
structural and pricing reforms.

*
Export potential large
(coal and hydroelectricity).
*
Regulatory reformn,
and policy development
slow due to weak capacity.
0* Low household access
to energy.
:Xt000 :t: Xq0:

~~~~~~management.

Invest in public and private
sector capacity-building efforts.

*

Ilcrrt

*
Increase access to electricity
over the period 2000-2003 (from
5% of households in 1999)
(Quantitative target to be
established over PRSP process)

IDA
Portfolio

management.

.
Implement National Water
Policy, including: i) increased
beneficiary participation; ii)
decentralized autonomous water
supply and sanitation services;
iii) integrated water resources
management; iv) capacity
building; vi) increased role for
the private sector.

*
Urban: Increase access to
safe water in maior cities to 50%
by 2004 (from 44% in 1998):

*
*

National Water I
National Water II

*
Rural: Increase rural access
Non-Lendine
to safe water to 40% by 2004MutlerlDns:ABEC
(from 12% in 1998).
4
PRSP Support
.
Water Resources
Management:: National Water
Policy and Water Law updated.
National Water Resources
Management Strategy formulated
with strong stakeholder
participation, by 2004.

Other Donors

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;
France(AFD); Germany;NDF;
Norway; Sweden; USAID
Multilateral Donor: ADB

PRSP Support

Water
*
Urban water supply
poor, of low quality and
reliability; sanitation and
drainage cause additional
problems.
*
Low rural access to
safe water, and poor
maintenance.
:: Need for regional
water reedsfourcreg

Page 4 of 12

IFC
.
Financing for private
operators
*
Advisory assistance on
privatization

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;
Austria; Canada; Denmark;
Finland; France (AFD); Germany;
Portugal; Sweden; Switzerland;
USAID

UJNDP;UNICEF

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Development
Objectives

80% of Mozambicans
live in rural areas, of whom
70% are poor.

PROO 10NG
RuR
DtYE1P0AEFNT

*

AND

*

AG&1cuLITuRE

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FYOI-03)
Bank Group Instruments
SelectedBank (underlined)
Government
and Goveraiment
Strategy/Actions
Performance Indicators

Agriculture dominates

of GDP, but large potential;

only 15% of arable land
cultivated.

Rural development central
to poverty reduction strategy;
elements include (i) investment
*

in infrastructure;

in real value ofeor

(ii) service

extension;

(iii) establishing

good

institutional and

regulatory

crops

ofaleonm;enyxportiey,icl Rural Action (FY02)

arcutra

Ipolicy,

IDA
Lending*
Roads and Bridges (FY)

Annual percentage increase
in agricultural GDP.
Annual percentage increase
*
*

frameworks.

*

Annual percentage increase

in smallholders' crop and

*

EnergyReform(FY02)
Portfolio:

livestock sales.

Cereals and cassava
*
production exceeds national
needs, but there are interregional differences.

*

Improve effectiveness of
public service delivery and
regulatory functions through
implementing PROAGRI.

Rural Rehabilitation Project
*
Agricultural Services
*
Rehabilitation Project
PROAGRI
*

Half of households
*
market output; of these,
only 30% of output sold.

Implement and enforce new
*
land law.
Promote decentralization to
*

*

Constraints to growth
*
include: low capitalization;
limited access to purchased
inputs; lack of land market;
poor rural infrastructure;
limited access to credit.

improve service delivery and
empower rural poor.

*

ROCS II
National Water Dev. I

*

Non-Lendin:
Rural Development Strategy
Poverty and Growth Links
Public Expenditure Review

*

PRSP Support

*
*

IFC
Investments in large- and
*
small-scale agribusiness

Page 5 of 12

Other Donors

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;
Austria; Denmark; Finland;
Ireland
France (AFD); German
Italy; Netherlands

orway;

Portugal; Sweden; Switzerland;
UK; USAID
Multilateral

Donors: ADB;EC;

FAO; IBIS; IFAD; SADC; UNDP

Annex B9
Page 6 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

Government
Strategy/Actions

Selected Bank (underlined)
and Government
Performance Indicators

Bank Group Instruments

ENSuRiM;SOUND

*

EHW'RN0`41"

largely unexploited.
*
Natural resources
contribute 45% of GDP and
70% of exports; important
to rural populations.
0* Rapid growth could

for environmental management
and elaborate complementary
regulations, including for waste
management, environmental
management, marine pollution.
*
Establish environmental

environment law (including on
waste management,
environmental standards, marine
pollution, CFC emission, and
protected areas).

threaten environment if not
appropriately managed.

assessment review system across
ministries and build capacity to

*
Environmental assessment
review system established across

ministriesand relatedcapacity-

*

neighboring countries high,

maDevel

building plan under

*

esp. in waterresources.

managementprogram,including implementation.
with a view to disaster

*

*

Rich endowment

Interdependencewith

Weak institutional

capacityto managenatural
resourcesthroughpolicy
formulation,regulation,and
enforcement.

*

Complete legal framework

implementandenforce.

water resource

*

Regulations adopted by end-

IDA and GEF
Lendinm:

2000 that apply to the

Rural Action (FY02)

Other Donors

Bilateral Donors; Denmark;
Finland; Netherlands; Norway;
USAID

.

Municipal Dev. (FY01)
Natural Resource
Management (FY01)
*

Multilateral Donors: EC; UNDP

Portfolio:

TransfrontierConservation

Coastaland Marine
Boiest
*

National Water I and II

prevention and mitigation.

p

PROAGRI

Non-Lendine:
* EnvironmentCritical
Pressures
* Environmental Framework
Assessment

*

PRSP Support

IFC
*

Extensionof WorldBank

standards to private sector and
financial intermediaries

Un

Annex B9

Page 7 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program

PROMGKC

IPJNOvATfo S
COhiVERS
ANO
EMPIX"Wr

Government
Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

Development
Objectives

*

Local firms have

.

Created new Ministry of

limitedabilityto compete, HigherEducation,Science,and
Technology
esp. inteationally.
esp.canternationally.ndandtlevel
Develop and implement
*
are
omFew local firmns
competingin marketsother strategiesfor technicaland
vocationaltraining as well as
than most basicproducts.
highereducation
Supportentrepreneurswith
*
* Skills shortageis
constrainingemploymentof matchinggrant scheme.
Mozambicans.
* Promoteinterbusiness
Educationsystemand linkages.
curriculanot meetinglabor * Buildcapacityamonglocal
entrepreneursin sectoral
programs:e.g. road construction.

Matrix (FYOI-03)

Bank Group Instruments

SelectedBank (underlined)
and Government
Performance Indicators
*

IDA

Develop and implement

o
education(specificindicatorsto
besblhdunrPSP.
Increaseemploymentand
*
job creation(specificindicatorsto
be establishedunder PRSP).

*
*

.
*
*

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;

SkillsDevelopment(FY03)

Austria; Canada;Finland;France
(MCF); Germany;Italy; Japan;
Netherlands;Spain; Sweden;

Municipal Dev. (FY01)

Switzerla

Lendin:

strategiesfor vocational,
technical,and higher level

Other Donors

M icParfliDvoFY1:wtzrad
Portfolo:
MultilateralDonors:EC
PODE
ESSP
ROCS11

HumanResourcesCap.
Bldg.
Non-Lendinz:
Constraintsto PSD Study
*
PRSP Support
*
*

* PrivateSector
Competitiveness(informalpolicy
advice)
* SupportGlobal Distance
LearningNetwork(WBI)
* SupportSchoolnetWorld
Links for Development(WBI)
IFC
* Advisoryand technical
assistancefor SMEsvia APDF
and AMSCO
* Expansionof SME
investmentswith local sponsors
* Investmentsin private
education

COUNTRY
Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

Annex B9
Page 8 of 12

ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Government
StrategylActions

Selected Bank (underlined)
and Government
Performance Indicators

Bank Group Instruments

Other Donors

II. IMPROVINGGOVERNANCE
AND EMPOWERMWENT
Rf~IvRirM~vw.7fE:
.
Publicsectorsmall
PUsRUC
SWTOR andcentralized,with poorly
paid andpoorly qualified
personnel.
* Careerandpay system

Developand implement
public sectorreform strategy.
*

.

* Completeimplementation
of muncpal decentraizatlion
reformed, administrative
processin new municipalities
simplificationbegun;public andextendstatusto others.
servicetrainingstrategy
*
Devolvenew powersand
launched.
responsibilitiesto municipalities,
* SWAPsleadingto
esp. in health and education.
privatizationof service
* Devolveresponsibilityfor
deliveryand devolutionof
developingandimplementing
decision-makingto
districtlevel developmentto
autonomousauthorities.
districts.
* Decentralizationunder
.
way, with 33 newelected
*
Implementnewbudget law.
municipalities.
*
Strengthenaccounting,
* Next stagesof Public
create newlaw of public assets.
SectorReformoutlined.
.
Continuecustomreforms.
* Abideby the 25 Principles
to CombatCorruptionin African
Countries.
* Undertakecapacity
buildingprogramsthroughout
public sectorsystem.

.
Public ServiceReform
Strategydefinedby end 2001.
a Municipalcapacitybuilding
entity established;50% of
membersand stafftrained.
.
New public accounting
systemimplemented.

IDA
Lending
*
*

MunicipalDev. (FY01)
Rural Action(FY02)

Bilateral Donors: Austria;
Canada; Denmark; Finland;
France(MCF); Germany;Ireland;
Italy; Netherlands; Norway;
Portugal;
Spain;
Sweden;

*

Public Sector and Legal

Switzerland; UK, USAID.

Ref
FY03
eform (F
)
*
Econ.Management&
PrivateSectorOp. (FY02)
Portfolio:
.
PROAGRI
*

HealthSectorRecovery
ROCS 11
NationalWaterI and 11

Legal & Public Sector
Non-Lendin2:
*
Legal and JudicialStudy
a MunicipalDevelopment
Programsand AFRICITIESpilots
(WBI)
.
PublicSectorReformStudy
*
PRSPSupport
*

IFC

* AMSCOtrainingon
corporategovernanceand
accounting

Multilateral Donors: EC; UK;
UNDP;UNICEF

Diagnosis

Development
Objectives

W
MPROU NG TO

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
BankGroupInstruments
SelectedBank (underlined)
Government
Government
and
Strategy/Actions
Performance Indicators

*

Legal and judicial

*

Develop and launch legal

sectoroutdated,inefficient
andpoorly equipped;laws
complexand capacityto
enforceveryweak.

sectorreformplan.

* Most lawyers,judges
in Maputo;legalhelp hard
to obtainelsewhere.

* ReformCommercialCode,
CommercialRegister,and
IncorporationAct; establish
legal reformcommission,focus
on familylaw, civilprocedures,
and penal procedures.
.
. .
* StrengthenAdministrative
Tribunalandthe Inspectorate
Generalof Finances.

* Weaklegal systema
majorobstacleto private
sector growth.
* Legal sectorslowto
reform,as sectorhighly
fractured,andMinistry
weak.
* Admin.Tribunal,
chargedwith approving
staffingchangesandpublic
accounts,needs reform.

Open a Centerfor Judicial
Studiesand Training.

*

IDA

Adopt new Commercial

Code, CriminalCode, Family
Law, CommercialRegister,
IncorporationAct, Labor Law,
and CivilCode; and simpler

Lendin:
PublicSectorand Legal
*
Reform(FY03)
Poroli

methodsfor acquiringvisas.
Sectorstrategyfor the legal
*
andjudicial sectors(including
Ministryof Justice)developed.

Legal and PublicSector
CapacityBuilding
FinancialSectorCapacity
Building
*

Non-Lending:
*
*

Legal and JudicialStudy
PRSP Support

AnnexB9
Page 9 of 12
Other Donors

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;

Portugal;USAID
MultilateralDonors:EC;
UNICEF
T

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country
Development
ObjectiVes

Diagnosis

J0
:

;

Program

Government
Strategy/Adions

Annex B9
Page 10 of 12

Matrix (FY01-03)
Rinerl
BankGrup Instruments

s leeB
uk
and Government

Other Donors

Performance
ndicators :
III INCREAIN HuM:ANCAPBILITmIES

RE
V/A IDS
M W S

* HIV prevalenceis
14.5% (1,140,000people)
Prevalencehighest
A*
alongtransportcorridors;
and increasingfastest
amongthe young.
0* Prevalencelevelsin
Mozambiquelikelyto rise
to neighboringcountries'
levelsof 20% or above.

* ImplementNationalPlan
for STD/HIV/AIDSlaunchedin
1999for the years2000-2002,
guidedby NationalAIDS
Council.
* IntegrateHIV/AIDS
awarenessin all sectorsand all
programs.

* By 2002, at least 1,600,000
peoplewith irregularsex partners
have access to servicesto reduce
STD/HIVinfection,
* By 2002,at least 15,000
livingwith HIV/AIDSand their
familieswith accessto services.
* By end 2000. Bankportfolio
reviewedand retrofittedto
includeHIV/AIDSinterventions
whereappropriate.

IDA
Lendinn:
*
IncludeHI/ADS
componentsin new operations
(whereappropriate).
Portfolio:
*
*
*

*
*
gumi

HIV/AIDS
PRSP Support

Developand approvea new
IDA
HealthSectorStrategicPlan by
Lendine:
end2000.
By 2003:
a HealthSIP (FY03)
Reduceindex of gzeographicPotli:Nra;otul;Sin
i
Norlay Health ector Recovery
in the provisionof
elhSco
eoey
healthcareservicesto below2.8
(estimatedto be 3.0 in 1998).
IFC

qualifiedhealthservice
personnel.

*posts/centers
Increasestocked
proportion
of health
with

*

EssentialDrugsProgramkits to
90 percent (from 88% in 1997).
X
Increaseproportionof health
posts/centersstaffedwithtrained
personnelto 90 percent(from
86% in 1997!

MultilateralDonors:EC; UNDP;
UNFPA;UNICEF;WHO

HRSP
ROCS II
PODE
Non-Lendine:

* Healthsector
*
Implementhealthprogram
indicatorscontinueto be
focusingon: i) qualityof health
poor.
services;ii) sector institutions,
* Healthservice
supportservicesandsubcoveragehas improved;but nationalhealthmanagement
coveragediferswidely bwyy systems;iii) humanresources
region
n rural
an is lowapacity.inequality
0region
0 2 iiand
0 Is 0low
0 in rural
.apaci..
areas.
*
Addresshealthissue in all
sectorbudgetallocation.

BilateralDonors:AusAID;
Germany;Netherlands;UK;
USAID

*medical
Investments
services in private

BilateralDonors:Canada;
Demnark;Finland;Germany;
Ireland;Italy; Japan;Netherlands;
uK; SAID
Sizrad
K SI
MultilateralDonors:ADB; EC;
OPEC;UNDP;UNFPA;
UNICEF;WFP;WHO

Annex B9

Development
Objectives

IAfR1U
n'U0
EDUcioN

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FYO1-03)
BankGroupInstruments
SelectedIank (underlined)
Government
and Government
Strategy/Actions
Performance Indicators

Diagnosis

*
Enrollment since the
war doubled; gross
enrollment at EP 1 75%; but
quality low, due to lack of
qualified teachers,
textbooks, instruction
manuals, and classrooms.
* Adult illiteracy high,
especially in rural areas and
among women.
*
Low capacity to

providesecondaiyand
tertiary level education, and

vocational training.

Implement ESSP launched
*
in 1998. Priorities are: i) teacher

By 2003:
* Increase proportion of

training, pedagogical support,
and supply of teaching materials;
ii) construction and
rehabilitation of schools, and
initiatives to increase female
enrollment; iii) institutional
capacity; and iv) strategies for
vocational training and higher
education.
edctin
H Createa new Ministryof
Higher Education, Science, and
Technology.

students passing key primary and
lower secondarv exams: i! crade 5
from 54% to 75%: ii) grade 7
from 37% to 60%: and iii) grade
10 from 33% to 55%.
*
Reduction of the averace
repetition rate by half for primary
and lower secondary education.
I_IC_FPWH
Increase cross enrollment
rates: i) grade 1-5 from 71%to
86%: and ii) crade 6-7 from 15%
to 30%.

IDA
Lending:
.
.

.
Sklls Development(FY03)
Portfolio:
ESSP
Human Resources Cap.

Page 11 of 12
Other Donors

BilateralDonors:AusAID;
Austria; Canada; Denmark;
Finland; France (MCF);
Germany; Ireland; Italy; Japan;
Netherlands; Norway; Portugal;
Spain; Sweden; UK; USAID

B

MultilateralDonors:ADB; EC;

*

Islamic Development Bank;
UNDP; UNESCO; UNICEF;
WFP;VWHO

[C
Investments in private
education (tertiary focus)

*
Increase in czirls'enrollment
and retention rates at primary and
secondary schools.
..
PROTECT7ON

Completion of study on
social securitv reform.

IDA

Complete PRSP which
defines a social protection
strategy.

Portfolio

*
Government has
several safety net programs

*

Review, as a part of the
design and implementation of

*

aimed at vulnerable groups.
However, with limited
budget and widespread
poverty, transfers are small
and coverage low.
*
Limited sustainability
and efficacy of existing
pension schemes.

the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper, the existing programs in
order to ensure appropriate
targeting, eligibility criteria, and
coverage levels as a step towards
developing programs for
marginalized groups currently
not covered.

*

*
Capacity to anticipate
hazard events to prevent
and prepare for disasters
still weak.

Develop regulations for
a
private pension schemes and
undertake actuarial studies on
the two main national schemes.

Disaster relief system
*
focused on aid coordination
functions adequately.

Place programs to support
a
the transition of workers to other
productive activities, including
through training.Poiyavcantehcl
Strengthen the Government
*
agencies responsible for
anticipating hazard events to
prevent and prepare for disasters.

Bilateral Donors: Canada;
Germany; Netherlands; Sweden

MultilateralDonors:UNFPA;
Railways and Ports
(retrenchment component).
*

*
Flood Emergency Recovery
Project

Non-Lending
*

PRSP Support (policy advice

on emergency rehabilitation and
social protection).
Policy advice and technical
assistance on disaster mitigation
and management.
Policy advice on pension
*
reform through Railway and Ports
Restructuring and EMPSO.

UNICEF, WFP

Annex B9
Page 12 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Dei'elopnef_t

Diagnosis

Obectives

:
Strategy/Ations
0 fff000000:

:

V

Banku6rop istruments

Seleted`B:ank(nderlined)
00
0000
and Goverutnent
000
PerformaneelIdkators

OtherDon

Group

OTHR.R
:Bank

Support national
*
Short-term external
financing needs met.
development dialogue (incl. NGO
ru
outreach)
0
RglrCnuttv
meRetigulandCnonsultiv Gonroupladoriato,C
m
an iormal donor
*
Local aid coordination, CG

*

.
Guide and coordinate
support from development
parters to ac~hievepoverty
reduction and priority
intermediate objectives through

*

development effort.

several processes (including
PRSP, MTEF, SWAPs, annual
budget, local donor working

meetings.
*
Annual review meetings for
sector programs/SWAPs

Mozambique's shortSn1MGmIiw
term external financing gap
is met by numerous
PA~IS11JPSexteral aid partners that
arextas
th natio

groups,consultativegroup
meeting).

* Increased needs and
demandsfor a national

*

nationalconsultativeprocessand

in 2001based on a national

dialogue led by
Govemment to develop a
long-term vision and

dialogue in developing a PRSP.

dialogue and consultative process,
inclusive of all major stakeholders
including external partners,

strengthenedpartnerships.

Government to lead a

*

Development of a full PRSP

All external partners

meetings
.

etg
Annual meetings

*
.

CT meetingsand Tetreats
CAS

.

PRSP Support

All Partners

privatesector,academia,unions,
journalists,NGOs,churchgroups,
etc.

*

Strengthen partnership
among the Bank Group and
vwithIMF for quality
service delivery.

*
MaintainstrongCountry
Team coordination, dialogue,
brainstorming, and cooperation,
including team members from
WBI, IFC, MIGA and the Bank.
*
Maintain strong coordination
with IMF in economic work,
PRSP, and HIPC.

WB Group and IMF

-

57Annex B10
Page 1 of 1

CASSummaryof DevelopmentPriorities
Country
Networkarea

PovertyReduction& Economic
Manaaement
Povertyreduction

Majorissue - Country
priority

Bankpriority Reconciliation
of

performance

countryand
Bank oriorities

Fair

Widespreadpoverty;High
regionaldisparities

High

Good
Fair

Sustaingrowth
Weakcapacity

High
High

High
High

Fair

Gaps in service
access

Moderate

Moderate

Education

Fair

Health,nutrition& population

Fair

Socialprotection

Fair

Poor accessand
High
qualitv
Poor accessand
High
aualitv
Targetinggiven
Moderate
widespreadpoverty

Economicpolicy
Publicsector
Gender

HumanDevelopment

Environmentally&Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Fair

Rural poverty,
limitedinfrastructureand

High
High
Moderate

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

arm,css tn markats

Environment

Fair

Socialdevelopment

Fair

Finance,PrivateSector & Infrastructure
Financialsector
Fair

Prnvatesector

Fair

Energy& mining

Fair

Infrastructure

Fair

Weakregulatory
and enforcement
caoactv
Further
decentralization

High intermediation Moderate
costs;banking
supervision

High

Ongoingdialogue

Redtape; market Moderate
entry (transport;
utilities)
Regulatory
High
environment;pivate
sectorentry

High

Ongoingdialogue

Sustainabilityand
instnutional
frameworkIroads)

High

High

High

- 58 -

ANNEXC
Page 1 of 3

The Government's Program,its Poverty ReductionStrategy, and the CAS
This World Bank Country AssistanceStrategy has been designed around the Government's FiveYear Programand its emerging poverty reduction strategy.
A. The Five-Year GovernmentProgram (2000-2004)
The new GovernmentProgram (2000-2004),submittedto the National Assembly in March 2000,
is based on three pillars.
1. The pillar on economic development(increasingeconomicopportunities) emphasizesthe
objectives of poverty eradicationand a reduction of regional developmentasymmetries
through growth. To this end, the Government's program is focused on maintaininga sound
macroeconomicenvironment,developingthe financial sector, and strengtheningthe capacity
of the national private sector. Particularemphasisis placed in developing agro-industry,
energy, mining,transport and transport corridors, communicationsand tourism. Technical
and vocationaltraining will aim at increasing employmentand improvingthe capacity, skills,
and productivityof the labor force. The developmentof infrastructure,particularlyin rural
areas, is central to the growth strategy. The environmentfor private sector developmentis to
be improvedthrough continued efforts to removered-tape.
2. The pillar on social development (improvinghuman capabilities)emphasizesimproving
health standards in order to improve productivityand living standards. The program places a
special emphasisis on the preventionof HIV/AIDS and malaria. Expanded and improved
education services will aim to reduce illiteracy. The Government's program emphasizes
improvingthe welfare and capabilitiesof women, in particular with regard to equal rights and
opportunities,especially in education.
3 . The pillar on the organization of the state (improving governance and empowerment) aims to

maintain social and political harmony,protect human rights, and effectivelydeliver public
services required for the poverty reduction effort. Consolidatinglaw and order and
maintaining national unity are priorities. Strengtheningand modernizing state administration,
along with decentralization,are importantaspectsof a strategyto improve the effectiveness
and responsivenessof the public sector. Developingpublic sector capacity, particularly at the
local level and in rural areas, will be central to this effort. Reformingpublic sector processes,
such as control and audit functions,is the focus of a strategyto improve the competence of
the public sector, improve transparency,and combat corruption. The Governmentprogram
stresses the need for increased effortsto enhanceparticipation of citizens in economic, social
and political processes and to promote dialogueas a basic methodologyof governance.

- 59 -

ANNEXC
Page 2 of 3

B. The Plano de Accaopara a Reducao da Pobreza Absoluta (PARPA) andthe Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy
In 1999 the Government elaboratedan Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (Plano
de Accao para a Reducao da Pobreza Absoluta - PARPA) which served as the basis for its
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (interim PRSP), completedin early 2000. 1, 2 The
Government's PARPA and interim PRSP are a subset of its overall Five Year Program. These
documents outline nine key components of the Government's emerging poverty reduction
strategy, which are aligned under the pillars of the Government's program.
1.

Economic Development (IncreasingEconomic Opportunities)

Maintain rapid and sustainablegrowth, particularlyin agriculture, construction, and industry
Increase agricultural productivityin the smallholdersector, particularlyin areas with high
agro-ecological potential.
>
Develop infrastructure in the rural areas.
> Promote employment in rural and urban areas through vocationaltraining and the promotion
of income generating micro-projectsand enterprises, with particular attention to women, the
unemployed and socially excluded young people.
> Improve technical and institutional capacity to monitor, analyze and evaluate poverty in order
to improve knowledge of the phenomenon and select appropriate strategies to fight it.
>
>

2.

Social Development (ImprovingHuman Capabilities)

Develop human capital through public investment in education, health, and water and
sanitation services.
Protect the most vulnerable groups through social security and assistance programs.
>

3.

Organizationof the State (ImprovingGovernanceand Empowerment)

Reduce regional asymmetries by promoting decentralizationand empowerment.
> Improve the allocation of available resources and external aid.
>

The Government intends to elaborate its Poverty Reduction Strategy more fully through a broad,
consultative process leading to a full PRSP in March 2001. Whileunder the PARPA the
Governmenthas commencedthe processes of selecting indicators for monitoring the success of
its poverty reduction strategy, in developingthe full PRSP the Government will further refine the
set of monitorable indicators, adjust program targets in light of setbacks due to the February 2000
floods, and formulatea strategy for the monitoringof these indicators.

The Government's interim PRSP consists of the PARPA and a companiondocument which additionallyoutlines the
steps to be taken towards the finalization of a full PRSP.
The interim PRSP was presented by the Governmenton occasion of its decision point under the enhanced HIPC
framework. The Govermmentintends to complete a full PRSP by March 2001, when it expects to reach the completion
point under the enhanced HIPC framework.
2

ANNEX C

- 60 -

Page 3 of 3
C. Link between the CAS and the Government Program and the emerging PRSP

There is a direct link between the Bank's CountryAssistance Strategy,the Government's FiveYear Program, and its emerging PovertyReduction Strategy as outlined in the PARPA and
interim PRSP (see table below). The CAS program pillars are based on the pillars of the FiveYear program. Given its over-ridingobjective of supportingthe Government's program to reduce
poverty, the CAS is also closely aligned in supportingthe Government's emerging poverty
reduction strategy. In accordancewith its mandate, the Bank is not involved in issues of political
governance. It is also not involved directly in supportingthe Government's efforts to maintain
peace, ensure public safety, and protect human rights. These are areas where the Bank does not
have a comparativeadvantage and where other partners are active.
The CAS performance indicators are outlinedin the CAS Program Matrix (see Annex B9). The
Bank will support the Government's work to refine the indicators in its emerging PRSP and to
develop a monitoring strategy. CAS performanceindicators and targets will be reviewedupon
Government's completion of the full PRSP to reflect refined and revised targets and indicators in
the full PRSP.

GovernmentProgram
Economic Development
(IncreasingEconomic Opportunities)
.Private sector, financial sector,
economicmanagement
* Infrastructure
. Rural developmentand agriculture

Government
Poverty Reduction
Strategy
Government
Five-YearProgram (I-PRSP/PARPA)

World Bank
Country
Assistance
Strategy
.

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

. Publicsectormanagement

X

X

X

* Judicial and legal
* Peace and safety

X
X

* Environmental
management
* Innovation,competitiveness,
employment
Organization of the State
(Improve Governanceand
Empowerment)

X

Social Development
(ImproveHumanCapabilities)

. Education
. Health

X
X

X
X

X
X

* HIV/AIDS

X

X

X

. SocialProtection
* Rights

X

X

X

X

-

61 -

ANNEX D
Page 1 of 1

MozambiqueCAS Consultations
How the CAS consultation process was conducted: The CAS consultationswere divided into two
rounds. In the first round, which occurredbefore national elections in December 1999and enjoyed
Government participationthroughout, representativesof the outgoing Govermnent, the donors, civil society
and the private sector were invited to discussthe situation of Mozambique's people, their aspirations,and
their ideas for realizing those aspirations. In this round, Bank staff were listeners rather than participants.
In the secondround, which occurred in March 2000 with the new Governmentin place, the Bank returned
to the same constituencies to report what it had heard and learned in the first round, and to discuss the
outlines of the draft CAS. Because the consultationsstraddled national elections, the Bank was able in the
first round to learn from the experience of officialsin the outgoing administration, and in the secondround
to inform and consult with officials in the new administrationabout the new CAS.
September 1999: Country Team Retreat on the CAS (Maputo and Washington,D.C.)
November 1999: First "listening" round of consultations(Maputo,Beira, Nampula)
December, 1999: Presidential and parliamentary elections (Mozambique)
December 1999: Distillation of findingsof first round (Maputo and Washington)
February 2000: Concept paper and upstream review (Washington)
Second "feedback" round of consultations(Maputo, Beira and Nampula)
March 2000:
Distillation of findings of second round and finalization of the CAS (Maputo and
April 2000
Washington)
CAS review by the ExecutiveDirectors
June 2000:
Who was consulted: In the first round, the consultationswere held in a series of 12 meetings in Maputo
with several different groups includinghigh-level government officials, mid-level government officialsand
project managers, municipal government, local bilateral and multilateral development partners, local and
international NGOs, national trade unions, the private sector (separatemeetings with the formal large-scale
enterprises, formal small-scale enterprises,and informal sector),religious leaders, academics, and
journalists. In the first round, two meetings were held in each of Beira and Nampula, for the private sector
and civil society and for governmentauthorities respectively. The secondround of consultationsrevisited
each of these groups. In addition, separaterural consultationsusing participatorymethods were held in
January 2000 to talk with villagers.
What was learned: In addition to discussing where Mozambiquewas today and their vision for the
country's future, there was substantialcommonalityregarding the top issues and priorities that the country
needed to address:
1. Education - More vocational and tertiary education; education to meet market needs; improved quality
of teaching; more schools (improve literacy); gender equity in educational opportunities.
2. Governanceand public sector management - Improved capacity of civil service, economic
management, transparency and accountability, and rule of law; further decentralization; less corruption;
increased participation and community development; improvedpublic safety.
3. Agriculture and rural development- Better roads; expanded access to rural credit; improved rural
marketing; developed land market; rural water and electrification; improvedagricultural extension;
improved food security; support to livestock, irrigation,and mechanization.
4. Private sector development - Improvedgovernance: clearer policy environment and enforced
legislation; trained managers and entrepreneurs;reduced red tape; access to cheaper financing; increased
employment for nationals; more industrialization and rural enterprise; growth throughout the country.
5. Infrastructure- More roads; improved rural and urban water supply; increased access to electricity and
telecommunications;developed urban infrastructure; expandedirrigation; specificrailway links, bridges,
ports rehabilitated or built.
6. Health - Improvedquality of and access to basic health care; preventionand control of malaria and
HIV/AIDS; reduced cost of medicine.

- 62 -

ANNEX E
Page 1 of 4

A Framework

for Development Partnership

In Mozambique, there is an emerging consensus regarding the importance of defining the country's
development agenda, increasing government ownership, and fostering strong partnerships among
government, donors, civil society, and the private sector. The CAS process contributed to this consensus
and may initiate a wider Government-led dialogue to forge a common long-term vision and development
framework for Mozambique. Although Mozambique is not a pilot country under the Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF)1 , in developing the CAS, a Framework for Development Partnership was
formulated which shares some of these principles and provides a useful way to map the broad array of
ongoing development activities while identifying potential gaps in Mozambique's development strategy.
It can be viewed as both a coordination tool and a process for stimulating discussion about Mozambique's
long-term development strategy.
In developing the framework, the activity areas listed were identified on the basis of priorities articulated
by the Govemment of Mozambique and among the development partners, including bilateral and
multilateral donors, private sector representatives, NGOs and civil society. The matrix above is the
summary of a more detailed matrix (see following pages) which attempts to capture the specific
commitments and current activities of the Government of Mozambique and its partners. This
information was obtained from the discussions with the Ministry of Planning and Finance, the
development partners, as well as from their various publications. The matrix represents a snapshot of the
existing development agenda and will change as more information is gathered and as priorities,
programs, and circumstances change over time.

Mozambique:CurrentActivitiesof the DevelopmentPartnership
Increasing
Economic
Opportunity Increasing
Capabilities
ImprovinGovernance
Partnert

Activity

-Gow
'>d

'

2a

ES

mapnu
oitctof

Govt

*Eo
ank

p

E _ CLc.Q
iiYFIa8dC)
o r

>-

*w

t3

*C

* C.

1

0)

i
C

a

a

Bilateral
Multilateral
World
Bank

4

IFC
Civil
Society

F71Little Focus

LZ~Some
Focus

SignificantFocus

HighFocus

'T'he CDF is a conceptual tool that can help a country identify priorities and strategies for reducing poverty. By
mapping out a holistic set of priorities for reducing poverty, and the activities among development partners, the CDF
provides a mechanism for encouraging better coordination among development partners.

Annex E
Page 2 of 4
Frameworkfor DevelopmentPartnership

~

*P~0.0001 8r

0W(6

MWory of
Indoy
Fr0e,
sod Com r..

i

0*00,1*

177. A.0Iie
8.0,.h

.y

15[m T..;,oO,
hoo.*g, pd0.

d

d 3.15. Mity
_. ,
Eororod
&
prwbo 1

0.0 T0oism, Wdry
sod

of

A4.AI: 4..f.
D
lq-

.A0AID 27,0W0i0r(N-0
p Vj0 h)
041,
vSWoo

A.,.1

I.

R0
,

A.0i00.0

hC__l-d

1.. U

0W0
P0 0. o.1
0
900.0 (UMc7f0 3.4e R-jo
lsd. r
T.n kUB

Ul-

A.AID:
A

00.000,0.04..

--.

.

.

,C-'.I

.~

z.0e
d

(0

2..

C0m

s.d

p.s

.

- 7Cl-

A..i.

3.2e fi0i(0

(NDP,

UNICEF. ADC)

A.0.

1.30,

..

5.

Vvo

00

.700
(0~~~~~~~~~i-412
sm __
C:
7.30 Ds-i-.o.P foo LftooolodN0
.011-.

G
e
smi
7.00000(01
(Girl
& lddioo
&e00,i 13.
10
Child ' UNI.CNEF"),
10 Fo_d
10.4~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
)07X'AM0( 3.00 E&.o0.oos M(O.in1.
Ca.
0..

wU

T

hiiP

Is 660,
88. NO
polc., MhNsy of I1.no

Pw-s

D0 -i0i0i0
r_
M'100Ui0ipw

4
fo .1ho.hR.-..

Fa0iS0

AsAID . 1.6fe

A-i.
0

C. _. 3 6. M &- 2.ge r
-M..0;
kl01.00..
C...

beto

5.25

Mu1o

Cudh 040,. (CARE).
1.40 Mioo A,
oehCOTEC)
SoOl.ls&00y

Wo.0 (99/02)10.591.
0RoA001

7m0
0at.

Adri..

A..AID:
.b0r

1.20
&
Y

S

.
1788.8 fom.,o,

so

f280 Li
01.91

7.23 Di0 ,
1h0"oTteoo

m
116 Lof sod
h .0o
ted

3.8. AIDS
10

1

hci_s

00I-4..

o

iioEo.oo.

E.*.ii

(WOo0dVW.o)

F0-00, (AFD)
PPOPAhCo010e.
M,
SW,
2.060B.00 Y
250
N3sl
3.7m
Mnod:; 3,1105o.co
UCBh0,k 115
M INCO cp
i.d

370.-r
Db.
0.ol.0
P0000

0rS

Fiee1d: 14eh3,
SO0pl36.6e N.,.
Dov.

.W00
MI0

D0.000,,

-AA

*

,fibi.

D
o:
Di,.oA
P0.lido.,
700 Mg

e
CO

^41.7C
1004Fed:13.0.g`A d T0d4:
0N ooI 900ps.
Ed
0o 503. As h4
C5.ooolo

010,4:101.1
(3v0 Cp-yThild.o

0L90l

7.01.
-.
13.Mi

Dconr
0.2.08.
CI
71

Fdb0d 2.l.D6m

.......
70._00. 2.
I &e .dloSO ppt4 0.3,
D-,,oloo (UNDP)

(A413) 230.COlW10o F-100. (AFD): 6.1J_
C3 L-;4.5.00001
b 0.s 4.0e -ew,
ge-n1
3.M
4c.
_.0
00006 3. iiDM
000. 6.00

Tyo
1G-.Rn
3.50
fi&06eR R.I..c 3ela Ti-N
1b.0.p
&11b
10.31.,,,
B0ior P.pni-

.li

P.

.10P0.
IOf..

.01(57.)
U0.t0100.

p~~~~~.
(080). 30,000,1
D.lpd
Pooo..76

(/4Cp)* 310,300,0,00

5.3e R
10.4. W - r RS4ply Ce..o:
G-,:
R
Sfid0 0
,
QM-0b,.3e W rS4pply
R- Rebb M ec3.7elb.B..d
D-~~~~~~li.7. R-0 W0- r0,U00,.
R0. Re0b119e Rood0R00
iq3Silo
31.9G
os&"
3
0,5(1. 7.4e
Mo1000e)0
0
00 &e &
N_pda3. s El scibcoi sn
N.4
G 0
11
roh.bNN-d
140
10.4cO

0.,

4900

01.0,0.
Pl-kole

F
5.3Wooy

Cr eo F_t 6e Se dl
S.W4.bba1r7 000001

G 7. 2.30
F,cRdW-

370
C..V
0.4
Pri_0Ed,0
Ed
IlmP...
: 5.1
X El..1 Er.
5.30
0
F1.0,0
F-ni7
V.-i7

05
o(:
0
D

0001
d7)
/0A ,0

1-05(0

-

3 50
7--

000b

. bld I 50F0.04. R.M.

90,
Idy: 104.400,
Comdor

D-.r&.

D00k:15.61
Peli

Pbi l1.r..i0,i'.3
op. .p, ; 56.& MWF

poo.,o

m

Fie-d:11:0,
1
Pn80y Ed4(0.S&F)

[e 044.4.09eM e
E7000
0c130.5
Sr
3,000c..

d.03 4mID3FPA
S-i.C Ccr

136e

0.e.

Trfbco

1

D...0:
Edw..0i

o.

D

135.0
f
C.7*o
.04lh

0r
1y:25.0Bo,o
1.wply( I 001,0140,1.
11., 2.04 12.6&eF0*.
P0bli.
7,1.
FFIS
W0
r. P00b 8.00
W0

2. 1.4T.1,0
&chool for S.W ID7I,
0.0BA-1.07-pl0
18
.0
M1.0d M0

: 72. h. Po21.60
0.IALW
5(P-. 1D.-&fid0
3.10 PRA00033

14d: 1.2eUe.hh
00*06.20L0.R"63
11)db C7 ; 2.40
lk11.1,.00,0,1500
PROAGI

90(d4 3.0 &hl_
00,Go.o0.~
,.*0
d,0,o.
Ed R0 0

010:4.001(00(0.
-.. 0i .1.7eHed
l,2.3.
0uip
h
U,lli
0fid1 17.50 &o0 lA,
W,e 1.7.
gvooi HygRp TA
3.020.0.00101010
3 4. Cs-5dy* h6l3

21017370
O UEMdH
C-.

3;1.

_

_ G-d
10 D.-,f

(UNDpO)

00y 2.00 s
P0H,0 Omwi

~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~10
ilerbbU

UGR

.

_

_

1

l

I~~~~~~~0,s30O0

y, l.Sm0M00i.oo

Annex E
Page 3 of 4
Framework for Development Partnership
______

0 3Sj;00
Ec::
::

bor
Up_
R,
B.dM -oi-R-do
Bkre PMrt 14. Mqo

Z
0

No3a3
N

N.Vo.

Wildifo

Z

P-

X

*4:
E.P;

NeAX
W.*
& 6L0
Nh
d1.:
3.
No
U_b .
Nsa,;k
T-040 PiloORein; AU7S
Z.7 Npl..
2.4n M Sq.
Pon
1
0033c
r.64 fi.t&
i 2c.;0
-,,q
W.A.
-,7rebb& ind
b , 1.6nFie

0

2

B15BkP.c7c

46.0 Secor
o Rleo.li,ciy 14.

Nno7,
RoBb

4.7.01Rl

1

bl.

N3.0
7:316.i 9'
Pihcio.

R3.

B

3.0
ool

er.00K

A 46ptT-rl,

J4=: B l Rb
2w
TIM..
P.d.;op.o Chib7

31
N0rl
04 933
N
SV,,y M.3&i0
12.0 NCO
W..0
1M6c-,
S333P-c.0yl&33.
N63
1w 7230
ypnl

_

3.
3l:.
VPo

1.9,

c.c-

Ndbnld

4.
C-4R.foIWpo
B_i PA 2f.oS
I
ocMnjo 3.0 UDEBA
3
eriol
3F.3

Nl_le:
36.0
o
UICOA: 4.fm P['4I,
Rd
603.7.0.0.3
Smotc.;
13 In

N.wo,.

DitiooPl.

N-.

Nonu-w 4.7.
M.0.0.i6 33

~~~~~~~~~~iwwsvp-t_
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

Pw401
14.
S,-: T
okcc.0,

-

1661TA7wo,w.

3 SnDo.0_
MwigC,i
SPP y,lH-

F

p..d
].2.P1t
p-l
3 SfilnN9b, , 3.0 Sody

Pl

RR

i
Ed,

l.li1nf d

P.

l; 7.3

6 73 Polcor

Nrl
Oooooo

P..,

09W.U*.I;

7

i.e

-

1.5.

~~~~~~~~~~~~
~ ~~~~~~Tn
~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~He.lihllit;
i

C

n T.

Zd

S

IL J.

I f-

PotopI:
2wedm
6.T..0ocot
125.
5mR..
Ni66; I5 S
E-&
n p06

orOc 44d39
Ro. R.-co

R

Eli'6001nNi-;32.

Sw14d 327.PD
d&-I,;
2 I PSD
Ni-o
3.
TBW

416
3.4.

__
ncpp.

So0do,c. 367.03

Ufi
u:
o.(pOIS
I im(poj
lI:
03pW0

r

c

c 2.

~

i0.

S36.44.:wiw
6.30,6

_

mili.W

i

r

d4colecpo...3.occo.
uK
3 7o75.pyB ..

7.4

ZADP; Z.
PROAGRI

36i.

U

.

P.dn.

i.8
5A

.
l

: 373 Pw.bliw
Aw.42rW.di
.
1 9'
B0d4
Ni6-

__
cfod

P3cpd.
Z6D3)0
Psd; 1.7..4
7o
4
D-

-;

Z.53 N-

-

B.d

Swed - 406PN,o
'4P.

Ucio

0

BonyB.300.qpcr.603

USAID 47.7

diW

56

pro^,r n

R7.

6.6
37.0

23W6.~33
4.2.0



PODE 7bdp&)
6jIROA(.
if

4 0;

0*

_

Nrl.:
7.10.64
P mN.
W.o I 1.
RP6.3O
.;
ri. 0
Dccolo-4,4.2.
F WV-1 S,,133

Al-t
4W. T..,i

_

______________
J,9VoiaiT-i.;
Co,r3

l8ll

~~~~~P-0c

x

r
.

Nd
-0d Z 4.0 3O-d
P-,oe
l:
6.7.
S.h.bic.
Wooc Spy.;
M,*oSc
L.6.Ueb.
39
S3394.6B

rX
7nwy
Ao

U.0

:,0IC
::: t0.0.0t0 3,

.

SRi

570 Pil

v

Swi

&-6edvlq-

Q

r33
PSI4-o.
_

USA D

2 3w

.

7 1.P33

li,

3

P

&,

UAD

l

f62

N
P

_

7 6m

.6

BodgotT0.0.O2

Swn_

33.0

.o

4.W6.03.00.0.-;.

_

bililn

ogl.qpo

-1 Hnilb

U44D:27

lygO

lio.4opc4

1cc.1

IUw;M
33 4 f0 344

X:

&.

Swi

38.0W

dioccoococy

addi,
4dec-4-"nsi

1.

ur...

4pw ..

3.6.0
3.4. pa

.s~34

oc3

.~..O

10L

S_

USAID: 350k

USAID:
S
533.63

_

N

1t;1

LII'II

~~MULTILATERA
L PA.RTERS_

2|

jlit
t1

-

___

____,,-_

lki,~~~~

_ _______

6~~~~~i
|t i;

S~~
_ _ _ _ _

q'R
__

_~~~

!9I'.2

ii

~~
p
~ ~~~~~~
_ q
_

1

?

$

_ _ _ _ _I

MAP SECTION

I

EM.REP
D0
TANZAIA
OFCONGO
vCK
4

r
jANQIA

aBPN
~4'
'
~''/
~~~~~~~~~-TANZANIA

A

EM

AI

iMUEDO

I j/

/~
mIgm'~
BAj

62'40

'

N

So
EUA~Muedo<

1/-/;

-

2(f

--

ABLO'DC

K

K
I

MALAW

>~

A

IA

2

-

-

o

ei

'

N

ZAMBIA

MI

MAVACO

AMN

.

BCHIN~

MAUAEMA

I

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~IPP

MA

1

N1n?LBA---

N~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,*t/

i ._AETRIC

Nj~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

IA BASnA

heGor

AC1RAAC

lAB BP

~~<
ZIMBABWE

MOZAMBIQU~~~~~MCLOUEECNA

A

-CPA LALANG

40CA

CDiNG

-GI-LP

MAGO'

Vt-~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
vANRajo

Th

BWBZ

MOZAMBIQU

.~~M
'AN',

R

/

-

r~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ B

-

jA

ME00

Main roads~CRIJMAL

'~~~~

SCHEMA'alcrios

/

~~~~~~~

7

/4tA'B!V

/4

i-ns

EN~

--

04001
P
M&ALN

I~H

ZIMBABWCAEEE

QpratPEnA

-i---.-.-

(

j

-

A
CBE'aJAC\

74

~

n3C

"A'

A

nonAM8opErtoa
CurrentlyAR

-'a-'-

cte

',eece

CHANNA

'B

roiGecpio

\

GAZA~SS

2(y

WI

ZAUE
bL~~~\

BEU

IQU

'$jBBSCOIUZAM

'1

""'~t

Ditictuna

AR

SO TH2GEA

Inenai

/82-

nalopndaries

Sri"'bo
%1-~~~~4~~tfb
N200'IAOMEEE

-24'

SOUT

AFRCSO,~

JA

'Ni~~~~~~~~~'~HBT
p> ~~~A9WT)
Nno,oo&?
06 '

UTH RC

o

Tins

A3'4Q

"op

00$

pInernla b

tioMop Ioog

nc6rfTesW,JB,h

2-

