Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
For Official Use Only

Report No. 22163-EGT

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

June 5, 2001

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of

their officialduties. Its contentsmaynot otherwisebe disclosedwithoutWorldBank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency unit: Egyptian Pound (LE) as of May 9, 2001
US$1 = LE 3.87
FISCAiLYEAR
July 1 - June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
BOT

Analytical and Advisory Assistance
Build, Operate, Transfer

HSRP
IBRD

CAS

Country Assistance Strategy

ICT

CBE
CEDAW

IDA
IFC

CG

Central Bank of Egypt
Committee for the Elimination of all Discrimination
Against Women
Consultative Group

COMESA
CPPR
DFID
ECD

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Department for International Development
Early Childhood Development

ILO
IMF
MDF
MIGA

EHDR
ESW

Egypt Human Development Report
Economic and Sector Work

NBI
NCCM

EU
FDI
FIAS

European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service

NGO
OED
PBDAC

FSAP
FY
GDP
GDLN

Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Distance Learning Network

SFD
SME
UNDP
USAID

GDI
GEF
GOE

Gross Domestic Investment
Global Environment Facility
Government of Egypt

WBI
WFP

IFPRI

Health Sector Reform Program
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Information & Communications
Technology
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Food Policy Research
Institute
International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Mediterranean Development Forum
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Nile Basin Initiative
National Council for Childhood and
Motherhood
Non-governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Principal Bank for the Development of
Agricultural Credit
Social Fund for Development
Small- and Medium-size Enterprises
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Institute
World Food Program

IBRD
Vice President
Country Director

Jean-Louis Sarbib
Mahmood A. Ayub

IFC
Vice President
Director
Task Manager

Assaad Jabre
Sami Haddad
Tarek Allouba

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
EGYPTCOUNTRYASSISTANCE
STRATEGY
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVESUMMARY............................
1.

..............................................

i

RECENTDEVELOPMENTSAND POLICYOPTIONS.1

II.

A.

Political Context

B.

RecentEconomic Developments.

C.
D.

More Recent Economic Challenges.
Poverty and Social Indicators.

.I
3
4

EGYPT'SDEVELOPMENTAGENDA.

5

A.
B.
C.
D.

6

Achieving Sustainable High Growth and Reducing Poverty.
Social and Human Development .11
Agriculture, Rural Development and Water .13
Removing Obstacles to Private Sector Development .14

111. EXTERNALENVIRONMENT AND MACROECONOMICOPTIONS.17
A.
B.
TV.

External Environment .17
Macroeconomic Constraints and Policy Options .17

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

.

.19

Implementation of the Previous CAS: What Worked, What Did Not .19
Lessons Learned and Benchmarks for Future Assessments .20
Changing Relationship: Mix of Lending and Non-Lending Services .22
Base Case Assistance Program .....................
:
.
................................
Alternative Scenarios and Contingencies .26
IBRD Portfolio Management and Performance .27
IFC Portfolio Management and Performance .......................................................
MIGA's Involvement in Egypt .................................................................
Experience with the Decentralization of the Bank Group Country Management to the Field

V.

COORDINATION

WITH DEVELOPMENT

VI.

BANK EXPOSURE AND RISKS

PARTNERS ..............

.............................

......................................................................

22

28
30
30
31
33

BOXES
Box
Box
Box
Box

A:
B:
C:
D:

Incidence and Dynamics of Poverty in Egypt ......................
................................
Implementation of Previous CAS: What Worked, What Did Not .........
.....................
OED Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) .......
...............................................
Major Donors in Egypt .
......................................................................

5
20
21
32

Egypt's Key Economic Indicators .................................................................
Outlook for Economic Indicators Under Three Scenarios ..............
..........................
Base Case Bank Assistance Program, FY02-04 ........................
............................
Triggers and Main Assumptions for the Lending Program .............
..........................
Sector Distribution of IFC's Egypt Portfolio .......................................................

2
18
24
27
29

TABLES
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table

1:
2:
3:
4:
5:

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

ANNEX TABLES
1:
2:
A2:
B2:

World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy
World Bank Institute (WBI) in Egypt
Egypt at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
B3: Bank Group Program Summary
B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
B5: Social Indicators
B6: Key Economic Indicators
B7: Key Exposure Indicators
B8: Statement of IBRD/IFC OperationsPortfolio
B9: CAS Program Matrix
B10: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
MAP General Map of the Arab Republic of Egypt. Map IBRD 27759

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.

During the second half of the 1990s, Egypt's growth performance strengthened in

quantitative terms, but it showed some qualitative weaknesses. Following the stabilization efforts

of the early 1990s,macroeconomicpolicy provided a stable environmentfor private sectoractivity,
with particular success in reducing inflation. Stabilizationwas accompaniedby the implementation
of a series of structural reforms in the areas of capital markets, tariff reduction, reforms of the
insurance industry, privatizationof more than half of the designated public enterprises with assets
worth almostUS$4 billion, and improvementin the targetingof the social safetynet. This resultedin
higher GDP growth,but the impact in terms of povertyreductionremains to be assessed. In addition
a number of concerns have emerged as to the sustainabilityof this economic performance. First,
there is the short-termconcern regarding the macroeconomicframework. Despite the roughly 12
percent depreciation of the currency since January 2000, the effective exchange rate remains
appreciated. There has also been a reversal of the fiscal stance since 1999. Resulting balance of
payments pressures have led to significant loss of reserves. Second, with the exception of
manufacturing,the fastest growing sectors have been generallynon-tradable,focused on domestic
demand. Perhaps most significantlyfor the medium term, growth sectors in Egypt have not been
technology-intensive,nor associated with large improvementsin productivity. In particular, the
construction boom that occurred during 1995-99 was a significant component of the increased
investment and growth effort. The issue is to what extent the draft Mortgage Law -- expected to
improve housing affordability through longer amortizationperiods -- can resuscitate this sector,
which has witnessed a major slowdownin 2000-2001. Third, despite a recent rebound, merchandise
exports practically stagnated during the 1990s, a period during which world merchandisetrade
expandedby an average of 5.6 percent per annum.
ii.

Egypt possessesmany advantagesthat can allow it to achieve a growth rate high enough

to result in a sustainable reduction in poverty. It has a relatively large domestic market with
rising purchasingpower. It has a relativelycheap labor force and incomparablecultural and touristic
attractions. It has proven natural gas reserves of over 40 trillion cubic feet, compared to its current
annual domestic consumption of only 17 billion cubic feet. It boasts social stability with
exceptionallycrime-freeurban centers.
iii. For Egypt to exploit these comparative advantages and to tackle the problem of
increasing unemployment, it would have to pursue policies that engender a strong and
sustained growth. This will depend essentially on two factors. First, the country will need to
addressmore aggressivelyits unfinishedagenda of structuralreforms. This will entail reactivating
the recently sluggish privatization program; further reducing tariffs and other trade barriers;
implementingtax reforms; undertakingchanges in the legal system to make investmenteasier and
commercialdisputes quicker to settle; and developinga financial system that is prudentiallysound,
provides medium- and long-termresources at lower cost, and responds more rapidly to the needs of
small businesses. The second factor is the level of investmentand borrowingneeded to achievethe
current Five-YearPlan's growth objective of 7.0-7.5 percent. Even if the Government succeedsin
doubling foreign direct investmentduring the decade from its present level of US$1.5 billion per
annum, it is almost certain that the anticipated higher growth rate will not materialize without
increasedforeign capital flows, including from less concessionalsources. While Egypt's reduction
of its externaldebt from 130 percent of GDP in 1989 to 30 percent of GDP in 2000 is commendable,
the continuation of this excessively conservative external borrowing strategy will restrict GDP
growth to around 5 percent, not sufficient to absorb the 550,000 new job entrants into the labor

ii

market and to make inroads into the current backlog of unemployment. Avoiding external public
borrowingfor projects with high socialrates of return carries a real-and probablysizeable-penalty
in the form of foregoneproductiveinvestment.
iv. In importantrespects, the Bank's role in Egypt is similar to that in most lower middleincomecountries. The Bank is by no means the major partner in the country. USAID and the EU
have larger assistanceprograms. Moreover,giventhe country's cautious externalborrowingstrategy
and Egypt's graduation from IDA about two years ago, the Bank cannot anchor its role in its
financial contribution. On the other hand, despite some progress in negotiations with foreign
financial institutions to float a Eurobond, Egypt does not yet have sustained access to private
international markets. Taken together, these factors have several implications for the Bank's
involvementin Egypt:
* The Bank's lending role in Egypt is limited to a modest level. This is the Government's
prerogative, and determines the nature of the Bank's overall involvement in the country.
However, the downside is that, should the Governmentdecide to have the Bank play a larger
lending role commensuratewith Egypt's size and importance, we will not be able to respond
quickly, simplybecause the Bank lacks the solid analyticalbase that is a prerequisitefor a rapid
response. This weak policy dialogue is particularlyapparentin two critical areas: (a) analysisof
the nature and incidence of poverty in Egypt, which prevents the Bank from developinga truly
effectivepovertyalleviationstrategy; and (b) an assessmentof the financialsector, which would
help the Governmentbetter understand,and respond to, the weaknessesof the financial system
and its vulnerabilityto economicshocks.
*

Within this constrained relationship, selectivity in Bank's involvement becomes critical. In
particular, the Bank's focus will be in areas where (a) Governmentcommitmentto projects is
unequivocally strong; (b) the Bank has a long and positive experience (water sector and
irrigation;human development);(c) it can bring knowledgemanagementand experienceof other
countries to guide Egypt's policy reforms (mortgage market development; information and
communications infrastructure; poverty and gender analysis; and community-based
development);and (d) it can serve as a catalyst for mobilizingfinancingpackages 2-3 times that
of Bank loans for well-designedand high priority projects. Given the importantprograms of
other developmentpartners, the Bank will have minimal direct involvementin energy,industrial
restructuring,and environment.

*

In view of the Government'srequirementthat all new operations should have a grant element of
at least 40 percent, it will be critically important to ensure even closer cooperation with
developmentpartnersthat have softerlending terms than those of the Bank.

* Over time, and as the size of the Bank's portfolio decreases, a greater share of administrative
budget resources will be allocated to knowledge-based, non-lending activities which are high
priority for the Government or which are necessary for due diligence.
v.
The role of IFC has increasedconsiderablyover the past three years and is expectedto
expand further. IFC's committed portfolio is now US$328 million. This makes it IFC's largest
portfolioby far in the MiddleEast and North Africa.
vi. The over-archingobjective of the Bank Group's country strategy in Egypt is to reduce
poverty and unemployment. Workingclosely with the authoritiesand other developmentpartners,
the Bank Group will focus on three types of interventions: (a) interventionsthat support higher and

iii
sustained growth (supporting macroeconomic stability; phased restructuring of the bank and
corporate sectors; and improved infrastructure for greater competitiveness). Given the important and
active involvement of USAID and the EU in this broad area, the Bank's lending, at least under the
base case scenario, will be limited; (b) targeted interventions for poverty reduction (basic education
and health; social protection and safety net; and rural poverty); and (c) interventions with indirect
poverty reduction impact. These include interventions that may have major indirect benefits for the
poor in terms of promoting broad-based growth, development of poor areas, initiating dialogue on
governance and community development issues, and building effective institutions.

vii. The "base case"--considered to be the most likely scenario-presumes a continuation of
the current pace of growth (5.0-5.5 percent per annum) and policy implementation. The
scenario is characterizedby no significantshocks or reversals of policy reforms, but also no major
structural reform breakthroughs. The base case strategy will be implemented through the following

instruments.
*

The Bank's portfolio is expected to shrink to about 14 operations by FY04, compared to 19 at
present. Four considerations will dominate the Bank's portfolio management: (a) closer
management of closing dates to ensure speedier delivery of project benefits; (b) greater effort on
the part of the Government and the Bank to reduce effectiveness delays; (c) a special effort to
reduce the use of project management units (PMUs) to ensure sustainability of project outcomes;
and (d) while early indications of parallel financing with development partners for the Bank's
proposed new operations are positive, discussions will be initiated with the Government to move
away from the project-by-project requirement of meeting the 40 percent grant element toward a
more macro or sectoral approach to debt concessionality.
TThe Bank's Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) program will focus on: (a) studies and
activities that provide the intellectual underpinning for operations and technical advice in human
development, rural development and water management; (b) core diagnostic work on poverty,
public expenditure review, financial sector assessment, and gender analysis and mainstreaming.
The recently completed Social and Structural Review provides a solid base for deepening policy
dialogue between the authorities and the key development partners. WBI is expected to play an
important role in disseminating world-wide best practice and bringing focus on high priority
development issues. Over time, the share of analytical and capacity building work in the
program is expected to increase. Most critically needed AAA will be funded out of the Bank's
administrative budget. However, arrangements will be explored with other donors and possibly
the Government to share costs for additional on-demand AAA or capacity building services. A
review of the effectiveness of the Bank's AAA will be undertaken toward the end of the CAS

periodto guideour future analyticaland capacitybuilding workin Egypt.
* New lendingof 2-3 projects a year amountingto a total of US$450-500millionduring the period
FY02-04.
*

Selective expansion of IFC and MIGA activities. IFC's priorities, closely coordinated with those
of the Bank, will focus on developing private-financed infrastructure; providing support to the
services sector, including tourism; supporting internationally competitive and export-oriented
ventures; supporting the privatization effort through both advisory services and providing
financing to privatized ventures; providing support to small and medium enterprises; developing
financial markets; and possibly participating in building pipelines to export Egypt's large natural
gas reserves to Eastern Mediterranean countries.

iv
*

The use of Bank guarantees, alongside MIGA and IFC investments, will be explored to attract
private capital into areas where performance risk remains a major bottleneck.

viii. In terms of alternativescenarios,a "highcase" assistancescenariowould apply if there is
a major deepening of the structural reforms or in the case of a severe deteriorationin the
externalenvironmentwhichmay lead the Bank to step up its assistancein supportof a credible
program. Under this scenario, the Bank could increase total lending over the three years to around
US$1.5 billion of which about a half could be in the form of quick-disbursing loans. As indicated
earlier, the rapidity of the Bank's response will be determined to a large extent by the existence of a
sustained dialogue between the Government and the Bank on the key structural issues. Alternatively,
if the implementation of policy reforms and Bank portfolio deteriorate considerably (deepening
controls, halting structural reforms, and deteriorating Bank portfolio), a "low case" lending scenario
would be envisaged, under which Bank lending for the whole period would be limited to about
US$100 million for one or two projects in the social sectors. Triggers for the scenarios are outlined
in the main text.

ix.

There are risks attached to the proposed country strategy. These are summarized in

Section VI of the CAS, and relate to external exogenous shocks, the risk of fiscal unsustainability,
and delays in the implementation of macroeconomic and structural reforms. However Egypt is
unlikely to face a major risk of balance of payments crisis in the short run, thanks to the adequate
international reserves (US$14 billion, about eight months of imports), and cautious attitude to new
borrowing, which has resulted in low debt service ratio and a relatively small short-term debt (at 6.5
percent of total debt). Egypt has continued to maintain a very good track record in servicing its debt
to the Bank Group. Bank exposure is moderate, and expected to remain so under the base case
lending proposal. IBRD's share of Egypt's overall external debt service would be a comfortable 6-7
percent, as compared with the guideline of 20 percent.

x.

The followingissues are suggestedfor Board consideration:

* Is the proposed Bank Group program sufficiently selective, taking into account the role of other
development partners?
*

Does the proposed mix of lending and non-lending services reflect the changing relationship
between Egypt and the Bank Group?

*

Are lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS sufficiently taken into account
in the design of the present assistance program?

*

Is there sufficient flexibility in the proposed lending program to respond to downside risks?

I.

RECENTDEVELOPMENTS
AND POLICYOPTIONS
A.

Political Context

1.
Following President Mubarak's re-election for a fourth six-year term in 1999, a new
governmentwas formed in October 1999, with an ambitious reform agenda. This was followedby
Parliamentary elections during October/November2000. While the ruling National Democratic
Party (NDP) retained its parliamentarydominance, its majority was reduced from 94 percent of
parliamentary seats in 1995 to 85 percent. The number of opposition deputies in parliament
increasedfrom 13 to 54, and manyprominentNDP legislatorslost their seats.
2.
While voter apathy is still quite high (turnout in the election ranged from 14 percent to 40
percent across the country), the election process has been widely perceived as a step in the right
direction. In particular,for the first time the legislativeelectionswere supervisedby thejudiciary.
3.
With parliamentaryelections completed,the pace of policy reforms will be determinedto a
large extent by the Government's commitmentto reforms and its ability to pass through Parliament
several pieces of importantlegislation(e.g., MortgageLaw, Anti-TrustLaw, FinancialLeasingLaw,
IntellectualPropertyRights Law, LaborLaw, NGO Law).
4.
Egypt is an importantplayer in the MiddleEast peace process and recent developmentsin the
area havebeen detrimentalto prospectsfor political stabilityand economicdevelopmentin the whole
region.
B. Recent Econonic Developments
5.
Egypt's economic growth performance during the second half of the 1990shas been robust.
The stabilizationefforts of the early 1990s resulted in lower growth (averaging3.8 percent during
1990-95). However, they set the stage for sustained GDP increase during the past five years
(averaging about 5.5 percent during 1996-2000)1.Macroeconomic policy provided a stable
environmentfor private sector activityby maintainingexternal and internal balances stable for most
of the period(see Table 1), with particularsuccessin reducinginflation.
6.
Duringthe last two to three years, however, concernshave emerged about the sustainabilityof
this economicperformance,in particular with regard to the external accounts. These concerns are
focusedon two key areas:
* First, there is an issue regardingthe structuraland productivityunderpinningsof growth. Egypt
remains an inward looking economy, with a lukewarm performance of non-oil manufacturing
exports both in terms of growth and composition, as well as not being a major recipient of
foreign direct investment(FDI). Other growth sectors, in particular services and construction,
while creating new employment, are also not contributing to improving productivity and the
economy's competitiveness.
* Second, there is a shorter-termconcern regarding the macroeconomicframework. Despite the
roughly 12 percent depreciationof the currency since January 2000, the real effective exchange
rate remainsappreciated,while productivityhas not strengthenedas much as hoped for. Balance
of payments(BOP) pressuresbeganin 1997,which led to a significantloss of reserves and to the

This average could be lower once the final GDP data for 2000 are revised downward to about 5.0 percent, as has been indicated by
govemment sources. It is also important to note that the growth rate of non-oil GDP has been more variable. In 1999/00, non-oil GDP is
estimated to have grown at 4.3 percent, down from 8.1 percent in 1998/99.

2
abandonment of the fixed nominal dollar peg during 1999-2000. The Government has taken
action but continued pressure on reserves suggests that investors continue to have concerns.
TABLE1: EGYPT'SKEY ECONOMICINDICATORS
(percentages unless otherwise stated)

GDP, market prices, real growth rate
GDP per capita, real growth rate
Gross Domestic Investment, ratio to GDP
Gross Domestic Savings, ratio to GDP
Exports of GNFS, real growth rate
Imports of GNFS, real growth rate
Merchandise Terms of Trade Index (1992=100)
Current Account Balance, ratio to GDP
Overall Fiscal Balance, ratio to GDP
Foreign Direct Investment (Billions of US$)
Total GovernmentDebt, ratio to GDP
External Debt (DOD), ratio to GDP
Debt Service, Ratio to Exports of GNFS
Inflation Rate (CPD
Gross Reserves (months of imports)
Reserves/M2

1990-1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000*

(A
Inual
Average)
3.8
1.6
19.7
13.6
5.7
2.6
98.5
3.5
-7.1
0.9
116.9
69.6
17.4
14.4
7.5
28.9

5.0
3.1
16.6
10.8
1.6
1.6
95.8
-0.3
-1.3
0.6
96.9
46.8
13.2
7.3
11.9
37.8

5.5
3.6
17.7
13.0
2.4
1.9
114.4
0.2
-0.9
0.7
92.6
40.1
9.7
6.2
12.0

5.6
3.8
20.5
14.0
-7.7
1.1
97.4
-3.0
-1.0
1.0
88.4
36.7
8.5
3.8
10.6
32.4

6.0
4.3
22.8
14.4
9.2
12.8
96.8
-1.9
-4.2
0.7
88.8
33.7
9.5
3.8
10.2
26.2

6.4
4.7
24.2
19
7.0
9.4
107.3
-1.2
-3.6
1.6
84.7
30.0
8.7
2.8
8.6
21.7

1

35.9

* Provisional. All figures are for fiscal years, i.e., 2000 means 1999/2000.

Source: World Bank Live Data Base (LDB). Data for 2000 are govemment estimates,and could be revised.

7.
Investment, both public and private, has been one of the main driving forces behind the robust
GDP growth in the post-stabilization period. Gross Domestic Investment (GDI) increased to 24.2
percent of GDP by 2000, up from 16.6 percent in 1996. This increased investment has been mainly
driven by high domestic credit growth, high public investment expenditures and privatization.
Annual credit growth, in particular credit to the private sector, has been very high during most of the
post-stabilization period: indeed during 1994-99, nominal credit growth to the private sector was
more than double the nominal GDP growth. Government capital expenditure also increased from 5.4
percent of GDP in 1998 to 8.2 percent and 6.8 percent in 1999 and 2000, respectively. Privatization,
which was particularly intense during 1996-99-averaging some 24-29 transactions annually for an
average value of 1 percent of GDP per annum-was likely another factor behind the increase in
private investment. Foreign direct investment (FDI) has played a more modest role. During 19962000, it averaged some US$1 billion annually (roughly 1 percent and 5 percent of GDP and GDI,
respectively). More than half of the FDI flow into Egypt during the past decade has been in three
subsectors: chemicals, food and beverage, and engineering. If tourism were added to them, they
would represent some 70 percent of the total.
8.
An analysis of the sources of growth in Egypt during the past few years additionally suggests
that, while the country's growth performance was strong in quantitative terms, it was less so in
qualitative

*

terms.

First, except for manufacturing (which grew at almost 10 percent during 1998-2000) the fastest
growing sectors have been primarily non-tradable, mainly focused on domestic demand. In
particular, the services sector has been the largest contributor to GDP growth. While tourism
explains part of the sector's expansion, much of this growth was linked to domestic demand. In
addition, the construction boom that occurred during 1995-99 (with the sector recording doubledigit growth rates during this period) was a significant component of the increased investment
effort. The issue is to what extent the draft Mortgage Law -- expected to improve housing

3
affordability through longer amortization periods -- can resuscitate this sector, which has
witnessed a major slowdown during 2000-2001.
*

Second, merchandise exports practically stagnated during the 1990s, a period during which world
merchandise trade expanded by 5.6 percent per annum on average. Between 1990 and 1998,
Egypt's merchandise exports declined from 15 percent of GDP to merely 6.2 percent, and their
share in total world merchandise exports declined from 0.15 percent in 1990 to 0.1 percent in
1998. The recent rebound in export growth most likely reflects the response to the depressed
domestic market. Constant market share analysis reveals that Egypt failed to take advantage of
buoyant world trade because it did not trade enough in products for which world consumption
was growing fast (large and negative world consumption switching effect) and because it lost
market shares in its traditional exports products (negative competitiveness effect).

*

Third, and perhaps most significant for the medium-term, growth sectors in Egypt are not
technology-intensive, except perhaps manufacturing, and they are not usually associated with
large improvements in productivity. For example, while part of the boom in construction may
reflect upgrading of key infrastructure, it also suggests that a significant share of investment
constituted new buildings rather than re-tooling or investments in high-tech sectors. In this
regard, FDI has not been a source of technology to upgrade Egypt's competitiveness and
productivity. Given the large role of state banks in the financial system, financial intermediation
may have suffered from interference and weakened the quality of the investment being financed.
And as suggested by the negligible importance of net exports in aggregate demand and the rather
disappointing composition of exports, even manufacturing growth seems to have been
concentrated in satisfying local demand, and has been in relatively low technology sectors such
as textiles. In short, growth in Egypt has been driven largely by factor accumulation rather than
by total factor productivity gains.
C.

More Recent Economic Challen2es

9.
Since early 1998, an important macroeconomic issue has been the pressure on the balance of
payments (BOP). The current account swung significantly from a surplus in 1997 to a deficit
equivalent to 3 percent of GDP in 1998, before gradually improving to a deficit of about 1 percent of
GDP in 2000. In 2000 and the first quarter of 2001, the capital account also showed a significant
deficit mainly because of net outflows from the domestic banking system. To ease the demand for
foreign exchange, the authorities imposed import restrictions, and in 1999 the Central Bank of Egypt
(CBE) started to draw down reserves to meet the growing demand for foreign exchange and to
defend the exchange rate peg. In total, net international reserves declined from US$20 billion in
1998 to US$14.3 billion by December 2000 (equivalent to nine months of imports). The authorities
relaxed the peg and allowed the nominal exchange rate to depreciate gradually, from US$/LE3.40 in
January 2000 to US$/LE3.85 in January 20011. In early 2001, the authorities put in place a new
exchange rate system that, depending on how it is implemented, may allow for more flexibility in the
nominal exchange rate.
10. The main exogenous factor behind the pressure on the BOP was the decline in tourism receipts
following the attack in Luxor on tourists in late 1997. An additional important factor was the
continued appreciation of the real exchange rate after 1997, mainly as a result of the sharp rise in the
value of the US dollar to which the Egyptian pound was pegged. This trend in the pound must have
contributed to the poor export performance as well as the reduced confidence in the sustainability of
the peg, especially in conjunction with the relatively weak productivity performance.

I

The weighted average of market rates during the last three weeks of January 2001.

4

11. The impact of these unfavorable shocks was initially exacerbated by the macroeconomic
policy mix of the authorities. Perhaps concernedwith the declinein tourism in 1998,the authorities
continuedto implement expansionaryfiscal and monetary policies during 1998-99,despite emerging
symptoms of overheating, and only moved to tighten monetary policy during 2000. This policy
reversal, in turn, led to a domestic liquidity squeeze, particularly in the private sector, which was
exacerbatedby the accumulationof payment arrears by the government. As a result,overnightinterbank interest rates rose from 11.5 percent in October 1999 to 14.6 percent in February 2000. As
fears and complaints about the impact of the lack of liquidity on domestic activity grew, the
authoritiesonce again eased monetarypolicy, as indicated by the decline in the inter-bank rate to
below 11.5percent during April-December2000.
12. On the fiscal front, whilethe authoritieswere successfulin containingthe budget deficitduring
1995-98,it increased significantlyin 1999and 2000 (4.2 percent of GDP in 1999 and 3.6 percent in
2000). The sudden reversal in the fiscal stance can be explained partly by improved reporting of
fiscal data by consolidatinginto the budget the expendituresfinanced by the National Investment
Bank (NIB). It also partly reflects the Govemment's decisionto clear the arrears to the private sector
to spur the slowingeconomy. However,there has also been an increase in public investmentin mega
projects. The Governmenthas announcedthat it will tighten control on public investmentspending,
and is making a concerted effort to identify private investors in the Middle East for some of the
larger projects. However, preliminarydata on the 2000/2001 fiscal deficit suggest little success so
far.
D. Poverty and Social Indicators
13. Poverty analysis in Egypt has been severely hampered by the absence of a rigorous and
systematic assessment of poverty incidence and the Government's reluctance to allow access to
primary data. However, based on investigationsundertaken since 1995 (Box A), the incidence of
poverty in mid-1990s was in the range of 22-48 percent of the total population with about 7-10
percent of the population ultra-poor'. Poverty is concentratedin the rural areas and urban-female
headed households. It is the worstin rural UpperEgypt.
14. The extent to which the recent high growth performance in the second half of the 1990s
translatedinto poverty reduction remainsto be assessed.But continued sustainablehigh growth will
be essential for achieving significant poverty reduction in Egypt. Given that poverty in Egypt is
relatively shallow, policies that encourage labor-intensive growth are particularly important in
bringinga relativelylarge number of householdsback abovethe poverty line.
15. Egypt has made importantstrides in improvingseveral of its social indicatorsduring the past
decade. Between 1990 and 1998, life expectancyhas increased from 63 years to 67 years; fertility
rate has declinedfrom 4.0 to 3.3; and infant mortalityrate (per 1000live births) has declinedfrom 69
to 49. Population growth has slowed to slightly under 2 percent, compared to 2.5 percent two
decades ago. However, some outcome indicators, such as literacy, infant mortality and maternal
mortality do not reflect the high levels of inputs. For example,the net primary enrollmentratio is
around 93 percent, yet illiteracyis still about 45 percent. Moreover,despite almost universalaccess
to health care, which is higher than in most countries at similar income levels, infant mortality is
higher than in comparatorcountries. Similarly,although the proportionof GDP spent on education
and health is similar to or greater than in comparatorcountries, the efficiency of service delivery in
these sectors clearly needs improvement. Finally wide disparitiespersist between Upper Egypt and
Lower Egypt and between the rural and urban populationsespecially in terms of fertility rates and
infant and child mortalityrates.
These figures are not endorsed by the Govemment, and a detailed household survey has just been completed.

5

16. In tenns of achievingthe InternationalDevelopmentGoals (IDGs)by 2015,prospects are good
for meetingthese goals. The two main areas that will need special attentionare (i) reducing by half
the number of malnourishedchildren between 1990 and 2015 (the number of underweightchildren
under the age of five remains at almost 12 percent comparedto 10.4percent in 1990; and (ii)making
progresstoward genderequality and empoweringwomen (at roughly 80 percent, the ratio of girls to
boys in primary and secondaryschoolshas not improvedmuch during the past decade; and literacy
rates among girls 15-24 years old, while improving, lag behind boys). The Bank's assistance
strategy,with its focus on social developmentand eliminationof gender disparities,takes accountof
thesechallenges(see sectionIV).
Box A: INCIDENCE AND DYNAmiCSOF POVERTYIN EGYPT

Poverty analysisin Egypt is handicapped by a lack of systematic assessment of poverty incidence and the
emovirnent
reluctanceto provide access to surveydata. UNDP's Egypt Human DevelopmentReport (EHDR), IFPRI
and some Egyptian institutions undertook poverty assessmentsin the 1990s.Their results variedconsiderablyaccording
to survey data used and estimation of different poverty tines. The Government has just completed a large household
survey,from which data will become availablein mid-2001.A thorough assessmentof poverty in Egypt in the late 1990s
cannot be undertakenbeforc such survey data becomeavailable.
Incidence of Poverty: Recent estimatesput the incidenceof poverty in the mid-1990sin the range of 220/%-48%
of the
total population, while the ultra-poor have becn estimated at 7%/610%of total population. The range of the poverty
incidence is wide because a large proportion of the Egyptian population lies near the estimated poverty lines and smaU
changesin the estimation of poverty linesvieldsignificantchangesin the incidence of poverty.
Dynamics of Poverty: There are few comparable surveys to assess the evaluation over tirmeof poverty in Egypt. The
1996EHDR shows that the incidence of poverty (usingupper poverty line estimates) increased from 30% in 1981/82
to 39% in 1990/91and further to 48% in 1995/96.
Geographical Concentration of Poverty: Approximatelytwo-thirdsof the poor (and three-quartersof the ultra-poor)
live in rural areas. EHDR's lieadcount Index estimates the incidence of poverty in 1995/96 at 34%/4in urban
Governorateswhilein rural Governoratesit ranged between 48% in Lower Egypt and 604/oin Upper Egypt. The depth
of poverty is estimatedto be markedlyworsein rural Upper Egypt.
Characteristics of the Poor: Recent poverty assessmentsconfirm that poor people tend to live in larger households
and support more childrenper adult. The poor and non-poor tend to have similarrates of male labor force participation
but females' participation rates are much lower for the poor. Poverty is highly concentrated in female-headed
households (50% more poverty compared to male-headedhouseholds in urban areas and 29% more in rural areas
according to IFPRI). IFPRI's survey also shows that, on average, the poor have 2.6 fewer years of schoolingthan the
non-poor and their literacyrate is 27% lower than the non-poor.
EGYPTIANPARTICIPATORY
POVERTYASSESSMENT(JEPPA):An interestingexercisewas undertaken in 1999by the
EgyptianSocialFund for Development (SF1D)in collaborationwith the UK Departmnentfor InternationalDevelopment
(DFID) in nincteen communities across five Govemorates. The EPPA aimed to find out from the poor themselves
what they saw as key issuesand constraints preventingthem from playingtheir full role in economic, politicaland social
life. Similar to the general findingsin other countries of the Bank's "Voir afthe Poo?'study, the Egyptian analysis
concluded that the poor do not see povertv simplyin financialterms but associate it with social status, control over
assets such as land, accessto housing,health and educationand with the abilityto gain a secure livelihood.The poor also
linkedtheir poverty to issues of social recognition,status, dignityand autonomy.At the conmmunity
level,povertyis seen
by the poor to be associated with lack of access to resources (safe water, sanitation, transport, qualityland and social
services).There is a strong sense among the poor in Egypt that poverty is self-perpetuating.Levels of politicaland social
exclusionaffected the abilityof individualsand communities to accessassets and resources.
Sources:IFPRI (i 998A,SFD /DFID (1999)and Handoussa(2000) EHDR (1996)

II. EGYPT'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
17. The Government's twenty-year plan covers the period 1997-2017 within which it implements
five-year plans. The current five-year plan covers the period 1996/97-2001/02. The Government's
over-arching objective, as expressed in these plans, is to achieve a private sector-led growth rate of
7.0-7.5 percent that would create gainful employment opportunities and reduce the incidence of
poverty. The agenda for achieving sustainable high growth and poverty reduction calls for
significant deepening of structural reforms, as well as addressing specific cross-cutting issues of

6
increasing relevance to Egypt's economic and social development, such as external openness,
governance, financial sector reform, environment, and gender.
The authorities' strategic
development agenda addresses also the following high priority areas: (i) accelerating social and
human development; (ii) promoting rural development as an effective poverty alleviation mechanism
and addressing critical water sector issues; and (iii) removing obstacles to private sector
development. Egypt intends to continue its internal program of reform with particular emphasis on
strengthening institutions. Fostering regional integration, particularly in the context of the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) is also an
important area, but this has not yet evolved as a strategic priority, although in the future it most likely
will.

A.

Achieving Sustainable High Growth and Reduciny Poverty

18. Apart from its success in stabilizing the economy, Egypt has implemented a series of structural
reforms during the past few years in the areas of capital markets, tariff reduction, reforms of the
insurance industry (e.g., amendment of the Insurance Law to permit foreign investors to own shares
in Egyptian insurance companies), privatization of more than half of the Law 203 public enterprises,
joining of COMESA, initialing the EU Association Agreement', the recent introduction of a more
flexible exchange rate mechanism, and the strengthening of the social safety net (improved targeting,
reduced subsidies).
19. However, if the country is to achieve the desired 7 percent growth rate, it would need to
continue upgrading its human capital, remove obstacles to private sector development, particularly
with regard to small and medium scale enterprises, and address the critical policy issues of
agricultural development and water resource management. In addition to these sectoral policy issues
(discussed more fully below), Egypt will need to address a number of critical constraints on growth
and poverty reduction which are broad and cross-cutting. The cross-cutting issues relate to increased
openness, governance, the financial sector, environment and gender.

IncreasedOpenness
20. In contrast with the strong growth in domestic demand during the 1990s, the performance of
merchandise exports during the last decade has been generally weak. As noted above, merchandise
exports as a share of GDP declined from 15 percent in 1990 to 6.2 percent in 1998, and Egypt has
lost market share in world markets. A recent joint Government of Egypt/World Bank task force
concluded that exporters face highly negative price incentives as well as cumbersome customs
procedures and other administrative barriers.
21. Success in improving the performance of non-oil merchandise exports will be largely
determined by removal of the anti-export bias in trade policy and a more flexible management of the
exchange rate. With regard to trade policy, the key reform is to reduce the level and dispersion of
import tariffs. The recent initialing of the EU agreement is a key step to integrate Egypt successfully
into the world economy, providing a framework for reduced protection. In addition, the authorities
would need to improve the responsiveness of the public administration in developing an exportfriendly environment, strengthen infrastructure, streamline and modernize customs procedures,
including updating and harmonizing product standards and quality control, and facilitating export
finance.

I
Egypt initialed the Association Agreement with the EU in January 2001. It is part of the wider Euro-Med framework that also covers
cooperation in cultural, human rights and other areas. On the trade side, the objective is to dismantle tariffs within a period of 17 years after
ratification. The Agreement also provides European market access (quotas) to Egyptian agricultural commodities.

Governance Issues
22. Egypt's key economicgovernanceissues relate to tax policy and administration;civil service
reform; legal and judicial reform; greater involvementand participation of civil society in service
deliveryand decision-making;and corporategovernance.
•

Tax policy and administration:Surveysin many countriessuggestthat petty corruptionand, more
generally,ineffectivenessby tax officials increasesbusiness costs and distorts competition. In
addition, tax incentivestend to offset each other out and have little incrementaleffect. A good
businessenvironmentrequires improvementsin administrationas well as in the tax code itself.
With regard to the former, the joint Government/WorldBank task force report recommended
setting public performance standards that can be easily monitored through management
informationsystemsin all major functionsof revenue collection'. A start could be made with the
duty drawback and sales tax rebates for exports. With regard to the tax code, the task force
suggestedrevisionof the code and abolishingmost tax incentives. Such a system would reduce
distortions,limitdiscretion and facilitatetax administration.

* Improvingthe civil service: Egypt faces a major problem of a large, inefficient and underpaid
civil service with weak professionalincentives and performance. The civil service not only
stands out for its enormous over-staffing(the governmentemploys roughly one-quarter of the
total labor force of about 22 million) and weak productivity,but also for its immense political
influencein resisting efforts to reform it.2 Interviewsin Egypt suggest that dramatic reforms of
the civil service, or of particular portions of it, are not considered politically feasible. Under
these circumstances,the above-mentionedGovernmentlWorldBank task force report identified
three types of short-term actions. These actions are similar to those already proposed above in
the tax area and include: establishingand publicly monitoringperformancestandards;setting up
institutional formal complaint mechanisms linked to internal management and disciplinary
processes; and contracting out activities to private companies (for example, pre-shipment
inspectionof imports).
* Commerciallegal system: While the courts in Egypt are well respected by the private sector and
are trusted to uphold contracts and property rights, the system is seen as too slow and
cumbersome in resolving commercial legal disputes. The "clearance rate" for commercial
disputeresolution (percentageof filed cases actually resolved)was reported in the mid-1990sto
be 36 percent (compared to 80-100 percent in most developed countries). Cases that were
clearedaveragedover six years to resolve. The main reasons for this poor performanceappearto
be the limited number of judges and their low remuneration,the extensive use of court experts
(civil servants), the lengthy and inappropriateprocedures (including the lack of effective case
management),and poor courtfacilities.
* Greater participationof civil society: Experience from other countries confirms that promoting
citizen consultationin strategypreparationfor public service delivery, involving civil society in
the monitoring of public sector performance, and decentralizing more decision-making to
communitiesincreasestransparencyand accountability. The Governmenthas started to involve
civil society--service users, think-tanks, private sector, women's groups, non-governmental
organizations(NGOs) and other groups of citizens--in planning and decision-making. Recent
examples are the participatory process of preparation of the next Five-Year Plan, the intense
The joint report "Egypt: Action Plan for improving the Business Environment, Civil Service and Business Linkages" was one of five
reports prepared by joint Govemment-World Bank Task Forces during 1999-2000. The other four areas covered were: export promotion; social
safety nets; employment and training; and private financing of infrastructure.
2
For details on interactions between Egypt's civil service and business, see FIAS: "Egypt - Reform nvestment Administration and
Strengthen Investment Servicing,"Washington D.C., April1998.

8

consultationswith civil society on the draft MortgageLaw and other pieces of legislation. The
Governmenthas also expressed interest in innovative uses of the internet and other forms of
informationand communicationstechnology(ICT) to enhance the efficiency, transparencyand
accountabilityof government (e-Government). There is, however, a great deal more to be done
in this whole area, especially in terms of effective decentralizationof decision-making,and
facilitating the role of the more than 14,000 NGOs in Egypt in providing social services and
serving as part of the country's social safety net. In this context, it is important for the
Governmentto ensure that the new draft NGO law is supportiveof civil society.
Corporate governance:Just as public governance issues discussed above are important for the
public sector,so corporategovernanceis importantin the private sector. With Egypt's increasing
exposureto globalizationand its need to tap domesticand internationalcapital markets,corporate
governancestandards will need to improveto give investors the protectionrequired to encourage
them to provide capital. Increasingly,individual investors, funds, banks, and other financial
institutionsbase their decisionsnot only on a company's outlook, but also on its reputationand
its governance. Corporate governance comprises those aspects of the economic environment,
laws, regulations, procedures and common practices that provide an incentive framework for
companies to maximize long-term value of shareholders, while respecting the interests of
stakeholdersand society at large. Given the depth and size of the capital markets in Egypt, a
corporategovernanceassessmentwouldbe a useful tool for the country.
FinancialSectorIssues
23. Despite a steady reduction in the importanceof the public sector in the financial system, its
role remains dominant, especiallythrough its ownershipof large banking and insurance institutions.
Though good progresshas been made in revitalizingthe capital markets in the last few years, banks
still constitutethe bulk of the financialsystem. The dominanceof the publicly owned institutionsin
the Egyptian economyand their inability to match the performanceof their internationaland private
counterpartshas limited the scope and depth of the financialmarkets and its development. The range
of products available in the financial markets is insufficientto meet the needs of private sector, and
access of small- and medium-size enterprises (SME's) to the financial products is constrained.
Internationalexperience indicates that banking systems dominatedby state banks can be reformed
effectively through a well-designed and well-managedprogram of privatization that focuses on
improving governance and introducing market discipline. The four state-ownedbanks in Egypt
(National Bank of Egypt, Bank of Alexandria,Banque du Caire, and Bank Misr) account for more
than half of all loans and advances outstanding. Any program for the developmentof the financial
markets would need to address the effect of their public ownership on the development of the
financialmarkets.
24. Access to financial sector data has been limited, making judgements on the health of the
financial system difficult. However, based on data providedby the authorities,Egypt's prudential
standards conform to the internationalstandards. While capital adequacy requirementsmeet the
minimums established by the Basle Committee, and regulations regarding loan classification and
provisioning are in line with international standards, the disclosure practices need further
improvement. Non-performingloans have risen slightly as share of total portfolios (according to
Central Bank of Egypt data, from 9.6 percent at the end of 1999 to 10.5 percent at the end of 2000).
Internationalexperienceindicates that rapid credit growth of the type seen in Egypt during the past
decade is likely to be associated with a decline in lending standards. Banks may, therefore, be
vulnerableto a decelerationof economicactivity. Under these circumstances,a further strengthening
of regulationand supervisionstandardsneeds to be accordedpriority. This should be done in parallel
with the extensivetraining effort being undertakenby the Central Bank of Egypt to upgradebanking

9
skills across the board. The Government understands the importance of these issues and is
consideringparticipationin the FinancialSector AssessmentProgram (FSAP). This exercise would
help the authorities to assess better the vulnerabilitiesand development needs of the country's
financialsystem.
25. There are also issues related to the non-bank financial sector, such as implementinga welldesignedmortgage law to facilitate better housing finance;developing the corporate bond markets;
reformingthe insurancesector; introducingnew financialservices;introducingnew instruments(risk
management instruments are particularly lacking); and assuring more market-basedrural credit.
However, in terms of strategic priority, the issue of the health of the banking system and
modernizationof the regulatoryframeworkfor the capital marketsneed more emphasis.
EnvironmentalIssues
26. Egypt's high population density and concentrationof industry along the Nile Valley and the
Delta have led to an increased burden on the country's natural resource base and have adversely
affectedpublic health. The main environmentalissuesfaced by the country are:
* Acute water scarcity and decliningquality: Per capita water availabilityis expected to fall from
the current level of about 950 cu.m per year to about 670 cu.m by the year 2017. Water quality
in the Nile river and the canals deteriorates in a northward direction due to the disposal of
municipal and industrial effluents, agricultural drainage as well as decreasing flow. Drainage
canals are heavily polluted. While access to sanitationin urban areas is 20 percent of the total
urban populationof 45 million, the comparablefigure for the rural population is only 5 percent.
Public health is, therefore, seriously affected, with water-bornediseases a major cause of death,
and a predominanceof the shallowwells in the Nile acquiferbeing contaminated.
*

Land degradation: Annual loss of agricultural land due to urban encroachment is estimated
between 15,000 and 30,000 feddans (1 feddan = 0.42 hectares). The major causes of land
degradationare poor irrigationdrainage,soil salinization,inadequatecrop rotation and selection,
fragmentedland tenure and soil erosion.

* Increasingpollution and untreated urban and hazardouswaste disposal: The major sources of
outdoorpollution are hazardousair emissionsand water discharges from the heavymetallurgical
industries,refineries,cement and power plants, as well as from a very aging transportsector. In
addition, some 15 million tons of municipalsolid waste are generatedannually, of which about
2.5 million tons remain uncollectedand no appropriatesanitary landfills exist for their disposal.
Hazardous waste, agriculturaland hospital waste are also mixed with municipal waste in open
dumps where burning is the most commonmethod of disposal. Air and water pollution are not
surprisinglysources of respiratoryand allergic ailments,especiallyamongchildren.
* Poorly protected cultural and natural heritage: Air pollution, wastewater, uncontrolled urban
encroachmentand a large influx of tourists are the major causes of the poorly preservedcultural
and historical monuments. The issue is not one of legislation; there are many sectoral laws
regulating the environment in Egypt. The problem is the poor enforcement and compliance
under those laws.
27. It will be extremely important to assess more systematically the economic damages from
environmentaldegradationto raise public awareness. Egypt has witnessed a rapid surge of more
than 200 NGOs in the field of environment,and these, together with an increasinglyenvironmentconsciousmedia,can be catalysts in orchestratingpublic debate on environmentmanagement.

10

GenderIssues
28. The Government has consistently expressed its commitment to integrating women fully in
development. Gender is an important component in its current Five-Year Plan, and the Government
has requested Bank support in mainstreaming gender in the next plan through a well-tailored gender
assessment. It is a signatory to the Committee for the Elimination of all Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAW), and its commitment to greater gender equality was well articulated at the UN's
Beijing +5 meeting. Women are increasingly gaining equal access to legal protection under the law
and improvements in access to education and health care over the past two decades have had a
particularly positive impact on women. However, as the Government itself realizes, more needs to
be done to bridge the gender gap, as summarized below.
*

In the area of education and training, the Government is rightly focusing on (i) addressing issues
that would increase girls' retention in schools; (ii) combating illiteracy, which affects 50 percent
of all female adults, compared to 29 percent of all male adults; (iii) increasing women's training
opportunities in science and math as well as technological and vocational training; and (iv)
enhancing women's educational opportunities, particularly at the university level and in nontraditional fields. To overcome these challenges, more focus will be needed on the curricula side
to ensure that text book content remains updated and does not include any gender-discriminatory
material. Equally important is to focus on teacher caliber and teacher training needs.

*

Official unemployment statistics indicate that female unemployment is twice or three times that
of men, the highest rate being for young and educated women in rural areas. The ILO's latest
World Employment Report indicates that women's participation in the labor force increased five
times faster than men's during 1980-1996, and yet the participation rate in 1996 was 25 percent
for women compared to 73 percent for men. Since agriculture employs some 40 percent of
working women, gender considerations need to be borne in mind in any agricultural reforms.
The same is true for public sector employment, where women constitute one-third of the
employees. Facilitating women's access to micro credit, providing the relevant training,
establishing vocational training centers that respond to women's needs, simplifying procedures
for small projects and encouraging local banks and NGOs to combine micro credit with relevant
training for women are some aspects of a viable strategy. Finally eradicating discriminatory
hiring practices and other kinds of workplace discrimination, especially in the private sector,
needs to be supported.

*

In the area of health, despite progress in lowering population growth during the last two decades,
more attention needs to be given to reproductive health services and the introduction of new
methods of birth control. With regard to female genital mutilation (FGM), the Ministry of Health
has issued a decree forbidding this practice in public and private centers and punishing the
perpetrators. However, the practice continues and more is needed to educate and disseminate
information as well as to improve the capacity of social and health workers and NGOs to address
this issue. Early marriage is another area of concern. Despite the legal marriage age being 16,
early marriage persists, adversely affecting women's health conditions. Legal measures to
prevent this practice, which typically occurs because a good number of women are not registered
at birth, must be implemented and supported by a national campaign to encourage and ensure
registration of girls at birth.

*

The Government is fully cognizant of the need to raise women's awareness of their legal and
social rights as spelled out in the Constitution and in the conventions to which Egypt is a
signatory. Apart from addressing the discriminatory hiring practices referred to earlier, the

11

Government has rightly identified as an important strategy tool to provide identity cards, which
determine women's right to access services and to participate fully in the development process'.
29. The Government expects the Bank and other development partners to play an important role in
these areas through planned work on gender assessment and a public expenditure review, and, more
generally, ensuring the mainstreaming of gender in all developmental activities.

B.

Social and Human Development

EducationSectorIssues
30. To remain competitive in the increasingly globalized economy, Egypt will require a
sophisticated education system that can generate graduates with problem-solving and technological
skills for the fast-changing, information-oriented environment. The attention and resources devoted
to the sector by the Government have been significant, especially at the basic and secondary levels.
The share of education in total expenditures increased from 12 percent in 1991 to about 20 percent at
present. The share of pre-university expenditures in total education expenditures also increased from
72 percent in 1997/98 to 76 percent in 1998/99. However, these increased resources have not
translated into producing quality students needed for the increasingly complex and demanding
economy. Interventions at the higher education levels, including initiatives for improved science and
technology programs, have yet to be launched, although a clear strategy is in place. And the
Government has yet to start investing at the pre-basic level to establish a firmer foundation for
human capital formation. The following are the key issues needing Government attention during the
next few years.
*

At the basic and secondary education levels, access has improved considerably: the net
enrollment ratios for girls and boys at the basic level are 88 percent and 98 percent, respectively.
The remaining challenge is to focus more on the quality of education, where only a small dent
has been made in the retraining of some 700,000 teachers in technology and modern pedagogy.
Similarly, professional development for about 80,000 school managers remains to be carried out
to enable them to manage in a more decentralized system. Moreover, achievement testing and
performance assessments need to be mainstreamed.

*

The expansion of access at lower levels combined with a higher growth rate in the 18-24 years
age cohort, has placed severe pressure on the higher education system. Per student expenditure at
this level has declined by roughly 8 percent annually in real terms, leading inevitably to a drop in
quality. Reforms are needed to facilitate greater involvement of the private sector, more use of
information technology and greater cost-efficiency. While national consensus for the reform of
higher education is strong, intensive technical assistance and financial support will be needed to
undertake the reforms.

*

International research confirmnsthat relatively small investments in early childhood development
(ECD) yield high returns in the long run for both individuals and saciety. ECD interventions, at
both nursery school and kindergarten levels, have been shown to enhance nutritional and health
status of children, improve their intelligence scores, increase school enrollment, and reduce
repetition in, and dropout from, schools. Studies also show that, in general, the benefits of early
interventions are especially high for disadvantaged children and their families. The Government
will need to focus more on this area.

An Egyptian NGO won a Bank Development Marketplace grant to develop work in this area.

12

31. The authorities have been working closely with some 1200 stakeholders,including several
donors, to develop a vision and an evolving strategy for all levels of education, drawing on
internationalexperience. This has resulted in the Government's 20-year frameworkfor Education
and Training, which is serving as the basis for cooperationwith the key developmentpartners in a
coherent way.
Health Sector Issues
32. Over the last two decades, Egypt has achieved significant improvements in the health status of
the population. Between 1980 and 1998, infant mortality rate declined from 120 per 1,000 live births
to 49; and total fertility declined from 5.1 to 3.3. The country has invested extensively in health
service infrastructure, and has provided good access to safewater, sanitation and basic public health

programs.
33. Notwithstanding these achievements, wide inequities persist in the availability and quality of
health care services and health outcomes: the infant child mortality rate is three times higher in the
poorer rural governorates than in the urban ones. There are also significant inefficiencies in the
system, exemplified by very low hospital occupancy rates (37 percent average occupancy rate in
public hospitals), and by excessive prescription and use of drugs. There are 1.3 physicians per
occupied hospital bed, one of the highest ratios in the world, while Egypt's medical schools are
turning out more physicians than required, further exacerbating the existing surplus. At the same
time, there is an uneven distribution of resources, with a surplus of physicians and hospital beds
concentrated in urban areas and a dearth in the rural areas. Finally, while the incidence of HIV/AIDS
in Egypt remains very low (at end 1999, the number of adults and children in Egypt with HIV/AIDS
was estimated to be 8,100 cases, or just under 0.02 percent of the total population), there is need to
maintain vigilance, especially among intravenous drug users'. There is also need for encouraging
prevention and safe practices.
34. In 1997, total health spending in Egypt represented 3.8 percent of GDP (lower than the 5.3
percent average for lower income countries) of which 50 percent was out-of-pocket spending by
households. As Egypt enters into the middle income transition, it faces a dual burden, requiring a
response to (i) the disease burden of the poor (high infant and maternal mortality) and (ii) the
emerging problems associated with health transition, namely an increase in risk factors such as
obesity, smoking and hypertension leading to a rise in chronic disease and injuries from road
accidents.
35. In 1998, the Government embarked upon an ambitious Health Sector Reform Program
(HSRP), designed to be a blue-print for a comprehensive reform of Egypt's health sector over the
next two decades. The HSRP represents a major shift away from more traditional health programs
that focused on vertical programs for a defined disease or health problem. The reform begins to
consolidate the fragmented health financing system within the framework of a national health
insurance program, which will provide the basis for ensuring risk-pooling and equitable distributions
of resources. It also aims to reduce duplication and wastage of resources among the many providers.
36. Embedded within the concept of family health, promoted under HSRP, is a call for greater
participation of families and communities in health promotion and preventive care. Thus it represents
increased importance given to integrating health care services with other social development
programs. For example, the Bank-financed Population Project (FY96) fosters active collaboration
between the Ministry of Health and the Social Fund for Development (SFD) to generate demand for
I

UNAIDS, 2000 Update.

13
family planningservicesin low demandareas througha variety of communitydevelopmentprojects.
This approachis particularlyeffectivein reachingthe most vulnerableand hard-to-reachpopulation.
37. While the Government'sstrategymoves the sectorin the right direction,the implementationof
the strategy has proven to be challenging: despite the acceptance of the overall objectives and
strategic framework for reform, the administration,in its day to day decision making process,
continuesto exhibit tendenciestoward centralizedcontrol. This could underminethe intentionof the
reform strategy.
SocialProtectionIssues
38. Socialinsuranceand unemploymentschemesand labor market protection are only availableto
those employed in the formal sector. A better targeted social protection system is of paramount
importance for the bottom two deciles of the population: the present social protection system,
accountingfor roughly 2 percent of GDP (food subsidies: 85 percent; Social Fund programs: 13
percent; and cash transfers and related programs: 2 percent) supports many non-poor. More
generally,reforms need to be undertakenin key areas which have the potential to become drains on
public resources (health insurance, food subsidies, social insurance/pensions,etc.). Moreover,
institutionalweaknessesare serious and impede the translationof policy into effectiveprograms.
39. An emerging area of concern in Egypt is child protection as the country starts to exhibit
symptomsof break-downof the traditionalfamily networksand rise in urban slums. There has been
a drop in school attendance for children belonging to the lowest quintiles of income. The
establishmentof the National Council for Childhoodand Motherhood (NCCM), and the launch by
PresidentMubarak of the second decade (2000-2010)for the protection and welfare of children has
sharpened the focus on this area, makingthe approachmore comprehensiveand community-based.
C.

Agriculture, Rural Development and Water

40. Egypt's agricultural sector pioneered the economicreform process that was then extended to
the rest of the economyduring the early 1990s. During the last two decades, substantialsuccesswas
achieved in price liberalization of inputs and outputs, and the elimination of land-use controls for
most crops. Duringthe 1990s,the focus has been on increasingagriculturalproductivityof land and
water through more efficient use of these limited resources. In response to these measures, the
performanceof the agricultural sector improved considerably: the average annual growth rate of
agriculturalproductionincreased to 3.0 percent in the 1990sfrom 2.8 percent in the 1980s, and the
food gap narrowedsignificantly.
41. Notwithstandingthis progress,much more needs to be done to harness the full potential of the
sector in increasing rural incomes and alleviating poverty. Greater openness in the markets of
Egypt's significanttrading partners would, of course, help. The following three issues appear most
relevantfor the comingyears.
According to a 1998 survey by the InternationalFood Policy Research Institute (IPRI), 63
percent of the poor and 74 percent of the ultrapoor in Egypt live in rural areas. Increasingthe
productivityof agriculture remains an important prerequisitefor increasing the incomes of the
rural poor in a sustainablemanner. More effort needs to be made to develop new crop varieties
and agricultural techniques to enhance small holder access to basic services, information,
technology and extension. In addition, increased emphasison non-agriculturalsources of rural
employmentand income from rural handicrafts and industries will be needed for rural poverty
alleviation. Improvingthe performanceof financial services to the rural populationremains an

14
importantissue. Finally,in a country where 95 percent of the populationlives on only 4 percent
of the land, pressuresare buildingon the governmentfor horizontalexpansionto new agricultural
areas. Land reclamationefforts are underwayin the Western Delta (through the Nasser Canal),
the Eastern Delta and Sinai (Es SalamCanal) and more recentlyin the South of the New Valley
area (Toshka) and East Al Aweinet on the border with Sudan. The costs and benefits of
investmentsin the new lands will need to be carefullyassessed.
*

There is need for a more systematic approach to the development of agricultural exports.
Revenuesfrom agriculturalexportsduring the 1990shave remainedlow and volatile(agricultural
exports, excluding cotton, account for only 5 percent of total merchandiseexports) owing to
incompleteliberalizationof prices and marketingmechanismsfor some products. In sub-sectors
such as cotton, this could threaten the existence of the whole sub-sector: on average, cotton
exports in the 1990s reached only half of their 1980svolume. Other reasons,especially for the
horticulturesub-sector (identifiedas the most promisingsub-sector for exports) are shortagesof
adequatetechnical and managerial skills, lack of reliable supporting infrastructure(land, water
and warehousing) and other services to allow private sector competitive involvement in the
sector .

* Water scarcity will be a criticalchallengefor the futureof Egypt. Per capita water availabilityin
Egypt is about 950 cu.m. per year, lower than even the regional average of 1200 cu.m. per year.
Compoundingthe problem of waterquantity are issues related to the quality of water because of
water-logging,salinity and degradationby pollution. Some water usage savingscan be expected
from the reuse of drainagewater, rainwaterharvestingand watershedmanagement(mainlyalong
the Mediterraneancoast), limited desalination,reduction of Nile water flows to the sea and the
continuationof irrigationand drainageimprovement.The Nile Basin Initiative(NBI)should also
help (see para. 74). However, increased investments will be needed for the operation and
maintenanceof the drainageand irrigationsystemsin the new and old lands, which will make the
institution of a viable cost recovery program critical. Moreover, the increasing demand for
limited water resources will put pressure on the Governmentto formulatepolicies and programs
to improve water allocation among various water users. Since agriculture uses more than 80
percent of availablewater, a key option will be to reallocatewater within agriculture,by moving
gradually out of water-intensivecrops such as rice and sugarcane. Finally, while substantial
investmentsof over US$ 4 billion have gone to urban waste water management,rural sanitation
and waterpollution have remainedrelativelyneglected.
42. The Governmenthas adopted a rural developmentstrategy that addresses many of the above
issues. However, it is critically importantthat during the next few years the focus remain on water
management issues, promotion of agricultural exports and a concerted effort to eradicate rural
poverty.
D.

Removing Obstacles To Private Sector Development

43. Despite considerableprogress during the past decade, Egypt's private sector is saddled with a
number of constraints that have thwarted opportunitiesfor a much more vibrant private-sector-led
growth (for a detailed discussion, see Annex 1). In addition to the trade and competition policy
framework,and a financialsector that is dominatedby the public sector and does not support small
and medium enterprise (SME) development, the following are the main barriers to private sector
development:unfavorablebusiness environment;weak and inefficient infrastructureservices; and a

'World Bank: "Toward Agricultural Competitiveness in the 21P Century: Egypt's Agricultural Export-Oriented Strategy," July 2000.

15
slowdown of the privatizationprocess. In addition, the economy needs to take advantageof the
informationand communicationstechnology(ICT) possibilitiesopened up by the "new economy".
BusinessEnvironmentRelated Issues
44. Private operatorsfrequently identify the tax system and customs administrationas a primary
constraint. The system imposes uncertainty, delays and excess costs on Egyptian businesses,
particularly on SMEs. The commerciallegal system is also regarded as too slow, expensiveand
cumbersomein resolvingcommerciallegal disputes. This limits the developmentof impersonaland
complex contractingand raises the cost of business transactions. Labor regulations,while formally
cumbersome, are not widely enforced. However they may deter large companies from investing
and/or distort their investment decisions toward more capital-intensive,less employment-creating
technologies.
45. The business environmentis even less supportiveof SMEs and micro enterprises.! There is
little incentivefor them to join the formal sector; formalizationdoes not necessarilylead to a better
access to land, capital and know-how. This implies a loss of growth potential in a potentially
dynamic sector, loss of fiscal revenue for the government, and, when SMEs do choose to locate
within the formal sector,unfaircompetitionfrom larger firms.
InfrastructureIssues
46. In the past two decades Egypt has invested significantly in upgrading its physical
infrastructure. Whereas twenty years ago businessmenwould fly to Athens to make an international
call and there was only one dual highway in the country, today telephones work well, roads are
adequate, electric power is uninterruptedand water supply in urban areas is of generally good
quality. Problems remain, of course. City transport, especially in Cairo, is congested and the
railways and water services do not cover their costs. After a long investmentboom, maintenanceis
an increasingconcern. Moreover, the shift in budget expendituresto human resource development
(especiallyeducationand health) have meantreducedresources availablefor infrastructure.
47. In order to cope with the need for continuedinfrastructureinvestmentin a constrainedbudget
environment,the Government is embarked on a massive effort to attract private capital to public
infrastructure. Two power BOTs are under constructionand two others are planned. Port handling
has been concessionedout in one port and new airportsand toll roads are beingbuilt on a BOT basis.
Progress in mobilizingprivate funds is, however, slow in light of the fact that the concepts behind
privateinvestmentin public entitiesis still relativelynew to Egypt and problemsof cost recoveryand
contractualagreementsremain. Under the circumstancesforeign investors approachsuch projects in
Egypt cautiously. In addition, certain kinds of investment (for instance, rural water and sanitation
and certain roadways)are not likely to attract private finance and the Governmentwill need to step
up investmentsin these particular areas. In parallel, funds for maintenanceof existing investments
are short.
48. There remains scope for further privatizationin telephones, power and water servicesand a
numberof venturesare under negotiation. More aggressivemarketingof such possibilitiesshouldbe
undertaken,however. In addition, Governmentneeds to address difficult questions of cost recovery
and adequate maintenance. Pricing of water is particularly sensitive in this regard. Finally, as

I

Egyptian enterprises employing less than 10 workers are estimated to contribute 80 percent of private sector value added and some 75
percent of employment.

16
greaterprivate participationin infrastructureoccurs questions of regulationand legal efficiency will
become moreimportant.
Privatization
49. After an impressive privatizationdrive during 1994/95-1999/00,when some 130 enterprises
with assets worth about US$3.8billion were privatized,there was a markedslow down in the process
during most of 2000 in the run-up to the legislative elections in October/November2000 and the
volatile political situation in the Middle East. Other reasons for delay were related to valuation
problems and a decision to undertake restructuring of a number of poorly performing companies
prior to their privatization.
50. Despite progress made, the public sector still accounts for a remarkably high share of
economicactivity,at around 30 percent. Accelerationof the privatizationprocess will be essentialto
revitalizethe investmentclimate and to help sustain the momentumof growth. The Governmenthas
indicated its plans to divest most of the remainingenterprisesduring the next 2-3 years. The most
imminent activities are the sale of 20 percent of Egypt Telecom, the privatization of the gas
distributionnetwork, and the sale of the public sector's share of joint venture insurance companies.
Recent developmentsin the gas sector,where Egypt has a very significantresource,illustratewhat is
possible in terms of private sector involvement.' Since March 2000, major deals have been struck
betweenthe governmentand the private sector,with BP Amoco, Shell and British Gas.
ExDloitinm
Informationand CommunicationsTechnologv(ICT) Possibilities
51. Egypt is one of the fastest growinginformationtechnologymarkets in the world, growingby
some 35 percent annually. It is a major priority of the Governmentto capitalize on the country's
relatively cheap pool of skilled labor. The recently established Ministry of Communicationsand
Information Technology is in the process of setting up an enabling environment and developing
programsin whichICT industriescan continueto grow.
52. Government's initiatives are focusing on empowering the private sector and stimulating
national demand for communicationand informationtechnology through education programs and
public projects; establishing partnerships with global industry; and modernizing Egypt's
telecommunicationsand postal infrastructure.In order to upgradeEgypt's infrastructureand develop
the workforce,the Governmenthas signed agreementswith many global IT companies,notablyIBM,
Cisco Systems, Oracle, Network Solutions,and PSINET(adding to the cooperationagreementwith
Microsoft).
53. The number of internet users in Egypt continuesto increase and is currently close to 500,000
subscribers,a market penetrationof about 0.7 percent. The number of Internet Service Providershas
grown to over 60, and the cost of internet access has fallen dramaticallyfrom an average of US$30
per monthas a flat charge to less than $10 per month. Annualrevenuesfrom internetrelated services
are estimated at about US$23 million. Additionally,market penetration for wireless and fixed line
communication is growing and estimated to be currently around 3 percent and 10 percent,
respectively.
54. While Egyptis a leader in the Arab World in terms of the "new economy",much remains to be
done. Access to technologyand internet in schools and universities at affordable prices needs to be
I

Egypt has proven reserves of 43 trillion cubic feet and potential reserves of 120 trillion cubic feet. Current domestic consumption of
only 17 billion cubic feet indicates the major potential for export.

17
assured. Telecommunications and in particular internet infrastructure needs greater attention. ECommerce infrastructure, the heart of ICT, requires strengthening of the financial services sector and
in particular greater use of credit cards.
55. There is also need for developing the regulatory environment for telecommunications and
postal services, and for protecting intellectual property, financial regulation and the development of
new cyber-laws. In addition, specific work is required to create awareness, promote Arabic content
on web sites, encourage markets and develop and retain human resources. Without a focus in the last
area, Egypt will continue to lose its best and brightest ICT professionals abroad.

III. EXTERNALENVIRONMENT
ANDMACROECONOMIC
OPTIONS
A.

External Environment

56. As indicated earlier, Egypt's economic growth during the 1990s has been largely driven by the
domestic market. A decomposition of economic growth into its domestic and foreign components
indicates that in the second half of the 1990s, some three-quarters of economic growth was a
consequence of domestic demand. Nonetheless external factors do have important implications for
the growth of the Egyptian economy in several ways.
-

Egypt's terms of merchandise trade are expected to register a 4 percent increase in 2001,
followed by a decline of about 3.4 percent per annum during 2002-2004. The merchandise
export price index is expected to increase in 2001, in line with price increases for oil,
manufactured exports and cotton, and to fall thereafter. The expected decline in terms of trade is
also attributable to a modest projected increase in the price of imports.

*

With the gradual decline of the oil sector in Egypt during the 1990s (the share of oil in GDP
declined from a peak of 18 percent in the early 1980s to about 6 percent in the late 1990s) and the
near balance between exports and imports of oil prices, the net impact of oil prices in the future
will be insignificant.

*

A slowdown in economic activity in Egypt's main trading partners (in the 1990s the shares of the
EU countries, US and the Middle East were 48 percent, 13 percent and 12 percent, respectively)
would affect demand for Egypt's major merchandise exports, particularly textiles and agricultural
products, and tourism. With the projected improvements in the economies of the Gulf countries,
worker remittances can be expected to remain high (US$3.7 billion in 2000). However a
deterioration of the Middle East crisis could severely affect tourism and Suez Canal revenues.

*

Given the country's manageable external debt (about 30 percent of GDP) and very small shortterm debt, as well as expected declines in international interest rates, the cost of servicing
external debt can be expected to decline.

57. In short, the external environment for Egypt presents a mixed picture, which could, however,
be significantly negative in the case of further deterioration of the Middle East situation. The extent
to which the country can exploit the positive external factors and prepare itself against the negative
ones will be determined by the depth and pace of structural reforms.

B.

Macroeconomic Constraints and Policy Options

58. The Government's key medium-term objective is to provide jobs for Egypt's growing
population through labor intensive fast growth. Since the mid-1970s, labor has been mainly

18
absorbed by migration (about 2.7 million jobs), government (2.6 million) and the informal sector (3.7
million). Prospects for job creation in the first two areas seem dim, and most jobs would need to be
created through the development of productive activities in the formal and informal private sectors.
Indeed, to absorb new entrants (about 550 thousand per annum) and reduce unemployment (widely
believed to be above the official estimate of 9 percent), the economy would need to expand annually
at a minimum by 7 percent.
59. To achieve a growth target of at least 7 percent would entail changes in the medium-term
macroeconomic framework generally followed by the authorities in the post-stabilization period. It
would entail investment levels of about 5-6 percentage points of GDP above the 1999-2000 average
level of about 24 percent (see Table 2). Since gross national savings, which averaged about 22.0
percent during 1999-2000, cannot be realistically expected to be above 25.0 percent during the
decade, the country will require annual foreign inflows of around 5 percent of GDP to achieve the 7
percent growth rate. The Government expects that net private investment (FDI and portfolio
investment) would double during the decade from its level of about US$1.5 billion in 2000. This will
require a major improvement in the business environment. However, even if this level of private
investment were attracted, Egypt would still need annually at least US$1 billion additional inflows,
after taking into account medium and long term borrowing at the present levels.
60. The three prospective macroeconomic scenarios illustrate the implications for growth of a
more intense structural reform program, as well as continued macro stability. The most likely
scenario shows a gradual increase in the investment to GDP ratio, as in the recent past, without a
major increase in domestic savings. The current account deficit increases over the 5-year projection
period, but remains financeable, especially if Egypt attracts additional FDI. The scenario also
presupposes a sustained improvement in export performance. While national savings as a ratio to
GDP is not projected to increase significantly, the public sector is presumed to increase its savings
efforts gradually over the period, as shown by the slow decline in the fiscal deficit, to the benefit of
private consumption. The other two scenarios differ from the most likely scenario mainly with
regard to the presumed savings and investment effort. In particular, non-government saving as a
share of GDP is projected to increase modestly under the most likely and High Case scenarios, and to
deteriorate by about three percentage points of GDP under the Low Case scenario.
TABLE 2: OUTLOOK FOR ECONOMIC INDICATORS UNDER THREE SCENARIOS
lndicttor

See rio

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

GDP growth rate (O/)

Most-Likely

6.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

5.9

5.9

Low Case
High Case

6.4
6.4

4.0
6.0

3.3
6.9

2.9
7.2

3.1
7.5

3.1
7.8

Most Likely
Low Case
High Case
Most Likely
Low Case
High Case
Most Likely
Low Case
High Case
Most Likely
Low Case
High Case

-1.2
-1.2
-1.2
-3.6
-3.6
-3.6
24.2
24.2

-1.8
-1.8
-1.7
-4.4
-4.8
-3.6
25.0
23.9

-2.1
-2.8
-2.9
-4.3
-4.6
-2.7
25.1
23.6

-2.0
-3.5
-3.5
-4.1
-4.6
-2.2
25.4
23.5

-2.0
-4.1
-4.2
-4.0
-4.5
-2.1
25.8
23.2

24.2

25.6

27.2

28.1

28.9

7.0
7.0
7.0

8.4
5.8
10.9

9.6
6.7
11.4

10.4
6.4
11.7

9.5
7.0
12.0

-1.8
-4.2
-4.8
-3.9
-4.4
-2.0
26.0
22.9
29.4
9.9
6.5
12.3

Current Account/ GDP (%o)
OverallFiscal Deficit/ GDP (/)
Gross Domestic Investment/GDP (0/i)

Export of Goods and NF Services, Real
Growth Rate (%o)
_

61. Additionally, the most likely scenario (as well as the High Case) is based on three key strategic
actions by the Government:

* Ensuring macroeconomic stability.

Despite recent actions by the authorities, there is still
considerable uncertainty whether these will suffice to reduce BOP pressures. Actions to reduce

19
the fiscal deficit do not seem to have had the expected results, and the 2001 outcome may
represent a deterioration over the previous year. The recently introduced exchange rate system,
basically an adjustable peg with a narrow band, is more flexible than the peg that was in place
until 2000. The concern is whether in practice the new system will be managed in a flexible
manner. Overall, the current combination of expansionary financial policies with a peg may lead
to continued pressures on reserves.
*

Undertaking the necessary measures to increase productivity. In addition to the maintenance of
macroeconomic stability, this would entail second generation structural reforms, such as
institutional strengthening, reduction of high effective protection, technological upgrading,
promotion of FDI, considerable improvement in the services sector, including increased
efficiency of service delivery, and enhancing technical skills of the labor force. Given the
importance of banks in the financial system, actions to improve the efficiency of the
intermediation are critical to improve growth performance.

*

Creating an export push. More rapid economic growth cannot be achieved without a doubling of
the growth rate of exports from the annual average of less than 4 percent during the last decade.
Increase in non-oil merchandise exports will be largely determined by removal of the anti-export
bias in trade policy, the responsiveness of the public administration in developing an exportfriendly environment, better infrastructure, streamnlinedand modernized customs procedures,
updating and harmonizing product standards and quality control and facilitating export finance.

62. Achieving a higher growth rate is also likely to imply, depending on the response of private
capital flows, that the public sector will have to increase its foreign borrowing. Thanks to the highly
favorable Paris Club debt and debt service reduction in 1991, workers remittances, Suez Canal
payments, high aid flows, and appreciable economic growth, Egypt was able to reduce its external
debt to GDP ratio from more than 130 percent in 1989 to about 30 percent in 2000. To maintain this
favorable performance, the Government requires that total external debt should not increase in
nominal terms (implying further reductions in the debt burden as a share of GDP and exports), and
that all public foreign borrowing should be restricted to loans with a grant element of at least 40
percent. Given the increased external borrowing needs, the Government may have to begin to tap
less concessional sources of financing and increase its nominal debt stock.
IV.
A.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Imrplementation of the Previous CAS: What Worked, What Did Not

63. The Board discussed the previous CAS for Egypt in May 1997. Overall, the Bank Group's
lending and investment activity was in line with the CAS base case proposals. For the period FY9800, the CAS foresaw 11 IDA/IBRD operations for a total of US$450-600 million. Actually 10
operations were approved by the Board for about US$580 million.' Similarly, IFC's investment flow
- which depends on the investment climate, the availability of suitable transactions and partners, and
the level of competition in funding from local banks - has increased' steadily during this period.
IFC's committed portfolio increased from about US$196 million at end FY97 to US$250 million at
end of FY00. FY01 has witnessed a marked rise in the level of approvals and commitments. In the
first 10 months, IFC approvals were US$177 million in loans, equity investments and guarantees in 8
different projects and a total of US$305 million for the account of participants to two power projects.
IFC's committed portfolio at end-April 2001 stood at US$328 million. This is by far IFC's largest
portfolio in the MENA Region.
i

However, of these 10 operations, five were approved in one fiscal year -FY99-which was the last year of IDA-eligibilityfor Egypt.

20
64. In terms of specific aspects of the CAS, however, success in implementation has been mixed
and sustainable institutional development has been less than expected. Box B provides an
assessment of what worked well and what did not.
BOX B: IMPLEMENTATITONOF PREVIOUS GAS:WHAT WORKED,WHAT DID NOT

WhatWorkedWell
*

*

I
*

*

*

Despite some remaining problems, the overall quality
of Bank/IDA portfolio has improved over the CAS
period, in terms of numnber of problem projects,
dropped projects, etc. (see paras. 78.83).
In two of the four areas of focus recommended by
the CAS - human resource development and rural
development - Bank intervention has been effective,
"Bank support to irrigation and drainage has been
relatively successful, with satsfactory outcomes and
likely sustainability" (OED). The Bank's technical
expertise and policy dialogue is greatly appreciated.
Simiarly in the education and health sectors, there
has been a significant improvement in the quality of
the policy dialogue,in close coordination with other
developtnent partners.
IFC activities during the CAS period were broadly
consistent wxiththe strategy articulated, with
investments in infrastructure, financial sector, oil and
gas, tourism and industrial sectors.
Bank's involvement, together with other development
partners in the Social Fund for Developmenit (one of
the largest such funds in developing countries), has
been instrumental in maintaining social stability
during the reform process.
Several knowledge-based activities (analytical work,
workshops, etc.) were undertaken, which have been
gready appreciated by the Egyptian authorities. These
sector activities focused on education, health, social
safety nets, water sector, renewable energy and urban
transport. Even m-ioreeffective has been the
preparation of the five Task Force Reports, carried
out jointly by the CGovemment and the Bank, aimed
at providing the authorities with plans of action in:
export promotion; improving business environment;
training and skills development; social safetv nets; and
private provision of infrastructue.

B.
65.

What Did Not WorkSo Well
*

*

Projects continue to encounter effectiveness delays. CAS
had set a target of a maximum of nine months lapsed
time between Board and effectiveness. In practice, delays
have been longer (about a year).
In the other two areas of proposed focus of the CAS -export push, and private sector development - the
Bank's policy dialogue role was marginal, and planned
projects (Export Development Project, planned for
FY98; Private Sector Finance of Infrastructure, planned
for FY00), did not materialize. More generally, the Bank's
role in policy dialogue has been circumscribed.
Moreover, the CAS had recommended the use of several
partial risk guarantees, none of which materialized.

^IFC
needed to develop innovative ways to provide
finance and skills to the SME sector. IFC set up a leasing
company to finance SMEs, but more needs to be done.
*

Despite its overall achievement, the issue of sustainability
of the Social Fund iremains.

*

Because of lack of access to data, the Bank has niot ben
able to undertake analytical work in two areas that the
1997 CAS correcdy considered important poverty
assessmiernt,and financial sector analysis. Under that
CAS, two poverty related studies were planned Neither
was undertaken. Even in the case of the five Task Force
Reports, there has been little follow up on the policy
dialogue uwth the Bank.

Lessons Learned and Benchmarks for Future Assessments

Based on the experience with the implementation of the previous CAS, and drawing on the

conclusions of OED's Country Assistance Evaluation (see Box C) the following lessons can be
drawn, which are being incorporated into the design of the new country strategy:
*

IBRD lending to Egypt will be strongly demand-driven and will, therefore, inevitably fluctuate

from year to year. The Bank Group should stand ready to respond with quick-disbursing lending
in case of external or domestic shocks. However, for the Bank to respond rapidly there would

need to be a deeper and more sustained policy dialogue based on solid analytical foundation.

21

* IBRD lending should be limited to areas where Government commitment to the projects is
unequivocallystrong and where the WorldBank has had a positiveexperience. The Bank should
be more realistic in the number of projects to be prepared. During FY98-00, 10 projects were
presentedto the Board. During FY02-04,no more than 6-7 projects shouldbe plannedunder the
base case scenario. Under this scenario,the size of the portfolio would declinefrom 19 projects
at present to about 14 at the end of FY04.
* Given the Government's requirementthat all new operationsshould have a grant element of at
least 40 percent, it will be criticallyimportantto ensure that cofinancing(or parallel financing)
from donors with softer lending terms than the Bank is in place before proceeding too far with
preparationof projects. This indicates the need for even closer partnership with other donors.
This shouldbe accompaniedby efforts to move away from a project-by-projectfulfillmentof the
"40 percent rule" to a more macro or sectoral one.
* As the size of the portfolio decreases,a greater share of administrativebudget resources should
be allocated to knowledge-basednon-lendingactivitiesfor which the Governmenthas expressed
great interest,or which will be necessaryfor due diligence.
*

Clearbenchmarksshould be establishedto enable future assessmentsof the Bank Group's
involvementin Egypt.

BOX C: OED COUNTRY ASSISTANCE EVALUATION (CAE)
In Januarv 2000, OED completed a Country Assistance Evaluation for Egypt, which was discussed by the Committee
on Development Effectiveness. The report focused in pafticular on the period since 1990, although it included an overview
of Bank assistance to Egypt since the 1950s. The following is a summary of the report's key findings and recommendations.
*
*

*
*
*
*
*

66.

Egypt has done a commendable job of significant structural reform, achieving macroeconomic stability and realizing
strong growth, without major social unrest, in the past five years.
Some social indicators, such as chAd malnutrition and life expectancy, have improved markedly. Others, including
literacy, particularly among women, and infant mortality, although improved, have not achieved gains commensurate
with good access to social services.
The Bank's role in Egypt has been modest, although it was actively involved in the early 1990s in supporting structural
adjustment and in helping Egypt with major debt rescheduling.
An important gap in Bank assistance has been the absence of work on poverty alleviation.
Because of the large amounts of concessional funding available to Egypt, the Bank should forge closer partnerships
and cofinancing arrangements with other donors.
The Bank should continue to lend in areas where the Government is interested, and where the Bank has had positve
results, such as in irrigation and drainage.
The next CAS should propose clear guidelines to link the administrative budget to the size and complexity of the
pottfolio, and the likely effective demand by the Egyptian Government for the Bank's lending and non-lending
services.

Based on the above lessons, the following benchmarks

will be-used not only to guide the

Bank's lendingand non-lendinginvolvementin Egyptbut also to determine the allocationof country
administrativebudget for Egypt. Clearlyjudgement wouldneed to be used in taking into accountthe
overall observanceof these benchmarks,rather than mechanisticallyrequiring the fulfillmentof each
one of them.
* Successof the Bank Group in being able to complete substantiveanalytical work in the areas of
povertyalleviationand financialsector.
* Sustainedpolicydialogue betweenthe Governmentand the Bank.

22
* Fewer dropped projects and lower average cost of those dropped. Average cost to be aligned
with Bank averageduring FY02-04.
* Delaysin effectivenessreducedfrom an averageof about a year now to abouteight months.
C.

Chaneing Relationship:Mix of Lending and Non-Lendin2 Services

67. Owing to the availabilityof sizeable grant resources, the country's graduationfrom IDA, and
its conservativeborrowingstrategy,new Bank lending to Egypt is expected to be modest in relation
to the country's size and importance. IEFCcommitments should, however, expand, as should
MIGA's. In addition, the Government places a very high value on Bank Group advice, global
knowledgesharing, training,and its capacityto workin partnershipwith otherdevelopmentpartners.
Lookingahead, the share of non-lendingservicesin the Bank's assistanceto Egypt would increase
over time. This is expected to happenas the size of the Bank's portfolio gradually shrinksfrom 19
projects at present to about 14 projectsby the end of FY04. The objective should also be to move
graduallytoward cost sharingand eventuallyreimbursableservices,in consultationwith theEgyptian
authorities. In the interim, the strategy would be to projectize technical assistance requests where
feasible, and to seek collaborative arrangementswith other development partners in which their
resourceswouldbe used to leverageBank knowledgeand experience.
68. Notwithstandingthe increasingimportanceof non-lending services,Bank lending in selected
high priority areaswill continue. The Governmentviews Bank lending as importantmore thanfor its
financial transfer aspect: it is valued for its technical excellence and for serving as a catalyst for

mobilizing financing packages 2-3 times that of Bank loans for well-designed and high priority
projects. Given the importantinvolvementof USAID,EU and other developmentpartners in Egypt,
strict selectivityin Bank involvementwill be observed. In particular, the Bank's focus will be in
areas where (i) Governmentdemandfor and comrnmitment
to projects is unequivocallystrong; (ii) the
Bank has a long and positive experience(water sector and irrigation;human development);and (iii)
it can bring knowledge management and experience of other countries to guide Egypt's policy
formulationand implementation(informationand communicationsinfrastructure;mortgage market
development; and community-based activities). Given the important involvement of other
developmentpartners, the Bank will have minimal involvementin energy, industrial restructuring,
and environment.
D.

Base Case Assistance Proeram

69. The underlying assumption for the base case is a continuationof the current pace of growth
and policy implementation. The economywould grow around 5.5 - 5.9 percent annually,and is not
subjected to any major external and domestic shocks. There is no substantial increase in private
domesticor foreigninvestment. The governmentgraduallyimprovesits current fiscal and monetary
stance and the current exchange rate policy. In short, the scenariois characterizedby no significant
shocksor reversalsof policy reforms,but also by no major structuralreform efforts.
70. CAS instruments. The Bank Group's proposed base case assistance strategy will be
implementedthroughseveral instruments:
* Steadily improving the performance of the existing Bank portfolio of ongoing operations (see
paras. 78-83),especiallyin terns of institutionaldevelopmentand sustainability.
* In terms of knowledge-basedservices,priority in AAA and capacitybuilding work will be given
to studies and activities that provide the intellectual underpinningfor operations and technical
advice in human development, rural development, water management and selected areas of
infrastructuredevelopment. Priority will also be given to core diagnostic work on poverty,

23
public expenditure review and financial sector issues, as well as to gender analysis and
mainstreaming,on the assumptionthat access to informationis granted by the Governmentin
these areas. The recently completed Social and Structural Review provides a solid basis for
deepening policy dialogue between the authoritiesand the key developmentpartners'. WBI is
expectedto play an importantrole in disseminatingworld-widebest practice and bringing focus
on developmentissues identifiedas priority. Increasinglyopportunitieswill be sought to partner
with local think-tanksand other agenciesin the conceputalizationand disseminationof analytical
work. A good recent example was the dissemination of the World Development Report
2000/2001jointly with two local think-tanks. Most criticallyneeded AAA will be funded out of
the Bank's administrativebudget. However, arrangementswill be explored with other donors
and possibly government to share costs for additional on-demand AAA or capacity building
services. At the end of the CAS period a review of the effectivenessof the Bank's AAA will be
undertakento guide our future analyticaland capacitybuildingwork in Egypt.
* 2-3 projects a year are included in the Bank's lending programin carefullyselectedareas where
demand from Egypt is strong and where the Bank has a comparative advantage. This would
amount to US$450-500 million in new lending during the period FY02-04. The lending
program,as outlinedbelow, is not yet programmatic,althoughthe objective is to movegradually
in that direction. Planned workon public expenditurereview and continuingeffort on improving
financialmanagementwill help steer the process in that direction(see para 82 for fiduciary work
related to Bank operations). In the interim, several ongoing and planned operationsare of a
sectoral and/or APL nature, especially in education, health and water sectors, involving a
comprehensive sectoral approach, government ownership and close coordination with
developmentpartners.
* Selectiveexpansionof IFC and MIGAactivities (see para. 72).
* Exploring the use of IBRD guarantee instruments to attract foreign capital into areas where
performancerisk remains a major bottleneck.
71. Focus of Bank Group Assistance. The over-arching objective of the Bank Group's country
assistance strategy in Egypt is to reduce poverty and unemployment. Working closely with other

developmentpartners, the Bank Group will focus on three types of interventions: (i) interventions
that supporthigher and sustainedgrowth; (ii) targeted interventionsfor poverty reduction; and (iii)
interventionswith major indirect poverty reduction impact. Table 3 summarizesthe various Bank
instruments to be employed under the base case assistance program.

72. Interventionsthat support higher and sustainedgrowth: This entails providingsupportfor
macroeconomicstability, phased restructuring of the bank and corporate sectors, and improved
infrastructure for greater competitiveness. It also involves the gradual integration of Egypt into
global markets, particularly in the context of the recently initialed Association Agreement with the
European Union (EU).
*

Given the important and active involvement of USAID and the EU in this broad area, the Bank's
lending will be limited to two projects where it has the knowledge base and comparative
advantage: the Agricultural Exports Project and the Information Technology Infrastructure
Project. In the case of the former project the objective is to support all aspects of promoting

horticultureexports, especially in the context of the agreement with the EU. The project will
draw on the findings of the recently completed report on agricultural exports. The Information

TechnologyInfrastructureProject would supportthe authorities'efforts to developthe regulatory
framework for the telecom sector and to modernize the strategy, structure, processes and systems
Egypt: Social and Structural Review, World Bank, June 2001.

24
of the Egyptian postal services in order to enhance its market orientation, internal efficiency and
financial performance.
*

On the analytical side, the Bank will work closely with the IMF and other development partners
to undertake work on the Financial Sector Assessment Program (should the Government request
it), capital market and mortgage market development, strengthening public debt management,
improving the efficiency of public expenditures, and corporate governance, all consisting of high
priority activities for more rapid and efficient growth. The Bank will also ensure an effective and
continuous monitoring of the economic situation, and provide the authorities with guidance and
advice through flagship economic reports such as the follow-up Social and Structural Review.
WBI is expected to play a prominent role in disseminating information to the civil society .
TABLE 3: BASE CASE BANKASSISTANCEPROGRAM, FYO2-04

*
*

Poverty Assessment
Early Childhood Development
Analysis of Social Health
Insurance
Nile Basin Initiative
Corporate Governance
Assessment
Gender Assessment
Economic Monitoring

*

CPAR Update

*
*

Cairo Traffic Bureau
Environmental Training for
Local Admin.
Primary Market for
Government Securities
Integrating Global into Local
Environment (17F)
Project Appraisal, Monitoring
& Evaluation (IDF/WBI)
Health Sector Reformn&
Financing Workshop (WBI)

I

*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*

1/
2/

*

I

FY04

FY03

FY02
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

ANALYTICALWORK
Public Expenditure Review
Irrigation Improvement Sector
Review
Drainage & Wastewater Reuse
Nile Basin Initiative
Financial Sector Assessment
(FSAP)
Economic Monitoring
CFAA

CAPACITYBUILDING (INCL.wsn)
Mortgage Market Development
Global Conference on Endemic
Disease Control
*
Strengthening Public Debt
Management
* Governance Issues (WBI)
* Public Expenditure Review
Workshop (WBI)
* Agricultural Trade & WTO (WBI)
*
*

*

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*

LENDING
*
Natural Resource Management
*
H4igherEducation Project
*
Project (US$50m)
(US$50m)
Skills Development Project
*
Early Childhood Development
(US$50m)
(US$50m)
*
*
Information Infrastructure:
Telecom, Post, e-Commerce
(US$1Om)
.
Informalpolicynoteswillbe producedin variousareason clientdemandand identifiedneed.
Thisprojectis for FY04/05

CAS
Social and Structural Review II
Nile Basin Initiative
Evaluation of Health Sector Reform
Economic Monitoring
Informal Policy Notes!/

Wind Energy (GEF)
Solar/Thermal Energy (GEF)
Biodiversity (GEF)
Conference on Urban Management
(WI)
Conference on Water Issues (WBI)
Other demand-driven capacity
building needs will be identified

Health Sector Reform II (US$100m)
Irrigation/Drainage Improvement
(US$100m)
Agricultural Exports (US$40m)
Rural Water/Sanitation Project
(US$50m)2

IFC's priorities, closely coordinated with the Bank's activities, will emphasize more rapid job
creation through private sector use of natural resources for sustainable development. In
particular, IFC will focus on (i) developing private sector financed infrastructure. Egypt has
For more details on WBI involvement in Egypt, see Annex 2.

25

alreadymade headwayin attractingprivate investmentin infrastructureprojects,especiallyin the
power sector (Sidi Krir, Suez and Port Said power generationplants). IFC has been involvedin
all three power projects awarded to the private sector. With the Bank providing policy advice
and technical assistance, IFC will identify opportunities for investmentsin other infrastructure
sectors; (ii) providingsupport to the servicessector, including tourism. IFC has been financing
tourismprojects in Egypt with focus on integrateddevelopmentson the Red Sea coast. With the
number of tourists expected to double during this decade, IFC will continue to seek selective
investments in the sector; (iii) providing financing to internationally competitive and exportoriented ventures; and (iv) supporting the government's privatization effort through both
advisory servicesto particulartransactionsand providingfinancingto privatizedventures. Other
areas of future EFC involvement include supporting small and medium enterprises (SMEs),
developing financialmarkets, and possible participationin building pipelines to export Egypt's
large natural gas reserves to Eastern Mediterraneancountries.
* The Bank guarantees could also help, alongside MIGA and IFC investments, in catalyzing
private finance for infrastructureimprovements. As in other countries, partial risk guarantees
(PRGs) can be an element in attracting private financing for new investments on sustainable
terms. Inclusionof a PRG in a project also has the effect of improvingbid responses,increasing
investment commitments, and stabilizing tariff requirements. Possible uses for guarantees
include toll road projects,the ThirdLine of the CairoMetro, and urban waterand sanitation.
73. Targeted interventions for poverty reduction. Reflecting the over-arching objective of
poverty reduction, most of the Bank's focus, planned lending operations, and IBRD administrative
budget will be devoted to activities in this category. This is also the area where the Bank has a solid
experience in Egypt and the analytical underpinnings for deepening our involvement.
* Work on basic education, social protection and social safety net will continue through the Bank's

ongoingoperationsin educationand the Social Fundfor Development,in very close coordination
with other developmentpartners. Analyticalwork on early childhood development,followedby
a well-designedproject, is a new area of emphasisto improve the educational attainmentof the
Egyptian population, especially its disadvantaged segments.
* In the health sector, the Bank will build on its ongoing efforts at reforming the health sector,
including a strengthened insurance system, continued improvement of management and

decentralization,throughboth analyticaland project involvement.
* Since poverty in Egypt continues to be mainly rural-based, the Bank will prepare a follow-up
Natural Resource Management project that will increasingly encourage community-based
development. A Rural Water/Sanitation project will address the critical needs of the unserved,
mostly poor population.
* Water and sanitation is also an area of focus for the IFC. This will allow the Bank and IFC to
jointly pursue a strategy of increased private sector participation in receptive urban governorates.
*

On the analytical side, apart from the work aimed at supporting operations in health and early
childhood development, the focus will be on (i) filling the major knowledge gap on the extent
and nature of poverty in Egypt, through a comprehensive Poverty Assessment; (ii) ensuring
greater equity and efficiency in the allocation of public resources to the social sectors, through a
Public Expenditure Review (PER); and (iii) a Gender Assessment aimed at addressing the key
gender-related issues, and, at the request of the authorities, developing mechanisms to
mainstream gender in the country's next Five-Year Plan (2002/2003-2007/2008). WBI is

expected to organize workshops/seminarson the experience of other comparator countrieson
health reform and financing, endemic diseases and PER.

26

74.

Interventionswith major indirect poverty reduction impact. Bank Group's assistance in

this area supports interventions that may have major indirect benefits for the poor in terms of
promoting broad-based growth, development of poor areas or building effective institutions.
* Three lending operations are planned:
Higher Education, Skills Development and
Irrigation/Drainage Improvement. The first two are aimed at making higher education more
relevant to the needs of the economy and to establish a viable mechanism for training in
entrepreneurial, technical and managerial skills. The Irrigation/Drainage project will build on the
considerable work done so far in Egypt to improve the efficiency of irrigation and water use.
*

In the area of analytical and capacity building work, several activities are planned. Sector work
on irrigation improvement, and drainage and wastewater reuse would provide the analytical base
for the Irrigation/Drainage Improvement Project.

* The Bank will continue to play a facilitating role in the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI). This
initiative is led by ten riparian states of the Nile River Basin, and its goal is to develop the river in
a cooperative and beneficial manner, overcoming decades of dispute'.
*

In the energy sector, GEF-financed activities are planned for wind, solar and thermal energy, as
well as in biodiversity.

*

In the environment area, many development partners (USAID, Germany, Italy and others) are
already very active. Bank's technical assistance will, therefore, focus on areas such as
integrating global into local environment, and environmental training for local administration.

*

Finally, exploratory analytical work will be undertaken in the area of governance, focusing on
linkages with economic efficiency, competitiveness, and service delivery to the poor. It would
also include providing guidance and international experience on judicial and civil service reform
as well as experience in community development activities. In the context of our ongoing
projects (Matruh and Population) community participation in the design and implementation of
projects has already begun. For example, the Matruh Natural Resource Project helped tribes
improve the management of water resources. The follow-up Natural Resource Management
Project will expand this process to other activities and areas.

E.

Alternative Scenarios and Contingencies

75. The key assumptions underlying the base case and the corresponding Bank Group lending and
non-lending activities are summarized in Section D above. A high case lending scenario could be
envisaged under two possible eventualities: (i) a significant deepening of the structural reform
(accelerated privatization; significant trade liberalization; credible policy measures to improve
business environment; and effective export promotion policies); and improvement in the Bank's
portfolio; or (ii) a major deterioration in the external environment during the course of
implementation of a strong reform program (see Section V for possible risks), which may require the
Bank to facilitate Egypt's access to IBRD resources in larger volumes. Under this scenario, the
Bank could increase lending to around US$1.5 billion over the three years, of which about a half
could be in the form of quick-disbursing loans. As indicated earlier, the rapidity of the Bank's
response will be determined to a large extent by the existence of a sustained dialogue between the
Government and the Bank on the key structural issues.

I

The ten riparian countries are: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania and
Uganda. The first meeting of an Intemational Consortium for Cooperation on the Nile (ICCON) is planned for June 26, 2001, to raise donor
support and fundingfor the cooperative programs put forward by the NBI.

27
76. Alternatively, if the implementation of policy reforms and Bank portfolio deteriorate
considerably (deepening controls, halting structural reforms, and deteriorating Bank portfolio), a low
case lending scenario could be envisaged, under which Bank lending for the whole period would be
limited to about US$100 million for one or two projects in the social sectors.
77. Based on the above, there are four main triggers that will determine the level of Bank lending
in Egypt: macroeconomic framework; structural reforms; the quality of the overall policy dialogue;
and portfolio management. Details are provided in Table 4.
TABLE

*

.

4: TRIGGERS AND MAIN ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE LENDING PROGRAM

BASECASEASSUMTIONS
Gradual improvement in current
monetary and exchange rate
policies. Significant move
towards fiscal sustainability.
Fiscal deficit declines gradually
from a level of 4.4% in 2001.
Elimination of tariff surcharge.

HIGH CASETRIGGS

Significantprogress in achieving
fiscal sustainability.Fiscal deficit
of 3.6% achieved in 2001, and
reduction in following years.

*

Controls deepened, fiscal
deficit unsustainablyhigh.

*

Average unweighted tariff
reduced to 22%.

.

.

No progress in structural
reforms, especially in trade
liberalization.
No progress in financial sector
reform.

.

Progress toward reforms in the
financial sector. FSAP
completed.

*

.

Improvement in the quality of
policy dialogue. Full access to
poverty data.

*

.

Steady improvement in the
.
Bank's portfolio. Problem
projects in the 10%-35% range.
Delays in effectiveness gradually

Accelerationof financial sector
reform. FSAP completed. At
least one of the 4 large public
commercial banks privatized.
Significant improvement in the
quality of policy dialogue.
Poverty Assessment completed as
a joint product with the
Government.
Significantimprovement in the
Bank's portfolio. Problem
projects below 10%. Delays in
effectiveness reduced to about six

reduced to about eight months.

months.

F.

Low CASETRIGGERS

*

*

No improvement in policy
dialogue, and problems of
access to data persist.

*

Significant deteriorationin the
Bank's portfolio. Problem
projects over 35%. Effectiveness delays in excess of a year.

IBRD Portfolio Mana2ementand Performance

78. Historically, implementation of Bank projects has been good in Egypt (84 percent satisfactory
compared to a Bank wide average of 74 percent). The current portfolio is of medium strength. At
present the portfolio comprises 19 active operations of which 2 are at risk (about 10.5 percent).
Sustainability and Institutional Development of Bank operations, as measured by OED have,
however, been below Bank wide averages, reflecting the resistance of Egyptian institutions and
procedures to change and the fact that the Bank is not a significant financial player in Egypt.
Consistent with the overall good performance of projects in Egypt, there are some notable ones with
strong results on the ground. Two such examples are Schistosomiasis Control Project, which has had
a major impact on the incidence of bilharzia in Egypt, and the National Drainage Project, which has
reduced the problem of a rising groundwater table, that leads to waterlogging and salinity.
79. Gross commitments from the Bank and IDA have swung widely over the years. For example,
in FY99, the final year of IDA availability, US$550 million was committed, while during the two
subsequent fiscal years only US$50 million was committed. This reflects Egypt's fluctuating
financial needs, as well as availability of grant funds from other development partners. The average

28
size of the Bank's portfolio has been decreasing. The Egypt portfolio, nevertheless,remains large
(18h largest in the Bank and second largestin MENARegion).
80. Three overarchingissues have affected portfolioperformancein Egypt: bureaucraticdelays in
loan and credit effectiveness;systemicproblemsin agriculturecredit; and project-levelrequirement
for minimumcredit concessionality. Effectivenessdelays reflect partly the Government'scautious
approachto borrowing,althoughit is also the case that internalapproval proceduresare heavy. The
Governmentand the Bank have agreed on the compositionof the base case lending, and this should
help reduce effectivenessdelays. The Bank and Egypt are also exploring ways to streamline, if
possible, the various steps of Ministerialand Parliamentaryapproval. Problems of agriculturecredit
are serious, affecting two operations with PBDAC, the AgricultureBank, as well as the agriculture
credit components of rural developmentprojects. The Private Sector Agriculture Development
Project, which recently became effective, has a strong institution building component which is
designedto tackle the weaknessesof PBDAC. Finally,the currentgovernmentrequirementthat each
project shouldhave a minimumgrantelement of 40 percent is complicatingthe preparation of IBRD
projects. Debt concessionalityneeds to be monitoredat the macro or sectorallevel, rather than on a
project-by-projectbasis.
81. Accuracyin supervision reporting is a central priority and ratings for Egypt are 100 percent
realistic. The Country Team is committedto theirremainingso. Proactivityhas fluctuatedin light of
implementationdifficultieswith the Health SectorReformProject, which is now satisfactory. At the
end of this FY the proactivityindex is forecastto be 100percent.
82. In general, accountingstandards and contracting and procurementarrangementsare good. A
CountryFinancial AccountabilityAssessment(CFAA) was completed in 1997, and a desk update is
currentlyunder review. The last CountryProcurementAssessmentReport(CPAR), which was done
in 1994, was updated in 1998. A CPAR update and a full CFAA are planned for FY02 and FY03,
respectively. Moreover, as part of the Government's effort to improve the efficiency and
effectivenessof public investmentand budgeting,Bank assistancehas been requested for improved
investmentanalysis,monitoring and evaluation(M & E) and results-basedmanagement. Egypt has
been selected as the region's pilot for intensive M & E support. So far, WBI has deliveredcourse
material, an economy wide diagnostic of M & E capacity has been carried out, and an IDF grant
plannedto support the basic institutionaldevelopment.
83. For the future, four considerationswill dominate the Bank's portfolio management:(i) closer
managementof closing dates to ensure speedier delivery of project benefits; (ii) greater success on
the part of the Government and the Bank to reduce effectiveness delays; (iii) a special effort to
reduce the use of PMUs to ensure sustainabilityof project outcomes,and (iv) while early indications
of parallel financingwith developmentpartners for the Bank's proposednew operationsare positive,
discussionswill be initiated with the Government to move away from the project-by-projectto a
moremacro or sectoral requirementof meetingthe 40 percent grantelement.
G.

IFC Portfolio Mana2ement and Performance

84. IFC had a record year in FY01 with approvalof eight projects for US$177 million for IFC's
account and an additionalUS$305 millionfor participants. As a result, as of April 30, 2001, IFC had
outstandingcommittedinvestmentsof US$328 millionin Egypt in 19 companies,plus an additional
US$305for the accountof participants.
85. IFC's investments are in the sectors of general manufacturing (steel, cement, paper),
infrastructure,extraction of fuels, hotels, financial markets and chemicals (see Table 5). On a

29
volume basis, the highest level of IFC's investments has been in general manufacturing. The largest
number of projects are in the financial sector where IFC has invested in the equity of companies
engaged in commercial banking, leasing, life insurance, investment banking and in an offshore fund
that invests in listed equities.
TABLE 5: SECTOR DISTRIBUTIONOF IFC'S EGYPT PORTFOLIO

(ProjectedSharesby End FY-O1)
Sectot

Percenta e of Committed Portfolio

Manufacturing
1nfrastructure
Financial Services
Mining/Extraction
of Fuels
Hotels & Tou_rism

43%
24%
14%
8%
7%

Chemicals & Petrochemicals

40/o

86. As of April 30, 2001, 15.9 percent of IFC's disbursed loan portfolio in Egypt was in nonaccrual status compared to 13.2 percent for IFC as a whole. All the non-accrual is on account of one
investment, Misr Compressors.
87. IFC's activities in Egypt over the FY97-01 period have been consistent with the country
strategy articulated in the previous CAS which indicated that IFC's investments would continue to
focus on infrastructure, the financial sector, oil and gas, tourism, and key industrial activities.
88. In infrastructure, IFC approved and committed investments in FY01 of US$96 million for its
own account and up to US$305 million under the "B" loan program in two investments to build and
operate power plants at Port Said and Suez Gulf. In the financial sector, IFC focused on the creation
of new specialized financial institutions and approved investments in a life insurance company, an
investment bank, and a regional credit rating agency that launched a subsidiary in Egypt becoming
the country's first rating company. IFC also helped mobilize capital for Egypt's burgeoning stock
market by establishing an offshore closed-end fund investing in listed Egyptian equities. Total
approvals in the financial sector in the period FY97-01 amount to US$44 million, all for IFC's own
account.
89. In the industrial sector, IFC approved investments in nine companies producing steel, cement,
carbon black, industrial gases, corrugated boxes and autoparts in the FY97-FY01 period totaling
almost US$279 million of which US$199 million was for IFC's account and US$80 million under
the "B" loan program. In tourism, US$26 million in loans and equity was approved mostly to expand
an integrated tourist resort on the Red Sea coast.
90. IFC advisory activity since the last CAS included: conducting the financial and technical
assessment of an integrated steel mill and arranging the financing for the company's investments to
produce flat products; and providing advice on removing impediments to local bond market
development, with financing from the Technical Assistance Trust Funds (TATF). In addition, the
Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS) was involved in several advisory assignments to:
recommend reforms of investment procedures and institutions inhibiting FDI; and develop an FDI
database and a general investment promotion strategy.

30
H.

MIGA's Involvement in E2vpt

91. Egypt has been a member of MIGA since 1988. As of December31, 2000, MIGA has not yet
provided any guarantees for investments into Egypt. However, it has covered three Egyptian
overseas investmentsipitosub-SaharanAfrica for a total amount of US$14.7 million. In the second
quarter of FY00, MIGA conducteda marketingtrip to Egypt in recognitionof the country's potential
both as a host country for investmentsand as a source of foreign direct investments. The Agency
received considerableinterest from both Egyptian and foreign companies, the latter primarily for
investments in the infrastructuresector. MIGA's per-project limit of up to US$200 million, its
ability to syndicate additional insurance on the private market, as well as providing guarantees
against Breach of Contract, which it provides on a case-by-casebasis, position the Agency well to
facilitateinfrastructureprojects and other types of investments. In the years to come, this is expected
to translate into real applications and projects covered by MIGA for both inward and outward
investments.
92. In FY00, MIGA's Investment Marketing Department assisted the Ministry of Public
Enterprises in establishing a marketing presence on the Internet for the Egyptian privatization
programthroughthe PrivatizationLink. MIGAinitially concludeda Memorandumof Understanding
with the Ministry and has since provided technical assistance in mobilizing informationon stateowned enterprisesbeing divested,as well as the sales proceduresand intermediariesbeing employed.
Current efforts are underway to mobilize additional enterprise information from the Ministry of
Economy and other ministries that are supervising the privatization of utilities, joint venture
participation,and other state-ownedassets.
1.

Experience with the Decentralizationof the Bank Group Country
Managementto the Field

93. The previous CAS was presentedto the Board immediatelyprior to the decentralizationof the
Bank's Egypt Country ManagementUnit (CMU) to Cairo. Almost four years into the process of
decentralization,many of the expectedbenefits from this move have been realized. Among these,
the most noteworthyare: (a) closer dialogue with the clients on sectoral issues, especially with
ministries and agencies such as education, health, rural development, water resources, and
environment. This has undoubtedlyincreasedthe effectivenessof Bank interventions;(b) improved
quality of portfolio management, with the CMU playing a critically important role in financial
management,procurement,disbursementand other portfoliofollow up; (c) significantimprovement
in the developmentand maintenanceof partnershipswith other donors (see paras. 97-100), private
sector, academia,press and NGOs; and (d) a greatly enhanced comprehensionof the political, social
and economicrealities of the country,which has made Bank interventionsbased more on realities on
the ground.
94. Overall, there has been an improvementin country dialogue, although it needs to expand to
certain important areas such as private sector development, financial sector reform and targeted
povertyalleviation.! The expansionof the Bank's role in these areas would serve as triggersfor the
base and high cases in the present CAS.
95. Until about a year ago, the management structure of the CMU consisted of the Country
Director in Cairo, a Deputy Resident Representative in Cairo, and a Country Coordinator at

I

OED CountryAssistance Evaluationof January2000 notes: "Thegeneraldialogue with Governmenthas markedlyimprovedover the
last several years,and this should be recognizedas an importantaccomplishment,but it may have been at the cost of broadeningthatdialogue
into otherareas."

31

Headquarters. As of July 1, 2000, the position of CountryCoordinatorfor Egypt was abolished,and
as of January 1, 2001, as part of the overall reorganizationin the MENA Region, a new CMU was
established, still based in Cairo but also coveringtwo additionalactive IDA countries- Yemen and
Djibouti. Apart from improvingclient effectivenessfor Yemen and Djibouti, this arrangementwill
also spread overheadcosts in a muchmore affordablemanner.
96. IFC also decentralized to the field, with the Regional Director now based in Cairo, and
coveringthe entire MENA Region. In additionto the RegionalDirector,the IFC CairoOfficehas six
professionalstaff, includinga lawyer.
V.

COORDINATION
WITHDEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS

97. Owing to its size and geopoliticalimportance,Egypt receives relatively high levels of ODA,
and Cairo houses representativesof almost all bilateral and multilateral developmentorganizations
(many of which operate on a regionalbasis). Effective partnershipamong and betweendonors and
governmentis thereforevital. On a per capita basis net ODA flows to Egypt since 1990have been
among the highestin the world. FY91 (the time of the Gulf War) was an especiallyexceptionalyear
in which Egyptreceived almostUS$7.5 billion of ODA in one year. In the currentFY the amountis
lower (US$4.7billion) but still significant.
98. The US and the EU are the predominant assistance providers to Egypt. Development
assistance from the US has averaged about US$1 billion per year, but is now slowly diminishing
(below US$800 million this year). EU assistance, aggregating that of the Community and the
individualbilateral programs, also amountsto aboutUS$1 billion per year. In addition,the regional
developmentbanks and Japan are all activelyproviding low cost resources. In this context, Egypt
has maintaineda strategyof maximizinggrant funds and borrowingcautiously.
99. Donor coordinationtakes place at three levels for Egypt. The ConsultativeGroup, chaired by
the Bank, is held every three years (next scheduled for October 2001). In addition, a Donor
Assistance Group (DAG),currently chaired by the Netherlands,meets monthly in Cairo. The DAG
in turn has four sectoral subgroups,which meet as needed. Finally, under the leadershipof the UN
Resident Coordinator, there is a UN Heads of Agency Group which meets quarterly. The IMF
representativeand the Bank Country Directorconsult regularly in addition to the above. The Bank
participates actively in the DAG and Heads of Agency Group and the subgroups of the DAG in
human resource development and agriculture. All DAG meetings are periodically attended by
representatives of government. These meetings are useful in articulating linkages between the
extensivetechnicalassistanceand analyticalworkof bilateral donorswith Bank Group work.
100. During the CAS preparationprocess, donor programs (lending, TA and analytic work) were
reviewed to identify gaps and complementarities. Overall, the results show a high degree of
complementarityand cooperationamongdonorprograms,althoughthere are some gaps as well. The
Netherlands, Germany,Japan and the Bank are the major donors working on water management
issues. The EU, USAID, the Bank and the rest of the UN family are working jointly to develop
human capital. Italy, Germanyand Canadahave programs on small enterprise development,and the
EU and USAID actively support privatization and industrial restructuring. The Arab Funds are
playing an importantrole in infrastructureand land reclamation. Italy and the US are both working
on cultural heritage issues. Gaps in the developmenteffort are both analytical and operational.
Analytically,knowledgeabout the incidenceof poverty,public expenditures and financialsystem is
very weak. Operationally,agricultureand rural developmentreceivemodest attention,as does water
treatmentand sanitation. Civil servicereform is a high priority area which is not being tackled,and
the various donor and governmentinitiativeson women and children lack coherence. As part of the

32
preparation for the Consultative Group meeting, prioritization and allocation of responsibilities
among the development partners will be firned up, in close coordination with the Egyptian
authorities.

Box 1.0 MoJR DoNORS iN EGYPT
The United States
The United States is the most significant contributor of development assistance to Egypt. Between 1975 and 2000 Egypt
received about US$25 billion in ODA from the U.S. Current annual assistance is slightly below US$800 milhon and is
diminishing at about US$40 million per year. U.S.:Assistance is concentrated in four areas: I) econonuc growth, which is
essentially a cash transfer against policy reforrn, with an emphasis on privatzation 2) human resource development
and population; 3) scAence and technology which is a new initiative to
which compnrses projects in health ei
strengthen Egypt's capacities in IT; and 4) environmental protection. USAID has existing programs in power,
telecommunications, agriculture and water, aU of which will be phased down. In addition to the above, USAID provides
significant amounts of technical assistance, analytical support and traning.
The European Union
Th.e major EU instrument for assistance to Egypt is the MEDA grant program in support of the Euro-Med partnership.
There are four large programs underway, valued at Euro 615 million: 1) education enhancement; 2) health sector reforn;
3) the Social Fund for Development; and 4) industrial modernization. Tere are additional programs in private sector
development, public enterprise reformnand privatization, banking sector reform and family planning. The EU provides
additional support to Egypt through some of its regional programs and through the EIB. With the recent initialing of an
Egypt/EU Association Agreement there could be increases in the amount and scope of EIU assistance.

Germny
Current annual commitments to Egypt amount to, about US$70 milion equivalent, comprising loans, grants and
technical assistance. Grants and loans are focused on the environment (industial pollution and wind energy), water
supply and water managenment, urban development and the SFD, Technical assistance programs support vocational
education (KohW ubarak Iniative), agculture and solid waste management. Current assistance levels by Germany are
expected to remain stable over the foreseeable future. Future German developmnent cooperation will be concentrated on
three areas: water (water supply & sanitation, irrigation & drainage), social market economy (financial system,
employment creation, small and medium enterprises, vocational training) and environment (renewable energy, solid
waste management, industrial environmental protection, sustainable use of natural resources).
j:sa
Japan provides grants and soft loans to Egypt. Cunulative grants amount to about US$1 billion and the current most
significant one finances the first brid spanning the Suez Canal. After a decade-long moratorium on lending, Japan
reopened its soft loanawindow in 2000 and will focus on the environment, technology, human development and small
and medium, enterprises. On the technical assistance side, Japan supports transportation planning, improved
management of the Suez Canal, water supply, environmental monitoring, water management in irrigation, pediatric
emergency care and metal processing technology.
Arab Fuuds: IsDB. and AfDB
The Abu Dhabi Fund for Development, the Arab Fund for Econouic and Social Development, the Kuwait Fund for
Development, the Saudi Fund for Development and the IslanmicDevelopment Bank are all signiicant donors to Egypt.
Total comnnitennts from them since they began operations in Egypt cumulate to about US$2.8 billion, concentrated in
industry, infrastructure, housing and the Social Fund. AfDB commitments to date are about US$1.3 billion and it has
programmed a lending ceiling of about US$500 milion per year for Egypt over the comiing three years. The emphasis is
on private sector development through credit programs and direct investments in human development.
0

0

q~Others

Although less important in terms of financial flows, other bilateral -andmultilateral agencies contribute significantly,
especially in terms of technical assistance and trainng. Among the bilaterals, Canada, Denmark, Finand, Italy, the
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK are important. Among the multilaterals the main partners are
IFAD, UNDP, UNICEF and World Food Program (WFl).

33
VI.

BANKEXPOSUREAND RISKS

101. Egypthas continued to maintain a very good track record in servicingdebt to the Bank Group.
Bank exposurein Egyptis moderate. At end-2000,Egypt had IBRD debt outstandingand disbursed
of about US$639 million, accountingfor 2.2 percent of its external debt. If Egypt were to borrow
from IBRDat the base case level of US$450-500millionduring the period FY02-04,IBRD share in
the total externaldebt is likely to remain aroundthe same level. Within this framework,Egypt's debt
service to IBRD as a share of its exports is expected to decrease to around 0.4 percent. At the
average borrowing level of US$150 million a year, Egypt's debt service to IBRD as a share of its
overall external debt service would be around 6-7 percent as compared with the guideline of 20
percent. Egypt's preferredcreditor debt servicerelative to external debt service would declinefrom
about29 percent currentlyto around27 percentby 2004,comparedto the guidelineof 35 percent.
102. Despiterecently emergingeconomicdifficulties,Egypt is unlikely to face a major risk of BOP
crisis in the short-term. The country's reserves, despite their recent decline, remain adequate, at
aboutUS$14 billion, or more than eight months of imports. The authoritiesare expectedto continue
with their cautious attitude to new foreign borrowing,which has allowed the debt service to export
ratio to declineto 8 percent. Short-termdebt is also relativelysmall, at 6.5 percent of the total debt
and 12 percent of reserves. The gradualdepreciationof the pound since the summer of 2000 should
also ensure reduced pressure on reserves and the balance of payments. However, the ability of the
new exchange rate regime established by the Central Bank in January 2001 in dealing with any
further pressure remains to be tested. And beyond exchange rate management, further trade
liberalizationwould be required to improve the competitivenessof Egyptian exports and to reduce
pressure on the current balance, as the short-term vulnerability of the balance of payments to
domestic and externalshocksremainshigh, as demonstratedin 1997-98.
103. In the medium-term, the implementationof the Bank Group's proposed assistance strategy
faces two main risks: deterioration of the external environment and a slowdown in the pace of
structuralreforms.
104. At the internationallevel, there is a risk that new disturbancesin internationalmarkets may
reduce private capital inflows that Egypt counts on to finance a sizeable portion of its investments.
Egypt's foreign exchangeearningsare also highly vulnerableto regional political developmentsand
shocks. Workers' remittances, tourism,Suez Canal receipts, oil proceeds and foreign assistanceare
all susceptibleto internationaldevelopments,and particularlyto the Middle East peace process. The
untapped peace dividendin the region is huge, but the eruption of serious regional hostilitiescould
lead to devastatingeffects on the Egyptianeconomy. While the gradual integrationof the country's
economyin the global economy should open up new opportunitiesand graduallyreduce the overall
volatility of foreign exchange receipts, it will also demand a much more proactive and vigilant
managementof the economy.
105. At the domestic level, Egypt faces the risk of fiscal unsustainability, notably if the
expansionary financing of the mega projects were to continue with little improvement in tax
revenues, or if the government were to assume some contingent liabilities (e.g., banking system,
social security,guaranteesto private sector). Under the most likely scenario, the fiscal deficitwould
remain in the range of 4.0-4.5 percent of GDP during 2001-2005. However, a liquidity crisis in
some banks could represent a significantdownsiderisk on public finance. In this latter regard, it is
believed that the intermittent shortages in liquidity during the past two years, both in foreign and
local currencies, have strained credit quality of the banks' portfolio, while the overall operating

34
environment of the banking sector has deteriorated in the context of lower GDP growth performance
and declining real estate prices. Foreign currency borrowings by some large borrowers might also
have been insufficiently hedged.' Although loan loss provisions have been built up and the Central
Bank of Egypt maintains close monitoring, some public banks may remain significantly underprovisioned and under-capitalized.
106. The World Bank Group will work closely with the Egyptian authorities and other development
partners to monitor the situation and help minimize these risks. Monitoring the macroeconomic
situation is an important element in the Bank's policy dialogue. In the event of a major shock, the
Bank would stand ready to support an agreed upon reform program through appropriate instruments.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang

Peter L. Woicke

Washington, DC
June 5, 2001

1

Further insight on the stability of the financial sector is critically needed.
under consideration by the Government for FY03.

A Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) report is

Annex 1
Page lof 16

World Bank Group Private Sector Strate2v
Introduction
Private Sector Development(PSD) is critical for improvingliving standards and sustainable
job creation as well as promotingEgypt's successfulintegration into the global economy. For the
poor in particular,security,opportunityand empowermentwill accrue primarilythroughjob creation
while accessto infrastructureis becominga critical need. The private sectorcan play a majorrole in
not only providing this infrastructurebut moving the economy to a more productive and globally
competitivelevel. The WorldBank Group (WBG)1 will continue to support PSD as it remainsa key
elementin the WBG's current CAS objectives.
Kev Challenges
Egypt's key challenge is to sustain and accelerate growth in order to alleviate high
unemploymentand to pursue successfulintegrationinto the globaleconomy. Overcomingboth these
challengesrequiresan expandedrole for the private sector which is increasinglyviewed as the motor
of growthand raisingcompetitiveness.
While private sector investment and growth have improved following the stabilization
period, the pace of investment and productivity are significantly lower than what is needed to
accommodaterapid labor force growth and demographic pressures. Continued and accelerated
progress on improving private sector incentives through trade liberalization, privatization,public
sector reform, and financial sector developmentare becoming critical. In today's global economy
however,rapid technologicalchange, shorter productcycles and developmentsin the IT sectorhave
combined with privatization,trade and foreign investmentliberalizationto produce a very different
businessenvironment. The private sector will therefore need to adapt and respond to new ways of
doing business-increased rates of innovation, new modes of competition, shorter process and
productcycles-which are emergingfrom the global-widediffusionof e-commerceand IT.
The Government of Egypt has embarked on a set of policies to accelerate "second
generation"reforms to create a business environmentconducive to private investmentby enhancing
public-privatedialogue and cooperation,promoting a soundbusiness environmentand momentum
on the privatizationprogram, upgrading external competitiveness and technologicalcapacity and
boosting SME sector. These reforms are crucialfor Egypt's ability to improveits economicgrowth
performanceand to competesuccessfullyin the globalmarket.
WBG ActivitySince the Last CAS
The Bank Activity in PSD since the last CAS has been modest as Egypt has been able to
maintain high reserves and therefore has not required Bank assistance. In the period under review,
the Bank has carried out the followingmain activitiesin the PSD sector: (i) preparationof a financial

' WBGrefersto IBRD,IFC andMIGA.

Annex 1
Page 2 of 16
sector credit (PBDAC), (ii) participation in a joint World Bank/Governmentof Egypt business
environmenttask force, and (iii) sectorpolicy adviceon Private Provisionof Infrastructure.
IFC has had an active pipeline in Egypt, with equity and loan investmentsin manufacturing,
financial and infrastructure sectors, including participation in the first private sector power
generationprojects.
MIGA has not provided any guarantees to Egypt. The principal reason has been the
reluctanceof the governmentto providecounterguarantees.
The Governmentis lookingto (i) develop an effectivepartnershipwith the Bank that enables
it to access the Bank's knowledge resources on PSD topics and (ii) if the need arises, access to
financialresources.
Vision
There are five inter-linkedthemes to Egypt's vision for the private sector:
* Redefining how the public and private sector work together and reorienting the public sector Collaboration
* Promotingan enabling environmentfor private sector developmentto eliminate constraintsand
meetinternationalstandardsof serviceand cost - A soundbusinessenvironment.
* Allowing the private sector to take complete control of all productive sectors in the economy
over time - Privatization.
* Creating an environmentthat nurtures Small and MediumEnterprises (SME's) and allows them
to fully develop their potential as well as to ensure access to markets, resources and
infrastructure- Nurturing.
* Ensuring full participationin the global market and strikinga balance between the "old" versus
"neweconomy"- Globalization.
Overlayingthese themes is the need to: (a) reform the financial sector, and (b) strengthen
infrastructure.
PrivateSector DevelopmentPriorities
Redefining the public and private sector so they can work together in a collaborative
manner.
The agenda for private sector growth in Egypt has been clear for many years -discussion of
ways to create an improvedbusinessenvironmentthat leads to better competitiveness,privatization,
support for SME's, and financial sector strengtheninghave occurred many times. Why hasn't more
progressbeen made in implementingthis agenda? In large part the answer lies in the way the public

Annex 1
Page 3 of 16
sector and private sector interact or do not interact. It is generallyrecognized there is substantial
room for improvementin this relationship.
The lack of mutual understandingand trust betweenpublic and private sectors dates back to
the state-buildingperiod and today reflects the fact that neither party has clearly articulatedits roles
and responsibilitiesin a moderneconomy.
Movingforwardon this issuerequiresthree main initiatives:
* Definingclear lines of trust and responsibilitybetweenthe public and private sectors.
* A concertedeffort to strengthenprivate sector's voice - throughthe creation of strongerbusiness
agencies,and a willingnesson the Governmentside to consult.
* Civil service reform that discouragesrent seeking,improves accountabilityand moves the civil
servicetowardsgreater efficiencyand effectivenessis clearlyimportant.
The first and second initiatives are designed to promote a more collaborative overall
partnershipbetween the public and private sectors that will include: (i) finding a way for the public
and private sector to work together on a case by case basis in resolving and streamliningthe many
businessenvironmentconcerns; (ii) developingstronger business to business dialogue and linkages
to supply industry and market specific information as well as provide a forum for lobbying on
industry specific concerns; and (iii) bringing the informal sector into the fold, and at the same time
givingit voice.
Civil service reformis central to every aspect of economicreform in Egypt and is extremely
important to the successful implementation of the PSD agenda. Strengthening approaches to
privatization,reducingred tape for the informal sector,reformingthe financial sector,promotingthe
"new economy,"and creating effectivepublic private partnershipsall require sustainedcivil service
reform. However the reform process itself is dynamic and interactive--allof these policies will
interact with and shape the reform process itself. New applications arising out of Informationand
CommunicationsTechnology(ICT) providemechanismsto reduce and automate aspectsof the civil
service, privatizationreduces its power and size and sends powerful signals. Thus a push-pull
approachneeds to be developedwhere one reformleads to anotherand then another.
Promotingan enabling environmentfor private sector developmentto eliminateconstraints
and meet internationalstandardsof service and cost.
To be the main engine of growth and employment generation.in Egypt, the private sector
requires: (a) a stable and liberal policy and incentive framework; (b) a business environment
conducive to private sector activity where the rules of the game are transparent and clear, and
transactions costs are minimized; (c) easy access to key financial, technical and information
resources,and to markets; (d) low cost and high quality infrastructureservices and (e) a first class
laborresource.
>

Incentive Framework. The current policy environment inhibits competition and distorts the
incentives for firms to become more efficient and internationallycompetitive. Many sectors

Annex 1
Page 4 of 16
continue to enjoy high rates of effectiveprotectionfrom imports, an issue of particularconcern
with respect to the EU AssociationAgreement, and has the effect of re-deploying resources
toward protected sectors during the interim period. In spite of progress on privatization,
continued state dominancein a numberof sectors impedes private entry and access to resources.
Finally, Egypt lacks a Competition Law and a regulatory agency to limit anti-competitive
behavior in markets.
> Business Environment Related Issues. Private operators often indicate the tax system and

customs administrationas a primary constraint. The system operates in a way that imposes
uncertainty, delays and excess costs on Egyptian businesses, particularly small and medium
enterprises (SMEs). Officials continue to exercise considerablediscretion in the applicationof
tax and trade-relatedregulations,raisingcompliancecosts and evasion'. There may be scope for
streamliningtax incentivesfor new investmentsto make them more effective. The commercial
legal system is also regarded as too slow, expensive and cumbersomein resolvingcommercial
legal disputes and therefore is not heavily relied on by businesses. This limits the development
of impersonal and complex contractingand raises the cost of business transactions2. Secondary
issuesthat emergefrom recent work, include (a) businessand investmentlicensing;and (b) labor
regulation.
> Access to Resources. The financial system, is characterized by a low level of competition,
relatively high intermediationcosts and a low level of innovation. This set-up has limited the
access to credit for new firms and in particularemerging private SMEs. Human resourcesthat
have appropriatevocational and technical training are central to meeting the demandsof the
private sector and the new economy.
> Infrastructure. Infrastructureservicesimposeexcess costs on Egyptian firms both exportersand
non-exporters,limiting their competitivenessand discouraging investment. Port services are
slow and costly. Evidence also suggeststhat there are constraintsin domestic transport(in part
due to the limited road density),telecommunicationsand reliable electric power supply. Finally
access to land or industrial sites also presents a constraint to private sector activity.3 (A fuller
discussioncan be found below).
Privatization to ensurefull participationby theprivate sector in all productive sectors in the
economy.
Despite launchingone of the most successfulprivatizationprograms around the world during
the 1990s,4 the overall contributionof the public sector to GDP has remained virtuallyunchangedin
' It also appears that considerable administrativedelays in releasing customs (duty drawback related) letters of
guarantee is choking off the access to credit for exporting medium sized firms.
2 A new CommercialLaw has been under preparation for some time and is expected to be presented to Parliament in
the coming months.
3A recent FIAS study has highlighted business incorporation procedures, access to land and constraints on site
development as key constraints to FDI. Labor regulations, while formally cumbersome, are not widely enforced, but
may deter large companies from investing or distort their investment decisions towards more capital-intensive, less
employment-creatingtechnologies. Also it increases reliance on short term, sometimes informal employment which
in turn leads to insufficient investment in staff training.
4 Measured in percentage of GDP privatized per annum.

Annex 1
Page 5 of 16
the last decade. Most infrastructure activities and large financial institutions are controlled by
Government, which also retains substantial holdings of public enterprises. This share of
participation- at around 25% - is very high relativeto othernon-transitionaleconomiesand SOE's.
This high share of public activityhas significantnegativeimpacts:
*

It crowdsout the private sector and likely contributesto low productivity.

* It perpetuatesan environmentwhich is not conducivefor private provision of infrastructureand
the public sector has difficultyaddressingthe investmentneeds of the infrastructureand social
sectors.
* Key providers of financial and infrastructureinputs to the private sector are neither efficientnor
effective,which reduces the private sector's overall competitiveness.
To resolvethese problemsthe followingis required:
* Strengtheningthe managementof the privatizationprogram.
-

Effective "commercial" corporatizationof state-ownedenterprises and economic activities that
continueto be held at both the central governmentand municipallevels.

* Attention to investors' risk concerns through the developmentof financial instrumentssuch as
guarantees.
* Ensuring a level playing field as between foreigners and local investors on matters such as
withholdingtaxes. This stands at 32% on interest payments to foreign lenders and is a major
obstacleto foreignfinancing.I
* Developinga coordinatedregulatory and policy regime that is consistent with the needs of a
privatelyheld infrastructuresector.
* Provisionof substantial financial and other supportiveresources to deal with restructuringand
commercializationcosts.
Creatingan environmentthat nurturesSME's and Microenterprisesand allows them to filly
develop theirpotential.
SMEs and micro enterprises are a significantforce in the Egyptian economy. Enterprises
with less than 10 workersare estimatedto contribute80% of private sector value added and account
for 75% of private sectoremployment.

1 In the Sidi Krir BOOT,investorswere able to minimizethe impactby takingadvantageof the doubletaxation
treatywithSwitzerland.

Annex 1
Page 6 of 16
SMEs receive little support from Governmentand are faced with a complicatedand opaque
tax and business regulatory regime. Moreover there is little incentive for them to join the formal
sector;formalizationdoes not necessarilylead to better access to land, capital and know-howand it
is costlyfrom the vantagepoint of tax reporting. This has the followingunfortunateconsequences:
*

SMEs that are the future growthpoles of the economyopt out of the formal sector, which means
that growth and employmentpotential is lost.

* Rent seeking associated with allowing continued informality from within the administrationis
encouraged,which reinforcesthe problem.
* Those businessesthat do chose to locate within the formal sector suffer from unfair competition
- their competitorshave a significantlylower cost structure.
HelpingSMEs revolvesaround the followingfour areas:
* Providing access to finance, through the general strengtheningof the financial sector mentioned
above.
* Reducing and simplifying the bureaucratic red tape that overwhelmsEgyptian businessesbut
particularlySMEs.
* Strengtheningmarketingchannels,to ensure better informationand supportis available.
* Reforming the taxation system so that it is not unduly onerous, and is fair and simple to
administer.
Micro enterprises would benefit from the encouragementof (i) micro financial institutions
that are managed by private sector or non Governmentalentities, and (ii) the availabilityof basic
business know how (business administration and management, preparation of financial records,
marketing).
Ensuringfull participation in the global market, striking a balance between the old and
"new economy".
To take advantageof globalization,Egypt needs to: (i) improve its export performance in
non-oil sectors; and (ii) develop a strong "new economy" capability. A recent survey of private
manufacturingfirms suggests that the most binding constraintsto firms include high tariff rates on
imported inputs, lack of marketing and distributingcompanies, ineffective duty drawbackregimes,
cumbersomeexport procedures and absence of export credit and insuranceservices, particularlyfor
SMEs. The severity of these constraints appears to be high in industries where Egypt appears to
have a revealedcomparativeadvantage:textilesand food products.
Competitionin global markets is further hampered by a lack of managerial expertise with
respect to exportingand high unit costs createdby low capacityutilization. Egyptian firms also tend
to lack internal facilities for internationalmarket promotion and appear to be caught in a cycle of

Annex 1
Page 7 of 16
high domestic process for inputs, low domesticdemand,low utilizationof plant capacityand lack of
incentivesto expand output for world markets. Redundantlabor was also reported to be a negative
factoraffectingcompetitivenessprimarilyfrom public sectorfirms. (Cassinget al 2000).
Export Processing Zones have not lived up to their potential in terms of generatingforeign
exchange earnings, employment and attracting FDI. Data on the performance of the EPZs is
inadequate to monitor performance, objectives are unclear and there are few if any requirements
regardingexports for firms registeringin the zone.
Adoptinga strategyto improveexport competitivenesswill require the following:
* A concentratedmove towards a lower, more uniformtariff schedule.
* Overhaul of customs procedures to allow automatic clearance of products. Adoption of
harmonizedinternational standards and procedures to place producers on equal footing with
internationalcompetitors. Streamlineduty drawbackand temporary admissionprocedures.
* Exportfinancefocused particularlyon SMEsector.
* Better monitoringof EPZ sector, ensure that exportershave access to duty free inputs and benefit
from infrastructure,tax, labor and environmental regulations in the zone. Enhanced role of
private sectorin managementand operationof EPZs and overseasmarketingof EPZs.
While Egypt is without a doubt the leader in the Arab world in the new economy (the main
area being Information and Communications Technology (ICT)) and has demonstrated a
comparativeadvantagein this sector,much remainsto be done if Egypt is to expandthesecapacities.
Globalizationtrends are facilitating new and innovative uses of ICT which further reinforces an
acceleratedpace of globalization. This implies that the costs of delayed upgrading technological
capacity are rising, as demonstrated by the fact that in many developing countries, ICT-based
approach is outperforming the traditional approach in accelerating economic and employment
growthand contributingtowards the quality of life.
Adopting a strategy in this area mutually reinforces many of the themes in generally
strengtheningthe businessenvironment.
* The heart of ICT is the e-Commerceinfrastructurewhich requires strengtheningthe financial
services sector and in particular promoting the widespreaduse of credit cards and automatic
paymentsystems.
* Telecommunicationsand in particular internetinfrastructureis also very importantthrough links
with overallinfrastructurereform.
* Strengtheningthe general legal environmentin terms of protectingintellectual property,financial
regulationand the developmentof new cyber-laws.

Annex 1
Page 8 of 16
In addition specific work is required to create awareness, promote Arabic content on
websites, encourage market niches in this area and develop and retain human resources. Without a
focus in this last area Egypt will continue to lose its brightest and best ICT professionals abroad.

Reformin2'the FinancialSector
From a strategic perspective, inefficiencies in the Egyptian financial sector system are the
major issue, i.e. the total costs involved in the intermediation process. These costs are being
incurred by the GOE (though perhaps not immediately realized) through the explicit and implicit
subsidies (in terms of capital depreciation) and by the private sector (through the relatively high cost
of funds - real interest rates to medium borrowers now probably approach 10% - and lack of access
to credit).
Egyptian authorities feel that this problem can be resolved through a gradual program of
institutional and policy reforms, with a particular focus on the state banks, while allowing greater
freedom for the private sector to increase its share of the market. But, while some of these measures,
in particular improved accounting and auditing standards and an enhanced supervisory regime, are
essential and should be expedited, international experience, in widely different economic contexts,
shows consistently that: a) sound financial systems cannot be built on or around dysfunctional
banking systems; and b) banking systems dominated by state banks can only be reformed effectively
through an aggressive program of privatization that is designed to change ownership, governance and
introduce market discipline. Such a program has to be complemented with other measures to
enhance regulation, supervision and competition and diversity in the system. Of course there are
other issues, ranging from the need to build up the debt markets at one end and for better and more
accessible housing finance and more market based rural credit at the other-to provide the diversity
of products/institutions needed to support a more dynamic economy and ensure a stronger financial
system. But in terms of strategic priorities the issue of the health of the banking system needs to be
emphasized.

Strenetheninzthe InfrastructureSectors
The overriding infrastructure issue in Egypt is finding adequate levels of investment to both
maintain existing assets and provide for new projects. Every infrastructure sub-sector is undercapitalized. Government revenues are not enough to support the level of investment required, and
only the participation of the private sector can ensure adequate funds. BOTs have been attempted in
energy, ports and roads, and some small concessions granted for water and wastewater services.
The main tool to involve the private sector and expand access to infrastructure is the
promotion of entry and competition into the infrastructure sectors. This in turn would require
adapting the regulatory framework to an environment with more numerous, and more diverse,
players, and to the objective of expanding access. This might imply, for example, removing barriers
to entry, adapting quality standards to willingness to pay, establishing targeted subsidy systems
compatible with opening of sector to competition, and simplifying regulatory processes to enable
small, less sophisticated operators, to participate.
Infrastructure issues to be addressed might include: the need for cross sectoral policies which
encompass complementary or inter-related activities (e.g. gas and electricity); cross-sector

Annex 1
Page 9 of 16
considerations on tariffs and subsidy mechanisms; and a consideration of whether regulatory
institutionscould/shouldbe set up on a cross-sectorbasis.
World Bank GrouDAssistanceStrate2y
Overview
Egypt is fortunate in that it enjoys strong donor support from a wide variety of institutions
including USAID,the EU, UNDP, AfDB, Kuwait Fund, KfW and the Islamic DevelopmentBank.
In broad terms the WBG strategy is to work in partnership with other donors to provide the
followingsupport:
The Bank will; (i) facilitateknowledgesharingon the implementationaspects of the agenda
and (ii) provide financial resources to fund the significantimplementation and restructuringcosts
arising from privatizationand financial sectorreform. The primary area where the Bank can help is
facilitatingthe public/privatepartnershipdialogue which is seen as the starting point for meaningful
reform. In parallel, specific technical assistance can be provided in areas that will acceleratethe
forces for change, such as privatization,PPI and civil servicereform.
To deliver on this agenda the Bank will work closely with the Govemment and other
membersof the donor communityto develop innovative"low cost" financing packages and develop
mechanismsfor the provision of reimbursabletechnicalassistanceby the Bank.
IFC will focus on; (i) supportingPPI initiatives with either guarantee, capital or advisory
services as the case may require, (ii) assisting the developmentof new financial sector institutions
and instrumentsfor the private sector, (iii) catalyzing new private sector investmentin both the
traditional (manufacturing,oil and gas and tourism), social sector and new economy sectors, (iv)
supportingSMEinitiatives.
MIGA will remain available to provideguaranteeinstrumentsto facilitate new private sector
investment,if required.
The Bank will work closelywith the IFC and MIGAto develop projects incorporatingpublic
policy and institutionbuildingcomponentsthat supportdirect lending to the private sector. MatrixA
summarizes the complementarityof the Bank Group PSD assistance. Such projects could include
privatelysuppliedhousingand infrastructureservicesand municipalfinance.
DetailedProposals
The following is a list of detailed proposals based on the five themes discussed abovenamely collaboration, business environment, privatization, nurturing of SMEs and boosting
globalization and integration of the new economy-all of which support the broader goals of
improving growth performance, employment generation and competitiveness while enhancing
Egypt's integrationinto the globaleconomy.

Annex 1
Page 10 of 16
Matrix A: Complementarityof the Bank GroupPSD Assistance
Financial sector
The Bank Group would focus on
enhancing legal and regulatory
environment and strengthening the
banking sector and the payments
system, which would pave the way
for increased IFC involvement.

SME development
The Bank would focus on improving
the business environment and
collaborate with the IFC to reduce
the constraints to SME development
(finance, market access, etc.).

Bank

IFC

- Non-lending services focused on
capital marketdevelopment and
mortgage markets.
- TA to strengthen the capacity of
middle management in the Central
Bank, and establish a primary
market for Governmentsecurities.
- Possible lending aimed at
developing mortgage markets.

- TA/advice on and investmentin
innovative financial instruments or
structures to build institutions in
mortgage finance, underwriting and
trading of bonds, and factoring.
- Medium to long - term loans to
banks and non-bank financial
intermediaries.
- Collaborate with the Bank on
mortgage market development,by
intervening in primary markets or
becoming a shareholder of a secondary
mortgage market institution.

- Lending (under "high case
scenario") to develop export
finance mechanisms(e.g., preshipment export finance
guarantees).
- TA/ESW to help create a legal
and regulatory framework
conducive to SME development.

- Focused lending to facilitate access
to finance (investments in credit lines,
risk capital, guarantees, or non-bank
financing instruments, such as
leasing).
- Extended African Project
DevelopmentFacility to Egypt.
- Selected direct investmentsin
companies with clear development
impact (e.g. IT).

- TA to improve performance of
public enterprises through the
development of monitoring and
managementmechanisms,and
corporatization.
- Pilot turn-around fund to
encourage privatization of
selected public enterprises, if
requested.

- Advisory services.
- Selected transactions.

- TA on policy and regulatory
reforms in the power sector.
- advise municipal authorities on
PSP optionsin the watersector.

- IFC investmentsin IPPs in power.
- Potential investmentsin diverse
sectors such as water and wastewater,

- Lending and TA support in: (a)
ICT Education; (b) capacity
building of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority; (c)
preparation of a modern legal
frameworkfor e-commerce and egovernment; (d) reform of postal
services.

- Investments in educational facilities
and/or technical institutions (in
collaboration with the Bank) to
promote computer literacy and ICT
skills.
- Investments in incubators and jber
parks.

Privatization

Infrastructure

____________________________

Informationand communication
technology

ports andairports.

Annex 1
Page 11 of 16
In addition to providing a more detailed description of recommended actions, this section
also highlights areas of potential comparative advantage for the Bank and IFC.
Detailed proposals under the main themes are set out below:
Collaboration: In recent years the Bank Group has supported a variety of approaches (consultative
forums, regulatory complaint offices, and strengthening professional associations) designed to foster
ongoing public-private dialogue on the objectives, scope and details of reforms. Such activities have
included the creation of Private Sector Foundations in Senegal, Ghana and elsewhere,
Competitiveness Review Commissions (Cote d'Ivoire and Cameroon) and simpler networking
activities which have helped to harmonize the activities of diverse PSD groups and focus the agenda
for public-private debate. To enhance the government -private sector dialogue the Bank Group can
support a series of workshops and strengthening institutional and organizational capacity along these
lines. A specific component of this work could be to develop conflict resolution mechanisms as well
as to upgrade the capacity and support systems of local professional associations and chambers of
commerce.
Business Environment: The business and regulatory environment plays a substantial role in
determining the commercial orientation and cost structure of the private sector. WBG assistance in
this area could include an omnibus ESW policy package addressing the legal-regulatory environment
and administrative processes which impose barriers to entry, exit and domestic competition. This
would include investment approval processes, competition policy to address nontradable sectors
which will complement the trade facilitation component in addition to tax issues. An additional
component of this package would be facilitating the private-public dialogue and collaboration.
Privatization: WBG assistance in this area could involve: (a) technical assistance to improve
performance of public enterprises through the development of monitoring and management
mechanisms, and corporatization; and (b) pilot turn-around funds to encourage privatization of
selected public enterprises. In the longer term, depending on the speed of the privatization program,
the Bank could provide financial resources to facilitate the program.' Privatization advisory services
can be provided by the IFC, where the Government would prefer to give IFC a mandate for a
particular transaction.
SME Development: In addition to the proposed assistance to create an incentive structure and
business environment conducive to private sector (including SME) activity, the Bank Group can
provide assistance in three dimensions of SME development: (a) facilitating access to resources,
especially finance; (b) providing business development assistance; and (c) helping to build linkages
between Egyptian and foreign SMEs. The nature of this assistance, in turn, varies for different
categories of SMEs. Egyptian SMEs represent very heterogeneous sectors that consist of a large
variety of enterprises in terms of the number of employees, amount of assets, technical
competencies, "know-how", dynamism, etc., and range from informal to formal, self-employment to

' Turn-around funds catalyze operational and financial turnaround of target companies. The component would
structure a package of managerial/technicalresources and financing on terms which maximized the incentive of firm
managementto improve competitiveness and restore profitability, and solicit private sector participation in such a
vehicle. The component would also serve to identify tax and regulatory obstacles to corporate restructuring.

Annex 1
Page 12 of 16
enterprises hiring 200 or more workers, artisanal products to high technology products, or
subsistenceenterprisesto those that are more competitiveand dynamic.
Specificinitiativescould include:
> Focusedlending opportunitiesto facilitateaccess to finance (e.g., IFC investmentsin credit lines,

risk capital, or non-bank financing instruments,such as leasing, as well as Bank assistanceto
develop modem export finance mechanisms,including guaranteesetc.). The focus would be on
sustainability. In addition,financial intermediarieswill be targetedfor assistance. Opportunities
to issue credit lines for direct SMElending,especiallyin the leasingindustry will be examined.
> Developingan ICT package for SMEs in differentsectors (see section under ICT).
> As part of the WBG assistance, the business partnership group could help to spur the

developmentof new partnershipactivitiesbetween selectedEuropeanand Egyptian Chambersof
Commerce that would: transfer expertise on best practices of Chamber services for SMEs,
encouragelinkagesamongstEuropeanand EgyptianSMEs, and provide SME skills development
in joint venturesand e-commerce.
Globalization: Under the CAS high case scenario, the Bank could consider a trade facilitation
project which deals with tariff reforms, customs reforms and removing infrastructure and
administrativeconstraints to exports. EPZ developmentand monitoring could also be included. In
addition, the project could include schemesto facilitate access to foreign markets and buyers (e.g.,
matching grants financed by other donors, or e-commerce schemes managed and operated by
professionalassociations)by Egyptian SMEand new exporters.
> The Bank could also assist in the area of Information and Communication Technology.
Specifically, a project will be prepared focusing on Information Infrastructure, which could
include capacity building of the Telecom Regulatory Agency, preparation of a modem legal
frameworkfor e-commerceand e-governmentand reform of the postal services.
IFC plans to invest directly in internet or IT companies and in internet infrastructure
enterprises. FIAS will continue to supportefforts to improvethe climate for foreigninvestors.
FinancialSector
The Bank wouldprovide TA to promote the financialreform agenda. Specifically,this TA
wouldfocus on building the capacityof middle managementin the Central Bank, and establishinga
primary market for Government securities. The Bank would also collaborate with the IMF to
enhancethe legal and regulatoryenvironmentin the context of a financialsector assessment(FSAP).
A MortgageMarket capacitybuildingactivitycould be prepared to provide variousfinancial
products that would help the Governmentin mobilizingat relatively low cost, the large amountsof
private funding that will be needed. It may also be possiblefor the IEFC
to support a Bank operation
by interveningin primary markets or by becoming a possible shareholder of a secondarymortgage
marketinstitution.

Annex 1
Page 13 of 16
IFCwould follow a three-prongedapproachin the financialsector: creatingor strengthening
existing institutions,providingmedium to long-term funding, and deepening the financial sector by
developingthe bond markets and introducingnew financialinstruments.
IFC's institution building role will build on the successful experience of setting up joint
venturesbetweenlocal financialinstitutionsand internationalcompaniesthat are industry leaders, to
promote the transfer of expertise and best practice. IFC expectsto be activein setting up institutions
to engage in activities that are as yet undeveloped, including mortgage finance, underwritingand
trading of bonds, and factoring. Developing mortgage finance will first entail the growth of a
primary market, where existing or new institutionsprovide mortgages. This is expectedto happen
with the passage of the mortgage law. A second stage will be the development of a secondary
mortgage market, which will need the introduction of securitization and setting up secondary
mortgageinstitutions.
IFC will continue to offer medium to long-termloans to the financial sector,to banks and to
non-bank financial intermediaries. The maturities offered by IFC are longer than those available
from' other sources, and would enable financial institutions to better manage their balance sheets.
Extendingfinancingto intermediariesengagedin the SME sector, such as leasing companies,will be
the focus of particular attention.
Developing the corporate bond market, and fixed income markets more generally, is an
importantcomponent of general financial sector development. An active, well functioningprimary
market provides an important corporate finance tool that can reduce interest rate, foreigncurrency
and refundingrisk. Egypt has a somewhatactive primary corporate bond market (althoughactivity
has droppedoff sharplyrecently) with establishedprocedures,but an illiquid secondarymarket. IEFC
has provided advisory services to the Capital Markets Authority on developing the corporate debt
market, and will seek to complementthat by setting up a new institution(s)or strengtheningexisting
ones that underwriteand trade debt instruments.This activitywould also support developmentof an
active governmentsecurities market, which provides benchmark interest rates across the maturity
spectrum,amongother financial sectorbenefits.
Infrastructure
The Bank Group has and can continue to play a role in the infrastructure area, and
increasinglyin the private provision of infrastructure. Areas for Bank and IFC activity include
power, water and wastewater,and ports and airports. Over the short term the role of the Bank in this
sector wouldbe to provide technical assistanceon policyreforms and needed regulatoryframework.
IFC's involvementinclude both advisoryactivitiesand investment.
The water and sanitation sector has benefitedfrom substantial donor funding over the past
two decades. With donor funding expectedto decline,policy advice will focus on attractingprivate
sectorparticipationin the provision of water and sanitationservices. Low water tariffs are a major
impediment to private sector participation. Reforms of the regulatory frameworkare expected to
decentralizedecision-makingand grant more autonomyto municipalwater and sanitationauthorities
in settingtariffs. The WBG can advisemunicipalauthoritieson PSP options and ways to implement
transactions with private sector companies and IFC could provide direct financing to the projects.
Cities such as Alexandria,with a strong commitmentto private sectorparticipationand wheretariffs

Annex 1
Page 14 of 16
are higher than other cities (they are still low by internationalcomparison)are more likely to attract
private sector investmentin water/sanitationand can then serve as a model to be replicated in other
cities.
In the renewable energy area work to develop self sustainingmarkets can also be pursued.
IFC throughPSAS can provideadvisoryservicesto facilitateprivate transactions.
In the power sector, reforms need to be aimed at attracting private sector participationand
financing of the large amount of investmentneeded in generation,transmissionand distribution to
cater for load growth. IFC has been requested to provide financing for the first 3 IPP's in Egypt.
While it is expected that there will continue to be demand for IFC financing in power generation,
IFC's strategy will be to explore the scope for private participationin the distributionsub-sectorand
in developing alternative sources for generation such as wind power. In this sector, Egyptian
authoritiesare dealing simultaneouslywith the cornerstoneelementsof sector reform,namely sector
structure,ownershippolicy and regulation(includingprices). Until recently, electricity supply was
under monopolycontrol of the EgyptianElectricity Authority(EEA), but this has changed and the
private sector is now authorizedto build, own,operate and transfer(BOOT)power generationplants.
In addition, the Governmentand Egyptian Electricity Holding Company are currently considering
whetherit is better to separate generationfrom distributionbefore proceedingwith the privatization
process.
While the technical performanceof the generation,transmissionand distributionsystems is
adequate,consumersreceive a reliable serviceat a low price, and the power sector in Egypt has, over
the last few years, experiencednotable achievements,these arrangementshave not been adequateto
establish financial discipline and sound commercialpractices in the power sector. The financial
position of the sector is weak; there are subsidies in electricity tariffs and large arrears in the
payment of electricitybills, mainly by several major customersin the public sector. As for pricing
and regulation,electricity tariffs are set by Cabinet decree. There have been no changes in tariffs
since 1994,which means that tariff rates havebeen decreasingin real terms.
IFC has been heavily involvedin the power sector in Egypt in recent years. The work done
on specific BOOT investmentsin power generationhas provided an opportunityto addresssome of
the issuesfacing the country in this sector. This involvementhas allowed IFC, as a part of the Bank
Group an initial entr6e to the discussionswith the Governmentof Egypt. The outcomeof decisions
made by the Government of Egypt will have a considerableimpact on the future commercial
performanceof the sector, and its ability to attract the necessaryinvestmentfor meeting future load
growth.
IFC Activitysince the last CAS
In the manufacturingsector, since the last CAS IFC approved9 investments in companies
producingsteel, cement, carbon black, industrialgases, corrugatedboxes and autoparts. In general
however, demand for IFC financing in the manufacturingsector has been less than expected. This
has largely been due to the availability of financing from other sources, including local and
internationalbanks, other multilateral agencies such as the European Investment Bank, the African
DevelopmentBank, the Islamic DevelopmentBank and Arab funds and, to a limited extent, the
domestic bond market. Another reason has been the fears of a possible devaluation of the Pound,

Annex 1
Page 15 of 16
particularly since 1999, which have inhibited demand for US$ financing, including from IFC,
particularlyfor projectswhich are not foreignexchangeearners.
The last CAS identified IFC's strategyin the financial sector as a three-prongedapproach
of: creating or strengthening existing institutions, providing medium to long-term funding and
providingtechnical assistance where appropriateexpertise can be sourced. IFC made significant
progressin all three areas. The aim of EFC'sinstitutionbuilding efforts is to deepen the financial
sector in Egypt, by introducing new activities and best practices and ultimately increasing the
efficiencyof the financial sectorin providingservicesin support of private sector activity. Since the
CAS, IFC has set up and invested in institutions in leasing, credit ratings, life insurance and
investmentbanking. In all these cases, the companiesare set up as joint ventures with international
companies that are industry leaders to ensure that best international practice is followed. Orix
Leasing Egypt has the Orix Corporationof Japan and Orix Leasing Pakistan as technical partners.
The rating company,Nile Ratings,was set up with Fitch IBCAof the U.K. CommercialInternational
Life InsuranceCompanyis a joint venturebetweenEgypt's leading private bank, CI ( which is also
an IFC investmentsince 1992) and Legal & General, one of the leading U.K. insurancecompanies.
The investment banking company, HC Securities, is in joint venture with Morgan Stanley Dean
'Witter.
IFChas also provided funding to the financial sector. A forfaiting credit line was recently
approvedto some Egyptian private banks to help them expand forfaiting servicesto their private
clients. IFChas also extended a loan to a leasing company,ORIX Leasing Egypt which IFC helped
establish in 1996, to enable it to expand the financingit provides to SME's. In FY01 IFCconcluded
a US$30 million loan to a leading investmentbank to help it fund new lines of business and to
expand into regional markets. IFC has also been offering long-term lines of credit to private
Egyptian banks to enable them to provide term US$ funding to their private clients, but none have
been concluded so far. In general , IFC lending to the financial sector, to banks and to non-bank
financialintermediaries(NBFIs),has been in less demandthan expected. Once Egyptwas awarded
investmentgrade rating from the major rating agencies in 1997, the availabilityof shorterterm, but
lower cost financingin US dollarsfrom internationalbanks to Egyptianbanks improvedand reduced
the demandfor IFC lending to the bankingsector. NBFIs generallyhave a preference to borrowin
local currency unless the foreign exchangerisk can be hedged,and hedging instrumentsare limited
in Egypt.
IFChas supported the growth of the Egyptian Stock Exchange. IFC included the Egyptian
market in its widelyfollowedIFC Indices in 1997,helping to increase internationalinterest and the
flow of capital to Egyptian equities. IFC also set up and invested in the first offshorecountryfund
for Egypt (The Egypt Trust, capitalized at US$ 90 million) thus helping to mobilize international
fundsto investin Egyptian listed equities.
IFChas also providedtechnical assistanceto the EgyptianCapital Markets Authority(CMA)
and Ministryof Economyto help developthe corporatedebt market.
In infrastructure,the Governmenthas opened up some areas to private sector investment.
Power generationhas been at the forefront and 3 contracts to develop and operate power stations
have been awardedto private companies to date. The large financing requirementsof theseprojects
and the long tenors needed created a demandfor IFCfinancing which was sought for all 3 projects.

Annex 1
Page 16 of 16
IFC's Board approvedfinancing to the first (Sidi Krir) in FY1999 and to the other 2 (Suez and Port
Said) in FY2001. The loan to Sidi Krir has not been signed as the company has not yet chosen to
convert the bridge loans it obtainedfrom commercialbanks to the longerterm IFC loan.The loans to
Suez and Port Said were signed in April 2001. IFC's loans are of the long tenors needed and,
throughthe B loan program,IFC is able to mobilize large amountsof internationalbank financingto
complementits own lending. For the Suez and Port Said projects, IFC will attempt to raise a total of
about US$300 million from internationalbanks to complement the US$90 million it will provide
from its own resources.

Annex 2
Page 1 of 1
World Bank Institute (WBI) in Egypt
As the focus of the Bank Group shifts increasingly toward knowledge-based
activities, the role of WBI is expected to become correspondingly important in capacity
building and knowledge management services. For greater impact and to assure
selectivity, WBI will focus on a few strategic areas where the Bank Group is heavily
involved. Table 3 summarizes some of WBI's activities under the base case scenario. In
each case WBI is expected to ensure wide consultations and dissemination of experience
of other countries in areas where AAA on Egypt is underway or completed.
Egyptian participants are expected to benefit from courses for the sub-region in
Lebanon on: health sector reform and health financing; agricultural trade and WTO; and
financial sector issues. Other WBI learning programs relate to governance issues,
privatization strategy and infrastructure finance; and in the area of information and
communicationtechnology.
WBI's strategy is to work closely with, and strengthen, local partners for training
and policy dialogue. Following the WDR workshop in Cairo (Feb 2001), a group of
Egyptian civil society leaders will participate in country and regional development
debates focused on poverty with videoconference support. Later, a similar group will
provide critical input and draw substantial benefit from the next Mediterranean
Development Forum (MDF) event scheduled for March 2002. The fourth MDF should
be an effective instrument for policy dialogue in the region, with relevance and concrete
follow-up for all countries concerned.
WBI will stay responsive to strong country demand in other specific areas, such as
project appraisal, monitoring and evaluation, following up on the successful course
offered in Cairo in March 2001. WBI will also explore the demand for learning on
education (including ECD), reproductive health and population, as well as water and
environment issues and urban management. It is also expected to support exploratory
work and consultations on governance issues.
Egypt's global distance learning center will become operational in 2001 at the
Regional Information and Technology Software Engineering Center (RITSEC). As part
of the Global Distance Learning Network (GDLN), WBI, in collaboration with the
Economic Research Forum (ERF) and RITSEC, will offer in 2002 a first distance
learning course in Cairo for a regional audience on Macroeconomic Management for
Financial Stability and Poverty Reduction.

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep. at a glance
M. East
& North
Africa

Lowermiddleincome

62.4
1,380
86.4

291
2,060
599

2,094
1,200
2,513

1.8
2.7

2.1
3.0

1.1
1.2

23
45
67
49
12
95
45
101
108
94

58
68
44
15
89
36
95
102
88

43
69
32
15
80
16
114
114
116

POVERTY and SOCIAL
Egypt
1898
Population, mid-year (nillions)
GNP per capita (Atlas method,US$)
GNP (Atlas niethod, US$ billions)

Developrnentdiamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate /latest year available, 1993899)
Poverty (% ofpopulation below nabonal poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 Ive births)
Child malnutrition (% of chikden under 5)
Access to improved water source (% ofpopulaton)
illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
GrossprimarVenrollment (%of'school-agepopulation)
Male
Female

GNP
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to safe water

EW'ptArabRep.
Lower-mIddrt-Incomegroup

-

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979

1989

1998

1999

GDP (USS billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

18.2
32.8
29.7
14.2
..

30.0
31.8
17.9
17.3
30.0

82.5
20.5
16.8
14.0
21.0

89.0
22.8
16.0
14.4
21.0

Current account balance/GDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Presentvalue of debVGDP
Presentvalue of debt/exports

-10.6
1.2
82.1
6.4

-1.6
3.7
151.9
23.3

-3.0
0.9
36.7
8.5

-1.9
0.8
33.7
9.5

1979-89 1989-99

1998

1999

1999.03

4.3
2.6
3.5

5.6
3.9
-7.7

6.0
3.9
9.2

5.7
4.1
12.4

Econonilc ratIos'

Trade

Domestic
Savings

Investment

Indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GNP per capita
Exports of goodsand services

5.8
4.5
4.4

-Egypt,Arab Rep.

--

Lower-mIddle-incomegroup

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1979

1989

1998

19f8

Growthofinvestrent

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

20.9
35.8
13.6
43.3

19.7
28.0
18.1
52.3

17.5
32.3
18.6
50.2

17.4
31.5
19.5
51.0

20
10
0

Private consumption
General governmentconsumption
Imports of goods and services

68.7
17.1
48.3

70.1
12.6
32.4

75.9
10.1
23.3

75.5
10.1
24.4

aoOf

1979-89

1989-99

1998

1999

Growtb or exports and imports (%)

Agriculture
Industrv
Manufactuing
Services

2.8
5.6
7.5

3.0
4.0
5.9
4.6

3.7
7.1
7.8
5.4

Private consumption
General governmentconsumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

3.5
4.8
1.2
-1.6
7.2

4.2
1.8
4.7
2.8
4.7

4.3
4.5
21.4
1.1
5.8

}

andGWP(%)

,_0
Ip_

94

95

9

GDI

97

9a

99

0GDP

(averageannualgtrowth)
..

3.7
3.7
9.7
8.3o
3.6
3.9
19.8
12.8
5.7

15

10
s
w

95

96

97 \

95 /

99

-10
-Exports

0Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep.
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1979

1989

1998

1999

..

16.7
18.5

3.8
3.6

3.8
1.7

22.3

inflation(%
10* '

-

Govemment finance

(%of GDP,Includescunfentgrants)
Currentrevenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficR

-

<-

2

o..
..
..

19.3

22.8

22.2

-4.9
-15.4

2.9
-1.0

2.0
4.2

1989
2,697
1,066
299
978
10,361

1998
5,128
1,728
103
1,685
16,899

1999
4,445
1,000
208
2,080
16,969

95

94

-GDP

98
99
96
97
deflator -0-CPI
w__w___

TRADE
(US$ m9lions79
Total exports (fob)
Cotton
Otheragriculture
Manufactures
Total imports (cil.

..
..

Food

2,404

3,194

2,374

Fuel and energy
Capital goods

680
2,050

2,188
4,801

1,319
5,575

91
86

107

98
94
105

94
90
104

Export price Index(1995=100)
Importpricelndex(1995=100)
Termsof trade (1995=100)

..
.

Export andlniport levels (US$mill.)
20,000

T
15000
100-0

s,oojj *-

]

-

o
olmports

a Exports
_

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USSminllons)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1979
5,401
8,781
-3,380

1989
8,216
12,539
-4,323

1998
13,503
21,795
-8,292

1999
13,537
21,109
-7,572

Net income
Net current transfers

-1,069
2,534

-389
4,243

1,213
4,600

995
4,869

2

Current account balance

-1,915

-469

-2,479

-1,709

-1

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

1,747
168

35
433

2,344
135

-409
2.117

-3
-4

0.7

2,437
2.6

20,878
34

18,763
34

1979

1989

1998

1999

14,906
258
266

45,611
1,448
905

30,313
846
1242

29,955
761
1273

519
22
2

2,910
250
12

1,643
236
25

1,833
221
28

258
1,148
441
1,216

455
397
259
1,250

0
-105

-193
-165

0

0

298
172
3
169
21
148

241
118
144
-26
118
-144

Current account balance to GDP(%I
-

s
4

194

93

95

96

97

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaVUS$)

..

DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
EXTERNAL
(US$ rmillions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Compositionof net resource flows
Ofricial grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DevelopmentEconomics

Composlton of 1999 debt (US$mill.)

G:3,0

0:4,21

F.723

E. 21,976
142
217
180
38
81
-44

550
199
166
32
83
-50

A -IBRD
B-IDA
C- IMF

E -Bilateral
D-Othermultilateral F-Private
G - Short-term
_ - - - - --

04/13/01

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

CAS AnnexB2 - ArabRepublicof Egypt

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date: 05/30/2001

Indicator

1998

1999

2000

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa

2001

17

20

21

19

Average ImplementationPeriod (years) b

4

3

4

4.7

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a

17.6

15

19

10.5

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount as

15.4

12.3

36.9

1.8

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ' d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d

17.6
15.4

15
12.3

19
36.9

10.5
1.8

36

14.4

8.1

5.6

Yes (Nov 97)
1,124.0
62.5

No
1,359.0
59.1

No
1,596.0
76.0

No
1,332.0
66.6

DisbursementRatio (%) '
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousapd)
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project)

Item
Memorandum
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amtf
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

SinceFY 80
73
3474.7
24.3
14

LastFiveFYs
7
435
29
2

Asshownin the AnnualReporton PortfolioPerformance(exceptfor currentFY).
Averageage of projectsin the Bank'scountryportfolio.
Percentof projectsratedU or HUondevelopmentobjectives(DO)and/orimplementation
progress(IP).
AsdefinedunderthePortfolioImprovement
Program.
Ratioof disbursements
duringtheyearto the undisbursedbalanceof theBank'sportfolioat the
beginningof theyear:Investmentprojectsonly.

f. Figureis basedonnet disbursements
of unsatisfactory
projectsaftercancellations.Ifbasedon original
commitments,
figurefor LastFiveFYswouldbe 11%.
* All indicatorsarefor projectsactivein the Portfolio,withtheexceptionof Disbursement
Ratio,
whichincludesallactiveprojectsas wellas projectswhichexitedduringthefiscalyear.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 1

Arab Republic of Egypt
Bank Group Program Summary
Proposed IBRDIIDABase-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal
year

Project

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards
(HIMIL)

Implementation
Risks
(HIMIL)

2002

Higher Education Enhancement Prog.
Skills Development
Information Technology
Result

50.0
50.0
10.0
110.0

H
M
H

M
M
L

2003

Early Childhood Development
Natural Resource Management
Result

50.0
50.0
100.0

H
H

M
M

2004

Health Sector Reform II
Irrigation/DrainageImprovement
Agriculture Exports
Result

100.0
100.0
40.0
240.0

H
M
H

M
L
M

Overall Result

450.0

a/ This tablepresentsthe proposedprogramfor the nextthreefiscalyears.

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

ArabRepublicof Egypt:Summaryof NonlendingServices
As of 4/13/01
Product
Recent completions

Completion FY
Export Promotion
Safety Net
Agriculture Reports
Cairo Traffic
Business Environment

FY
01
01
01
00
01

Ongoing

Social & Structural Review
Nile Basin Initiative
Water Notes
CDF for Education
Private Investment in Public Infrastructure
Project Analysis for Training (WBI)
Economic Monitoring

01
01-04
01/02
01
01
01
01-04

02
Poverty Assessment
02
CPARUpdate
02
Health Insurance
02
Gender Assessment
02
Early Childhood Development
02
Corporate Governance Assessment
03
CFAA
03
Public Expenditure Review
03
Irrigation Improvement Sector Review
03
Drainage and Wastewater Reuse
03
Financial Sector Assessment
04
Social & Structural Review II
Evaluation of Health Sector Reform
04
04
CAS
G = Government;B = Bank; D = Donors; P = Public Dissemination
KG = Knowledge Generation; PD = Public Debate; PS = Problem Solving
Planned

Cost
(US$000)
20.3
9.5
170.2
31.0
143.9

Audience
G, B
G, B
G, B, D
G, B
G, B, D

Objective
PS
PS
PD, PS
PS
PD, PS

150.0

G, B, D, P
G, B, D
G, B
G, B, D
G, B, D
G
B, G

KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
PS
KG

200.0
30.0
75.0
75.0
50.0
40.0
50.0
250.0
100.0
100.0
150.0
250.0
100.0
150.0

G, B, D, P
G, B
G, B, D
G, B, D
G, B, D
G, B
G, B, D
G, B, D
G, B, D
G, B, D
G, B
G, B, D, P
G, B, D
G, B, D, P

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
PS
KG, PS
KG
PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
PS, KG
KG, PD
KG, PS
PD, PS

164.7
108.6
67.8
276.8
166.0
-

AnnexB5
Page 1 of 1

Egypt, Arab Rep. Social Indicators
Latestsingleyear

1970-75

1980-85

Same reglon/income
group

1993-99

M. East
& North
Africa

Lowermiddleh
Income

POPULATION
Totalpopulation,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(% annualaveragefor period)
Urbanpopulation(%of population)
Totalfertilityrate(birthsper woman)

36.3
1.9
43.5
5.4

46.5
2.6
43.9
4.6

62.7
1.9
45.0
3.3

290.3
2.0
58.2
3.5

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

2,060
114

1,200
137

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..

..

..
..

..

22.9
22.5
23.3

INCOME
GNI per capita(US$)
Consumerprice index(1995=100)
Foodprice index(1995=100)

340
6
..

640
21
23

1,380
120
116

INCOME/CONSUMPTION
DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

Lowestquintile(% of incomeor consumption)
Highestquintile(% of incomeor consumption)

..

5.8
48.1

..

28.9

..

9.8
39.0

..

SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditure
Health (% of GDP)

..

..

1.8

2.2

2.3

5.1
4.7

6.3
5.2

4.8
0.1

5.2

4.8

63
75
49

..
..

93
98
88

87
90
83

99
100
99

Total
Urban

..

80

..

95
96
94

89
96

Rural

90
93
61

80

94
69

..

74
95

91
92

87
87

..

..

96
95
12

..

9

53
52
55

59
58
61

67
65
68

68
67
69

69
67
72

139
235

92
175

49
61

44
56

32
40

255
179

257
204

193
168

183
151

191
133

Education(%of GNI)
Socialsecurityand welfare(% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female

..

Access to an improved watersource

(%of population)
..

Immunization
rate
(%under12months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

..

Lifeexpectancy
atbirth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

Mortality
Infant(per1,000live births)
Under5 (per 1,000live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000population)
Female(per 1,000population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)

Birthsattendedby skilled healthstaff (%)

..

..

170

..

..

56

Note:0 or 0.0 meanszeroor less than halfthe unit shown.Net enrollmentratiosexceeding100 indIcatediscrepancies
betweenthe estimatesof school-agepopulationandreportedenrollmentdata. Latestyearfor accessto improvedwater
sourcedatais 2000.
2001World DevelopmentIndicatorsCD-ROM,WorldBank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep. - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture

100
17

100
18

100
17

100
17

100
17

100
16

100
15

100
14

100
13

Industry

32

32

32

32

34

32

32

33

Services

51

51

50

51

50

52

53

53

33
54

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Governmentinvestment
Private investment

89
16
5
11

87
18
6
12

86
19
7
12

86
20
7
13

81
22
7
14

82
24
6
18

82
24
6
18

81
25
5
19

80
25
5
20

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports(GNFS)

20
26

20
25

17
23

16
24

16
22

17
24

18
25

19
25

20
26

Grossdomesticsavings
Gross national savingsc

11
17

13
20

14
21

14
21

19
24

18
23

18
23

19
23

20
24

67591

75516

82539

89016

99459

107123

114628

120177

1100

1200

1280

1380

1610

1670

1700

1750

1820

5.5
6.6

5.6
5.3

6.0
4.5

6.4
8.7

5.5
4.3

5.6
5.2

5.7
5.3

5.9
5.6

3.8
-0.1
-0.1

4.3
2.5
2.5

4.7
2.9
2.6

3.8
4.0
4.7

3.9
2.6
3.1

4.0
2.6
3.1

4.2
2.5
3.0

Memorandum iters
Gross doinestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPper capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.0
Gross Domestic Income
3.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.1
3.6
Total consumption
1.9
2.2
Private consumption
2.3
2.1
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB
Imports(GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resourcebalance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net,incl.errors& ornnissions)
Change in reserVeSd
Memorandumitems
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR92 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

102884

13415
4609
17660
14263
-4245
3521
-185

14534
5345
19528
16718
-4994
4145
119

13503
5128
21795
15321
-8292
4600
-2479

13537
4445
21109
16969
-7572
4869
-1709

15975
6388
22756
17861
-6781
4679
-1171

17539
7219
24746
19234
-7207
4660
-1865

19402
7960
26527
20454
-7125
4530
-2225

21651
9008
28806
21822
-7155
4694
-2237

24071
10417
31038
23356
-6967
4473
-2411

612
-354
21
-374
497
-570

723
-255
-51
-205
1326
-1912

967
-105
0
-105
1481
135

655
-522
-298
-224
-542
2117

1613
-788
-587
-201
-2679
3025

1613
-864
-522
-342
-1400
2516

1855
-955
-587
-368
-1400
2724

2133
-1026
-621
-405
-1300
2430

2453
-1144
-724
-420
-1200
2302

-6.3

-6.6

-10.0

-8.5

-6.8

-7.0

-6.7

-6.2

-5.8

-12.8
-16.1
-21.9
6.9

-2.4
-10.9
-13.6
10.8

24.0
2.5
61.3
19.5

-9.5
-27.7
26.4
4.2

31.7
33.7
40.3
7.0

6.0
9.5
10.0
5.0

13.7
11.3
15.0
4.8

15.6
9.5
20.0
5.0

15.8
9.6
20.0
5.0

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep. - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

W

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
25.1
Current expenditures
22.6
Current fiscal surplus (+) or deficit(-)
2.5
Capital expenditure
5.2
Foreignfinancing
-0.6

23.7
20.8
2.9
5.2
-0.6

22.8
19.9
2.9
5.4
-0.5

22.2
20.2
2.0
8.2
-0.6

21.3
20.2
1.1
6.8
-0.8

21.0
20.8
0.1
5.8
-0.5

20.8
20.7
0.0
5.5
-0.6

20.4
20.6
-0.2
5.1
-0.6

20.0
20.4
-0.4
4.7
-0.7

73.4
10.5
80.1

75.7
15.1
83.8

75.1
8.6
98.1

77.6
11.4
73.9

75.3
8.8
75.4

75.1
10.5
38.0

75.1
9.8
73.5

75.1
9.9
74.0

75.1
10.1
74.6

Price indices( YR92 =100)
Merchandiseexport price index
Merchandiseimport price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

107.5
112.3
95.8
123.0

127.8
111.8
114.4
129.4

98.9
101.6
97.4
146.6

94.7
97.8
96.8
152.8

103.3
96.3
107.3
164.6

110.1
98.7
111.5
160.4

106.8
100.2
106.6
152.7

104.6
101.8
102.7
149.7

104.5
103.8
100.6
144.1

Real interest rates
Consumerprice index (%change)
GDP deflator (% change)

7.3
7.1

6.2
5.9

3.8
3.6

3.8
1.7

2.8
5.4

3.4
5.0

3.5
4.0

3.8
4.0

4.1
4.0

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2(%)
Private sector credit growth
total credit growth (%)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS"denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includesuse of TMFresources.
Consolidated central govemment.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Egypt, Arab Rep. - Key Exposure Indicators

Totaldebt outstandingand
disbursed(TDO) (US$m)'

31613

30319

30313

29955

28988

28124

27170

26143

24999

Net disbursements(US$m)'

-476

522

-105

-522

-788

-545

-583

-618

-624

Totaldebt service(TDS)

2378

1926

1642

1769

1793

1827

1840

1873

1973

175.2
46.8
13.2
63.0

152.8
40.1
9.7
75.6

157.1

154.8

134.5

118.4

106.9

95.7

85.8

36.7
8.5
76.2

33.7
9.5
76.8

30.0
8.7
78.5

28.8
7.7
79.5

26.6
7.2
80.3

24.5
6.9
81.1

22.3
6.8
81.7

11.0
29.9

10.4
31.1

9.1
30.9

7.2
28.6

6.8
27.3

6.4
28.6

6.2
28.9

6.1
28.7

6.1
27.5

1.6
1075

1.3
869

1.2
846

0.8
761

0.6
639

0.5
579

0.4
573

0.4
587

0.4
605

1324

1359

1384

(US$m).

Debt and debt serviceindicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposureindicators(%)
IBRDDS/publicDS
PreferredcreditorDS/public
DS (%)C
IBRDDS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of whichpresentvalue of
guarantees(US$m)
Shareof IBRD portfolio(%)
IDA TDO(US$m)d
IFC approvals (US$m)
Loans
Equityand quasi-equity /c
GSR (Guarantee/Standby/Risk
Mgt)

..

..

..

..

..

..

1090

1206

1242

1273

1266

1289

85.5
42.5
16.0
27.0

82.2
69.0
13.0
0.2

78.8
67.5
11.3
0.0

81.0
76.7
4.3
0.0

15.5
8.8
2.8
4.0

177.2
133.7
2.5
41.0

MIGA
MIGAguarantees(US$m)
a. Includespublicandpublicly
guaranteeddebt,privatenonguaranteed,
useof IMFcreditsandnetshort-termcapital.
b. "XGS"denotesexportsof goodsandservices,includingworkers'remittances.
c. Preferredcreditorsaredefinedas IBRD,IDA,theregionalmultilateral
development
banks,theIMF,andtheBankforIntemational
Senlements.
d. Includespresentvalueof guarantees.
e. Includesequityandquasi-equity
typesof bothloanandequityinstruments.

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B8 - Egypt, Arab Republic
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of May 18, 2001

ActiveProjects

DifferenceBetween
ExpectedandActual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating

ProjectID

ProjectName

P005157
P005161
P049166
P005169
P045175
P045499
P004981
P005173
P005153
P041410
P054958
P005163
P053832
P005168
P005152
P050484
P066336
P052705
P040858
Total

AGRICULTURALMODERNI
BASICEDUCATIONPROJ
EG-EASTDELTAAG.SERV.
EG-ED.ENHANCEMENT
PROG.
EG-HEALTHSECTOR
EG-NATIONALDRAINAGEII
EG-REDSEA COASTAL
EGYPTIRRIGATIONIMP
MATRUHRESOURCEMANA
P.S. REHAB.III
POLLUTIONABATEMENT
POPULATION
PRVTSECT.&AG. DEV.
PVT SEC TOURISMINF& ENV
SCHISTOSOMIASIS
CONTROL
SEC EDUC ENHPROG
SOC PROTINIT PROJ
SOCIALFUNDIII
SOHAGRURALDEV.

IBRDIDA

ClosedProjects:86

Oriainal Amount in US$ Millions

Development implementation Fiscal
Obmectives
Progress
Year
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

TotalDisbursed
(Active)
of whichhasbeenrepaid
TotalDisbursed
(Closed)
of whichhasbeenrepaid
TotalDisbursed
(Active+ Closed)
of whichhasbeenrepaid

324.10
4.88
3,942.10
2,850.30
4,266.28
2,855.14

TotalUndisbursed
(Active)
TotalUndisbursed
(Closed)
TotalUndisbursed
(Active+ Closed)

719.96
0.00
719.96

S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S

1994
1993
1998
1997
1998
2000
1993
1995
1993
1999
1998
1996
1999
1993
1992
1999
1999
1999
1999

a/ Intendeddisbursementsto date minusactual disbursementsto date as projectedat appraisal.

IBRD
54
0
0
0
0
50
0
26.7
0
120
20
0
100
260
0
0
0
0
0
630.7

Disbursements

_

IDA GRANT Cancel.
67
55.5
15
75
90
0
0
53.3
22
0
15
17.2
75
0
26.8
50
5
50
25
641.8

0
0
0
0
0
0
4.8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4.8

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
189.5
0
0
0
0
0
189.5

Undisb.
6.0
7.7
13.4
41.9
79.2
50.0
0.9
53.2
1.7
119.5
23.5
13.3
169.5
8.0
10.7
46.0
4.7
47.9
23.7
720.9

Orig. FrmRev'd
2.6
-5.5
6.6
13.4
21.7
0.0
-0.3
37.5
-4.2
43.2
10.6
9.0
48.2
67.5
4.5
2.0
0.5
17.7
5.4
280.5

0.0
-13.4
0.0
2.9
0.0
0.0
-0.9
12.6
-6.1
0.0
-6.6
5.0
0.0
2.5
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Arab Republic of Egypt
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of April 30, 2001
(In US Dollars Millions)
IFC Held
Company
ANSDK
Abu SomaDevelop
CIL
Carbon Black-EGT
Club Ras Soma
Cmrcl Intl Bank
ECC
EFG Hermes
Egypt Trust
HC Investment
IT Worx
MGDK
Meleiha Oil
Misr Compressor
Orascom
Orix Leasing EGT
Port Said
Suez Gulf
UNI
Total Portfolio

IFC Disbursed

Loan Equity/QE Guar/RM Partic
8.57
22.59
19.85
0.00
0.00
1.45
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.65
0.00
0.00
13.00
2.96
0.00
0.00
2.45
2.37
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
34.40
0.00
30.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
1.41
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.47
0.00
0.00
0.00
30.82
0.00
0.00
9.70
3.77
0.00
0.00
16.00
4.85
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.89
0.00
0.00
45.00
0.00
0.00 152.50
45.00
0.00
0.00 152.50
7.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
176.78

97.32

54.25

305.00

Approvals Pending Commitment
AAC
Sidi Krir
ACB Expansn III
OLE - CL
Total Pending Commitment:

Loan Equity/QE Guar/RM Partic
4.74
0.00
0.00
0.00
70.00
0.00
0.00 122.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
6.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
85.74
0.00
0.00 122.00

ANSDK Guarantee/RMheld is presently showing only the Guarantee amouunt.

Loan Equity/QE Guar/RM Partic
8.57
22.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.13
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.88
0.00
0.00
13.00
2.96
0.00
0.00
2.45
2.37
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.41
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.47
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
9.70
3.77
0.00
0.00
16.00
4.85
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.89
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
56.78

62.91

0.00

0.00

Annex B9
Page 1 of 6
EGYPT COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX, FY02-04
PROGRAM
DIAGNOSIS

-

1.
MacroeconomicStability& Growth
Recent increase in the fiscal deficit
current budget processmakesit
difficult for governmentto
implement its policies and assess
outcomeof expenditures.
Export Promotion
> Distorted incentivesframework;
inefficientandhigh cost
infrastructureservices;institutional
and bureaucraticconstraintsled to
disappointingexport performance.

Private Sector Development
> Unfavorablebusiness environment
with a particularlyunsupportive
SME environment.

INTERVENTIONS

BANK GROUP
NSTRUMIENTS

INDICAToRs/BENcHMARKS

FSTRATEGY/ACTIO

SUPPORTING

IHIGHER AND SUSTAINED

OTHER DONOR

_

__

_A.CTIvITlFS

GROWTH

>

Maintain fiscal discipline. Establish
a medium-termframeworkfor
public expenditureplanning.
Prioritize and scaleback
implementationof mega projects.
Shift graduallytoward resultsoriented budget.

>

Fiscal deficitcut below 4% of
GDP. Current and investment
budgetsconsolidated. Investment
projects prioritizedon economic
grounds. Major tax reform
completed(extensionof GST, tax
admin,corporatetax system).

>

AAA: Public Expenditure
Review; Social & Structural
Review 11;Economic
Monitoring;Project Appraisal &
Evaluation (WBI/IDF).

IMF; USAID

>

Flexible managementof exchange
rate. Tariffreform (reductionin
level and dispersionof tariffs).
Adherence to requirementsof
COMESA,PAFTA and EU.
Removal of non-tariff barriers
(customs reform,quality controls).
Enhancingprivate provisionof
infrastucture.

>

Non-oilexports increase by at
least 10%p.a. Reduce maximum
tariffs from 40% to 30%. Bring
all tariffs that were between 20%30% to 20%;bring them between
15%-20%to 10%. Eliminatethe
customs surcharge.

>

New operation: Agricultural
Exports Project.
IFC loans & equitv: Investment
in export-orientedcompanies.
Investmentin IPPs in power.
Potential investmentsin diverse
sectors such as water and waste
water, ports, airports.
Non-lending: Agricultural
Trade and WTO (WBI).

IMF; USAID;
EU; Arab Fund;
Kuwait Fund;
Japan

>

Streamliningof tax and customs
administration. Strengthen
commercialand legal system.
Reform labor legislation.
Bankruptcyand intellectualproperty
rights legislation.

>

Improvedperceptionof business
environment(surveys). Increased
private domestic investmentand
FDI.

>

Non-lendinm:TAto strengthen
business environment.
Corporate governanceTA.
IFC loans, equity & TA:
Focused lending to facilitate
access to finance (credit lines,
risk capital, guarantees,leasing,
etc.). Extended African Project
Development Facility. Selected
direct investmentsin companies
with clear development impact.

USAID; EU; UK;
UNDP; Germany;
Italy; CIDA;
AFDB

Annex B9
Page 2 of 6
DIAGNOSIS
Financial Sector
> Dominance of publicly-owned
institutions has limited scope and
depth of financial markets. Range
of products available insufficient to
meet needs of private sector,
especially SMEs. Slight increase in
non-performing loans. No
mortgage market to facilitate
housing finance. Need to
modernize and better regulate
capital markets and insurance
sector.

Privatization
> After impressive progress during
1995-99, marked slowdown in
privatization. Share of public
sector still 30% in economic
activity.
ICT Sector
> Weak capacity of the telecom
regulatory authority (TRA).
Inadequate postal services.
Incomplete legal framework for ECommerce.

OTHERDONOR
ACTIVITIES

>

Strengthen bank supervision.
Gradually privatize the public
financial institutions. Develop nonbank financial institutions. Deepen
and broaden capital markets.

>

Privatize at lease one state-owned
bank. Stronger bank supervision
capacity in place. Mortgage
market development initiated.

>

IFC loans, & equity: TA on, and
investment in, innovative
financial instruments to build
mortgage finance institutions,
underwrite and trade of bonds.
Medium & long-term loans to
banks and non-bank financial
intermediaries. Become a
shareholder of secondary
mortgage market institution.
Non-lending: Mortgage
development and capital market
development. Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP).

IMF; USAID;
EU; UK

>

Govemment plans to divest most of
remaining enterprises during next 23 years.

>

Substantial progress in
completing industrial sector and
non-industrial privatizations.

>

Information Infrastructure
Project (Telecoms & Post). TA
to improve performance of
public entities. Advisory
services and selected
transactions (IFC).

USAID; EU;
Germany; CIDA

>

Build TRA capacity. Reform and
modernize postal sector. Develop
necessary legal framework for ECommerce.

>

Fully functional TRA. Major
improvement in postal services.
Significant growth in ECommerce activities.

>

Information Infrastructure
Project. Direct investments by
IFC.

USAID

Ongoing operations: Basic
Education; Education
Enhancement; Secondary
Education.
New operations: Early
Childhood Development.
Non-lendinz: Early Childhood

USAID; AFDB;
UNICEF; CIDA;
EU; ESDF;
Japan; Kuwait;
Netherlands;
Germany

IJ.
Education
> Despite near universal basic
education, inequity remains in
certain area. Low student
performance at all levels, especially
in problem-solving and technology
skills.

BANKGROUP
INSTRUMENTS

PROGRAM
INDICATORSIBENCHMARKS

STRATEGY/ACTION

>

TARGETED

OSFOR
NSNT

INTERVE

Increase demand for education in
disadvantaged areas through
parental participation and provision
of early childhood education.
Improve the quality of student
learning for all. Reform curricula
and provide enhanced learning
environment at all levels.

>

POVERTY

REDUCTION

Annually increase enrollment for
girls by 2% and for boys by 1.2%
until universal 8 years of basic
education reached. Improvement
in student achievement score,
particularly in problem solving
and technology skills.
L_Development.

>

Annex B9
Page 3 of 6
DIAGNOSIS

Despite improvedaccess for girls'
educationover past two decades,
more needs to be doneto bridge the
gender gap.

>

BANK GROUP
INSTRUMENTS

OTHERDONOR
ACTIVITEES

>

Provide additionalbasic education
for girls, especiallyin rural areas.
Train female teachers,improve
teaching methods. Provide mothers
education and encourage
involvementin school activities.
Facilitate proceduresfor obtaining
birth certificates for children not
registered at birth.

>

Increased female literacy;
increasedfemale participation in
formal economy.

>

AAA: Gender Assessment.

Netherlands;
Italy; UNICEF;
USAID

>

Support expansion of family
medicine practiceto establish
quality standardsand accreditation
mechanisms,and provide an
integratedprimary care service
responsive to needs of whole family,
with greater emphasison prevention
and communityparticipation.

>

Preparationand implementation
of govemorate Masterplans in
new target sites (Upper Egypt).
Increasenumber of accredited
family medicinepractitioners to
meet the needs identified in
Masterplans.

>

Ongoine: Population Project and
Social Fund Project (health
component).

USAID; EU;
SFD; (Multidonor Support);
Kuwait; Spain;
UNICEF;UNDP;
Denmark

Healthdelivery systems at all
levels inefficientin operations and
maldistributionof physical and
human resources,leading to
duplication,wastageand inequity.

>

Rationalizeinvestmentsin health
infrastructureand human resources
through health service standards,
preparationof govemmentHealth
Masterplansand GIS mapping to
identify needs, gaps and duplication
in service delivery.

>

Implementationof an integrated
nationalinformation system to
support the communicabledisease
surveillancesystem.

>

New: Health Sector II Project.

EU

Public health servicessupply
driven and fragmentedthrough
proliferationof many vertical&
disease specificinterventions.

>

Strengthen integrationof public
health programsthrough improved
disease surveillancesystem and
greater govemorate and district
capacity to monitor and identify
areas of need.

>

Expansionof community
developmentprogramsin "hot
spot" villages in Egypt with very
high fertilityrates and high
Schisto infectionrates.

>

Ongoing: Schistosomiasis
Control Project, and Population
Project.

UNICEF; WHO

Social health insurancecoverage
limited to formal sectors,students
and infants,leaving most women
and familiesin informalsector
without effective insurance
protection.

>

Phased expansionof social
insurance coverage for basic
primary health care servicesby
govemorates, and institutional
capacity buildingof insurance
functions at governoratelevels.
Undertake actuarialanalysisto
quantify financingimplicationsof

>

Expansionof Family Health Fund
in selectedgovemoratesto
finance primary care social
insuranceprogram, and
enrollmentof uninsured
populationin targeted
govemorates.

>

Ongoing: Health Sector I
Project.
New: Health Sector II Project.
AAA: Health Care Financing
Studyand Workshop.

EU; USAID

Health
'
Freepublic health services
availablein principle,but poor
quality of services,especiallyin
poor rural and urban areas render
them ineffective.

>

PROGRAM
INDICATORS1BENCHMARKS

STRATEGY/ACTION

expanding social health insurance.

Annex B9
Page 4 of 6

PovertyAnalvsis & Social SafetyNets
> Limitedupdated informationon the
magnitudeand nature of poverty
makesit difficultto develop propoor policies and strategies.

BANK GROUP
INSTRUMENTS

PROGRAM
INDICATORS/BENCHIMARKS

STRATEGY/ACTION

DIAGNOSIS

P

Governmentto complete
HouseholdSurvey and make
results available. Governmentto
develop revised Poverty Strategy.

>

Governmentto update poverty
figuresand establish poverty line.
CompletePoverty Assessment.

>

AAA:Poverty Assessment.

UNDP; UK;
Italy; USAID;
WFP;
Netherlands;
Denmark
USAID

>

Needfor better understandingof
distributionalimpact of public
expenditures.

P

Beneficiaryanalysis of public
expenditures.

>

CompletePublic Expenditure
Review (PER).

>

AAA: Public Expenditure
Review (PER) and WBI
Workshop.

>

Needto improve social safety net
componentsin terms of coverage,
efficiencyand effectiveness,based
on recommendationsof BankTF
report submitted to government.

>

Governmentto take steps to
improve food subsidies,cash
transfers, Social Fund and/or social
insurance.

>

Governmentaddressessafety net
issue in poverty strategy.

>

AAA: Bank report on Safety
Nets submittedto government.
PER.

>

Incorporatesafety net beneficiary
assessmentin PER.

>

Reduced soil salinity and water
logging. Increased agricultural
productionin poor rural areas.

>

Ongoing: Matruh Natural
ResourcesManagementProject
includesrain harvesting
techniques,water shed
management.
New: Natural Resource
ManagementProject II; Rural

Rural Development
> 63% of the poor and 74% of the
ultrapoorin Egypt live in ruralareas.
Increasingthe productivityof
agricultureessential for increasing
rural incomes.

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

>

Improved water availability,
reduced soil salinity and water
logging,better rural servicesfor
the poor.

USAID;
Germany
Netherlands;
Japan

Water/Sanitation Project.
0

09 0 :0III.

Higher Education& Skills Development
Graduatesof secondaiy and higher
educationlack market-relevant
skills. Need for strengtheningskills
in managerialentrepreneurialand
technical skills in a viable manner.

INTERVENTIONSV

>

IMPAACT: : ;90 0S0000;;
POERKTY REDU ICTIO0N
INDY5IRaECT

WITh MAJO

Better align curricula and
assessmentwith the skills needs of
employers and further learning.
Strengtheneducationmanagement
informationsystem and introduce
accountabilitybased on student
outcomes. Strengthenfinancial&
administrativeautonomyof higher
educationinstitutionsand their
partnershipwith privatesector.

>

Increased employersatisfaction
with graduates as measuredby
tracer studies. Policy decisionmakingbased on performance
indicators and objectivecriteria.
50% of higher educationbudget
will be allocated to higher
educationinstitutionsas block
grant.

>

Higher Education Project; Skills
DevelopmentProject.

EU; ILO;
USAID;
Germany

Annex B9
Page 5 of 6

Water, Irrigation.DrainageImprovement
Per capita availabilityof water in
Egypt is low (less than 1,000cu.m.
per capita per year). Improving
productivityof scarce water
resourcesa key issue. In addition,
cooperationwith Nile riparian
countriesis criticalto assure longterm cooperativemanagementof the
Nile.

>

>

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

>

Govemmentplans to invest in
waterpumping stations, irrigation
improvementand drainage(I&D)
to improve productivityof water
use. Active involvementin the
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) for
"win-win" activities in the Nile.
Institutionaland management
improvements,includingwater
user participation and cost sharing
programs.

>

Agricultureoutput per unit of
water. Conveyanceefficiency,
reduced soil salinity.
Identificationof "win-win"
activities on the Nile Basin
Initiative. Improvedmanagement
of reuse. Recovery of O&M and
capital cost as proportionof
actual costs.

>

Ongoing: IfPs, NDP, Pumping
Stations, and NDP 11Projects.
New: Irrigation/Drainage
Improvement Project. Private
Sector role in Water
Management (IFC).
AAA: Drainage & Wastewater
Reuse; NBI; Irrigation
Improvement Sector Review.

Germany;
Netherlands;
Japan; USAID;
UNDP; CIDA;
AFDB; FAO;
Kuwait Fund;
Abu Dhabi Fund

>

Sub-surfacedrainage problem a
nationalpriority. Strategyfor
reuse of drainage water under
implementation.

>

Monitoringsystemof water
qualityoperational.

>

New: Rural Water & Sanitation
Project.

Germany;
Netherlands;
CIDA; USAID

>

Support policy dialogue on
environmentthrough systematic
economicassessmentsof Egypt's
environmentissues.

>

Estimationof the cost of
environmentaldegradationas %
of GDP.

>

Non-lending:METAP Study on
cost of environmental
degradation.

CIDA; Denmark;
Netherlands;
Germany; Italy;
Japan; UNDP;
UK; USAID

Linkagesbetweenenergy and
environmentpoorly understoodin
electricity,petroleumand transport
sectors.

>

Enable Egypt to identifyand
implementlocal environment
managementprojects whichbring
global benefits.

>

Sector strategydeveloped for
energy, addressing links to global
environment concerns.

>

Non-lending:TF Study on
energy-environmentreview.
GEF work on wind, solar/
thermal energy and biodiversity
issues.

Private sector and especiallySMEs
would be particularlyaffected by
negative/positiveimplicationsof
complying with strict environmental
standardson exports/importsas a
result of Egypt's Association
Agreementwith EU.

>

Support private sector in reducing
risks and exposures to
environmentalregulations.

>

Percentagechange in imports/
exports due to changesin
environmentalregulations.

>

Non-lending:METAP Country
Assessment of environmental
regulations on trade and
competitiveness.

Poor environmentalmanagementat
local level.

>

Improve access to environmental
informationand help promote
better environmentalmanagement.

>

Number of staff trained on
environmentalmanagementin
local administration.

>

Non-lending:DGF for
environmentaltraining at the
local level.

Deterioratingwater quality.
Continuingproblemof salinity,
pollution and rural sanitation.

Environment
> Costs of environmentaldegradation
considerablebut need to be better
quantifiedfor policy decisionmaking.
>

BANK GROUP
INSTRUMENTS

PROGRAM
INDICATORS/BENCHMARKS

STRATEGY/ACTION

DIAGNOSIS

Annex B9
Page 6 of 6

Governance
> Absenceof transparencyand
ineffectivenessby government
officials increasescost of business.
Also tax incentivestend to offset
each other with little incremental
benefit, but room for petty
corruption.

BANKGROUP
INSTRUMENTS

PROGRAM
INDICATORS/BENCHMARKS

STRATEGY/ACTION

DIAGNOSIS

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

>

Needfor improvementsin
administrationand tax code.

>

Set up easily monitorable
performancestandardsin all
major revenue collection
functions,starting with duty
drawbackand sales tax rebates for
exports. Abolish most tax
incentives.

>

AAA: Govemance Issues
Report.

IMF; USAID;
UNDP; Spain

Commerciallegal system too slow
and cumbersomein resolving
commerciallegal disputes.

>

Increasenumber of judges and
improvetheir remuneration.

>

"Clearance rate" for commercial
dispute resolution(% of filed
cases actually resolved) to
increase from about 40% at
present to 50% by 2005.

>

AAA: Task Force Report on
Business Environment
(completed).

USAID; CIDA

With Egypt's increasingexposure to
globalizationand its need to tap
domesticand internationalcapital
markets,corporategovernance
standardswill need to improveto
give investorsthe protection
requiredto encouragethem to
provide capital.

>

Egypt to undertake an assisted selfassessmentof corporate
governancestandards.

>

Completion of Corporate
GovemanceAssessment.

>

AAA:Corporate Governance
Assessment. Seminar to
disseminate findings.

USAID

.

Annex B10
Page 1 of 1
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Networkarea

Country
performance'

PovertyReduction& Economic
Management
Povertyreduction

Majorissue'

Countrypriority'

Bankpriorityc

Reconciliationof countryand
Bankprioritiesd

F

Lackof credibledata

H

H

PovertyAssessment

Economicpolicy

G

Fiscalstability,exchangerate
managementand privatization

H

H

PER;Coordinationwith IMF

Publicsector

F

Civil servicereform;
administrativedecentralization

M

M

Policydialogueon best practices

Gender

G

Gender-differentiated
data

H

H

GenderAssessment

Education

G

Efficiencyand quality/
curriculumreform

H

H

Health,nutrition& population

G

H

H

Socialprotection

F

Overstaffing/ healthinsurance
coverage
Effectivenessof government
programs

M

M

HumanDevelopmentDepartment

Environmentally
& SociallySustainable
Development
Ruraldevelopment
Environment
Socialdevelopment

F
F
F

Rural incomes
Water/ air quality
Lackof decentralization

M
M
M

M
H
M

Bilateraldonors takinglead

Finance,PrivateSector& Infrastructure
Financialsector

F

Lackof transparancy

M

H

ProposedFSAP

Privatesector

F

M

H

Bilateraldonorstakinglead

Energy*&mining/Infrastructure

G

Slow paceof privatization;low
FDI
PrivateParticipation/Cost
Recovery

M

M

a. Use'excelient,"
'good,"'fair,' or'poor.'
b. indicateprincipalcountry-specific
problems(e.g,,forpovertyreduction,
'ruralpoverty;"
foreducation,
'femalesecondary
completion;'
forenvironment,
'urbanair pollution').
c. Toindicatepriority,use'low,"'moderate,"
or 'high.'
d. Giveexplanation,
if priorities
do notagree;forexample.
anotherMDBmayhavetheleadontheissue,or theremaybeongoingdialogue.

ARAB REPUBLICOF EGYPT
IBRD27759
Sea

Mediterranearan
Marsa Matruh0

/

i
hine
Q
Lk

JORrDA

sad

Ismiliyo

SS
G fiAIRO

ARAB REPUBLIC
°OF EGYPT

280

~~~
ISRAEL

.(j)~~~~~

~

~~~~~~~~Suez

i Suef

SAUDI
-

As

I

320-

GAZA
WESrRANtKAND

Ai XOfldRAL

.

360

,

320

280

280
ARABIA

. ,

Hurghada

ut

~~~~~Redi

Sok

na~~~~e
sea

CITIES
SELECTED

0

xor

NATIONALCAPITAL

'*

RIVERS
AREAS
CULTIVATED
24°

won

240

0

I"

0

50
.1I

'

100

I

150 MILES

I

Lake
Laker

Nosser

100 150 KILOMETERS

50

b<theMapDesignyitof TheWlridBankh
produced
Avas
map
This
on
shown
an an other rmation
7hnanes,pr, ominations

thismop do

ml

nhe
to prt

of The word0BnekGrou, any udgmnqUA

oaonyterritory,or any-esement oracceptanceof
status
onthelegal

320

360

APRIL1997

